EAST DUNDEE, ILLINOIS
CODE OF ORDINANCES
Contains 2025 S-25, current through
Ordinance 25-23, passed 4-21-2025, and
State legislation current through 2024 Advance Legislative Service No. 6
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
(800) 445-5588   www.amlegal.com
VILLAGE OFFICIALS
Daniel Pearson, Village President
Village Trustees
Ryan Gumma
Scott Kunze
Kathleen Mahony
Mathew Oclon
Andy Sauder
Tricia Saviano
Katherine Diehl, Village Clerk
Erika Storlie, Village Administrator
Brandiss West, Finance Director
Elrod Friedman LLP, Attorney
Joshua Fourdyce, Chief of Police
Phil Cotter, Director of Public Works
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE NO. 03-11
AN ORDINANCE ENACTING A CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR THE VILLAGE OF EAST DUNDEE
REVISING, AMENDING, RESTATING, CODIFYING AND COMPILING CERTAIN EXISTING GENERAL
ORDINANCES OF THE VILLAGE OF EAST DUNDEE DEALING WITH SUBJECTS EMBRACED IN SUCH
CODE OF ORDINANCES AND DECLARING AN EMERGENCY
   WHEREAS, the present general and permanent ordinances of the Village of East
Dundee are inadequately arranged and classified and are insufficient in form
and substance for the complete preservation of the public peace, health,
safety, and general welfare of the Village and for the proper conduct of its
affairs; and
   WHEREAS, the Acts of the Legislature of the State of Illinois empower and
authorize the Village to revise, amend, restate, codify, and compile any
existing ordinances and all new ordinances not heretofore adopted or published
and to incorporate such ordinances into one ordinance in book form; and
   WHEREAS, the corporate authorities of the Village have authorized a general
compilation, revision, and codification of the ordinances of the Village of a
general and permanent nature and publication of such ordinance in book form;
and
   WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide for the usual daily operation of the
Village and for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health, safety,
and general welfare of the Village that this ordinance take effect at an early
date.
NOW THEREFORE BE IT ORDAINED BY THE PRESIDENT AND BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF THE
VILLAGE OF EAST DUNDEE, KANE AND COOK COUNTIES, ILLINOIS, AS FOLLOWS:
   Section One. The general ordinances of the Village as revised, amended,
restated, codified, and compiled in book form are hereby adopted as and shall
constitute the “Code of Ordinances of the Village of East Dundee.”
   Section Two. Such Code of Ordinances as adopted in Section One shall consist
of the Titles on the attached exhibit.
   Section Three. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated in
such Code of Ordinances shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective
date of this ordinance, except as they are included and re-ordained in whole or
in part in such Code; provided, such repeal shall not affect any offense
committed or penalty incurred or any right established prior to the effective
date of this ordinance, nor shall such repeal affect the provisions of
ordinances levying taxes, appropriating money, annexing or detaching territory,
establishing franchises, or granting special rights to certain persons,
authorizing public improvements, authorizing the issuance of bonds or borrowing
of money, authorizing the purchase or sale of real or personal property,
granting or accepting easements, plat or dedication of land to public use,
vacating or setting the boundaries of streets or other public places; nor shall
such repeal affect any other ordinance of a temporary or special nature or
pertaining to subjects not contained in or covered by the Code. It is hereby
declared to be the stated intent of this ordinance to recodify and not to
materially amend the substance of such prior ordinances. Wherever the statutes
and laws of the State of Illinois require public notice and hearing before
amendment of ordinances, specifically including but not limited to zoning
ordinances, it is declared the purpose of this ordinance to recodify and not to
so amend such ordinances.
   Section Four. Such Code shall be deemed published in pamphlet form as
provided by law as of the day it is adopted and approval by the corporate
authorities, and the Clerk of the Village is hereby authorized and ordered to
immediately file a copy of such Code of Ordinances in the Office of the Clerk.
   Section Five. Such Code shall be in full force and effect as provided in
Section Six, and such Code shall be presumptive evidence in all courts and
places of the ordinance and all provisions, sections, penalties, and
regulations therein contained and of the date of passage, and that the same is
properly signed, attested, recorded, and approved and that any public hearings
and notices thereof as required by law have been given.
   Section Six. This ordinance is declared to be an emergency measure necessary
for the immediate preservation of the peace, health, safety, and general
welfare of the people of the Village and shall take effect at the earliest date
provided by law.
   Adopted this 21st day of July, 2003, pursuant to a roll call vote as
follows:
AYES   :   Zaeske, Ruffulo, Bartels, Schock, VanOstenbridge, Scarpelli, Jr.
NAYES:   None
ABSENT:   None
   Approved by me this 21st day of July, 2003
    Roger W. Ahrens, /s/
   President
Published in pamphlet form this 30th day of July, 2003, under the authority of
the President and Board of Trustees.
ATTEST:
Jane Theis, /s/
Village Clerk
Recorded in the Village Records on July 30th, 2003
ORDINANCE NUMBER 04-41
   AN ORDINANCE ENACTING AND ADOPTING A SUPPLEMENT TO THE EAST DUNDEE CODE OF
ORDINANCES
   WHEREAS, the Village of East Dundee is a home rule unit of local government
under and pursuant to Section 6 of Article VII of the Constitution of the State
of Illinois, has the authority to exercise any power and perform any function
pertaining to its government and affairs, including but not limited to the
power to regulate for the protection of the public health, safety, morals, and
welfare; and
   WHEREAS, American Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio, has completed
the 2004 Supplement to the Code of Ordinances fo the Village of East Dundee
(herein the "Village"), which supplement contains all ordinances of a general
and permanent nature enacted since the prior supplement to the Code of
Ordinances of the Village; and
   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation has recommended the revision
or addition of certain sections of the Code of Ordinances which are based on or
make reference to sections of the Illinois statutes; and
   WHEREAS, it is the intent of the Village to accept these updated sections in
accordance with the changes of law of the State of Illinois; and
   WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide for the usual daily operation of the
Village and for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health, safety,
and general welfare of the Village that this ordinance take effect at an early
date.
NOW THEREFORE BE IT ORDAINED BY THE PRESIDENT AND BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF THE
VILLAGE OF EAST DUNDEE, COOK AND KANE COUNTIES, ILLINOIS, AS FOLLOWS:
   Section One. That the 2004 Supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the
Village as submitted by American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati,
Ohio, and as attached hereto be and the same is hereby adopted by reference as
if set out in its entirety.
   Section Two. Such Supplement shall be deemed published as of the day of its
adoption and approval by the Village and the Clerk is hereby authorized and
ordered to insert such supplement into the copy of the Code of Ordinances kept
on file in the Office of the Clerk.
   Section Three. This ordinance is declared to be an emergency measure
necessary for the immediate preservation of the peace, health, safety, and
general welfare of the people of this Village and shall take effect at the
earliest date provided by law.
   Section Four. Severability. If any section, paragraph or provision of this
ordinance shall be held to be invalid or unenforceable for any reason, the
invalidity or unenforceability of such section, paragraph or provision shall
not affect any of the remaining provisions of this ordinance.
   Section Five.  Repeal. All ordinances, resolutions, motions or parts thereof
in conflict herewith shall be and the same are hereby repealed.
   Section Six. Publication. This ordinance shall be in full force and effect
forthwith upon its adoption, approval and publication in pamphlet form as
provided by law.
   Adopted this 15th of November, 2004, pursuant to a roll call vote as
follows:
AYES: Zaeske, Ruffulo, Bartels, Schock, VanOstenbridge, President Ahrens
NAYES: None
ABSENT: None
ABSTENTION: Scarpelli
   Approved by me this 15th day of November, 2004.
                           Roger W. Ahrens /s/
                           ROGER AHRENS, President
Published in pamphlet form this 22nd day of November, 2004, under the authority
of the President and Board of Trustees.
ATTEST:
Jane E. Theis /s/
JANE THEIS, Village Clerk
Recorded in the Village Records on November 22, 2004.
ORDINANCE NUMBER 11-32
   AN ORDINANCE ENACTING AND ADOPTING A SUPPLEMENT TO THE EAST DUNDEE CODE OF
ORDINANCES
   WHEREAS, the Village of East Dundee is a home rule unit of local government
under and pursuant to Section 6 of Article VII of the Constitution of the State
of Illinois, has the authority to exercise any power and perform any function
pertaining to its government and affairs, including but not limited to the
power to regulate for the protection of the public health, safety, morals, and
welfare; and
   WHEREAS, American Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio, has completed
the 2010 Supplement to the Code of Ordinances for the Village of East Dundee,
which supplement contains all ordinances of a general and permanent nature
enacted since the prior supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the Village;
and
   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation has recommended the revision
or addition of certain sections of the Code of Ordinances which are based on or
make reference to sections of the Illinois statutes; and
   WHEREAS, it is the intent of the Village to accept these updated sections in
accordance with the changes of law of the State of Illinois; and
   WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide for the usual daily operation of the
Village and for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health, safety,
and general welfare of the Village that this ordinance take effect at an early
date.
NOW THEREFORE BE IT ORDAINED BY THE PRESIDENT AND BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF THE
VILLAGE OF EAST DUNDEE, COOK AND KANE COUNTIES, ILLINOIS, AS FOLLOWS:
   Section One. That the 2010 Supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the
Village as submitted by American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati,
Ohio, and as attached hereto be and the same is hereby adopted by reference as
if set out in its entirety.
   Section Two. Such Supplement shall be deemed published as of the day of its
adoption and approval by the Village Clerk is hereby authorized and ordered to
insert such supplement into the copy of the Code of Ordinances kept on file in
the Office of the Clerk.
   Section Three. This ordinance is declared to be an emergency measure
necessary for the immediate preservation of the peace, health, safety, and
general welfare of the people of this Village and shall take effect at the
earliest date provided by law.
   Section Seven. Severability. If any section, paragraph or provision of this
resolution shall be held to be invalid or unenforceable for any reason, the
invalidity or unenforceability of such section, paragraph or provision shall
not affect any of the remaining provisions of this resolution.
   Section Eight.  Repeal. If any section, paragraph or provision of this
Resolution shall be held to be invalid or unenforceable, the invalidity or
unenforceability of such section, paragraph or provision shall not affect any
of the remaining provisions of this Resolution.
   Section Nine. Publication. This resolution shall be in full force and effect
forthwith upon its adoption, approval and publication in pamphlet form as
provided by law.
   Adopted this 11th of July, 2011, pursuant to a roll call vote as follows:
AYES: 5 - Trustees Gorman, Miller, VanOstenbridge, Skillicorn and President
Bartels
NAYES: 0
ABSENT: 2 - Trustees Ruffulo and Lynam
   Approved by me this 11th day of July, 2011.
                                 Jerald Bartels /s/
                                 Jerald Bartels, Village President
Published in pamphlet form this 18th day of July, 2011, under the authority of
the President and Board of Trustees.
ATTEST:
Jennifer Rehberg /s/
Jennifer Rehberg, Village Clerk
Recorded in the Village Records on July 18, 2011.
(SEAL)
ORDINANCE NUMBER 12-60
   AN ORDINANCE ENACTING AND ADOPTING
   A SUPPLEMENT TO THE EAST DUNDEE CODE
   OF ORDINANCES
   WHEREAS, the Village of East Dundee is a home rule unit of local government
under and pursuant to Section 6 of Article VII of the Constitution of the State
of Illinois, has the authority to exercise any power and perform any function
pertaining to its government and affairs, including but not limited to the
power to regulate for the protection of the public health, safety, morals, and
welfare; and
   WHEREAS, American Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio, has completed
the 2012 Supplement to the Code of Ordinances for the Village of East Dundee,
which supplement contains all ordinances of a general and permanent nature
enacted since the prior supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the Village;
and
   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation has recommended the revision
or addition of certain sections of the Code of Ordinances which are based on or
make reference to sections of the Illinois statutes; and
   WHEREAS, it is the intent of the Village to accept these updated sections in
accordance with the changes of law of the State of Illinois; and
   WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide for the usual daily operation of the
Village and for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health, safety,
and general welfare of the Village that this ordinance take effect at an early
date.
   NOW THEREFORE BE IT ORDAINED BY THE PRESIDENT AND BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF THE
VILLAGE OF EAST DUNDEE, COOK AND KANE COUNTIES, ILLINOIS, AS FOLLOWS:
   Section One. That the 2012 Supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the
Village as submitted by American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati,
Ohio, and as attached hereto be and the same is hereby adopted by reference as
if set out in its entirety.
   Section Two. Such Supplement shall be deemed published as of the day of its
adoption and approval by the Village Clerk is hereby authorized and ordered to
insert such supplement into the copy of the Code of Ordinances kept on file in
the Office of the Clerk.
   Section Three. This ordinance is declared to be an emergency measure
necessary for the immediate preservation of the peace, health, safety, and
general welfare of the people of this Village and shall take effect at the
earliest date provided by law.
   Section Seven. Severability. If any section, paragraph or provision of this
resolution shall be held to be invalid or unenforceable for any reason, the
invalidity or unenforceability of such section, paragraph or provision shall
not affect any of the remaining provisions of this resolution.
   Section Eight.  Repeal. If any section, paragraph or provision of this
Resolution shall for any reason be held to be invalid or unenforceable, the
invalidity or unenforceability of such section, paragraph, clause, or provision
shall not affect any of the remaining provisions of this Resolution.
   Section Nine. Publication. This resolution shall be in full force and effect
forthwith upon its adoption, approval and publication in pamphlet form as
provided by law.
   Adopted this 6th day of August, 2012, pursuant to a roll call vote as
follows:
AYES: 6 - Trustees Gorman, Lynam, Skillicorn, Miller, VanOstenbridge and
President Bartels
NAYES: 0
ABSENT: 1 - Trustee Ruffulo
   Approved by me this 6th day of August, 2012.
                                 Jerald Bartels /s/
                                 Jerald Bartels, Village President
Published in pamphlet form this 10th day of August, 2012, under the authority
of the President and Board of Trustees.
ATTEST:
Heather Maieritsch /s/
Heather Maieritsch, Village Clerk
Recorded in the Village Records on August 10, 2012.
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapter
   
10.   RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
CHAPTER 10: RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
Section
   
10.01   Title of code
   
10.02   Definitions
   
10.03   Section headings
   
10.04   Rules of construction
   
10.05   Official time
   
10.06   Fiscal year
   
10.07   Inauguration for newly elected officers
   
10.08   Revivor; effect of amendment or repeal
   
10.09   Reference to other sections
   
10.10   Conflicting provisions
   
10.11   Amendments to code
   
10.12   Severability
   
10.13   Reference to public office or officer
   
10.14   Errors and omissions
   
10.15   Ordinances repealed
   
10.16   Ordinances unaffected
   
10.17   Ordinances saved
   
10.18   Technical codes
   
10.19   Historical and statutory references
   
10.20   Debts due and owing the village
 
   
10.99   General penalty
§ 10.01 TITLE OF CODE.
   This codification by and for the Village of East Dundee, Illinois, shall be
designated as the Code of the Village of East Dundee and may be so cited.
§ 10.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this code, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ANOTHER. When used to designate the owner of property which is the subject
of an offense, includes not only natural persons, but also every other owner of
property.
   BOARD OF TRUSTEES. The Board of Trustees for the Village of East Dundee,
Illinois.
   COUNTY or COUNTIES. Kane County and Cook County, Illinois.
   COUNTY BOARD or COUNTY BOARDS. The County Board of Kane County, Illinois,
and the County Board of Cook County, Illinois.
(ILCS Chapter 5, Act 70, § 1.07)
   COURT. Any court of competent jurisdiction.
   DECREE. Synonymous with JUDGMENT.
(ILCS Chapter 5, Act 70, § 1.24)
   ELECTORS. Persons qualified to vote for elective officers at municipal
elections.
(ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, § 1-1-2)
   EXECUTIVE OFFICER. Words used for an executive or ministerial officer may
include any deputy or other person performing the duties of the officer, either
generally or in special cases.
(ILCS Chapter 5, Act 70, § 1.08)
   HERETOFORE or HEREAFTER.  HERETOFORE means any time previous to the day on
which the ordinance, resolution or statute takes effect; HEREAFTER means at any
time after that date.
(ILCS Chapter 5, Act 70, § 1.17)
   HIGHWAY, ROAD or STREET. Any road laid out by authority of the United
States, of the state or of any town or county of the state and all bridges
thereupon.
(ILCS Chapter 5, Act 70, § 1.16)
   ILCS.  Illinois Compiled Statutes, 2002, as heretofore and hereafter
amended.
   KEEPER or PROPRIETOR. Includes all persons, whether acting by themselves or
as a servant, agent or employee.
   LAND or REAL ESTATE. Includes rights and easements of an incorporeal nature.
   MAY. The act referred to is permissive.
   MONTH. A calendar month.
(ILCS Chapter 5, Act 70, § 1.10)
   MUNICIPAL CODE. The Illinois Municipal Code, ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5.
   OATH. Includes affirmation and SWEAR includes affirm.
(ILCS Chapter 5, Act 70, § 1.12)
   OWNER. When applied to property, includes any part owner, joint owner,
purchaser and seller under a contract and/or deed, tenant in common of the
whole or part of the property and includes any beneficiary of a land trust
which owns property.
   PERSON. Any legal person; includes associations, partnerships, corporations,
joint ventures and bodies politic and corporate as well as individuals.
(ILCS Chapter 5, Act 70, § 1.05)
   PERSONAL PROPERTY. Includes all property, except real.
   POLICE OFFICERS. Police officers employed and in the service of the village.
POLICE FORCE shall be construed to include such persons in the employ of a
village as members of the Department of Police, who are or shall hereafter be
appointed and sworn as POLICE OFFICERS.
(ILCS Chapter 5, Act 70, § 1.20)
   PREMISES. As applied to property, includes land and buildings.
   PRESIDENT. The President of the Village of East Dundee.
   PROPERTY. Includes real, personal, mixed estates and other interests.
   PUBLIC AUTHORITY. Includes school districts; units of legal government; the
village, city, county, state or federal governments, officers and agencies
thereof, or any commissions or committees thereof; or any duly authorized
public official.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Includes any street, sidewalk, park, cemetery, school yard,
body of water or watercourse, public conveyance or any other place for the sale
of merchandise, public accommodation or amusement.
   REAL PROPERTY. Includes lands, tenements and hereditaments.
   REGISTERED MAIL. Includes certified mail and CERTIFIED MAIL includes
registered mail.
   SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.
   SIDEWALK. The portion of the street between the curb line and the adjacent
property line intended for the use of pedestrians.
(ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 1-188)
   SPECIAL DISTRICTS. The meaning ascribed in Article VII of the Constitution
of the State of Illinois of 1970.
(ILCS Chapter 5, Act 70, § 1.29)
   STATE. The State of Illinois.
   STREET. Where the context admits, includes alleys, lanes, courts,
boulevards, squares and other public thoroughfares.
   TENANT or OCCUPANT. As applied to premises, includes any person holding a
written or oral lease or who actually occupies the whole or any part of the
premises, alone or with others.
   THIS CODE or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES. The village’s code hereby adopted, and
as hereinafter modified by amendment, revision and by the adoption of new
titles, chapters or sections.
   UNITS OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT. The meaning established in Section 1 of Article
VII of the Constitution of the State of Illinois of 1970.
(ILCS Chapter 5, Act 70, § 1.28)
   WEEK. Seven consecutive days.
   WHOEVER. Includes all persons, natural and artificial; partners; principals,
agents and employees; and all officials, public or private.
   WRITTEN or IN WRITING. Includes printing, electronic and any other mode of
representing words and letters; but when the written signature of any person is
required by law on any official or public writing or bond, required by law, it
shall be:
      (1)   The proper handwriting of that person or, in case he or she is
unable to write, his or her proper mark; or
      (2)   An electronic signature as defined in the Uniform Electronic
Transactions Act, except as otherwise provided by law.
(ILCS Chapter 5, Act 70, § 1.15)
   YEAR. A calendar year unless otherwise expressed; and the word YEAR alone is
equivalent to the expression “Year of Our Lord.”
(ILCS Chapter 5, Act 70, § 1.10)
§ 10.03 SECTION HEADINGS.
   Headings and captions used in this code are employed for reference purposes
only and shall not be deemed a part of the text of any section.
§ 10.04 RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   (1)   Words and phrases shall be read in context and construed
according to the rules of grammar and common usage.
      (2)   Words and phrases that have acquired a technical or particular
meaning, whether by legislative or judicial definition or otherwise, shall be
construed accordingly.
   (B)   As used in this code, unless the context otherwise requires, the
following rules will be followed.
      (1)   The singular shall include the plural and the plural shall include
the singular.
(ILCS Chapter 5, Act 70, § 1.03)
      (2)   Words of one gender shall include the other genders.
(ILCS Chapter 5, Act 70, § 1.04)
      (3)   Words in the present tense shall include the future.
(ILCS Chapter 5, Act 70, § 1.02)
      (4)   AND may be read OR, and OR may be read AND, if the context admits.
   (C)   (1)   The time within which any act provided by law is to be done
shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last unless the
last day is Saturday or Sunday or is a holiday, as defined or fixed in any
statute now or hereafter in force in the state, and then it shall also be
excluded.
      (2)   If the day succeeding Saturday, Sunday or a holiday is also a
holiday or a Saturday or Sunday, then the succeeding day shall also be
excluded.
(ILCS Chapter 5, Act 70, § 1.11)
   (D)   When the law requires an act to be done which may, by law, as well be
done by an agent as by the principal, the requirement shall be construed to
include all such acts when done by an authorized agent.
   (E)   Words purporting to give joint authority to three or more municipal
officers or other persons shall be construed as giving authority to a majority
of the officers or persons.
(ILCS Chapter 5, Act 70, § 1.09)
   (F)   These rules of construction shall not apply to any provision of this
code which shall contain any express provision excluding that construction or
when the subject matter or context of this code may be repugnant thereto.
   (G)   All general provisions, terms, phrases and expressions shall be
liberally construed in order that the true intent and meaning of the President
and Board of Trustees may be fully carried out.
(ILCS Chapter 5, Act 70, § 1.01)
   (H)   The provisions of any ordinance, in so far as they are the same as
those of any prior ordinance, shall be construed as a continuation of the prior
provisions and not as a new enactment.
(ILCS Chapter 5, Act 70, § 2)
§ 10.05 OFFICIAL TIME.
   The official time for the village shall be as set by federal law.
§ 10.06 FISCAL YEAR.
   The fiscal year of the village shall commence on the first day of January in
each year.
(Ord. 05-08, passed 2-21-05; Am. Ord. 23-28, passed 6-26-2023)
§ 10.07 INAUGURATION FOR NEWLY ELECTED OFFICERS.
   The date for inauguration for the newly elected officers of the village
shall be the first regular or special meeting of the corporate authorities in
the month of May following such election.
(Ord. 05-08, passed 2-21-05)
§ 10.08 REVIVOR; EFFECT OF AMENDMENT OR REPEAL.
   (A)   The repeal of a repealing ordinance does not revive the ordinance
originally repealed, nor impair the effect of any saving clause therein.
   (B)   (1)   The re-enactment, amendment or repeal of an ordinance does not
do any of the following, except as provided in division (C) of this section.
         (a)   Affect the prior operation of the ordinance or any prior action
taken thereunder;
         (b)   Affect any validation, cure, right, privilege, obligation or
liability previously acquired, accrued, accorded or incurred thereunder;
         (c)   Affect any violation thereof or penalty, forfeiture or
punishment incurred in respect thereto, prior to the amendment or repeal; and
         (d)   Affect any investigation, proceeding or remedy in respect of any
privilege, obligation, liability, penalty, forfeiture or punishment.
      (2)   The investigation, proceeding or remedy may be instituted,
continued or enforced and the penalty, forfeiture or punishment imposed, as if
the ordinance had not been repealed or amended.
   (C)   If the penalty, forfeiture or punishment for any offense is reduced by
a re-enactment or amendment of an ordinance, the penalty, forfeiture or
punishment, if not already imposed, shall be imposed according to the ordinance
as amended.
(Ord. 05-08, passed 2-21-05)
§ 10.09 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
   (A)   Wherever, in a penalty section, reference is made to a violation of a
section or an inclusive group of sections, the reference shall be construed to
mean a violation of any provision of the section or sections included in the
reference.
   (B)   References in this code to action taken or authorized under designated
sections of this code include, in every case, action taken or authorized under
the applicable legislative provision which is superseded by this code.
   (C)   Whenever, in one section, reference is made to another section hereof,
the reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified or renumbered unless the subject matter is changed
or materially altered by the amendment or revision and the context clearly
indicates that the reference to the section as amended or revised was not
intended.
(Ord. 05-08, passed 2-21-05)
§ 10.10 CONFLICTING PROVISIONS.
   (A)   If the provisions of different codes, chapters or sections of these
codified ordinances conflict with or contravene each other, the provisions
bearing the latest passage date shall prevail.
   (B)   If the conflicting provisions bear the same passage date, the conflict
shall be construed so as to be consistent with the meaning or legal effect of
the questions of the subject matter taken as a whole.
(Ord. 05-08, passed 2-21-05)
§ 10.11 AMENDMENTS TO CODE.
   All ordinances passed subsequent to this code which amend, repeal or in any
way affect this code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of
this code and printed for inclusion herein, or in the case of repealed
chapters, sections and divisions or any part thereof, by subsequent ordinances,
the repealed portions may be excluded from the code by the omission from
reprinted pages affected thereby, and the subsequent ordinances as numbered and
printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of
subsequent ordinances until this code of ordinances and subsequent ordinances
numbered or omitted are re-adopted as a new code of ordinances by the Board of
Trustees.
(Ord. 05-08, passed 2-21-05)
§ 10.12 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provisions of a section of these codified ordinances or the
application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the
invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of the section or
related sections which can be given effect without the invalid provision or
application and, to this end, the provisions are severable.
(Ord. 05-08, passed 2-21-05)
§ 10.13 REFERENCE TO PUBLIC OFFICE OR OFFICER.
   (A)   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to
any office, officer or employee of the village exercising the powers, duties or
functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary.
   (B)   The references shall also include the designee or agent of any such
officer or office unless the law or the context clearly requires otherwise.
(Ord. 05-08, passed 2-21-05)
§ 10.14 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   If a manifest error is discovered consisting of the misspelling of any word
or words, the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention
of the provisions affected, the use of a word or words to which no meaning can
be attached or the use of a word or words when another word or words was
clearly intended to express the intent, the spelling shall be corrected and the
word or words supplied, omitted or substituted as will conform with the
manifest intention, and the provision shall have the same effect as though the
correct words were contained in the text as originally published. No alteration
shall be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the nature or
extent of the error.
(Ord. 05-08, passed 2-21-05)
§ 10.15 ORDINANCES REPEALED.
   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated and
embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this code
shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code of
ordinances.
(Ord. 05-08, passed 2-21-05)
§ 10.16 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature (including, but not limited
to tax levy ordinances; appropriation ordinances; ordinances relating to
boundaries and annexations; franchise ordinances and other ordinances granting
special rights to persons or corporations; contract ordinances and ordinances
authorizing the execution of a contract or the issuance of warrants; salary
ordinances; ordinances establishing, naming or vacating streets, alleys or
other public places; improvement ordinances; bond ordinances; ordinances
relating to elections; ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of
real estate by or from the village; and all special ordinances) as well as any
other ordinances pertaining to subjects not enumerated and embraced in this
code of ordinances, shall remain in full force and effect unless herein
repealed expressly or by necessary implication.
(Ord. 05-08, passed 2-21-05)
§ 10.17 ORDINANCES SAVED.
   Whenever an ordinance, by its nature, either authorizes or enables the Board
of Trustees or a certain village officer or employee to make additional
regulations for the purpose of carrying out the intent of the ordinance, all
regulations of a similar nature serving that purpose effected prior to the
codification and not inconsistent thereto shall remain in effect and are saved.
(Ord. 05-08, passed 2-21-05)
§ 10.18 TECHNICAL CODES.
   (A)   Whenever any technical codes are incorporated herein by reference, any
subsequent amendments or revisions to the technical codes shall automatically
become a part of this code and shall be made available for public inspection by
the village.
   (B)   Further, to the extent of any conflict between the technical
provisions of this code and any technical codes adopted by reference, the most
restrictive provision shall prevail.
(Ord. 05-08, passed 2-21-05)
§ 10.19 HISTORICAL AND STATUTORY REFERENCES.
   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and passage
date of the original ordinance, and the most recent three amending ordinances,
if any, are listed following the text of the code section. Example: (Ord. 10,
passed 5-13-1960; Am. Ord. 15, passed 1-1-1970; Am. Ord. 20, passed 1-1-1980;
Am. Ord. 25, passed 1-1-1985)
   (B)   An “ILCS” cite included in the history indicates that the text of the
section reads either verbatim or substantially the same as the statute.
Example: (ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, §3.1-2-1) (Ord. 10, passed 1-17-1980; Am.
Ord. 20, passed 1-1-1985). An “ILCS” cite set forth as a “statutory reference”
following the text of the section indicates that the reader should refer to
that statute for further information. Example:
      § 38.04 PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.
   The village shall make available to any person for inspection or copying all
public records, as provided in the Illinois Freedom of Information Act.
   Statutory reference:
   Freedom of Information Act, see ILCS Chapter 5, Act 140, §§ 1 et seq.
   (C)   If a section of this code is derived from the previous code of
ordinances of the town published in a previous year and subsequently amended,
the prior code section number shall be indicated in the history by “(1981 Code,
§       ).”
(Ord. 05-08, passed 2-21-05)
§ 10.20 DEBTS DUE AND OWING THE VILLAGE.
   (A)   Any person, partnership, corporation or other entity ("debtor") owing
any fine, penalty, cost, tax, user charge, fee, judgment, financial contractual
obligation or any other debt to the village or any person, partnership,
corporation or entity under the control of such debtor, or lessee or user of
the debtor's property, shall not be entitled to any village service, permit,
license or other village action or approval unless that debt is paid in full or
the Village Administrator or his/her designee has approved a payment
arrangement for the debt owed.
   (B)   This section shall not prohibit water or sewer service or any
emergency village service to a debtor such as from the Police or Fire
Departments.
   (C)   Whenever any fine, charge, penalty or payment is due pursuant to any
provision in this code and is not paid after the village sends, mails or
otherwise delivers notice (unless a different period is stated elsewhere in
this code) to the debtor, the village may impose a penalty of 10% of the debt
owed for every 30 days of nonpayment after being noticed of such default of
debt due.
   (D)   Whenever any fine, charge, penalty or payment is due pursuant to any
provision in this code and is not paid after the village sends, mails or
otherwise delivers notice (unless a different period is stated elsewhere in
this code) to the debtor, the village may transfer such fine, charge, penalty
or payment to a private collection agency of the village's choosing or to an
attorney for collection purposes. Any such collection agency or attorney shall,
for purposes of collection of such fine, charge, penalty or payment, be deemed
an agent of the village. All costs or attorneys' fees incurred by the village
for the collection of any fines, charges, penalties or payments transferred to
any such collection agency or attorney shall be assessed against the debtor as
an additional fine, charge, penalty or payment, subject to any applicable
statutory limits.
   (E)   In addition to such fine, charge, penalty or payment imposed pursuant
to divisions (C) and (D), the debtor shall pay any other fee or penalty imposed
pursuant to this code.
(Ord. 16-28, passed 8-15-2016; Am. Ord. 19-33, passed 10-21-2019)
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any provision of this code or other ordinance of the
village for which another penalty is not specifically provided, shall be fined
not more than $750 for each and every violation thereof, and every day the
violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
Statutory reference:
   Authority to imprison for certain ordinance violations, see ILCS Chapter 65,
Act 5, § 1-2-1.1
   Limitations on penalties, see ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, § 1-2-1
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
Chapter
   
30.   BOARD OF TRUSTEES
   
31.   OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
   
32.   DEPARTMENTS, COMMISSIONS AND OTHER ORGANIZATIONS
   
33.   EMERGENCY SERVICES AND DISASTERS
   
34.   VILLAGE POLICIES
   
35.   TAXATION
   
36.   ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION
   
37.   FEES AND FINES
CHAPTER 30: BOARD OF TRUSTEES
Section
General Provisions
   
30.01   Election
   
30.02   Duties
   
30.03   Compensation
   
30.04   Village Hall
Rules of Order and Procedure
   
30.05   Meetings
   
30.06   Presiding officer
   
30.07   Duties of members of the Village Board
   
30.08   Standing committees
   
30.09   Visitors
   
30.10   Conduct of meetings
   
30.11   Motions
   
30.12   Ordinances and resolutions
   
30.13   Order of business
   
30.14   Privileges of the floor
   
30.15   Suspension of rules
   
30.16   Appeal from decisions of the presiding officer
   
30.17   Amendment of rules
   
30.18   Committee of the Whole
   
30.19   Sequence of agenda
   
30.20   Teleconferencing policy
   
30.21   [Reserved]
   
30.22   Minutes of meeting
   
30.23   Omnibus vote
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 30.01 ELECTION.
   The Board of Trustees shall be elected at a general election for a term of
four years and shall serve until their successors are elected and have
qualified. The inauguration of newly elected Trustees shall occur at the first
regular or special meeting of the corporate authorities in the month of May
following the election. Three of the six Trustees shall be elected in each odd-
numbered year.
(1981 Code, § 2.01) (Ord. 07-16, passed 4-2-2007; Am. Ord. 17-22, passed 4-17-
2017)
§ 30.02 DUTIES.
   The Trustees shall perform the duties and have the powers as may be
authorized by statute.
(1981 Code, § 2.02)
§ 30.03 COMPENSATION.
   (A)   The compensation for each member of the Board of Trustees shall be as
set by the Board for attendance at each regular meeting, each special meeting
and each adjourned meeting of the Board of Trustees actually attended by each
Trustee, the compensation to be paid to the several members of the Board of
Trustees quarterly.
   (B)   Travel expenses necessarily incurred by the several members of the
Board of Trustees while attending to village business and affairs, for which a
written voucher is furnished, shall be paid to the member promptly upon
approval by the Board as in other claims against the village, as defined and in
accordance with village policy.
   (C)   Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary, each elected or
appointed member of the Board of Trustees may forego any, or all, compensation
for attendance at each regular meeting, each special meeting, or each adjourned
meeting of the Board of Trustees attended by each Trustee. Any Trustee wishing
to forego compensation for attendance at any regular, special or adjourned
meeting shall notify the Village Treasurer, in writing, of their decision, its
effective date, and the duration. Nothing in this section shall prevent any
Trustee who has elected to forego compensation from electing to receive
compensation in the future, upon written notice to the Village Treasurer of
their desire to rescind the election to forego compensation.
(1981 Code, § 2.03) (Am. Ord. 85-6, passed 4-15-1985; Am. Ord. 94-16, passed 7-
5-1994; Am. Ord. 10-20, passed 5-3-2010)
§ 30.04 VILLAGE HALL.
   The building maintained by the village for offices for its official and
other public purposes, located at the southwest corner of Barrington Avenue and
Third Street in the village, shall be known and designated as the Village Hall
building.
(1981 Code, § 2.04)
RULES OF ORDER AND PROCEDURE
§ 30.05 MEETINGS.
   (A)   Regular meetings of the Board of Trustees shall be held on the first
and third Mondays of each month. The meetings shall begin at 6:00 p.m. unless
otherwise ordered at a regular meeting.
   (B)   In every case where the regular meeting falls on a legal holiday, the
regular meeting may be held on the day following such holiday.
   (C)   Special meetings may be held at any time on call of the President or
of any three Trustees. Such call shall be made in writing, and shall be
presented to the Village Clerk at least 50 hours prior to the time specified
for such meeting. The Clerk, or Village Administrator, or designee, shall
immediately serve, or cause to be served, written notice of such special
meeting on all members of the Board of Trustees. The written notice shall
describe briefly the object of the special meeting and shall be served, except
in case of emergency, at least 48 hours before the meeting. At a special
meeting, no business other than that proposed by the call shall be in order.
   (D)   In addition to any notice requirement prescribed by the Board of
Trustees, public notice of meetings must be given as prescribed in §§ 2.02 and
2.03 of the Open Meetings Act (ILCS, Chapter 5, Act 120, §§ 1 et seq.).
   (E)   All regular and special meetings of the Board of Trustees shall be
open to the public, except that a closed executive session can be declared for
purposes permitted by statute by a majority vote of the members of the Board
present. The presiding officer may invite such persons as may be required for
advice and information. During any executive session, a formal vote may not
take on any matter under discussion, except as to adjournment of the executive
session.
   (F)   News media so requesting shall be provided with the agenda for all
meetings of the Board of Trustees and their representatives shall be entitled
to attend all open meetings.
(Ord. 13-23, passed 7-8-2013; Am. Ord. 23-40, passed 9-18-2023)
§ 30.06 PRESIDING OFFICER.
   (A)   The President shall be the presiding officer at all meetings of the
Board of Trustees. Except as provided in the Municipal Code (ILCS Chapter 65,
Act 5, § 1-1-1, et seq.), he or she shall not vote on any ordinance,
resolution, or motion except where the vote of the Board of Trustees has
resulted in a tie; or where one half of the Board of Trustees elected have
voted in favor of an ordinance, resolution, or motion even though there is no
tie vote; or where a vote greater than a majority of the Board of Trustees is
required to adopt an ordinance, resolution or motion. In each instance
specified, the President shall vote. Nothing in this section shall deprive an
Acting President or President Pro Tem from voting in his or her capacity as
Trustee, but he or she shall not be entitled to another vote in his or her
capacity as Acting President or President Pro Tem.
   (B)   The President shall nominate one Trustee at the commencement of each
fiscal year to act as the presiding officer of the meeting in the absence of
the President, and one alternate in the event of the unavailability of the
appointed Trustee, which Trustee shall perform the duties of the President as
presiding officer.
   (C)   The presiding officer shall preserve order and decorum. The presiding
officer may speak to a subject before the Board of Trustees without
relinquishing the chair. The presiding officer shall decide all questions of
order, subject to appeal to the Board of Trustees. When two or more Trustees
request the floor, the presiding officer shall name the order in which they are
to be heard. In case of any disturbance or disorderly conduct, the presiding
officer shall have the power to have the chamber cleared of any or all
visitors.
(Ord. 13-23, passed 7-8-2013)
§ 30.07 DUTIES OF MEMBERS OF THE VILLAGE BOARD.
   (A)   While the presiding officer is putting the question or while business
is being transacted, no Trustee shall leave the Board of Trustees chamber
except by consent of the presiding officer. No Trustee shall speak or offer a
motion without first addressing the chair and being recognized.
   (B)   In speaking during the discussion of any question, members of the
Board of Trustees shall confine their remarks to the question under debate,
avoiding personalities and refraining from impugning the motives of any other
member of the Board or the staff. Members of the Board of Trustees shall not
speak more than once upon any subject until other members of the Board who wish
to speak shall have relinquished the floor.
   (C)   A Trustee, when called to order by the presiding officer, shall
thereupon discontinue speaking on the order of the presiding officer, which
order shall be binding and conclusive, subject only to right of appeal as
provided in §
30.06.
   (D)   Every Trustee present when a question is stated shall vote thereon,
unless excused by the Board, or unless he or she has a personal interest in the
question.
(Ord. 13-23, passed 7-8-2013)
§ 30.08 STANDING COMMITTEES.
   (A)   Standing committees of the Board of Trustees shall be as follows:
      (1)   Community Events and Depot Committee.
   (B)   Except for the Committee of the Whole, each standing Committee shall
consist of three Trustees with the President as an ex-officio member. The
President shall assign Trustees to each Committee each fiscal year but no later
than at the first regular meeting in June each year. Each Committee shall
enlist such assistance from other Trustees as the Committee may find desirable.
No Committee shall obligate the village for the expenditure of any money in
connection with its operation except with prior and proper authorization of the
Board of Trustees. The Committee shall keep the President aware of the
Committee activities and will report any policy matters to the President before
any action, publicity or opinions are presented to the public.
   (C)   Assignments to the Standing Committees shall be made by the Village
President.
   (D)   Committee procedures.
      (1)   All Committees shall hold meetings in accordance with the Open
Meetings Act.
      (2)   A copy of the agenda of each Committee meeting shall be delivered
to the President along with a copy of the minutes of the meeting.
      (3)   The Committee shall report on all matters under discussion upon
request of the President at any regular Board of Trustees meeting. Upon the
request of any two Trustees present, any report of a Committee shall be
deferred, for final action thereon, to the next regular meeting of the Board
after the report is made.
      (4)   Any person who requests to address the Committee shall be limited
to two minutes, unless otherwise directed by the Committee Chairperson.
(Ord. 13-23, passed 7-8-2013; Am. Ord. 23-33, passed 7-17-2023)
§ 30.09 VISITORS.
   Except during the time allotted for audience and visitors comments as
provided in §
30.10, no person other than a member of the Board of Trustees shall address
that body, except with the consent of the presiding officer.
(Ord. 13-23, passed 7-8-2013)
§ 30.10 CONDUCT OF MEETINGS.
   (A)   Quorum. Four members of the Board of Trustees shall constitute a
quorum and the affirmative vote of a majority of Trustees holding office shall
be necessary to adopt any motion, resolution, or ordinance, unless a greater
number is required by law. If a quorum is not present, the meeting shall
thereby stand adjourned and there may be no further discussion by the Trustees
present. A smaller number, however, may adjourn from time to time and may
compel the attendance of absentees, under penalties (including a fine for
failure to attend) as set forth by ordinance as may be amended from time to
time.
   (B)   Agendas. The Village President shall have the authority concerning the
preparation, placement, or removal of all items for the agenda for all meetings
of the Board of Trustees. Any two Trustees may add an item to the agenda which
may not be removed by the Village President. The Village Clerk shall distribute
the printed agenda with all supporting documents not later than 48 hours before
the meeting. Priority of business shall follow the printed agenda unless
changed by the presiding officer, subject to appeal of the Board of Trustees.
   (C)   The current edition of Robert's Rules of Order shall govern the
proceedings of the Board of Trustees where these Rules of Order and Procedure
are silent, and when not in conflict with statutes or ordinances.
   (D)   Public comment on agenda items only shall be permitted after the
meeting has been called to order, roll call taken and the Pledge of Allegiance
recited. No person recognized by the presiding officer may speak more than once
or speak longer than five minutes. All other public comments shall be heard
after conclusion of all business and prior to adjournment. No person recognized
by the presiding office may speak more than once or more than five minutes.
(Ord. 13-23, passed 7-8-2013)
§ 30.11 MOTIONS.
   (A)   No motion shall be debated unless it has been seconded. If any motion
or question contains two or more distinct propositions, the presiding officer
may have the same divided with the consent of Board.
   (B)   After a motion or resolution is stated by the presiding officer, it
may be withdrawn from consideration by the maker and the seconder with the
consent of majority of the Board.
   (C)   A motion to reconsider may be introduced by any member of the Board on
the prevailing side of the question at the same meeting at which the question
was voted upon or at the next regular meeting of the Board. A motion to
reconsider may only be presented at a Special Meeting at which there are
present at least as many members of the Board as were present when the original
vote was taken. A motion for reconsideration once having been made and decided
in the negative, shall not be renewed nor shall a motion to reconsider be
reconsidered. A motion to reconsider need not be seconded.
(Ord. 13-23, passed 7-8-2013)
§ 30.12 ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS.
   (A)   All ordinances and resolutions shall be introduced to the Board in
printed or written form.
   (B)   Any proposed ordinances may be prepared or reviewed by the Village
Attorney as directed by the Village President, Village Board, or Village
Administrator.
   (C)   The Village Clerk shall prepare copies of all proposed ordinances and
resolutions, together with copies of the attachments and shall distribute these
to the Board.
(Ord. 13-23, passed 7-8-2013)
§ 30.13 ORDER OF BUSINESS.
At every meeting of the Board of Trustees, the order of business shall be as
follows:
   (A)   Call to Order;
   (B)   Roll Call;
   (C)   Pledge of Allegiance;
   (D)   Public Comment;
   (E)   Consent Agenda:
      (1)   May contain routine items such as, but not limited to:
         (a)   Approval of past minutes;
         (b)   Approval of claims;
         (c)   Standard type resolutions and ordinances;
         (d)   Department reports;
         (e)   Treasurer's report; and
         (f)   Others.
      (2)   The following rule applies to the consent agenda:
         (a)   Any member of the Village Board may, by request, have any item
removed from the consent agenda. That item would be discussed immediately after
approval of the remaining items.
         (b)   The remaining items are approved by motion.
   (F)   Other Agenda Items;
   (G)   Financial Reports;
   (H)   Village President and Board Reports;
   (I)   Staff Reports;
   (J)   Executive Session; and
   (K)   Adjournment.
(Ord. 13-23, passed 7-8-2013; Am. Ord. 14-33, passed 10-27-2014; Am. Ord. 20-
44, passed 12-14-2020; Am. Ord. 22-36, passed 8-8-2022)
§ 30.14 PRIVILEGES OF THE FLOOR.
   (A)   No persons, other than the presiding officer, the Trustees, village
officials or persons invited by the presiding officer, shall have the privilege
of the floor.
   (B)   Persons other than the presiding officer, Trustees and village
officials shall not be permitted to address the Board except upon introduction
by the presiding officer or during the audience portion of the meeting.
   (C)   No person recognized by the presiding officer during the public
comment portion may address the Board more than once or speak for longer than
five minutes, except with the unanimous consent of all Board members present,
including the Village President.
   (D)   The presiding officer may have any person disrupting the meeting or
speaking when not recognized removed from the meeting. Disrupted behavior shall
include, but not be limited to, use of profane language or slanderous language.
(Ord. 13-23, passed 7-8-2013)
§ 30.15 SUSPENSION OF RULES.
   Any provision of these Rules not governed by the Illinois statutes or
village ordinances may be temporarily suspended at any meeting of the Board, by
affirmative vote of four of the members of the Board present.
(Ord. 13-23, passed 7-8-2013)
§ 30.16 APPEAL FROM DECISIONS OF THE PRESIDING OFFICER.
   Any Trustee may appeal to the Board from a ruling of the presiding officer.
If the appeal is seconded, the Trustee making the appeal may make a brief
statement of the reasons for the appeal, and the presiding officer may explain
the ruling briefly, but there shall be no debate on appeal and no other Trustee
shall participate in the discussion. The presiding officer shall then put the
question, "Shall the decision of the presiding officer be sustained?" If the
majority of the Trustees present vote "Aye," the ruling of the presiding
officer is sustained, otherwise it is overruled.
(Ord. 13-23, passed 7-8-2013)
§ 30.17 AMENDMENT OF RULES.
   These Rules may be amended or new Rules adopted by an affirmative vote of
five members of the Village Board.
(Ord. 13-23, passed 7-8-2013)
§ 30.18 COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE.
   (A)   There is hereby established a standing committee known as the
Committee of the Whole, which shall consist of the President and all the
Trustees. A quorum of the Committee of the Whole shall not be less than four.
The President shall serve as Chair of the Committee of the Whole and conduct
the order and consideration of business of the Committee of the Whole. The
President Pro Tem shall serve as Chair of the Committee of the Whole in the
absence of the President. The Committee of the Whole shall consider and make
recommendations to the Village Board regarding business of the village,
including but not limited to the subject matters of finance, administration,
community and economic development, public utilities, public parking, public
land renovations, public safety and transportation.
   (B)   The Chair of the Committee of the Whole may only vote to either break
a tie in the vote of the Trustees or to cause a tie in the vote of the
Trustees. The rules of order of the Committee of the Whole shall be established
by resolution adopted by the Village Board.
   (C)   The Committee of the Whole shall meet as needed. The President may
call such additional meetings of the Committee of the Whole as are required,
pursuant to the notice requirements set forth in this chapter.
   (D)   The Committee of the Whole shall also serve as the following
committees of the village: Economic Development Committee, Finance Committee,
Public Safety Committee, and Streets and Utility Committee.
(Ord. 05-15, passed 8-1-2005; Am. Ord. 09-14, passed 6-15-2009; Am. Ord. 12-18,
passed 4-2-2012; Am. Ord. 13-23, passed 7-8-2013; Am. Ord. 23-33, passed 7-17-
2023)
§ 30.19 SEQUENCE OF AGENDA.
   The Village Board has the authority to change the order of business of the
meeting agenda. Any member of the Village Board may, by request, have any item
contained within the meeting agenda moved to be heard earlier in the agenda to
accommodate presenters, visitors, and staff attending to participate in those
items, upon approval of the Village Board.
(Ord. 05-18, passed 8-15-2005; Am. Ord. 13-23, passed 7-8-2013)
§ 30.20 TELECONFERENCING POLICY.
   (A)   Teleconferencing meetings. The preferred procedure for meetings of the
Board of Trustees is that all Trustees be physically present at the designated
time and location within the village for the meeting; however, physical
presence may be waived and a Trustee may participate in a meeting of the Board
of Trustees pursuant to the Electronic Attendance at Village Meetings Policy
adopted by resolution.
   (B)   In the event the Village President wishes to appear at the scheduled
meeting telephonically, a Mayor pro tem will be appointed to preside over the
meeting and the Village President will participate in the meeting, but no
preside over the meeting.
   (C)   Payment of meeting fee is not permitted for Trustees attending
meetings of the Board of Trustees telephonically.
(Ord. 05-21, passed 10-3-2005; Am. Ord. 07-08, passed 3-5-2007; Am. Ord. 13-23,
passed 7-8-2013; Am. Ord. 24-16, passed 4-15-2024)
§ 30.21 [RESERVED]
§ 30.21 [RESERVED]
§ 30.22 MINUTES OF MEETING.
   (A)   Public access.
      (1)   Any record of a regular or special meeting of the Village Board of
Trustees, including but not limited to written minutes, audiotapes, and
videotapes, shall be available for public inspection within seven days of the
approval of such minutes by the Village Board. As of January 1, 2006, these
minutes shall be posted and available at the website of the village
(www.eastdundee.net) within seven days of the approval of such minutes by the
Village Board.
      (2)   The Village Clerk shall maintain an inventory of said records,
which shall identify the department that has custody of the records, how said
records are stored, and when said records may be disposed.
      (3)   Any request to review the minutes of a particular meeting of the
Village Board of Trustees must be made in writing to the Village Clerk. Any
request to the Village Clerk for reproduction of the minutes of a particular
meeting shall be completed at the cost of the requestor and payable to the
village.
      (4)   Said records shall be maintained by the village for no less than
two years.
   (B)   Disposition of minutes of meeting. Village records, including
audiotapes and videotapes of meetings of the Village Board of Trustees, may be
destroyed no less than two years after the completion, but only after the
Village Board approves the destruction of a particular record.
(Ord. 05-30, passed 12-5-2005; Am. Ord. 13-23, passed 7-8-2013)
§ 30.23 OMNIBUS VOTE.
   In addition to the voting requirements set forth herein, the Village
President and Board of Trustees at any meeting may, by unanimous consent, agree
to take a single vote, by yeas and nays, on several questions of any two or
more designated ordinances, orders, resolutions, or motions placed together for
voting purposes in and under the designation Omnibus Vote, and, in such event,
the Village Clerk may enter the words Omnibus Vote in the journal in each case
in lieu of entering the names of the Village President and Village Trustees
voting aye and those voting nay on the passage of each of the designated
ordinances, orders, resolutions, and motions included in such omnibus group.
The taking of such single or omnibus vote and such entries of the words Omnibus
Vote in the journal shall be a sufficient compliance of the requirements of
this chapter to all intents and purposes and with like effect as if the vote in
each case had been taken separately by yeas and nays on the question of the
passage of each ordinance, order, resolution, and motion included in such
omnibus vote, and separately recorded in the journal. Likewise, the yeas and
nays shall be taken upon the question of the passage of any other resolution or
motion at the request of any Trustee and shall be recorded in the journal.
(Ord. 06-07, passed 3-20-2006; Am. Ord. 13-23, passed 7-8-2013)
CHAPTER 31: OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
Section
General Provisions
   
31.01   Telephone services for elected officials
   
31.02   Officers and employees generally
   
31.03   Whistleblower reporting and anti-retaliation policy and procedures
   
31.04   State Officials and Employees Ethics Act
   
31.05   Determining eligibility under the Public Safety Employee Benefits Act
Specific Officers and Employees
   
31.15   Village President
   
31.16   Village Clerk
   
31.17   Village Administrator
   
31.18   Village Attorney
   
31.19   Village Engineer
   
31.20   Village Budget Officer
   
31.21   Deputy Village Administrator
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 31.01 TELEPHONE SERVICES FOR ELECTED OFFICIALS.
   Each elected officer of the village may be provided a telephone allowance
for the use of a telephone for village business. The telephone allowance shall
be based upon the charges for a private, single party line without accessories.
The telephone allowance shall be paid quarterly, at the time of the regular
salary payments. The telephone allowance will be reimbursed as an expense,
provided sufficient proof is provided to comply with Internal Revenue Service
regulations. If an elected officer does not submit an expense reimbursement,
for a specific quarter, no reimbursement shall be made. Nothing in this section
should be construed to prevent any elected officer or official from electing to
forego the telephone allowance provided for in this section, or any part
thereof.
(1981 Code, § 3.03) (Am. Ord. 10-19, passed 5-3-2010)
§ 31.02 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES GENERALLY.
   (A)   Appointments. The President, with the consent of the Board of
Trustees, shall make appointments to fill all appointive offices, in the
absence of provision to the contrary herein. The Village Administrator shall
hire employees of all other departments in the absence of provisions herein to
the contrary.
   (B)   Term. All officers appointed according to the provisions of this code
shall hold their office until the next regular election for the Trustees of the
village and thereafter for a term of one year or until their successors are
appointed and qualified.
   (C)   Assignment of duties. The President shall have the power to assign to
any appointive officer any duty which is not assigned by ordinance to some
other specific officer and shall determine disputes or questions relating to
the respective powers or duties of officers.
   (D)   Records. All records kept by any officer of the village shall be open
to inspection by the President or any member of the Board, at all times,
whether or not the records are required to be kept by statute or provision of
this code.
   (E)   Moneys received. Every officer of the village shall, at least once
every day, turn over all moneys received by him or her in his or her official
capacity to the Clerk with a statement which shows the source from which the
same was received.
   (F)   Oath. Every officer of the village shall, before entering upon his or
her duties, take the oath prescribed by law.
   (G)   Bond.
      (1)   Every officer of the village shall, if required by the Board,
before entering upon the duties of his or her office, give a bond in an amount
as may be determined by the Board and with sureties as it may approve,
conditioned upon the faithful performance of the duties of his or her office or
position.
      (2)   All bonds required to be made and executed in this chapter may be
written and made by a professional surety or insurance company authorized by
law to so enter into bonds and the premium therefore, upon presentation of a
written voucher by the officer in question, shall be paid by the village as in
the case of other claims.
   (H)   Salaries.
      (1)   All officers and employees of the village shall receive such
salaries as may be provided from time to time by ordinance.
      (2)   No officer or employee receiving salary from the village shall be
entitled to retain any portion of any fees collected by him or her in the
performance of his or her duties as municipal officer or employee in the
absence of a specific ordinance provision to that effect.
   (I)   Arrests. The President, Trustees, the Building Inspector, as well as
members of the Police Department, are hereby declared to be conservators of the
peace with such powers to make arrests as are given the conservators of the
peace by the Illinois Compiled Statutes, upon meeting the applicable
requirements of ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, § 3.1-15-25 or any other applicable
state law.
   (J)   Termination of office. Every officer of the village, upon the
termination of his or her office, shall deliver to his or her successor all
books and records which may be the property of the village; and if no successor
has been appointed within one week after the termination of office, the
property shall be delivered either to the Clerk or to the Treasurer.
   (K)   Residency requirements. All members of commissions and boards of the
village must be residents of the village in order to serve on said board or
commission.
(1981 Code, § 3.12) (Am. Ord. 86-18, passed 5-19-1986; Am. Ord. 94-17, passed
7-5-1994; Am. Ord. 98-19, passed 10-19-1998; Am. Ord. 07-03, passed 1-16-2007)
§ 31.03 WHISTLEBLOWER REPORTING AND ANTI-RETALIATION POLICY AND PROCEDURES.
   (A)   It is the policy of the Village of East Dundee to act in accordance
with Illinois Public Act 101-652 generally, and specifically § 4.1 of the
Public Officers Prohibited Activities Act, ILCS Chapter 50, Act 105, § 4.1.
   (B)   It is the policy of the Village of East Dundee to prohibit any
official from retaliating against any employee who:
      (1)   Reports an improper governmental action;
      (2)   Cooperates in the investigation related to a report of an improper
governmental action; or
      (3)   Testifies in a proceeding or prosecution of an improper
governmental action. An improper governmental action is defined as follows.
   (C)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      IMPROPER GOVERNMENTAL ACTION.
         (a)   Includes any action by a Village of East Dundee employee, an
appointed member of a board, commission, or committee, or an elected official
of the Village of East Dundee that is undertaken in violation of federal,
state, or Village of East Dundee ordinance, law or rule; is an abuse of
authority; violates the public's trust or expectation of his or her conduct; is
of substantial and specific danger to the public's health or safety; or is a
gross waste of public funds.
         (b)   Does not include Village of East Dundee personnel actions,
including, but not limited to, employee grievances, complaints, appointments,
promotions, transfers, assignments, reassignments, reinstatements,
restorations, reemployment, performance evaluations, reductions in pay,
dismissals, suspensions, demotions, reprimands, or violations of collective
bargaining agreements, except to the extent the actions amounts to retaliation.
Retaliation, in this context means retaliatory action that results from an
employee's protected activity of reporting improper governmental action,
cooperating in the investigation, proceeding or prosecution of a reported
improper governmental action.
   (D)   Copies of this policy and procedure, along with a copy of ILCS Chapter
50, Act 105, § 4.1 of the Public Officers Prohibited Activities Act will be
given to every employee upon hiring. Additionally, these same documents will be
furnished or made available to all employees on an annual basis.
   (E)   Designation of auditing official. Village of East Dundee designates
the Village Administrator to serve as the auditing official of the Village of
East Dundee, with the duties and responsibilities set forth in ILCS Chapter 50,
Act 105, § 4.1 Procedures for Reporting and Investigating Reports of Improper
Governmental Action.
   (F)   Reporting an "improper governmental action" or retaliation.
      (1)   If an employee believes that he/she has witnessed an improper
governmental action, as defined in the policy above, the employee must submit a
written report of the improper governmental action to the auditing official.
      (2)   If an employee believes that he/she has been retaliated against for
reporting improper governmental action, or cooperating in the investigation, or
procedure involving an improper governmental action, the employee must report
such alleged retaliation to the auditing official in writing within 60 days of
the retaliatory action taking place.
      (3)   The auditing official may transfer the complaint to another
auditing official, including the Kane County State's Attorney, if he/she
determines that it is appropriate.
      (4)   If the auditing official is also the subject of the complaint, the
complainant may file the complaint with any state's attorney.
   (G)   Investigation of complaint.
      (1)   Identity of the complainant.
         (a)   The Auditing Official will keep the identity of the complainant
confidential to the extent allowed by law.
         (b)   The complainant may waive confidentiality in writing.
      (2)   The auditing official shall investigate the complaint promptly and
thoroughly and conclude whether or not the evidence gathered through such
investigation warrants a finding that either an improper governmental action,
or retaliation for filing such a complaint or cooperating with such
investigation occurred or did not occur.
      (3)   The investigation by the auditing official may include:
         (a)   Interviews of the complainant and witnesses;
         (b)   Interviews of governmental officials who may have knowledge
about the complaint or may be the subject of the complaint;
         (c)   Inspection of documentation (in written, printed, or electronic
format) relevant to the complaint;
         (d)   Taking any other appropriate measures to ensure that the
complaint has been thoroughly investigated;
         (e)   Making a determination whether the complaint has merit or
whether the complaint does not have merit.
   (H)   Determination and remedial action if necessary.
      (1)   If the auditing official determines that the complaint has no
merit, he/she can dismiss the complaint.
      (2)   If the auditing official determines that the complaint has merit,
he/she may take remedial action on behalf of the complainant, including
reinstatement, reimbursement for lost wages or expenses, promotion, or other
remedial action that the auditing official deems appropriate. The auditing
official may also make his/her investigation findings available to the
complainant's attorney if the auditing official finds that restitution is not
sufficient.
      (3)   Any person who engages in prohibited retaliation under ILCS Chapter
50, Act 105, § 4.1 of the Public Officers Prohibited Activities Act may also be
subject to fines, appropriate employment action, civil or criminal prosecution,
or any combination of these actions as prescribed in that section.
(Ord. 22-34, passed 7-18-2022)
Statutory reference:
   Retaliation against a whistleblower, see ILCS Chapter 50, Act 105, § 4.1
§ 31.04 STATE OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES ETHICS ACT.
   (A)   The regulations of Sections 5-15 (ILCS Chapter 5, Act 430, § 5-15) and
Article 10 (ILCS Chapter 5, Act 430, §§ 10-10 through 10-40) of the State
Officials and Employees Ethics Act, ILCS Chapter 5, Act 430, §§ 1-1 et seq.,
(hereinafter referred to as the "Act" in this Section) are hereby adopted by
reference and made applicable to the officers and employees of the village to
the extent required by ILCS Chapter 5, Act 430, § 70-5.
   (B)   The solicitation or acceptance of gifts prohibited to be solicited or
accepted under the Act, by any officer or any employee of the village, is
hereby prohibited.
   (C)   The offering or making of gifts prohibited to be offered or made to an
officer or employee of the village under the Act is hereby prohibited.
   (D)   The participation in political activities prohibited under the Act, by
any officer or employee of the village, is hereby prohibited.
   (E)   For purposes of this section, the terms OFFICER and EMPLOYEE shall be
defined as set forth in ILCS Chapter 5, Act 430, § 70-5(c).
   (F)   The penalties for violations of this section shall be the same as
those penalties set forth in ILCS Chapter 5, Act 430, § 50-5 for similar
violations of the Act.
   (G)   This section does not repeal or otherwise amend or modify any existing
ordinances or policies which regulate the conduct of village officers and
employees. To the extent that any such existing ordinances or policies are less
restrictive than this section, however, the provisions of this section shall
prevail in accordance with the provisions of ILCS Chapter 5, Act 430, § 70-5
(a).
   (H)   Any amendment to the Act that becomes effective after the effective
date of this section shall be incorporated into this section by reference and
shall be applicable to the solicitation, acceptance, offering, and making of
gifts and to prohibited political activities. However, any amendment that makes
its provisions optional for adoption by municipalities shall not be
incorporated into this section by reference without formal action by the
corporate authorities of the village.
   (I)   If the Illinois Supreme Court declares the Act unconstitutional in its
entirety, then this section shall be repealed as of the date that the Illinois
Supreme Court's decision becomes final and not subject to any further appeals
or rehearings. This section shall be deemed repealed without further action by
the corporate authorities of the village if the Act is found unconstitutional
by the Illinois Supreme Court.
   (J)   If the Illinois Supreme Court declares part of the Act
unconstitutional but upholds the constitutionality of the remainder of the Act,
or does not address the remainder of the Act, then the remainder of the Act as
adopted by this section shall remain in full force and effect; however, that
part of this section relating to the part of the Act found unconstitutional
shall be deemed repealed without further action by the corporate authorities of
the village.
(Ord. 04-14, passed 5-17-04)
§ 31.05 DETERMINING ELIGIBILITY UNDER THE PUBLIC SAFETY EMPLOYEE BENEFITS ACT.
   (A)   Purpose.
      (1)   The purpose of this section is to provide a fair and efficient
method of determining the eligibility of full-time village police officers to
the benefits enumerated under the Public Safety Employee Benefits Act, ILCS
Chapter 820, Act 320, §§ 1 et seq. (“PSEBA”) through an administrative process,
including, if necessary, an administrative hearing. All benefits provided to
employees pursuant to the ordinance must be consistent with the PSEBA.
Individuals eligible for benefits under the PSEBA will be eligible for benefits
under this section (hereinafter referred to as “applicants”).
      (2)   The administrative procedure established herein is intended to
determine eligibility to receive certain health insurance benefits from the
village. This administrative procedure is not a contract that bestows a benefit
or entitlement on any particular individual and may be modified by the village
at any time without notice.
      (3)   Any full-time police officer, who after November 14, 1997, suffers
a catastrophic injury in the line of duty, may apply for health insurance
benefits under the Act as set forth below. The same benefits may be extended to
the spouse and eligible dependent children of the catastrophically injured
police officer killed in the line of duty, provided the conditions as
established by the Act are met.
   (B)   Application procedure.
      (1)   Application required. To seek benefits under the Act, a full-time
police officer, or in the event of the death or incapacity of the police
officer, a family member of the injured or deceased police officer, must file
with the Administration and/or Human Resources Department a fully completed
PSEBA application, in writing, within 30 calendar days of the granting of a
line-of-duty disability pension, or within 30 calendar days of the date of the
adoption of this section in the event that the employee has filed a pension
claim prior to the date of adoption of this section, whichever is later.
         (a)   The village’s PSEBA application must be completed and submitted
with all of the supporting documentation filed with the pension board by the
applicant. Applicant must also submit any other documents or information
submitted or identified as exhibits at the pension hearing, and any pension
board determination or ruling, documents/information supporting the PSEBA
eligibility requirements. Failure to timely file the fully completed
application along with submittal of other required information shall result in
a forfeiture of the benefits under PSEBA.
         (b)   Upon request, the Human Resources Director, or their designee,
shall furnish a Public Safety Employee Benefit Act application to the
applicant.
      (2)   Sworn statement required. The PSEBA application shall include a
sworn and notarized statement explaining how the disabling injury or death
directly resulted from:
         (a)   Response to fresh pursuit;
         (b)   Response to what is reasonably believed to be an emergency;
         (c)   Response to an unlawful act perpetrated by another; or
         (d)   A participation during the investigation of a criminal act.
      (3)   Medical release required. A signed PSEBA medical release
authorizing the collection of medical information related to the incident
including, but not limited to, the disability pension proceedings, worker’s
compensation records and medical records, must be submitted with the PSEBA
application. The PSEBA medical information release must specify the name,
address, email and phone information for pertinent health care provider(s) and
hospital(s), along with employee’s signature and a witness signature. A review
of the PSEBA application will not occur until the PSEBA medical authorization
release is submitted.
      (4)   General information release required. A signed PSEBA general
information release authorizing the collection of general information related
to the incident, including, but not limited to disability pension proceedings,
worker’s compensation records and medical records, must be submitted with the
application. The PSEBA general information release must specify the name and
signature of the employee along with the name and signature of a witness
authorizing the collection of information pertinent to the incident review
process. A review of the PSEBA application will not occur until the PSEBA
general information release is submitted.
      (5)   Other information. The Human Resources Director, or their designee,
may require other information necessary to decide as to whether an
administrative hearing is required, including, but not limited to health
insurance benefits the employee is currently receiving or is eligible to
receive; or, any other health insurance benefits the applicant or family
members are otherwise entitled. The applicant has an ongoing obligation to
update information provided. Failure to do so may result in the denial of
benefits.
   (C)   Application review by the Human Resources Director, or their designee,
and notification.
      (1)   Upon receipt of a fully completed application for PSEBA benefits
timely filed, the Human Resources Director, or their designee, shall review the
application and supporting documents to make an initial determination regarding
the application for benefits. That determination may be:
         (a)   A determination to grant benefits based upon the preliminary
record.
         (b)   A determination to deny benefits.
         (c)   The making of such other finding as is consistent with the
evidence or by agreement of the applicant and the village.
      (2)   If the Human Resources Director, or their designee, grants the
benefit based on the preliminary record and subject to any necessary
authorization by the Village Board, the applicant will be notified and required
to make further contact with the Human Resources Director, or their designee,
within 30 calendar days for benefit explanation and processing.
      (3)   If the Human Resources Director, or their designee, denies the
benefit based on the preliminary record, the applicant will receive written
notice of such denial and the applicant shall have the right to request an
administrative hearing which must be served in writing to the Human Resources
Director, or their designee, not later than 30 calendar days after being served
with written notice of the denial. Upon receipt of a timely notice from the
applicant, the Human Resources Director, or their designee, shall schedule an
administrative hearing and serve the applicant with notice of the
administrative hearing along with a date for the scheduled administrative
hearing.
      (4)   Failure to request an administrative hearing within 30 calendar
days after being served with written notice of the denial of PSEBA benefits by
the Human Resources Director, or their designee, shall result in the forfeiture
of benefits under the PSEBA.
      (5)   If the applicant or village, upon receiving written notice of the
administrative hearing date, cannot attend said date as indicated in the notice
of administrative hearing, the applicant or the village, as the case may be,
must contact the Hearing Officer within seven calendar days after being served
with notice of the administrative hearing, communicating alternative hearing
date(s) which are within close proximity of the original hearing date indicated
by the Hearing Officer. Continuances will be granted for good cause only.
Failure to appear and/or cooperate in the hearing process may result in denial
of benefits.
   (D)   Administrative hearing; Hearing Officer.
      (1)   Power of the Hearing Officer. The Hearing Officer shall have all of
the powers granted to him under common law relative to the conduct of an
administrative hearing including the power to:
         (a)   Preside over all village hearings involving PSEBA;
         (b)   Administer oaths;
         (c)   Hear testimony taken under oath and affirmation and accept
evidence that is relevant to the issue of eligibility under PSEBA;
         (d)   Issue subpoenas to secure attendance of witnesses and the
production of relevant papers or documents upon the request of the parties or
their representatives;
         (e)   Rule upon objections in the admissibility of evidence and other
motions;
         (f)   Preserve and authenticate the record of the hearing and all
exhibits in evidence introduced at the hearing;
         (g)   Issue a determination based on the evidence presented at the
hearing, after entertaining arguments in either oral or written format, at the
discretion of the Hearing Officer, the determination of which shall be in
writing and shall include a written finding of fact, decision and order.
      (2)   Appointment of Hearing Officer. The Village President, with the
consent of the Board of Trustees, is hereby authorized to appoint a person to
hold the position of a Hearing Officer for any hearing that shall be scheduled
by the village. In making said selection, the Village President shall consider
all pertinent information including, at a minimum:
         (a)   The candidate’s ability to competently perform the services; and
         (b)   The candidate’s service record and performance data made
available to the Village President on file with the village or otherwise
obtained by the village.
         (c)   The candidate must be an attorney licensed to practice law in
the State of Illinois for at least ten years prior to appointment and have
knowledge of and experience in employment and labor law, general civil
procedure, the rules of evidence, and administrative practice.
   (E)   Administrative hearing. An administrative hearing shall be held to
adjudicate and determine whether the applicant is eligible for benefits under
PSEBA. If the applicant is found eligible, the benefits shall be consistent
with the Act.
      (1)   Time and date. Hearings shall be held on the date, time and place
as established by the village with appropriate notice served upon the
applicant.
      (2)   Record. The proceedings shall be recorded by a certified court
reporter and a transcript of all proceedings shall be made by said certified
court reporter.
      (3)   Procedures. The village and the applicant shall be entitled to
representation by counsel at said hearing and may present witnesses, may
present testimony and documents, may cross-examine opposing witnesses, and may
request the issuance of subpoenas to compel the appearance of relevant
witnesses or the production of relevant documents. Each party shall bear the
costs of its own counsel and witnesses.
      (4)   Evidence. In so far as is practical, the rules of evidence as set
forth in the Illinois Code of Evidence shall apply.
      (5)   Final determination. The determination by the Hearing Officer of
whether the applicant is eligible for the benefits under the Public Safety
Employee Benefits Act (ILCS Chapter 820, Act 320, §§ 1 et seq.) shall
constitute a final administrative determination for the purpose of judicial
review.
      (6)   Burden of proof. At any administrative hearing, the applicant shall
have the obligation and burden of proof to establish that the applicant is
qualified to receive the benefits by clear and convincing evidence.
      (7)   Administrative records. All records pertaining to the
administrative process will be held in a separate file in the applicant’s name
maintained by the village.
   (F)   Health insurance benefits.
      (1)   If the Human Resources Director, or their designee, or Hearing
Officer awards PSEBA benefits, the village’s basic level insurance plan, as
designated by the village in the event the village offers more than one
insurance plan will be the plan offered. The village’s basic level insurance
plan may change from time to time. If the applicant chooses to enroll in a plan
available in the village other than the designated basic level insurance plan,
then the applicant must pay any difference in insurance premiums between the
village’s basic plan and that of another plan on a monthly basis, due by the
fifteenth of each month in which coverage is effective. Failure to pay said
premiums by the fifteenth of the month in which coverage is effective, may
result in cancellation of the health insurance plan.
      (2)   Individuals receiving benefits under PSEBA will only be able to
change from one plan to another during the village’s open enrollment period.
   (G)   Other health insurance benefits.
      (1)   Health insurance benefits payable from any other source will reduce
the benefits payable from the village. Each applicant will be required to sign
an affidavit attesting to the fact that he/she is not eligible for insurance
benefits from any other source.
      (2)   It is the responsibility of the applicant and/or the benefit
recipient to notify the village within 30 days of any changes to other sources
of health insurance benefits. Receipt of benefits in violation of this
provision will require reimbursement to the village of any benefits received.
The village reserves the right on an annual basis to have the applicant and/or
the benefit recipient provide another affidavit affirming whether other health
insurance is available or payable to the applicant, his/her spouse and/or his/
her qualifying dependent children.
      (3)   The applicant is also required to notify the village when the
applicant and/or benefit recipient becomes Medicare eligible so the village can
assist with the transition to Medicare coverage and/or adjust health insurance
benefits accordingly.
(Ord. 23-35, passed 8-7-2023)
SPECIFIC OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
§ 31.15 VILLAGE PRESIDENT.
   (A)   Election. The Village President shall be elected at a general election
for a four-year term and shall serve until his or her successor is elected and
qualified as is provided by statute. An election shall be held every four
years.
   (B)   Duties. The Village President shall be President of the Board of
Trustees and shall preside at all meetings of the Board and, except as
otherwise provided by statute, shall have the powers and perform the duties of
chief executive officer of the village and shall devote to the duties of his or
her office whatever time the faithful discharge thereof may require.
   (C)   Appointment of officers.
      (1)   The President, by and with the advice and consent of the Board of
Trustees, shall appoint:
         (a)   An Administrator;
         (b)   A Director of Public Works;
         (c)   A Chief of Police; and
         (d)   Other officers as may be necessary to carry into effect the
powers conferred upon villages.
      (2)   Any officer of the village may resign from his or her office. If
the officer resigns, he or she shall continue in office and continue to perform
the duties thereof until his or her successor has been chosen and has
qualified. If there is a failure to appoint a village officer or the person
appointed fails to qualify, the person filling the office shall continue in
office and shall continue to perform the duties thereof until his or her
successor has been chosen and has qualified.
   (D)   Designation of officer’s duties. Whenever there is a dispute as to the
respective duties or powers of any appointed officer of the village, this
dispute shall be settled by the President after consultation with the Village
Attorney; and the President shall have the power to delegate any appointed
officer any duty which is to be performed when no specific officer has been
directed to perform that duty.
   (E)   Licenses. The President shall sign all licenses and permits granted by
the authority of the Board of Trustees, except as otherwise provided by law or
ordinance.
   (F)   Discharge of prisoners. The President shall have the power and
authority to release and discharge, at his or her discretion, any person
imprisoned for the violation of any village ordinance. In each case in which
the release shall be made by the President, he or she shall cause a report
thereof to be made to the Board of Trustee, setting out his or her reasons for
the release.
   (G)   Salary and other compensation.
      (1)   The President shall be compensated at an amount as set by the
Board.
      (2)   Travel expenses necessarily incurred by the President while
attending to village business and affairs, for which a written voucher is
furnished, shall be paid to the President promptly upon approval by the Board
as, in other claims against the village.
      (3)   Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary, the Village
President may forego any, or all, compensation to which he or she is otherwise
entitled for any part of his or her term by notifying the Village Treasurer, in
writing, of such an election, the amount the President wishes to forego, the
length of time the President wishes to forego such compensation, and the
effective date of the election. Nothing in this section shall be construed to
prevent the President from rescinding the election to forego compensation, upon
written notice to the Village Treasurer of his or her desire to rescind the
election to forego compensation.
   (H)   Vacancy. Whenever a vacancy in the Office of President occurs during
his or her term, the vacancy shall be filled for the remainder of the term at
the next election of Trustees unless the vacancy is filled by a special
election as provided by law. During the period from the time that the vacancy
occurs until a President is elected and has qualified, the vacancy may be
filled by the election of an acting President by the Board of Trustees.
(1981 Code, § 3.01) (Am. Ord. 94-17, passed 7-5-1994; Am. Ord. 96-17, passed 7-
5-1996; Am. Ord. 98-19, passed 10-19-1998; Am. Ord. 10-18, passed 5-3-2010)
§ 31.16 VILLAGE CLERK.
   (A)   Appointment. The Village Clerk shall be appointed by the Village
President with the concurrence of at least four of the Board of Trustees then
holding office. The Clerk shall serve until his or her successor is elected and
qualified.
   (B)   Bond. The Village Clerk shall, before entering upon his or her duties
of his or her office, execute a bond to the village, paid for by the village,
in the penal sum of $50,000 with such sureties as the Board of Trustees shall
approve conditioned for the faithful performance of the duties of his or her
office.
   (C)   Duties. The Village Clerk shall, in addition to the duties now imposed
upon him or her by law, perform the following duties:
      (1)   The Clerk shall give notice of special meetings of the Board of
Trustees to the members and the Village Attorney.
      (2)   The Clerk shall attest all licenses granted under the ordinances of
the village and he or she shall keep a record of the issuance thereof.
      (3)   The Clerk shall, without delay, deliver to the President all
ordinances or resolutions in his or her charge, which are required to be
approved or otherwise acted upon by the President, together with all papers on
which the same are founded.
      (4)   The Clerk shall collect all monies due from any licenses issued
pursuant to village ordinances and deliver the same to the Village Treasurer
within one week after receiving the same and take his or her receipt therefor.
   (D)   Filing of ordinances. The original of all ordinances passed by the
Board of Trustees shall be filed in the Clerk’s office and he or she shall be
the custodian of the same.
   (E)   Recording ordinances.
      (1)   The Village Clerk shall record and index all ordinances hereafter
adopted in a book to be known as the Ordinance Book, giving a number to each
ordinance adopted by the Board of Trustees.
      (2)   At the foot of the record of each ordinance so recorded, the Clerk
shall make a memorandum of the date of the passage and publishing of the
ordinance.
   (F)   Salary. The Village Clerk shall be compensated in an amount as set by
the Board.
   (G)   Deputy Village Clerk. The Village Clerk may appoint one Deputy Village
Clerk, subject to the Village Board’s approval, as necessary to discharge the
functions and duties of the office of the Village Clerk. The Deputy Village
Clerk is hereby permitted to perform such other acts incidental to carrying out
said position, and to perform any other duties under the direction and
supervision of the Village Administrator. The Deputy Village Clerk shall be
compensated in an amount as set, and approved, by the Village Board.
(1981 Code, § 3.02) (Am. Ord. 84-02, passed 4-2-1984; Am. Ord. 94-17, passed 7-
5-1994; Am. Ord. 05-04, passed 2-7-2005; Am. Ord. 06-02, passed 1-3-2006; Am.
Ord. 06-10, passed 4-17-2006; Am. Ord. 09-13, passed 6-15-2009; Am. Ord. 13-07,
passed 3-18-2013)
§ 31.17 VILLAGE ADMINISTRATOR.
   (A)   Appointment; term of office.
      (1)   The Village Administrator, hereinafter referred to as Village
Administrator, shall be appointed by the President of the village with the
advice and consent of at least four of the Board of Trustees then holding
office for a term as set by the Board.
      (2)   No elected official of the village shall receive appointment while
he or she is serving as an elected official.
   (B)   Exclusive employment.
      (1)   The Village Administrator shall remain in the exclusive employ of
the village and shall neither accept other employment nor become employed by
any other village or other employer until his or her termination date without
the express consent of the Board of Trustees.
      (2)   The Village Administrator may, however, teach outside the customary
business hours of the village.
   (C)   Duties.
      (1)   The Village Administrator shall be the Chief Administrative Officer
for the village and have control over day-to-day operations.
      (2)   Nothing in this section shall give to the Village Administrator any
power not permitted by professional ethics, professional standards, statutes of
the state or this code of ordinances.
      (3)   The Village Administrator shall be responsible to the present Board
of Trustees for the proper administration of the affairs of the village and
shall have the authority as may be required to accomplish the duties that may
be assigned to him or her from time to time by resolution adopted by the Board.
   (D)   Compensation. The Village Administrator shall receive such
compensation as the corporate authorities shall fix from time to time by
resolution or ordinance.
   (E)   Other terms and conditions of employment.
      (1)   The corporate authorities, in consultation with the Village
Administrator, shall fix any such other terms and conditions of employment, as
it may determine from time to time, relating to the performance of the Village
Administrator, provided the terms and conditions are not inconsistent with or
in conflict with the provisions of this section and all other ordinances of the
village or state laws.
      (2)   All general provisions of the municipal code and regulations and
rules of the village relating to vacation and sick leave, retirement and
pension system contributions, holidays and other fringe benefits and working
conditions as they now exist or hereafter may be amended, also, apply to the
Village Administrator they would to other employees of the village, in addition
to the benefits enumerated specifically for the benefit of the Village
Administrator, except as herein provided.
(1981 Code, § 3.04) (Am. Ord. 86-16, passed 4-28-1986; Am. Ord. 94-17, passed
7-5-1994; Am. Ord. 96-19, passed 5-19-1996; Am. Ord. 14-38, passed 11-10-2014;
Am. Ord. 17-52, passed 11-6-2017; Am. Ord. 18-09, passed 5-21-2018)
§ 31.18 VILLAGE ATTORNEY.
   (A)   Appointment. The Village Attorney shall be appointed by the Village
President and the Board of Trustees, acting jointly, for a term of one year
commencing on the first Monday in May of each year. The Village Attorney shall
hold his or her office for the term and until his or her successor shall be
appointed and qualified. It is expressly acknowledged that the Village Attorney
hereby appointed is not a village officer, but rather an independent contractor
serving at the pleasure of the President and Board of Trustees.
   (B)   Duties. The Village Attorney shall prosecute or defend all suits of
any nature which may be begun by or against the village or in which the village
may be an interested party; he or she shall see to the enforcement or
collections of all judgments, orders and decrees entered in favor of the
village. He or she shall be the legal advisor to the President and Board of
Trustees; he or she shall give advice and opinions, upon request, on any legal
subject pertaining to village affairs and he or she shall submit written
opinions upon any such subject upon the request of either the President or the
Board of Trustees. He or she shall attend all regular and special meetings of
the Board, upon request, and assist the Board in its deliberations upon request
of any member. The Village Attorney shall approve all contracts, leases bonds,
assignments, deeds or other legal documents entered into or executed; provided
that, this provision shall not be construed, as affecting the legality and
validity of any instrument which has been executed without the approval of the
Village Attorney.
   (C)   Compensation. The Village Attorney shall be paid such compensation as
the Board of Trustees may from time to time, by resolution, provide. The
compensation for the service, as herein provided, shall be paid the Village
Attorney immediately following the approval by the Board of Trustees of a claim
presented therefor.
(1981 Code, § 3.05) (Am. Ord. 95-5, passed 4-15-1995; Am. Ord. 96-16, passed 4-
29-1996; Am. Ord. 96-17, passed 7-5-1996)
§ 31.19 VILLAGE ENGINEER.
   (A)   Appointment. The Village Engineer shall be appointed by the Village
President, with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees, for a term of
one year commencing on the first Monday in May of each year. The Village
Engineer shall hold his or her office for the term and until his or her
successor shall be appointed qualified.
   (B)   Duties. The Village Engineer shall perform the duties from time to
time assigned and directed to him or her by the Board of Trustees. He or she
shall give advice and counsel to the Board on an engineering matter pertaining
to village affairs. He or she shall attend all regular and special meetings of
the Board of Trustees upon request.
   (C)   Compensation.
      (1)   The Village Engineer shall be paid such compensation as the Board
of Trustees may from time to time, by resolution, provide.
      (2)   The compensation for the service, as herein provided, shall be paid
the Village Engineer immediately following the approval by the Board of
Trustees of a claim presented therefore.
(1981 Code, § 3.06) (Am. Ord. 98-19, passed 10-19-1998)
§ 31.20 VILLAGE BUDGET OFFICER.
   (A)   Appointment. The Village Budget Officer shall be appointed by the
Village President with the approval of the corporate authorities as provided in
ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, § 8-2-9.1.
   (B)   Bond. The Village Budget Officer before entering upon the duties of
his or her office shall execute a bond to the village in such sum as provided
in ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, § 3.1-10-25 with such sureties as the President and
Board of Trustees shall approve conditioned for the faithful performance of the
duties of his or her office.
   (C)   Powers and duties. The Village Budget Officer shall have such powers
and duties as provided pursuant to ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, § 8-2-9.2 including
the following enumerated by statute:
      (1)   Permit and encourage and establish the use of efficient planning,
budgeting, auditing, reporting, accounting, and other fiscal management
procedures in all municipal departments, commissions, and boards.
      (2)   Compile an annual budget in accordance with ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5,
§ 8-2-9.3.
      (3)   Examine all books and records of all municipal departments,
commissions, and boards which relate to monies received by the municipality,
municipal departments, commissions, and boards, and paid out by the
municipality, municipal departments, commissions, and boards, debts and
accounts receivable, amounts owed by or to the municipality, municipal
departments, commissions, and boards.
      (4)   Obtain such additional information from the municipality, municipal
departments, commissions, and boards as may be useful to the Budget Officer for
purposes of compiling a municipal budget, such information to be furnished by
the municipality, municipal departments, commissions, and boards in the form
required by the Budget Officer. Any department, commission or board which
refuses to make such information as is requested of it available to the Budget
Officer shall not be permitted to make expenditures under any subsequent budget
for the municipality until such municipal department, commission, or board
shall comply in full with the request of the Budget Officer.
      (5)   Establish and maintain such procedures as shall insure that no
expenditures are made by the municipality, municipal departments, commissions,
or board except as authorized by the budget.
      (6)   Heads of village departments may make requests to the Village
Budget Officer for revisions or alterations to the budget by deleting, adding
to, changing or creating sub-classes within object classes budgeted previously
to a department. The Village Budget Officer shall review all requests for
budget revisions as to their effect on the budget in total and the availability
of funds. The Village Budget Officer may revise or alter the budget by
deleting, adding to, changing or creating sub-classes within object classes
budgeted previously to a department, board, or commission without approval of
the President and Board of Trustees.
   (D)   Salary. The salary of the Village Budget Officer shall be in an amount
set by the Village Board payable semi-monthly.
(Ord. 03-01, passed 1-21-2003; Am. Ord. 18-09, passed 5-21-2018)
§ 31.21 DEPUTY VILLAGE ADMINISTRATOR.
   (A)   Appointment; term of office.
      (1)   The Deputy Village Administrator, hereinafter referred to as Deputy
Village Administrator, shall be appointed by the Village Administrator of the
village with the advice and consent of the Village President.
      (2)   No elected official of the village shall receive appointment while
he or she is serving as an elected official.
   (B)   Exclusive employment.
      (1)   The Deputy Village Administrator shall remain in the exclusive
employ of the village and shall neither accept other employment nor become
employed by any other village or other employer until his or her termination
date without the express consent of the Board of Trustees.
      (2)   The Deputy Village Administrator may, however, teach outside the
customary business hours of the village.
   (C)   Duties.
      (1)   The Deputy Village Administrator shall assist the Village
Administrator in his or her duties of acting as the Chief Administrative
Officer for the village and having control over day-to-day operations.
      (2)   Nothing in this section shall give to the Deputy Village
Administrator any power not permitted by professional ethics, professional
standards, statutes of the state or this code of ordinances.
      (3)   The Deputy Village Administrator shall report to the Village
Administrator. In the absence of the Village Administrator, the Deputy Village
Administrator shall act in his or her stead and shall be responsible to the
Board of Trustees for the proper administration of the affairs of the village
with such authority as required to accomplish the duties as may be assigned by
the President or the Board of Trustees.
   (D)   Compensation. The Deputy Village Administrator shall receive such
compensation as the corporate authorities shall fix from time to time by
resolution or ordinance.
   (E)   Other terms and conditions of employment.
      (1)   The Village Administrator, in consultation with the Village
President, shall fix any such other terms and conditions of employment, as it
may determine from time to time, relating to the performance of the Deputy
Village Administrator, provided the terms and conditions are not inconsistent
with or in conflict with the provisions of this section and all other
ordinances of the village or state laws.
      (2)   All general provisions of the municipal code and regulations and
rules of the village relating to vacation and sick leave, retirement and
pension system contributions, holidays and other fringe benefits and working
conditions as they now exist or hereafter may be amended, also apply to the
Deputy Village Administrator as they would to other employees of the village,
in addition to the benefits enumerated specifically for the benefit of the
Deputy Village Administrator, except as herein provided.
(Ord. 16-20, passed 6-20-2016)
CHAPTER 32: DEPARTMENTS, COMMISSIONS AND OTHER ORGANIZATIONS
Section
   
32.01   Department organization
   
32.02   Building Department
   
32.03   Finance Department
   
32.04   Police Department
   
32.05   Public Works Department
   
32.06   [Reserved]
   
32.07   Board of Police Commissioners
   
32.08   Police Pension Fund
   
32.09   Arts Council
   
32.10   Village boards, committees and commissions
Cross-reference:
   Local Gift Ban; Ethics Commission, see §
31.03
   Plan Commission, see §§
157.220 et seq.
   Public Works, see Title V
   Zoning Board of Appeals, see §§
157.205 et seq.
§ 32.01 DEPARTMENT ORGANIZATION.
   (A)   The administrative service of the village shall be divided under the
Village Administrator into the following departments and heads thereof:
      (1)   Building Department/Building Inspector;
      (2)   Finance Department/Village Treasurer;
      (3)   Police Department/Chief of Police; and
      (4)   Public Works Department/Director of Public Works.
   (B)   The heads of the departments shall:
      (1)   Be immediately responsible to the Village Administrator for the
effective administration of their respective departments and all activities
assigned thereto;
      (2)   Keep informed as to the latest practices in their particular field
and shall inaugurate, with the approval of the Administrator, the new practices
as appear to be of benefit to the service and to the public;
      (3)   Submit quarterly and annual reports of the activities of his or her
department to the Administrator;
      (4)   Establish and maintain a system of filing and indexing records and
reports in sufficient detail to furnish all information necessary for proper
control of departmental activities and to form a basis for the periodic reports
to the Administrator;
      (5)   Have power, when authorized by the Administrator, to appoint and
remove, subject to personnel regulations for employees, all subordinates under
him or her;
      (6)   Be responsible for the proper maintenance of all village property
and equipment used in his or her department; and
      (7)   Furnish, upon the direction of the Administrator, any other
department service, labor and materials as may be requisitioned by the head of
the department, and as its own facilities permit, through the same procedure
and subject to the same audit and control as other expenditures are incurred.
(1981 Code, § 3.07) (Am. Ord. 98-19, passed 10-19-1998)
§ 32.02 BUILDING DEPARTMENT.
   (A)   There is hereby established as an administrative department of the
village to be known as the Building Department, which shall consist of the
Building Inspector and other members that may be provided from time to time by
the Board of Trustees.
   (B)   The Building Inspector shall be hired by the Village Administrator.
      (1)   The Building Inspector shall enforce the ordinances of the village
relating to the construction and maintenance of building and the zoning
regulations and shall supervise all other inspectors. He or she shall attend
all regular meetings of the Board of Trustees and special meetings, as
requested. He or she shall perform other duties as are prescribed by ordinance
or directed by the Board of Trustees.
      (2)   The salary of the Building Inspector shall be in an amount set by
the Village Board.
      (3)   The Building Inspector shall have the power to compile, publish and
enforce rules and regulations and any amendments thereto.
   (C)   (1)   An Electrical Inspector shall be hired, on the recommendation of
the Building Inspector, by the Village Administrator.
      (2)   The Electrical Inspector shall enforce the ordinances of the
village relating to the electrical equipment and electrical installations in
the village and shall report to the Building Inspector. He or she shall perform
other duties as are assigned by the Building Inspector, as are prescribed by
ordinance or as directed by the Board of Trustees.
   (D)   (1)   A Plumbing Inspector shall be hired, on the recommendation of
the Building Inspector, by the Village Administrator.
      (2)   The Plumbing Inspector shall enforce the laws of the state relating
to plumbing installations in the village and connections to the water and sewer
systems of the village.
      (3)   He or she shall approve the issuance of plumbing permits and he or
she shall inspect, supervise and approve all plumbing work done within the
village. He or she shall be the administrative authority of the Illinois State
Plumbing Code adopted by this code and shall report to the Building Inspector.
      (4)   He or she shall perform other duties as assigned by the Building
Inspector as are prescribed by the Board of Trustees.
   (E)   (1)   A Fire Inspector shall be hired, on the recommendation of the
Building Inspector, by the Village Administrator.
      (2)   The Fire Inspector shall enforce the ordinances of the village
relating to the safeguard of life, property of public welfare from hazards of
fire and explosion and enforce the provisions of the Fire Prevention Code as
adopted by the code and shall report to the Building Inspector. He or she shall
perform other duties as assigned by the Building Inspector, as are prescribed
by ordinance or as directed by the Board of Trustees.
(1981 Code, § 3.08) (Am. Ord. 98-19, passed 10-19-1998)
§ 32.03 FINANCE DEPARTMENT.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/16574ba874f17dfbd958615eed907c929c4100f2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7683.jpg]Publisher's Note: This Section has been AMENDED by new
legislation (Ord. 25-58, adopted 12-8-2025). The text of the amendment will be
incorporated below when the ordinance is codified.
   (A)   There is hereby established an administrative department of the
village to be known as the Finance Department, which Department shall consist
of a Village Treasurer and other employees and members that may be provided
from time to time by the Board of Trustees.
   (B)   The Finance Department shall consist of one Village Treasurer and
other employees as may be lawfully provided from time to time by the Board of
Trustees.
   (C)   The Village Treasurer shall be hired by the Village Administrator.
      (1)   The Village Treasurer, before entering upon the duties of his or
her office, shall execute a bond to the village in the penal sum as required by
statute with such sureties as the President and Board of Trustees shall
approve, conditioned for the faithful performance of the duties of his or her
office.
      (2)   The Village Treasurer shall manage the investments of the village
funds; maintain accounts payable records; sign manually all disbursement
checks; maintain auxiliary cash controls; maintain the fixed asset accounts;
act as a custodian of the Police Pension Fund; make monthly reports to the
President and Board of Trustees, showing the amounts received and spent during
the month and the balance of the money in the treasury; and make an annual
report upon the close of the fiscal year to the President and Board of
Trustees, setting forth, in detail, all receipts and expenditures of the
village as shown by his or her books. He or she shall perform other duties as
assigned by the Village Administrator, as are prescribed by ordinance or as
directed by the Board of Trustees.
      (3)   The Village Treasurer shall receive all moneys belonging to the
village and shall make deposits of the sums as shall be received by him or her
for all sources of revenue whatever to the credit of the village, as Treasurer,
in a bank selected by the Board of Trustees, and the funds shall be left and
deposited in the following separate accounts:
         (a)   All moneys from the operation of the waterworks system and
sewerage system in accounts known as “The Water Fund” and “The Sewer Fund;”
         (b)   All revenues received from collection of special assessments in
an account known as “Special Assessment;” and
         (c)   All other sources of revenue shall be placed in the appropriate
fund.
      (4)   No money shall be deposited in any bank until the bank has complied
with the requirements of the Illinois Compiled Statutes.
      (5)   The salary of the Village Treasurer shall be in an amount set by
the Village Board.
      (6)   The Village Treasurer shall have the power to compile, publish and
enforce the rules and regulations and any amendments thereto.
(1981 Code, § 3.09) (Am. Ord. 86-18, passed 4-28-1986; Am. Ord. 94-17, passed
7-5-1994; Am. Ord. 98-19, passed 10-19-1998)
§ 32.04 POLICE DEPARTMENT.
   (A)   There is hereby established an administrative department of the
village to be known as the Police Department, which Department shall consist of
a Chief of Police and other officers and members that may be provided from time
to time by the Board of Trustees. All members of the Department, as well as the
President and Trustees of the village, shall be conservators of the peace and
with the duties and powers assigned to the conservators by the Illinois
Compiled Statutes.
   (B)   The Office of Chief of Police is hereby created. The Chief of Police
shall be appointed, on the recommendation of the Village Administrator, by the
President of the village, acting with the advice and consent of the Board of
Trustees.
   (C)   The Police Department shall consist of the Chief of Police and other
full-time sworn officers including supervisory and police officers, and other
employees of the Department including part-time police officers and civilian
members as may be authorized and budgeted from time to time by the President
and Board of Trustees.
   (D)   (1)   In addition to the power and authority given to the Chief of
Police under the statutes, he or she shall see that all ordinances of the
village are enforced and that all offenders are properly reported to some
proper tribunal for punishment and he or she shall have supervision over all
other officers and special police as may from time to time be appointed.
      (2)   The Chief of Police shall attend all meetings of the Board of
Trustees, execute all orders and all other warrants or other legal processes
required to be executed by him or her under any ordinance of the village.
   (E)   (1)   There is hereby created the office of police officer, which
office shall consist of all full-time sworn members of the Police Department,
other than the Chief of Police.
      (2)   All full-time sworn members of the Police Department, except the
Chief of Police and Deputy Chief of Police, shall be appointed by the Board of
Fire and Police Commissioners.
      (3)   All police officers shall perform duties as may be assigned to them
by statue, ordinance or by the Chief of Police.
   (F)   The Chief of Police shall devote his or her entire time and attention
to the duties of his or her office and shall not hold any other office which
pays compensation, either on a fee or salary basis, unless authorized to do so
pursuant to resolution of the Board of Trustees.
   (G)   Part-time police officers shall meet the following minimum hiring
standards:
      (1)   Must be a minimum of 21 years of age;
      (2)   Must have received an Associate's Degree or have completed 48 hours
in a semester system or 60 credit hours in a quarter system with a grade of C
or better from an accredited college or university;
      (3)   Must have successfully completed prior to hiring a certified
Illinois Law Enforcement Training and Standards Board (ILETSB) certified basic
400 hour (or more, as designated by the ILETSB Police Officer Training Academy
Program, which includes the ILETSB certified firearms training course, as
required by the Illinois Compiled Statutes; or have completed a comparable
police officer training academy program in another state, which would be
recognized and accepted by the ILETSB; and
      (4)   Must possess a valid Illinois driver's license.
   (H)   The Chief of Police shall have the power to compile, publish and
enforce the rules and regulations and any amendments thereto.
   (I)   The village hereby elects to participate in the program provided for
in the Illinois Police Training Act. Before an individual may commence regular
employment as a police officer, he or she must have been certified by the
Illinois Local Governmental Law Enforcement Officers Training Board as having
successfully completed an approved training course as provided in the Act. The
basic training must be completed by the trainee within his or her probationary
period.
(1981 Code, § 3.10) (Am. Ord. 96-02, passed 1-2-1996; Am. Ord. 96-22, passed
11-18-1996; Am. Ord. 98-19, passed 10-19-1998; Am. Ord. 12-59, passed 8-6-2012;
Am. Ord. 17-03, passed 2-6-2017; Am. Ord. 19-26, passed 7-22-2019)
§ 32.05 PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT.
   (A)   There is hereby established an administrative department of the
village to be known as the Public Works Department, which shall consist of a
Director of Public Works and other employees that may be provided from time to
time by the Board of Trustees.
   (B)   The Office of Director of Public Works is hereby created. The Director
of Public Works shall be appointed on the recommendation of the Village
Administrator by the President of the village, acting with the consent of the
Board of Trustees.
      (1)   The Director of Public Works shall enforce the ordinances of the
village relating to streets and sidewalks, the water works and sewerage system
of the village and all matters relating to the construction, maintenance and
operation of the physical properties of the village. He or she shall attend all
regular meetings of the Board of Trustees and special meetings, as requested.
He or she shall perform other duties as assigned by the Village Administrator,
as are prescribed by ordinance or as directed by the Board of Trustees.
      (2)   The salary of the Director of Public Works shall be in an amount as
set by the Village Board.
      (3)   The Director of Public Works shall have the power to compile,
publish and enforce the rules and regulations and any amendments thereto.
   (C)   Employees of the Public Works Department shall be hired, on the
recommendation of the Director of Public Works, by the Village Administrator.
   (D)   The Public Works Department shall be divided under the Director of
Public Works into the following divisions thereof:
      (1)   Division of Water, supervised by a chief operator, which shall
operate and maintain the village water system and perform such other duties as
assigned by the Director;
      (2)   Division of Sewer, supervised by a chief operator, which shall
operate and maintain the village sewer system and perform such other duties as
assigned by the Director; and
      (3)   Division of Street and Sanitation, supervised by a crew chief,
which shall maintain adequate drainage, all streets, sidewalks, bridges and
off-street parking lots and other village properties and perform such other
duties as assigned by the Director.
(1981 Code, § 3.11) (Am. Ord. 96-18, passed 5-19-1996; Am. Ord. 96-19, passed
5-19-1996; Am. Ord. 98-19, passed 10-19-1998)
§ 32.06 [RESERVED].
§ 32.07 BOARD OF POLICE COMMISSIONERS.
   (A)   There is hereby created a Board of Police Commissioners consisting of
three members. They shall be officers of the municipality as provided by
statute.
   (B)   The Board of Police Commissioners shall be appointed by the President
of the village, by and with the consent of the Board of Trustees. The terms of
office of the members of the Board of Police Commissioners shall be three years
and until their respective successors shall be appointed and qualified;
provided, that no appointments shall be made by any President within 30 days
before the expiration of his or her term of office; and provide further, that
the President shall appoint the first members of the Board, one of whom is
appointed to serve until the end of the current municipal year in which the
appointment is made, another shall serve until the end of the municipal year
next ending, and the third shall serve until the end of the municipal year
second next ensuing; provide, that each of the first members of the Board shall
serve until his or her successor is appointed and qualified. The members of the
Board shall be paid compensation as the President and Board of Trustees shall
from time to time provide.
   (C)   The members of the Board of Police Commissioners shall have such
qualifications as are now or may hereafter be required of them by law. Each
member of the Board of Police Commissioners shall take oath or affirmation of
office. The members of the Board of Police Commissioners shall be subject to
removal from office in the same manner as other officers of the village.
   (D)   (1)   The Board of Police Commissioners shall have the powers and
duties as are now or as may hereafter be given to it by law.
      (2)   The Board shall appoint all officers and members of the Police
Department of the village, except the Chief of Police and Deputy Chief of
Police, which appointments shall be made as provided by statute.
      (3)   All appointments made by the Board of Police Commissioners shall be
as designated in the Rules and Regulations of the Board of Police
Commissioners.
      (4)   The Board of Police Commissioners shall give preference for
original appointment to persons designated in ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 10-2.1-
8 and as designated in the Rules and Regulations of the Board of Police
Commissioners.
      (5)   The Board of Police Commissioners shall charge a fee for processing
each application as may be set from time to time in the annual fee schedule.
   (E)   The Board shall make rules and make appointments and removals, except
those herein reserved to the President and Village Board, and shall have other
and further powers as is provided by statute.
   (F)   The Board may employ a secretary or may designate one of its own
members to act as such. The Secretary shall keep the minutes of the Board’s
proceedings, shall be custodian of all papers pertaining to the business of the
Board, shall keep a record of all examinations held and shall perform such
other duties as the Board shall prescribe.
   (G)   Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary, any member of the Board
of Fire and Police Commissioners may elect to forego any, or all, of the
compensation to which they are otherwise entitled for attendance at meetings of
the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners. Any member of the Board of Fire and
Police Commissioners desiring to forego compensation shall notify the Village
Treasurer, in writing, of the election to forego all or part of their
compensation and shall state the date upon which the election shall take effect
and the duration of the election to forego compensation. Nothing in this
section shall be construed to prohibit any Commissioner from rescinding the
election to forego compensation, upon written notice to the Village Treasurer
of their desire to rescind the election to forego compensation.
(1981 Code, § 3.14) (Am. Ord. 83-23, passed 12-5-1983; Am. Ord. 94-17, passed
7-5-1994; Am. Ord. 98-19, passed 10-19-1998; Am. Ord. 05-01, passed 1-3-2005;
Am. Ord. 09-11, passed 5-18-2009; Am. Ord. 10-17, passed 5-3-2010; Am. Ord. 19-
26, passed 7-22-2019)
§ 32.08 POLICE PENSION FUND.
   (A)   The Police Pension Fund shall be administered by a Board of Trustees
known as the Board of Trustees of the Police Pension Fund. The Board of
Trustees shall administer the Police Pension Fund hereby created according to
the rules and regulations hereinafter set forth in this section and according
to the terms of the Illinois Compiled Statutes.
   (B)   (1)   The Board of Trustees shall consist of five members, two of whom
shall be appointed by the President of the village, two of whom shall be
elected from the regular police force by the active members and one or whom
shall be elected from the beneficiaries under the provisions of this section
and the Illinois Compiled Statutes by the beneficiaries.
      (2)   (a)   The members are to be elected by ballot for a term of two
years beginning on the second Tuesday of the first May after the election at a
regular election as aforesaid, at which election all members of the regular
police force shall be entitled to vote for the police force members of the
Board.
         (b)   All beneficiaries of lawful age shall be entitled to vote for
the member chosen from among the beneficiaries.
         (c)   The election provided for in this section shall be held
biennially on the third Monday in April under the Australian ballot system at
such place or places in the village and under regulations as shall be
prescribed by the appointed members of the Board.
      (3)   No more than one vote shall be cast by each person entitled to
vote.
   (C)   In the event of the death, resignation or inability to act of any
member of the Board elected under the provisions of the foregoing division, the
successor of the member shall be elected for the unexpired term at a special
election, which shall be called by the Board and shall be conducted in the same
manner as are the elections provided for above.
   (D)   (1)   The Board herein provided for shall hold quarterly meetings on
the second Tuesday of July, October, January and April of each year in the
Village Hall and special meetings upon the call of the President of the Board.
On the second Tuesday of July each year, the Board shall elect one of its
members to act as the President of the Board for the period of one year or
until such time as his or her successor is elected and qualified.
      (2)   The Board shall, on the same day also, select another of its
members who shall act as Secretary of the Board for the period of one year or
until the time as his or her successor is elected and qualified. The Board
shall, on the same day, elect one of its members who shall act as Vice-
President of the Board for a period of one year or until the time as his or her
successor is elected and qualified, the Vice-President to discharge the duties
of the President during any vacancies in that office or at the time as the
President is absent from the village or is incapacitated or unable to act for
any other reason.
      (3)   The members of the Board shall, also on the same day, elect one of
its members who shall act as Assistant Secretary of the Board for the period of
one year or until the time as his or her successor is elected an qualified, the
Assistant Secretary to discharge and perform the duties of the Secretary during
any vacancy from the office or at the time as the Secretary is absent from the
village or is unable to perform the functions of his or her office for any
other reason.
      (4)   (a)   It shall be the duty of the Board to issue certificates
signed by its President and secretary to any person entitled to any amount of
money from the Pension Fund and which certificates shall state for what purpose
the payment is made.
         (b)   It shall further be the duty of the Board to keep a record of
all its proceedings, which records shall be public.
         (c)   The Board also shall submit annually to the Village Board of
Trustees at the close of the fiscal year a list of persons entitled to payments
from the Pension Fund, stating the amount of the payments and for what purpose
the payments were issued.
      (5)   It shall also be the duty of the Board to list all items of income
which accrued to or are payable to the Pension Fund during the fiscal year,
which list shall be signed and certified by the secretary and President of the
Board and attested by the Secretary under oath.
   (E)   (1)   The Board shall have exclusive control and management of the
Pension Fund and of all money donated, paid or assessed for the pensioning of
disabled, superannuated and retired members of the Police Department, their
widows, minor children and dependent parents. All money shall be placed by the
Treasurer of the village to the credit of the Fund, subject to the order of the
Board.
      (2)   The Board shall have power to invest the money in the Pension Fund
in interest bearing bonds of the United States, State of Illinois, county or
municipal corporations of the state of Illinois, or in-chartered federal
savings and loan associations.
      (3)   The Board shall have the power to compel witnesses to attend and
testify before it upon all matters connected with the operation of this section
in the same manner as is or may be provided by law for the taking of testimony
before Master in Chancery and its president or any members of the Board may
administer oaths to the witnesses.
      (4)   The Board shall have the power to appoint a clerk and define his or
her duties; provided, however, that no person drawing a pension under this
section shall be employed by the Board as a clerk. The Board shall have power
to provide for the payment from the Pension Fund for all its necessary
expenses, including clerk hire, printing and witness fees; provided, however,
that no compensation shall be paid to any member of the Board for any duties
required or performed under this section.
      (5)   The Board shall have the power to make all necessary rules and
regulations for its guidance in conformity with the provisions set forth by the
statute and by this section. The rules and regulations shall be published by
the Board and copies transmitted from time to time to all pensioners and
contributors.
      (6)   On the second Tuesday in May each year, the Village Treasurer shall
make a sworn statement to the Board of Trustees of the Police Pension Fund and
to the President and Board of Trustees of the village of all money received and
paid out by the Treasurer an account of the Pension Fund during the year and
the amount of funds then on hand and owing to the Pension Fund.
   (F)   The Police Pension Fund shall consist of funds derived in the
following ways:
      (1)   An appropriate amount per month which shall be paid or deducted
from the salary of each police officer;
      (2)   All monies that may have been accumulated by the village in
conformity with any previous legislation establishing a fund for the benefit of
disabled or superannuated police officers; and
      (3)   The Village Board shall annually hereafter levy a tax upon all
taxable property of the village at a rate of the dollar of all taxable property
which will produce an amount which, when added to the deductions from the
salaries or wages of policemen and receipts available from all sources, as
herein referred to, will equal a sufficient sum to meet the annual requirements
of the Pension Fund under the provisions of the Illinois Compiled Statutes. The
tax shall be levied and collected in like manner with general taxes of the
village and shall be in addition to all other taxes hereafter authorized to be
levied upon all property within the village and shall be in addition to the
amount authorized to be levied for general purposes as provided by the Illinois
Compiled Statutes as amended.
   (G)   (1)   The Board of Trustees may take by gift, grant, transfer devise
or bequest any money, real estate, personal property or other valuable thing;
and the money and the proceeds from sale of or the income from the real estate,
personal property or other valuable thing so obtained shall be paid into the
Pension Fund.
      (2)   The Board of Trustees of the Pension Fund shall establish and
maintain a Reserve Fund to insure the payment of all obligations incurred in
accordance with the provisions of this code. The funds shall be not less that
$10,000 for each police officer and each beneficiary in the village; provided
that the Board of Trustees shall attempt to create and maintain a minimum
Reserve Fund which will be adequate to meet and provide for the estimated
actuarial requirements for each police officer and for each beneficiary of the
Fund and attempt to keep the established actuarial deficiencies at a minimum
and insure the solvency of the Fund.
      (3)   If the Reserve Fund is less than the minimum amount herein provided
for, the Village Board of Trustees shall designate the proportionate amount
needed annually to insure the minimum amount herein provided for in the Reserve
Fund after a period of 40 years subsequent to the effective date of the
pertinent statutory provisions, as amended July 17, 1959, and the Village Board
of Trustees shall attempt to improve the Reserve Fund in annual installments so
that the minimum reserve will be achieved in the period.
   (H)   Any person who has served, is serving or shall serve in any capacity
in the legally constituted Police Department or as a member of the Police
Department of the village shall be entitled to receive any benefits under the
terms of this section; provided that:
      (1)   He or she shall make written application to the Board of Trustees
herein provided for to come under the provisions of this section.
      (2)   He or she shall be found upon the examination of a duly licensed
physician selected by the Board of Trustees to be physically and mentally fit
to perform the duties of a police officer.
      (3)   He or she shall pay to the Fund a sum equal to the amount he or she
would have paid had deductions been made from his or her salary during the
period of his or her service extending from the date the village became subject
to the provisions of this section or the date of his or her original entry into
the police force, whichever is later.
      (4)   No person appointed, reappointed, re-employed or reinstated to the
Police Department after July 1, 1953, shall be entitled to the benefits of the
provisions of this section unless at the time of his or her first appointment
therein he or she was between the ages of 21 and 35 and unless he or she shall
make written application to the Board of Trustees of the Fund to come under the
provisions of this section and shall be found upon medical examination of a
duly licensed physician selected by the Board to be then physically and
mentally fit to perform the duties of police officers.
      (5)   Nothing in this section shall apply to special police officers, nor
to police officers appointed for a temporary duty only, nor to appointees nor
to persons specially appointed as traffic guards or for the purposes of aiding
or directing traffic at or near schools, even though the persons might be
endowed with certain police powers.
   (I)   Any person who may be convicted of a felony relating to or in
connection with his or her services as a police officer or any other grounds
provided by the Illinois Compiled Statutes shall not be entitled to any of the
benefits of the Police Pension Fund.
   (J)   The administration and distribution of the Police Pension Fund by the
Board of Trustees as heretofore set forth shall be guided by the rules and
regulations therefor as provided by Illinois Compiled Statutes.
(1981 Code, § 3.15) (Am. Ord. 94-17, passed 7-5-1994; Am. Ord. 98-19, passed
10-19-1998)
§ 32.09 ARTS COUNCIL.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/16574ba874f17dfbd958615eed907c929c4100f2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7683.jpg]Publisher's Note: This Section has been AMENDED by new
legislation (Ord. 25-34, adopted 6-16-2025). The text of the amendment will be
incorporated below when the ordinance is codified.
   (A)   There is hereby created an Arts Council consisting of five members,
two of whom shall be members of the Board of Trustees and three of whom shall
be members of the community who are not members of the Board of Trustees.
   (B)   The members of the Arts Council shall be appointed by the President of
the village, by and with the consent of the Board of Trustees. The chair of the
Arts Council shall be appointed by the President of the village from the
members of the Arts Council, by and with the consent of the Board of Trustees.
The terms of the members of the Arts Council shall be three years and until
their respective successors shall be appointed and qualified. The members of
the Council shall not be paid compensation for their service on the Council.
   (C)   The members of the Arts Council shall be subject to removal in the
same manner as officers of the village.
   (D)   The Arts Council shall have the following powers and duties:
      (1)   To promote and create public art and art events in the community;
      (2)   To enhance existing public art and identify new opportunities for
public art; and
      (3)   To apply for Illinois Arts Council Agency grants and other similar
public art grants and funding.
   (E)   The Arts Council shall meet as often as it deems necessary in order to
carry out its duties, but in no event shall the Arts Council meet less
frequently than six times per year. All meetings of the Arts Council shall
comply with the Illinois Open Meetings Act ILCS Chapter 5, Act 120, §§ 1 et
seq. Arts Council members shall complete training on the Illinois Open Meetings
Act within 90 days of being appointed, as required by ILCS Chapter 5, Act 120,
§ 1.05(b).
(Ord. 22-07, passed 3-7-2022; Am. Ord. 24-18, passed 5-6-2024)
§ 32.10 VILLAGE BOARDS, COMMITTEES AND COMMISSIONS.
   (A)   The following rules, regulations, and procedures shall be applicable
to all of the village’s boards, committees, and commissions created pursuant to
this code except the Village Board (collectively referred to in this section,
as a “commission” or “commissions”), unless expressly and specifically provided
otherwise in the specific regulations of this code governing each individual
commission.
   (B)   Appointment of members.
      (1)   All individuals who are eligible and desire to serve as a member of
a village board, commission, council, or committee must fully complete and
submit an application on a form provided by the village to village staff. The
Village President will then consider each completed application in his or her
appointment decision.
      (2)   The Village President shall appoint, with the confirmation of a
majority of the Village Board, all members of all commissions.
      (3)   All appointments of members shall be made at the first regular
meeting of the Village Board following the date of expiration of a member’s
term; provided, however, that vacancies shall be filled for the remainder of
the unexpired terms as soon as practicable after the vacancy occurs. In the
event that a vacancy in any office of a member of a commission occurs for any
reason, the Village President shall appoint, with the confirmation of a
majority of the Village Board, a successor to fill the unexpired term of office
created by the vacancy.
      (4)   The term of a member of a commission shall not terminate or expire
until that member's successor has been duly appointed, confirmed, and
qualified.
      (5)   All voting members of all commissions shall, at the time of
appointment and throughout the members' term of service, be a resident of the
village. The provisions of this division (A)(5) shall not apply to ex-officio
members appointed to commissions pursuant to this code.
   (C)   Officers.
      (1)   The Village President shall, with the confirmation of a majority of
the Village Board, appoint from among the voting members of each commission a
chairman and a vice-chairman of each commission, at the first regular meeting
of the Village Board. The individuals appointed as chairman and vice-chairman
may be so appointed at the same time that the individuals are first appointed
to be members of the commission.
      (2)   The members of each commission shall elect from among its members
such other officers, as the commission deems necessary and appropriate.
      (3)   In the absence of the chairman, the vice-chairman shall act as
chairman and shall have all of the powers of the chairman.
      (4)   The term of office for each officer shall be two years, or until
that officer's successor has been duly appointed or elected, confirmed, and
qualified. No member may serve in the same office for consecutive terms.
   (D)   Compensation. All members of all commissions shall serve without
compensation; provided that authorized expenses may be reimbursed in accordance
with applicable village regulations.
   (E)   Removal of member.
      (1)   Removal by the Village President. The Village President shall have
the power to remove any member of a commission with or without cause. The
removal shall be effective upon delivery of written notice from the Village
President to the member. A member removed by the Village President may appeal
the removal to the Village Board by delivery to the Village Clerk of a written
notice of appeal within 30 days after the date of delivery of the Village
President’s notice of removal. If the Village Board, by a majority vote of
those present and voting, grants the removed member's appeal, the removed
member shall be reinstated to his position on the Commission. The decision of
the Village Board shall be final and binding.
      (2)   Automatic removal based on absences. Any member of a commission
who, for no valid reason, is absent from, or fails to attend, either (i) three
consecutive meetings of the applicable commission, or (ii) at least 51% of the
total of all meetings of the applicable commission commenced during any one
year period, shall, effective as of the date set forth in division (E)(2)(c)
below, be deemed to have resigned from the commission and that member's office
shall, automatically and without further action, be deemed to be vacant as of
such date.
         (a)   For purposes of this section:
            1.   A VALID REASON shall be only as determined by the Village
Board or the Village Board's Committee of the Whole in accordance with division
(E)(2)(d) below.
            2.   A ONE YEAR PERIOD means January through the following December
31.
         (b)   Notice. The Village Administrator or his or her designee, shall,
prior to the next regularly scheduled meeting of the applicable commission,
deliver a written warning notice to any member who, by failing to attend any
future regular or special meeting during the remainder of the applicable year,
is at risk of automatic removal pursuant to division (E)(2). The failure of a
member to receive such written notice shall not constitute a valid reason for
absence from a meeting.
         (c)   Effective date of resignation and vacancy. The member's
resignation, and the vacancy of the member’s office, shall be effective on the
date that is ten days after the date of the final absence that triggers the
removal action set forth in division (E)(2), unless a timely request for a
determination of "valid reason" has been filed pursuant to division (E)(2)(d)
below, in which case the resignation and vacancy shall be effective upon final
resolution of such request.
         (d)   Determination of "valid reason". The determination of a "valid
reason" for a member to be absent from, or fail to attend, an applicable
commission meeting shall be made only by either (i) the Village Board, by a
majority vote of those present and voting at a regular or special meeting of
the Village Board or (ii) the Village Board's Committee of the Whole, by a
majority vote of those present and voting at a regular or special meeting of
the Committee of the Whole. The decision of the Village Board or the Committee
of the Whole, as the case may be, shall be final and binding.
            1.   Pre-absence determination. A member shall have the right to
request either the Village Board or the Committee of the Whole to determine, in
advance of an anticipated absence, whether a valid reason exists for such
absence. Such request shall be made in writing and delivered to the Village
Administrator at least seven days prior to the Village Board or the Committee
of the Whole meeting.
            2.   Post-absence determination. A member shall have the right,
within ten days after the occurrence of any absence, to request either the
Village Board or the Committee of the Whole to determine whether a valid reason
existed for that particular absence. Such request shall be made in writing and
delivered to the Village Administrator at least seven days prior to the Village
Board or the Committee of the Whole meeting.
         (e)   Ex officio members. The provisions of this division (E)(2) shall
not apply to ex officio members appointed to commissions pursuant to this code.
   (F)   Organization and bylaws. Each commission shall adopt bylaws governing
procedures to regulate its business as it deems necessary, which bylaws shall,
at a minimum:
      (1)   Be consistent with applicable provisions of this code;
      (2)   Require a majority vote of all voting members of the commission for
adoption and amendment;
      (3)   Unless specifically set forth in this chapter, specify the number
of members of the commission that constitute a quorum;
      (4)   Be subject to review and approval by the Village Attorney, and/or
Village Administrator.
   (G)   Meetings.
      (1)   All meetings of all commissions shall be held in compliance with
the Illinois Open Meetings Act.
      (2)   Except as modified by any bylaws or other rules approved by the
commission, Robert's Rules of Order, Revised, shall govern the proceedings of
all the meetings of each commission.
      (3)   Each commission, or Village Administrator or his or her designee,
shall, prior to December 1 of each year, submit for publication a written
schedule of the date, time, and location of its regular meetings for the
following calendar year.
   (H)   Reports and recommendations. Except as expressly provided in this
chapter, prior to December 31 of each year, each Commission may, as deemed
required by the Village Board or Village Administrator, prepare and submit a
written report to the Village Board that identifies the proposed goals and
objectives the commission intends to address during the next year. The report
shall also include a summary of the actions taken by the commission during the
past year.
   (I)   Mandatory training session. Each voting member of each commission
must, prior to attending a meeting of the commission, and once per term
thereafter, attend a training session organized and conducted by the Village
Administrator and/or the Village Attorney. The purpose of the training session
is to provide information about the procedures, guidelines, and laws applicable
to performing public service and conducting and participating in public
meetings, and the specific ordinances and regulations governing the particular
commission's jurisdiction.
(Ord. 23-44, passed 9-18-2023; Am. Ord. 24-04, passed 2-5-2024)
CHAPTER 33: EMERGENCY SERVICES AND DISASTERS
Section
   
33.01   Establishment of Agency
   
33.02   Coordinator
   
33.03   Functions
   
33.04   Local disasters and emergencies
   
33.05   Service as mobile support team
   
33.06   Agreements with other political subdivisions
   
33.07   Emergency action
   
33.08   Reimbursement by state
   
33.09   Purchase and expenditures
   
33.10   Oath
   
33.11   Office
   
33.12   Appropriation; levy of taxes
   
33.13   Civil emergencies
   
33.14   Emergency operations plan
   
33.15   Emergency interim successor
§ 33.01 ESTABLISHMENT OF AGENCY.
   (A)   There is hereby created the Emergency Management Agency to prevent,
minimize, repair and alleviate injury or damage resulting from disaster caused
by enemy attack, sabotage or other hostile action or from natural or man-made
disaster, in accordance with the Emergency Management Agency Act of 1988, ILCS
Chapter 20, Act 3305, §§ 1 et seq.
   (B)   The Emergency Management Agency shall consist of the Coordinator and
additional members as may be selected by the Coordinator.
(181 Code, § 10.01) (Ord. 95-29, passed 12-8-1995)
§ 33.02 COORDINATOR.
   (A)   The Coordinator of the Village Emergency Management Agency shall be
appointed by the Village President and shall serve until removed by same.
   (B)   The Coordinator shall have direct responsibility for the organization,
administration, training and operation of the Emergency Management Agency,
subject to the direction and control of the Village President, as provided by
statute.
   (C)   In the event of the absence, resignation, death or inability to serve
as the Coordinator, the Village President or any person designated by him or
her shall be and act as Coordinator until a new appointment is made as provided
in this chapter.
(1981 Code, § 10.02) (Ord. 95-29, passed 12-8-1995)
§ 33.03 FUNCTIONS.
   The Village Emergency Management Agency shall perform such functions within
the village as shall be prescribed in and by the State Emergency Management
Agency plan and program prepared by the Governor and orders, rules and
regulations as may be promulgated by the Governor and, in addition, shall
perform duties outside the corporate limits as may be required pursuant to any
mutual aid agreement with any other political subdivision, municipality or
quasi-municipality entered into as provided in the Emergency Management Agency
Act of 1988, ILCS Chapter 20, Act 3305, §§ 1 et seq.
(1981 Code, § 10.03) (Ord. 95-29, passed 12-8-1995)
§ 33.04 LOCAL DISASTERS AND EMERGENCIES.
   A local disaster emergency in accordance with this chapter and the Emergency
Management Agency Act of 1988, ILCS Chapter 20, Act 3305, §§ 1 et seq. may be
declared only by the Village President. It shall not be continued or renewed
for a period in excess of seven days, except by or with the consent of the
Village Board of Trustees. Any order or proclamation declaring, continuing or
terminating a local disaster emergency shall be given prompt and general
publicity and shall be filed promptly with the Village Clerk.
(1981 Code, § 10.04) (Ord. 95-29, passed 12-8-1995)
§ 33.05 SERVICE AS MOBILE SUPPORT TEAM.
   (A)   Any or all members of the Village Emergency Management Agency may be
designated as members of a mobile support team created by the Director of the
State Emergency Management Agency as provided by law.
   (B)   The leader of the mobile support team shall be designated by the
Coordinator of the Village Emergency Management Agency organization.
   (C)   Any member of a mobile support team who is a village employee or
officer while serving on call to duty by the Governor or the State Director
shall receive the compensation and have the powers, duties, rights and
immunities incident to the employment or office. Any member who is not a paid
officer or employee of the village, while so serving, shall receive from the
state reasonable compensation as provided by law.
(1981 Code, § 10.05) (Ord. 95-29, passed 12-8-1995)
§ 33.06 AGREEMENTS WITH OTHER POLITICAL SUBDIVISIONS.
   The Coordinator of Emergency Management Agency may negotiate mutual aid
agreements with other cities or political subdivisions of the state, but no
agreement shall be effective until it has been approved by the Village
President and by the Director of the State Emergency Management Agency.
(1981 Code, § 10.06) (Ord. 95-29, passed 12-8-1995)
§ 33.07 EMERGENCY ACTION.
   If the Governor proclaims that a disaster emergency exists in the event of
actual enemy attack upon the United States or the occurrence within the state
of a major disaster resulting from enemy sabotage or other hostile action or
from man-made or natural disaster, it shall be the duty of the Village
Emergency Management Agency to cooperate fully with the State Emergency
Management Agency and with the Governor in the exercise of emergency powers, as
provided by law.
(1981 Code, § 10.07) (Ord. 95-29, passed 12-8-1995)
§ 33.08 REIMBURSEMENT BY STATE.
   The State Treasurer may receive and allocate to the appropriate fund any
reimbursement by the state to the village for expenses incident to training
members of the Emergency Management Agency as prescribed by the Director of the
State Emergency Management Agency, compensation for services and expense of
members of a mobile support team while serving outside the village in response
to a call by the Governor or Director of the State Emergency Management Agency,
as provided by law, and any other reimbursement made by the state incident to
Emergency Management Agency activities, as provided by law.
(1981 Code, § 10.08) (Ord. 95-29, passed 12-8-1995)
§ 33.09 PURCHASES AND EXPENDITURES.
   (A)   The Village President may, on recommendation of the Village
Coordinator of the Emergency Management Agency, authorize any purchase or
contracts necessary to place the village in a position to combat effectively
any disaster resulting from the explosion of any nuclear or other bomb or
missile and to protect the public health and safety, protect property and
provide emergency assistance to victims in the case of disaster or from man-
made or natural disaster.
   (B)   In the event of enemy caused or other disaster, the Village
Coordinator of the Emergency Management Agency is authorized, advice and
counsel of the Village President, on behalf of the village, to procure
services, supplies, equipment or material as may be necessary for such
purposes, in view of the exigency without regard to the statutory procedures or
formalities normally prescribed by law pertaining to village contracts or
obligations, as authorized by the Emergency Management Agency Act of 1988, ILCS
Chapter 20, Act 3305, §§ 1 et seq., provided that, if the Village President
meets at such time, he or she shall act subject to the directions and
restrictions imposed by that body.
(1981 Code, § 10.09) (Ord. 95-29, passed 12-8-1995)
§ 33.10 OATH.
   Every person appointed to serve in any capacity in the Village Emergency
Management Agency organization shall, before entering upon his or her duties,
subscribe to the following oath, which shall be filed with the Coordinator:
   “I do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will support and defend and bear
true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of the United States and the
Constitution of the State of Illinois, and the territory, institutions, and
facilities thereof, both public and private, against all enemies, foreign and
domestic; that I take this obligation freely, without any mental reservation or
purpose of evasion; and that I will well and faithfully discharge the duties
upon which I am about to enter. And I do further swear (or affirm) that I do
not advocate, nor am I nor have I been a member off any political party or
organization that advocates the overthrow of the government of the United
States or of this State by force or violence; and that during such time as I am
affiliated with the East Dundee Emergency Management Agency organization, I
will not advocate nor become a member of any political party or organization
that advocates the overthrow of the government of the United States or of this
state by force or violence.”
(1981 Code, § 10.10) (Ord. 95-29, passed 12-8-1995)
§ 33.11 OFFICE.
   The Village President is authorized to designate space in a village building
or elsewhere, as may be provided for by the Village President, for the Village
Emergency Management Agency as its office.
(1981 Code, § 10.11) (Ord. 95-29, passed 12-8-1995)
§ 33.12 APPROPRIATION; LEVY OF TAXES.
   (A)   The Village President may make an appropriation for Emergency
Management Agency purposes, in the manner provided by law, and may levy in
addition for Emergency Management Agency purposes only, a tax not to exceed
$.05 per $100, of the assessed value of all taxable property in addition to all
other taxes, as provided by the Emergency Management Agency Act of 1988, ILCS
Chapter 20, Act 3305, §§ 1 et seq.
   (B)   However, the amount collectable under the levy shall in no event
exceed $.25 per capita.
(1981 Code, § 10.12) (Ord. 95-29, passed 12-8-1995)
§ 33.13 CIVIL EMERGENCIES.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      CIVIL EMERGENCY.
         (a)   A riot or unlawful assembly characterized by the use of actual
force or violence or any threat to use force if accompanied by immediate power
to execute by three or more persons acting together without authority of law.
         (b)   Any natural disaster or man-made calamity including flood,
conflagration, cyclone, tornado, earthquake or explosion within the corporate
limits of the village, resulting in the death or injury of persons or the
destruction of property to an extent that extraordinary measures must be taken
to protect the public health, safety and welfare.
      CURFEW. A prohibition against any person or persons walking, running,
loitering, standing or motoring upon any alley, street, highway, public
property or vacant premises within the corporate limits of the village
excepting officials of any governmental unit and persons officially designated
to duty with reference to the civil emergency.
   (B)   Whenever an emergency, as defined in this section, exists, the Village
President shall declare the existence by means of a written declaration setting
forth the facts which constitute the emergency.
   (C)   After proclamation of a civil emergency by the Village President, he
or she may order a general curfew applicable to the geographical areas of the
village or to the village as a whole, as he or she deems advisable and
applicable during the hours of the day or night as he or she deems necessary in
the interests of the public safety and welfare.
   (D)   After the proclamation of a civil emergency, the Village President may
also, in the interest of public safety and welfare, make any or all of the
following orders:
      (1)   Order the closing of all retail liquor stores, including taverns
and private clubs or portions thereof wherein the consumption of intoxicating
liquor and beer is permitted;
      (2)   Order the discontinuance of the sale of alcoholic liquor by any
wholesaler or retailer;
      (3)   Order the discontinuance of selling, distributing or giving away
gasoline or other liquid flammable or combustible products in any container
other than a gasoline tank properly affixed to a motor vehicle;
      (4)   Order the discontinuance of selling, distributing, dispensing; or
      (5)   Issue such other orders as are immediately necessary for the
protection of life and property.
   (E)   (1)   The proclamation herein authorized shall be effective for a
period of 48 hours unless sooner terminated by a proclamation of the Village
President indicating that the civil emergency no longer exists.
      (2)   The Village President shall have the power to re-proclaim the
existence of a civil emergency at the end of each 48-hour period during the
time the civil emergency exists.
   (F)   Upon issuing the proclamation herein authorized, the Chief of Police
shall notify the news media situated within the village and shall cause three
copies of the proclamation declaring the existence of the emergency to be
posted at the following places within the village: the Village Hall, the Police
Station and the Post Office.
   (G)   Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to impair the
powers contained in this code of ordinances giving powers to the Police
Department, but shall be construed together with existing ordinances now in
effect for the safety and welfare of the citizens of the village.
   (H)   (1)   In addition to the Village President’s authority to proclaim a
state of emergency in the village, including elsewhere in this section, the
Village President is authorized to declare of a state of emergency and to
exercise, by executive order, such powers of the Village President and Board of
Trustees as may be reasonably necessary to respond to the emergency.
      (2)   A declaration of a state of emergency under this division (H)
shall:
         (a)   Be executed under oath.
         (b)   Set forth the basis and underlying facts supporting the
declaration of a state of emergency.
         (c)   Make reference to published statements of federal, state or
county agencies whose duty it is to address emergency matters.
         (d)   To the extent possible, specify the procedures and protocols to
be followed during the state of emergency.
         (e)   To the extent possible, make specific reference to any
regulations which may be subject to suspension during the state of emergency.
         (f)   Consistent with division (H)(3)(h) below, set forth the duration
of the state of emergency.
         (g)   Be filed with the Village Clerk as soon as practicable.
         (h)   Expire no later than the adjournment of the first regular
meeting of the Village President and Board of Trustees after the state of
emergency has been declared.
      (3)   A declaration of emergency pursuant to the authority in this
division (H) may not suspend in any way the rights of persons under the
Illinois or U.S. Constitutions.
      (4)   The authority granted herein is in addition to, and not in lieu of,
the authority of the Village President to address emergencies in the village,
including, but not limited to, elsewhere in this section.
(1981 Code, § 10.13) (Ord. 95-29, passed 12-8-1995; Am. Ord. 20-07, passed 3-
23-2020)
§ 33.14 EMERGENCY OPERATIONS PLAN.
   The Emergency Operations Plan, attached to Ordinance No. 08-19, passed May
5, 2008, and as amended from time to time, is hereby adopted by reference as
fully as if set forth in full in this section.
(Ord. 08-19, passed 5-5-2008)
§ 33.15 EMERGENCY INTERIM SUCCESSOR.
   (A)   In the event of an emergency, the line of succession for the Village
President will be as follows:
      (1)   Mayor or Village President;
      (2)   First senior-most Board Member;
      (3)   Village Administrator;
      (4)   Director of Public Works/Deputy Administrator;
      (5)   Chief of Police;
      (6)   Lieutenant of the Police Department;
      (7)   Fire Chief; and
      (8)   Kane County Board Chairman.
   (B)   The most senior Board Member is the one who has served for the longest
consecutive period. In the event that two or more Board Members have equivalent
seniority, the emergency interim executive successor shall be chosen in
alphabetical order. The successor shall exercise the powers of the office of
Village President.
(Ord. 08-20, passed 5-5-2008)
CHAPTER 34: VILLAGE POLICIES
Section
Purchasing
   
34.01   Competitive bids to be obtained
   
34.02   Exceptions to competitive bid requirements
   
34.03   Procedure in contracts over $25,000
   
34.04   Emergency contracts
   
34.05   Contracts or purchases
   
34.06   Contracts exempt from purchase regulations
   
34.07   Invalid purchase contracts
Personnel Policy
   
34.20   Adopted by reference
Prevailing Wage Rates
   
34.25   Adopted by reference
Annual Fee Schedule
   
34.30   Annual Fee Schedule
Non-Liability
   
34.40   Indemnification
Surplus Property
   
34.50   Disposition of surplus property
Identity Theft
   
34.60   Identity Theft Prevention Program
Housing Assistance
   
34.70   Affordable housing program
Policy Prohibiting Sexual Harassment
   
34.80   Prohibition on sexual harassment
   
34.81   Definition of sexual harassment
   
34.82   Procedure for reporting an allegation of sexual harassment
   
34.83   Prohibition on retaliation for reporting sexual harassment allegations
   
34.84   Consequences of a violation of the prohibition on sexual harassment
   
34.85   Consequences for knowingly making a false report
Cash Balance Policy
   
34.100   Purpose
   
34.101   Background and considerations
   
34.102   Policy and procedures
   
34.103   Surplus
PURCHASING
§ 34.01 COMPETITIVE BIDS TO BE OBTAINED.
   Any labor, lease, goods or services to be purchased, sale of personal
property, equipment or supplies or public improvement which is not to be paid
for in whole or in part by a special assessment or special taxation, where the
expenses or costs thereof will exceed $25,000 shall be constructed or
purchased:
   (A)   By a contract let to the lowest responsible bidder after advertising
for bids.
   (B)   Exception. The section shall not apply to:
      (1)   Contracts authorized by a vote of two-thirds of all members of the
Village Board of Trustees then holding office upon a finding that an exception
to the bidding requirements is necessary and in the best interests of the
village;
      (2)   Any collective bargaining agreement or employment contracts to
which the village is a party;
      (3)   Any purchase, sale or lease of real property to which the village
is a party;
      (4)   Service agreements;
      (5)   Contracts involving village grant or incentive programs;
      (6)   Development agreements;
      (7)   Contracts with or purchases from another governmental entity;
      (8)   Purchases made pursuant to any joint purchasing program sponsored
by the state or other governmental agency or association;
      (9)   Special assessments or other procurements controlled by statutory
provisions; and
      (10)   Sole source providers or contractors.
(1981 Code, § 4.01) (Am. Ord. 06-08, passed 3-20-2006; Am. Ord. 14-30, passed
10-13-2014; Am. Ord. 17-52, passed 11-6-2017)
§ 34.02 EXCEPTIONS TO COMPETITIVE BID REQUIREMENTS.
   Contracts which, by their nature, are not adaptable to award by competitive
bidding, such as contracts for the services of individuals possessing a high
degree of professional skill where the ability or fitness of the individual
plays an important part, auditing, contracts for utility services such as
water, heat, light, telephone or purchasing of educational matter shall not be
subject to competitive bidding.
(1981 Code, § 4.02)
§ 34.03 PROCEDURE IN CONTRACTS OVER $25,000.
   (A)   Publication. All proposals to award purchase orders or contracts in
excess of $25,000 shall be published once at least ten days in advance of the
date announced for the receiving of bids in a newspaper of general circulation
throughout the village by the Clerk. Nothing herein shall be construed to
prohibit the Clerk from posting additional notices or advertising in addition
thereto in trade magazines, if so directed by the Board of Trustees.
   (B)   Advertisements for bids. Advertisement for bids shall describe the
character of the proposed contract, purchase or improvement in sufficient
detail to enable the bidders thereon to know what their obligations will be,
either in the advertisement itself, or by reference, to detailed plans and
specifications on file in the office of the Clerk at the time of publication of
the announcement. The advertisement shall also state the date, time and place
assigned for the opening of bids and the bids will be received at any time
subsequent to the time indicated in the announcement.
   (C)   Deposit on bids. Cash, a cashier's check or a certified check as a
deposit of good faith, in a reasonable amount not in excess of 10% of the
contract or purchase amount, may be required of each bidder on all sums in
excess of $25,000 if specified in the bid announcement.
   (D)   Opening of sealed bids. All sealed bids shall be opened publicly by
the Board of Trustees. All bids shall be open to public inspection in the
office of the Clerk.
   (E)   Bid award. The award of any purchase or contract in excess of $25,000
shall be made by the Board of Trustees to the lowest or highest responsible
bidder, depending on whether the village is to expend or receive money.
(1981 Code, § 4.03) (Am. Ord. 06-08, passed 3-20-2006; Am. Ord. 17-52, passed
11-6-2017)
§ 34.04 EMERGENCY CONTRACTS.
   (A)   In the event of any emergency affecting the public health, welfare or
safety so declared by the President, a contract may be let or a purchase made,
to the extent necessary to resolve the emergency without public advertisement
in a sum not to exceed $10,000.
   (B)   The President shall file his or her authority for the expenditure, in
writing, in the office of the Clerk and a copy to the Board of Trustees and
shall provide the date or time when the emergency shall terminate and shall
name the person authorized to make the expenditure or contract and the amount
or amounts to be expended.
(1981 Code, § 4.04)
§ 34.05 CONTRACTS OR PURCHASES.
   (A)   The Village Administrator may award contracts and approve the purchase
of all materials, supplies, equipment and services in an amount up to and
including $25,000 for which funds are appropriated in the current budget.
   (B)   Department heads may award contracts and approve the purchase of all
materials, supplies, equipment and services in an amount up to and including
$5,000 for which funds are appropriated in the current budget.
(1981 Code, § 4.05) (Am. Ord. 84-3, passed 5-21-1984; Am. Ord. 18-09, passed 5-
21-2018)
§ 34.06 CONTRACTS EXEMPT FROM PURCHASE REGULATIONS.
   The provisions of this subchapter shall not apply to local improvement
contracts, special assessments or to purchases or contracts otherwise
specifically provided for by the state statutes.
(1981 Code, § 4.06)
§ 34.07 INVALID PURCHASE CONTRACTS.
   Any purchase or contract executed in violation of this subchapter shall be
null and void as to the village and, if public funds have been expended
thereupon, the amount thereof may be recovered in the name of the village.
(1981 Code, § 4.07)
PERSONNEL POLICY
§ 34.20 ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The Personnel Policy, attached to Ord. 24-28, passed 7-15-2024, and as
amended from time to time, is hereby adopted by reference as fully as if set
forth in full in this chapter.
(Ord. 03-24, passed 11-3-2003; Am. Ord. 08-27, passed 6-16-2008; Am. Ord. 10-
37, passed 8-16-2010; Am. Ord. 12-77, passed 9-17-2012; Am. Ord. 17-08, passed
2-6-2017; Am. Ord. 17-53, passed 11-20-2017; Am. Ord. 23-25, passed 5-15-2023;
Am. Ord. 24-28, passed 7-15-2024)
PREVAILING WAGE RATES
§ 34.25 ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The prevailing wage rates (ILCS Chapter 820, Act 130, §§ 1 et seq.),
attached to Ord. 09-12, passed 6-15-2009, and as amended from time to time, is
hereby adopted by reference as fully as if set forth in full in this chapter.
(Ord. 09-12, passed 6-15-2009; Am. Ord. 10-35, passed 7-6-2010; Am. Ord. 11-30,
passed 6-6-2011; Am. Ord. 12-23, passed 5-11-2012; Am. Ord. 13-06, passed 3-18-
2013; Am. Ord. 14-07, passed 3-17-2014; Am. Ord. 15-12, passed 3-16-2015; Am.
Ord. 16-07, passed 3-4-2016; Am. Ord. 17-30, passed 6-5-2017; Am. Ord. 18-10,
passed 6-18-2018; Am. Ord. 19-21, passed 6-3-2019)
ANNUAL FEE SCHEDULE
§ 34.30 ANNUAL FEE SCHEDULE.
   Reference to the Annual Fee Schedule shall be to those fees and fines as
contained in
Chapter 37 of this Code of Ordinances.
(Ord. passed - - ; Am. Ord. 03-05, passed 4-21-2003; Am. Ord. 03-12, passed 7-
21-2003; Am. Ord. 03-22, passed 7-21-2003; Am. Ord. 04-09, passed 4-19-2004;
Am. Ord. 04-13, passed 5-3-2004; Am. Ord. 04-21, passed 6-7-2004; Am. Ord. 04-
23, passed 7-21-2004; Am. Ord. 04-36, passed 10-4-2004; Am. Ord. 04-40, passed
11-15-2004; Am. Ord. 05-01, passed 1-3-2005; Am. Ord. 05-03, passed 1-18-2005;
Am. Ord. 05-05, passed 2-7-2005; Am. Ord. 05-11, passed 4-18-2005; Am. Ord. 06-
01, passed 1-3-2006; Am. Ord. 06-12, passed 4-17-2006; Am. Ord. 06-16, passed
5-15-2006; Am. Ord. 07-01, passed 1-8-2007; Am. Ord. 07-06, passed 2-19-2007;
Am. Ord. 07-21, passed 4-16-2007; Am. Ord. 07-25, passed 5-7-2007; Am. Ord. 07-
28, passed 5-7-2007; Am. Ord. 07-29, passed 5-7-2007; Am. Ord. 07-30, passed 5-
7-2007; Am. Ord. 07-33, passed 5-14-2007; Am. Ord. 07-39, passed 8-6-2007; Am.
Ord. 08-04, passed 2-18-2008; Am. Ord. 08-09, passed 3-17-2008; Am. Ord. 08-11,
passed 3-17-2008; Am. Ord. 08-14, passed 4-21-2008; Am. Ord. 08-25, passed 6-
16-2008; Am. Ord. 08-26, passed 6-16-2008; Am. Ord. 08-41, passed 7-21-2008;
Am. Ord. 08-42, passed 7-21-2008; Am. Ord. 09-04, passed 1-20-2009; Am. Ord.
09-22, passed 8-3-2009; Am. Ord. 10-09, passed 3-1-2010; Am. Ord. 10-12, passed
4-5-2010; Am. Ord. 10-13, passed 4-5-2010; Am. Ord. 10-30, passed 5-17-2010;
Am. Ord. 10-31, passed 5-17-2010; Am. Ord. 10-32, passed 5-17-2010; Am. Ord.
10-42, passed 9-20-2010; Am. Ord. 11-03, passed 1-18-2011; Am. Ord. 11-45,
passed 10-17-2011; Am. Ord. 12-09, passed 2-27-2012; Am. Ord. 12-10, passed 2-
27-2012; Am. Ord. 12-58, passed 7-16-2012; Am. Ord. 12-73, passed 9-4-2012; Am.
Ord. 13-35, passed 9-16-2013; Am. Ord. 13-53, passed 12-16-2013; Am. Ord. 14-
15, passed 7-7-2014; Am. Ord. 15-24, passed 5-18-2015; Am. Ord. 15-31, passed
7-6-2015; Am. Ord. 15-42, passed 9-21-2015; Am. Ord. 16-04, passed 3-7-2016;
Am. Ord. 16-08, passed 3-14-2016; Am. Ord. 16-17, passed 6-6-2016; Am. Ord. 17-
09, passed 2-6-2016)
NON-LIABILITY
§ 34.40 INDEMNIFICATION.
   (A)   The village finds that it is in the public policy of the state that
members of governmental bodies shall not be liable in damages for the exercise
of their discretion in determining policies. This public policy is set forth in
ILCS Ch. 745, Act 10, § 2-201, which provides as follows:
      "Except as otherwise provided by Statute, a public employee serving in a
position involving the determination of policy or the exercise of discretion is
not liable for an injury resulting from his act or omission in determining
policy when acting in the exercise of such discretion even though abused."
   (B)   (1)   In light of division (A) above, if any claim or action not
covered by insurance is instituted against any elected or appointed village
official, employee, or authorized volunteer in connection with any act or
omission in determining policy, the village shall, to the fullest extent
permitted by law:
         (a)   Appear and defend against the claim or action;
         (b)   Indemnify the elected or appointed village official, employee,
or authorized volunteer for his or her court costs and attorneys' fees incurred
in the defense of such claim or action;
         (c)   Pay or indemnify the elected or appointed village official,
employee, or authorized volunteer for a judgment based upon such claim or
action; and
         (d)   Pay or indemnify the elected or appointed village official,
employee, or authorized volunteer for a compromise or settlement of such claim
or action, provided that the settlement is approved by a majority of the
members of the Board of Trustees.
      (2)   The term "elected or appointed village official" shall mean any
former or current Village President, Trustee, or member of any village board,
committee and commission.
   (C)   The foregoing indemnity shall not extend to any of the following:
      (1)   Any liability, attorneys’ fees, or costs with respect to any matter
in which the elected or appointed village official, employee, or authorized
volunteer is finally adjudged to be guilty of a criminal act. (To the extent
that any criminal proceeding shall be pending at the time of indemnification or
any criminal proceeding shall thereafter be instituted, any indemnification
paid or promised shall be conditioned upon the termination of the criminal
proceeding without a finding of guilt.);
      (2)   Any liability or judgment against an elected or appointed village
official, employee, or authorized volunteer which is payable to the village
itself or where the village was injured and the elected or appointed village
official, employee, or authorized volunteer either obtained personal benefit or
financial gain as a result of his or her wrongful conduct;
      (3)   Any liability, attorneys' fees, or costs incurred as a result of a
village-initiated or approved investigation into the misconduct of the elected
or appointed village official, employee, or authorized volunteer;
      (4)   Any liability, attorneys' fees, or costs incurred as a result of
the elected or appointed village official's, employee's, or authorized
volunteer's failure to reasonably cooperate or participate in the defense of
any claim, action, suit, or proceeding with any person, party, or entity; or
      (5)   Any liability excluded by a written waiver from the elected or
appointed village official, employee, or authorized volunteer.
(Ord. 06-09, passed 4-17-2006)
SURPLUS PROPERTY
§ 34.50 DISPOSITION OF SURPLUS PROPERTY.
   (A)   When the Village Administrator determines that the village owns
surplus property which is no longer necessary or useful to or for the best
interests of the village, he or she is, subject to the limitations hereinafter
set forth, authorized and directed to proceed without further authorization by
the Village Board to dispose of such village property by sale, trade-in, or any
other manner he or she considers most advantageous to the village.
   (B)   The authority granted to the Village Administrator in division (A)
above shall be limited to the disposition of any single item or any group of
items designated by the Village Administrator to be disposed of as a unit with
a value estimated by the Village Administrator to not be in excess of $100.
   (C)   In the event that the surplus village property has a value estimated
by the Village Administrator to be more than $100, but less than $5,000, the
Village Administrator shall establish a minimum bid to be accepted for each
item. After causing the surplus property to be advertised as provided in
division (E) below, the Village Administrator shall dispose of the surplus
property to the highest bidder and report the disposition to the Village Board.
   (D)   In the event that the surplus property to be disposed of has a value
estimated by the Village Administrator to be equal to or in excess of $5,000,
the Village Administrator may proceed to dispose of the same only after
establishing a minimum bid to be accepted for each item and advertising bids as
provided in division (E) below. The Village Administrator shall dispose of the
surplus property by obtaining the prior approval of the Village Board for the
disposition of surplus property in the following manner: The Village
Administrator shall submit to the Village Board a request for authorization to
dispose of such surplusage by submitting a schedule of the property and a
resolution of authorization. The Village Board may then direct the Village
Administrator to commence disposal of such surplusage.
   (E)   When the Village Administrator is obligated, pursuant to divisions (C)
and (D) hereof, to advertise items of surplus property for disposition to the
highest bidder, the following procedures shall be employed:
      (1)   Public notice of the disposition, including the time, place, terms
of disposition, and the schedule of disposition shall be posted in a public
place in the Village Hall and on the village website. Such notice of intended
sale of surplus property shall constitute notice to the general public and
anyone who may have interest in purchasing the items of surplus property. When
the Village Administrator determines that it is not practicable to so advertise
the disposition, he or she may dispose of the surplus village property in
whatever manner he or she considers most advantageous to the village.
      (2)   No sale of surplus property shall be effected by the village until
public notice required under this section shall have been posted for seven
days, and thereafter, the Village Administrator is authorized to proceed to
deliver a bill of sale for any or all of such items.
   (F)   If the village is unable to sell its surplus property after
solicitation to the public as referred to herein, the village may donate the
property to any not-for-profit corporation, organization, or entity as
determined by I.R.C. § 501(c)(3), having its principal place of business or
doing a substantial amount of business in the village, or if none can be found
within the village, then within Dundee Township. The Village Administrator
shall document the reasons as to why the materials may have been donated to a
non-village based entity.
   (G)   In all cases, excepting therefrom the on-line auction sale of surplus
property, no sale or surplus village property shall be made to a person, who
is, at the time of such sale, an officer, agent or employee of the village or
an immediate family member of the officer, agent or employee. Immediate family
member shall include spouses and dependent minor children living with the
officer, agent or employee.
(Ord. 09-08, passed 4-20-2009)
IDENTITY THEFT
§ 34.60 IDENTITY THEFT PREVENTION PROGRAM.
   (A)   The Identity Theft Prevention Program attached to Ord. 09-07, passed
4-20-2009, and as amended from time to time, is hereby adopted by reference as
fully as if set forth in full in this chapter.
   (B)   The Identity Theft Prevention Program shall be implemented and
administered by the Finance Manager as the Program Administrator.
   (C)   Changes to the Identity Theft Prevention Program of a day-to-day
operational character and decisions relating to the interpretation and
implementation of the Program may be made by the Program Administrator;
however, major changes or shifts of policy positions under the Program shall
only be made by the Village Board of Trustees.
(Ord. 09-07, passed 4-20-2009)
HOUSING ASSISTANCE
§ 34.70 AFFORDABLE HOUSING PROGRAM.
   (A)   The President and Board of Trustees do hereby approve and adopt the
Village of East Dundee Affordable Housing Program, a copy of which is attached
to Ordinance 11-54 and incorporated by reference as if fully set forth herein.
   (B)   The Village Administrator is hereby authorized and directed to take
such actions as may be required to implement the Village of East Dundee
Affordable Housing Program Policy.
(Ord. 11-54, passed 12-19-2011)
POLICY PROHIBITING SEXUAL HARASSMENT
§ 34.80 PROHIBITION ON SEXUAL HARASSMENT.
   It is unlawful to harass a person because of that person's sex. The courts
have determined that sexual harassment is a form of discrimination under Title
VII of the U.S. Civil Rights Act of 1964, as amended in 1991. All persons have
a right to work in an environment free from sexual harassment. Sexual
harassment is unacceptable misconduct which affects individuals of all genders
and sexual orientations. It is a policy of the village to prohibit harassment
of any person by any municipal official, municipal agent, municipal employee or
municipal agency or office on the basis of sex or gender. All municipal
officials, municipal agents, municipal employees and municipal agencies or
offices are prohibited from sexually harassing any person, regardless of any
employment relationship or lack thereof.
(Ord. 17-56, passed 12-11-2017)
§ 34.81 DEFINITION OF SEXUAL HARASSMENT.
   This policy adopts the definition of sexual harassment as stated in the
Illinois Human Rights Act, which currently defines sexual harassment as:
   (A)   Any unwelcome sexual advances or requests for sexual favors or any
conduct of a sexual nature when:
      (1)   Submission to such conduct is made either explicitly or implicitly
a term or condition of an individual's employment,
      (2)   Submission to or rejection of such conduct by an individual is used
as the basis for employment decisions affecting such individual, or
      (3)   Such conduct has the purpose or effect of substantially interfering
with an individual's work performance or creating an intimidating, hostile or
offensive working environment.
   (B)   Conduct which may constitute sexual harassment includes:
      (1)   Verbal: sexual innuendos, suggestive comments, insults, humor, and
jokes about sex, anatomy or gender-specific traits, sexual propositions,
threats, repeated requests for dates, or statements about other employees, even
outside of their presence, of a sexual nature.
      (2)   Non-verbal: suggestive or insulting sounds (whistling), leering,
obscene gestures, sexually suggestive bodily gestures, "catcalls", "smacking"
or "kissing" noises.
      (3)   Visual: posters, signs, pin-ups or slogans of a sexual nature,
viewing pornographic material or websites.
      (4)   Physical: touching, unwelcome hugging or kissing, pinching,
brushing the body, any coerced sexual act or actual assault.
      (5)   Textual/electronic: "sexting" (electronically sending messages with
sexual content, including pictures and video), the use of sexually explicit
language, harassment, cyber stalking and threats via all forms of electronic
communication (e-mail, text/picture/video messages, intranet/on-line postings,
blogs, instant messages and social network websites like Facebook and Twitter).
   (C)   The most severe and overt forms of sexual harassment are easier to
determine. On the other end of the spectrum, some sexual harassment is more
subtle and depends, to some extent, on individual perception and
interpretation. The courts will assess sexual harassment by a standard of what
would offend a "reasonable person."
(Ord. 17-56, passed 12-11-2017)
§ 34.82 PROCEDURE FOR REPORTING AN ALLEGATION OF SEXUAL HARASSMENT.
   (A)   An employee who either observes sexual harassment or believes herself/
himself to be the object of sexual harassment should deal with the incident(s)
as directly and firmly as possible by clearly communicating her/his position to
the offending employee, and her/his immediate supervisor. It is not necessary
for sexual harassment to be directed at the person making the report.
   (B)   Any employee may report conduct which is believed to be sexual
harassment, including the following:
      (1)   Electronic/direct communication. If there is sexual harassing
behavior in the workplace, the harassed employee should directly and clearly
express her/his objection that the conduct is unwelcome and request that the
offending behavior stop. The initial message may be verbal. If subsequent
messages are needed, they should be put in writing in a note or a memo.
      (2)   Contact with supervisory personnel.  
         (a)   At the same time direct communication is undertaken, or in the
event the employee feels threatened or intimidated by the situation, the
problem must be promptly reported to the immediate supervisor of the person
making the report, a department head, a director of human resources, an ethics
officer, the city manager or administrator, or the chief executive officer of
the municipality.
         (b)   The employee experiencing what he or she believes to be sexual
harassment must not assume that the employer is aware of the conduct. If there
are no witnesses and the victim fails to notify a supervisor or other
responsible officer, the municipality will not be presumed to have knowledge of
the harassment.
      (3)   Resolution outside municipality. The purpose of this policy is to
establish prompt, thorough and effective procedures for responding to every
report and incident so that problems can be identified and remedied by the
municipality. However, all municipal employees have the right to contact the
Illinois Department of Human Rights (IDHR) or the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC) for information regarding filing a formal complaint with
those entities. An IDHR complaint must be filed within 180 days of the alleged
incident(s) unless it is a continuing offense. A complaint with the EEOC must
be filed within 300 days.
   (C)   Documentation of any incident may be submitted with any report (what
was said or done, the date, the time and the place), including, but not limited
to, written records such as letters, notes, memos and telephone messages.
   (D)   All allegations, including anonymous reports, will be accepted and
investigated regardless of how the matter comes to the attention of the
municipality. However, because of the serious implications of sexual harassment
charges and the difficulties associated with their investigation and the
questions of credibility involved, the claimant's willing cooperation is a
vital component of an effective inquiry and an appropriate outcome.
(Ord. 17-56, passed 12-11-2017)
§ 34.83 PROHIBITION ON RETALIATION FOR REPORTING SEXUAL HARASSMENT ALLEGATIONS.
   (A)   No municipal official, municipal agency, municipal employee or
municipal agency or office shall take any retaliatory action against any
municipal employee due to a municipal employee's:
      (1)   Disclosure or threatened disclosure of any violation of this
policy,
      (2)   The provision of information related to or testimony before any
public body conducting an investigation, hearing or inquiry into any violation
of this policy, or
      (3)   Assistance or participation in a proceeding to enforce the
provisions of this policy.
   (B)   For the purposes of this policy, retaliatory action means the
reprimand, discharge, suspension, demotion, denial of promotion or transfer, or
change in the terms or conditions of employment of any municipal employee that
is taken in retaliation for a municipal employee's involvement in protected
activity pursuant to this policy.
   (C)   No individual making a report will be retaliated against even if a
report made in good faith is not substantiated. In addition, any witness will
be protected from retaliation.
   (D)   Similar to the prohibition against retaliation contained herein, the
State Officials and Employees Ethics Act (ILCS Ch. 5, Act 430, § 15-10)
provides whistleblower protection from retaliatory action such as reprimand,
discharge, suspension, demotion, or denial of promotion or transfer that occurs
in retaliation for an employee who does any of the following:
      (1)   Discloses or threatens to disclose to a supervisor or to a public
body an activity, policy, or practice of any officer, member, state agency, or
other state employee that the state employee reasonably believes is in
violation of a law, rule, or regulation,
      (2)   Provides information to or testifies before any public body
conducting an investigation, hearing, or inquiry into any violation of a law,
rule, or regulation by any officer, member, state agency or other state
employee, or
      (3)   Assists or participates in a proceeding to enforce the provisions
of the State Officials and Employees Ethics Act.
   (E)   Pursuant to the Whistleblower Act (ILCS Ch. 740, Act 174, § 15(a)), an
employer may not retaliate against an employee who discloses information in a
court, an administrative hearing, or before a legislative commission or
committee, or in any other proceeding, where the employee has reasonable cause
to believe that the information discloses a violation of a state or federal
law, rule, or regulation. In addition, an employer may not retaliate against an
employee for disclosing information to a government or law enforcement agency,
where the employee has reasonable cause to believe that the information
discloses a violation of a state or federal law, rule, or regulation. (ILCS Ch.
740, Act 174, § 15(b)).
   (F)   According to the Illinois Human Rights Act (ILCS Ch. 775, Act 5, § 6-
101), it is a civil rights violation for a person, or for two or more people to
conspire, to retaliate against a person because he/she has opposed that which
he/she reasonably and in good faith believes to be sexual harassment in
employment, because he/she has made a charge, filed a complaint, testified,
assisted, or participated in an investigation, proceeding, or hearing under the
Illinois Human Rights Act.
   (G)   An employee who is suddenly transferred to a lower paying job or
passed over for a promotion after filing a complaint with IDHR or EEOC may file
a retaliation charge - due within 180 days (IDHR) or 300 days (EEOC) of the
alleged retaliation.
(Ord. 17-56, passed 12-11-2017)
§ 34.84 CONSEQUENCES OF A VIOLATION OF THE PROHIBITION ON SEXUAL HARASSMENT.
   In addition to any and all other discipline that may be applicable pursuant
to municipal policies, employment agreements, procedures, employee handbooks
and/or collective bargaining agreement, any person who violates this policy or
the Prohibition on Sexual Harassment contained in ILCS Ch. 5, Act 430, § 5-65,
may be subject to a fine of up to $5,000 per offense, applicable discipline or
discharge by the municipality and any applicable fines and penalties
established pursuant to local ordinance, state law or federal law. Each
violation may constitute a separate offense. Any discipline imposed by the
municipality shall be separate and distinct from any penalty imposed by an
ethics commission and any fines or penalties imposed by a court of law or a
state or federal agency.
(Ord. 17-56, passed 12-11-2017)
§ 34.85 CONSEQUENCES FOR KNOWINGLY MAKING A FALSE REPORT.
   (A)   A false report is a report of sexual harassment made by an accuser
using the sexual harassment report to accomplish some end other than stopping
sexual harassment or retaliation for reporting sexual harassment. A false
report is not a report made in good faith which cannot be proven. Given the
seriousness of the consequences for the accused, a false or frivolous report is
a severe offense that can itself result in disciplinary action. Any person who
intentionally makes a false report alleging a violation of any provision of
this policy shall be subject to discipline or discharge pursuant to applicable
municipal policies, employment agreements, procedures, employee handbooks and/
or collective bargaining agreements.
   (B)   In addition, any person who intentionally makes a false report
alleging a violation of any provision of the State Officials and Employees
Ethics Act to an ethics commission, an inspector general, the State Police, a
state's attorney, the Attorney General, or any other law enforcement official
is guilty of a Class A misdemeanor. An ethics commission may levy an
administrative fine of up to $5,000 against any person who intentionally makes
a false, frivolous or bad faith allegation.
(Ord. 17-56, passed 12-11-2017)
CASH BALANCE POLICY
§ 34.100 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of the Cash Balance Policy is to establish the following:
   (A)   A target level of cash balance required for the General Fund and Water
and Sewer Fund;
   (B)   A process and criteria for the continued evaluation of that target
level as conditions warrant;
   (C)   A process for reaching and/or maintaining the targeted level of cash
balance and the priority for the use of resources in excess of the target; and
   (D)   A mechanism for monitoring and reporting the General Fund and Water
and Sewer Fund cash balance.
(Ord. 21-13, passed 4-19-2021; Am. Ord. 23-15, passed 3-20-2023)
§ 34.101 BACKGROUND AND CONSIDERATIONS.
   The village's administration, credit rating agencies, and others monitor the
levels of cash balance in the General Fund and Water and Sewer Fund as an
important indicator of the village's economic condition. In establishing an
appropriate level of cash balance, the village has considered the following
factors:
   (A)   The predictability of its revenues and the volatility of its
expenditures;
   (B)   The village's perceived exposure to significant one-time outlays
(e.g., disasters, immediate capital needs, state budget cuts);
   (C)   The potential drain upon General Fund and Water and Sewer Fund
resources from other funds as well as the availability of resources in other
funds;
   (D)   Liquidity (i.e., the disparity between when financial resources
actually become available to make payments and the average maturity of related
liabilities may require that a higher level of resources be maintained); and
   (E)   Commitments and assignments (i.e., the village may wish to maintain
higher levels of unassigned cash balance to compensate for any portion of the
cash balance already committed or assigned by the government for a specific
purpose).
(Ord. 21-13, passed 4-19-2021; Am. Ord. 23-15, passed 3-20-2023)
§ 34.102 POLICY AND PROCEDURES.
   (A)   The following shall apply to both the General Fund and Water and Sewer
Fund. The minimum cash balance reserve to be committed shall be 25% of budgeted
expenditures. An additional 10% cash flow reserve shall be committed in each
fund for cash flow purposes. This 10% cash flow reserve shall be used at the
discretion of the Village Administrator, provided that the 10% shall only be
used for cash flow to address revenue that is expected but has not yet been
received.
   (B)   The total 35% cash balance reserve required for each fund shall be
calculated prior to the adoption of the annual budget as follows:
      Projected beginning cash balance + budgeted expenditures = 35%
   (C)   As part of the annual budget process, the Village Administrator shall
report to the Village Board the required 35% cash balance reserve. This 35%
cash balance reserve shall be held in the General Fund and Water and Sewer
Fund, respectively, and shall be approved by ordinance each year in conjunction
with the adopted budget.
   (D)   A super majority vote of five affirmative votes of the Village
President and Board of Trustees is required for the Village Board to take
action on any item that will temporarily reduce the 35% cash balance reserve
below this minimum target level, other than for cash flow purposes. In the
event that the 35% cash balance reserve drops below this minimum target level
through the approval of the Village Board, the Village Administrator will
develop a plan, implemented through the annual budgetary process, to bring the
balance back to the target level over a period of no more than three fiscal
years.
(Ord. 21-13, passed 4-19-2021; Am. Ord. 23-15, passed 3-20-2023)
§ 34.103 SURPLUS.
   (A)   General Fund. Upon determining the minimum 35% General Fund cash
balance reserve, the difference between the budgeted and actuarial Police
Pension contribution amount shall be paid, then 50% excess (surplus) shall be
transferred to the Capital Projects Fund and shall be either utilized for
budgeted capital projects or restricted for capital projects identified within
the village's capital improvement plan. These transfers shall be made as
available, recommended by the Village Administrator based upon current needs,
and approved by ordinance.
   (B)   Water and Sewer Fund. Upon determining the minimum 35% Water and Sewer
Fund cash balance reserve, any excess (surplus) shall be either utilized for
budgeted capital projects within the Water and Sewer Fund or restricted for
Water and Sewer capital projects identified within the village's capital
improvement plan, as recommended by the Village Administrator and approved by
ordinance.
(Ord. 21-13, passed 4-19-2021; Am. Ord. 23-15, passed 3-20-2023)
CHAPTER 35: TAXATION
Section
   
35.01   Automobile renting use tax
   
35.02   Automobile renting occupation tax
   
35.03   Utility tax
   
35.04   Telecommunications tax
   
35.05   Amusement tax
   
35.06   Hotel operators occupation tax
   
35.07   Motor vehicle tax
   
35.08   Video and audio recording rental tax
   
35.09   Home rule municipal and service occupation tax
   
35.10   Hotel tax
   
35.11   Business districts designated; retailers’ occupation tax and service
occupation tax imposed therein
   
35.12   Motor vehicle transfer tax
   
35.13   Taxpayers’ bill of rights
   
35.14   Municipal gas use tax
   
35.15   Home rule property tax cap and bond limitations policy
   
35.16   Municipal cannabis retailer’s occupation tax
   
35.17   Vehicle parking tax
   
35.18   Local motor fuel tax
   
35.19   Municipal grocery retailers’ occupation tax and municipal grocery
service occupation tax
§ 35.01 AUTOMOBILE RENTING USE TAX.
   (A)   A tax is hereby imposed upon the privilege of using in the village an
automobile which is rented from a renter outside Illinois and which is titled
or registered with an agency of the state’s government in the village at the
rate of 1% of the rental price of the automobile while this section is in
effect, in accordance with the provisions of state statutes.
   (B)   The tax provided for in this section shall be collected from the
persons whose Illinois address for titling or registration purposes is given as
being in the village.
   (C)    The tax imposed by this section shall be paid to the Illinois
Department of Revenue.
(1981 Code, § 37.01) (Am. Ord. 94-21, passed 9-19-1994)
§ 35.02 AUTOMOBILE RENTING OCCUPATION TAX.
   (A)   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of
renting automobiles in the village at the rate of 1% of the gross receipts from
such business in accordance with state statutes.
   (B)   In the administration of and in compliance with this section, every
person engaged in the business in the village shall have the same rights,
remedies, privileges, immunities, powers and duties and be subject to the same
conditions, restrictions, limitations, penalties and definitions of terms and
employ the same anodes of procedure as are prescribed in state statutes, except
as otherwise provided within the acts.
(1981 Code, § 37.02) (Am. Ord. 92-06, passed 7-6-1992; Am. Ord. 94-21, passed
9-19-1994)
§ 35.03 UTILITY TAX.
   (A)   A tax is imposed on all persons engaged in the following occupations
or privileges from the business originating within the corporate limits of the
village:
      (1)   (Reserved).
      (2)   Persons engaged in the business of distributing, supplying,
furnishing or selling electricity for use or consumption within the corporate
limits of the village and not for resale, on the gross receipts actually paid
to the taxpayer for services billed on and after the effective dates set forth
herein and at the rates as set by the Board.
   (B)   No tax is imposed by this section with respect to any transaction in
interstate commerce or otherwise to the extent to which the business may not,
under the Constitution and statutes of the United States be made subject to
taxation by the state or any political subdivision thereof; nor shall any
persons engaged in the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing or
selling electricity or engaged in the business of transmitting messages be
subject to taxation under the provisions of this section for the transactions
as are or may become subject to taxation under the provisions of the Municipal
Retailers’ Occupation Tax Act, authorized by ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, § 8-11-1,
as amended.
   (C)   The tax shall be in addition to the payment of money or value of
products or services furnished to the municipality by the taxpayer as
compensation for the use of its streets, alleys or other public places or
installation and maintenance therein, thereon or thereunder of poles, wires,
pipes or other equipment used in the operation of the taxpayer’s business.
   (D)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      GROSS RECEIPTS. The consideration received for the transmission of
messages or distributing, supplying, furnishing or selling electricity for use
or consumption and not for resale, as the case may be; and for all services
rendered in connection therewith valued in money, whether  received in money or
otherwise including cash, credit, services rendered therewith; and shall be
determined without any deduction on account of the cost of transmitting the
messages without any deduction on account of the cost of the service, product
or commodity supplied, the cost of materials used, labor or service cost or any
other expense whatsoever.
      PERSON. Any natural individual, firm, trust estate, partnership,
association, joint stock company, joint adventure, corporation, municipal
corporation or political subdivision of the state or receiver trustee,
conservator or other representative appointed by order of any court.
      TRANSMITTING MESSAGES. In addition to the usual and popular meaning of
person-to- person communication, shall include the furnishing, for a
consideration, of services or facilities, whether owned or leased or both, to
persons in connection with the transmission of messages where the persons do
not, in turn, receive any consideration by the persons to other persons, for
the transmission of messages.
   (E)   This section shall be in effect upon the date of passage and the tax
provided herein shall be based on the gross receipts, as herein defined,
actually paid to taxpayer for services billed.
   (F)   (1)   Each taxpayer shall make a return to the Village Collector
stating:
         (a)   His or her name;
         (b)   His or her principal place of business;
         (c)   His or her gross receipts during those months upon the basis of
which the tax is imposed;
         (d)   Amount of tax; and
         (e)   Other reasonable and related information, as the corporate
authorities may require.
      (2)   On or before the last day of every third month thereafter, each
taxpayer shall make a like return to the Village Collector for a corresponding
three-month period.
      (3)   The taxpayer making the return herein provided shall, at the time
of making the return, pay to the Village Collector, the amount of tax, herein
imposed; provided that, in connection with any return the taxpayer may, if he
or she so elects, report and pay an amount based upon his or her total billings
of business subject to the tax during the period for which the return is made
(exclusive of any amounts previously billed) with prompt adjustments of later
payments based upon any differences between the billings and the taxable gross
receipts.
   (G)   If it shall appear that an amount of tax has been paid which was not
due under the provisions of this error of law, then the amount shall be
credited against any tax due, or to become due, under this section from the
taxpayer who made the erroneous payment; provided that no amounts erroneously
paid more than three years prior to the filing of a claim therefor shall be so
credited.
   (H)   No action to recover any amount of tax due under the provisions of
this section shall be commenced more than three years after the due date of the
amount.
   (I)   Any taxpayer who fails to make a return, or who makes a fraudulent
return, or who willfully violates any other provision of this section is guilty
of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined and, in addition,
shall be liable in a civil action for the amount of tax due.
   (J)   This tax shall be reviewed by the Village Board during May, annually,
for continuation.
(1981 Code, § 37.03) (Am. Ord. 94-21, passed 9-19-1994; Am. Ord. 16-33, passed
12-5-2016) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 35.04 TELECOMMUNICATIONS TAX.
   (A)   Pursuant to ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, § 8-11-17, Municipal
Telecommunications Tax, for persons engaged in the act or privilege of
originating in the village or receiving in the village intrastate or interstate
telecommunications on the gross charge for the telecommunications purchased at
retail from a retailer by the person at the rate of 5% of the gross charge for
the telecommunications purchased at retail from a retailer by the person for
the gross charges actually incurred by the taxpayer for services billed.
   (B)   (1)   For the purpose of this section, the following definition shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
         GROSS CHARGES. Does not include any fee imposed by the village under §
115.077 of this code of ordinances.
      (2)   All terms and definitions set forth in ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, § 8-
11-17 (internally repealed, effective January 1, 2003) are adopted and
incorporated as though fully set forth herein.
(1981 Code, § 37.04) (Am. Ord. 97-35, passed 12-15-1997)
§ 35.05 AMUSEMENT TAX.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      AMUSEMENT. Any event, exhibition, performance, presentation, or show for
amusement purposes which is shown, exhibited, staged or conducted in the
village, including, but not limited to the following:
         (a)   Any theatrical dramatic or musical performance, circus, rodeo,
animal act, athletic contest, sport or similar exhibition or activity in which
an attendee participates, and includes, without being limited thereto, animal
and flower shows, skating, dancing, swimming or other water activity, racing or
riding on animals or vehicles or other devices or equipment, baseball,
basketball, softball, football, tennis, golf, hockey, track and field games,
bowling, billiard and pool mines, motion picture film projection;
         (b)   Any video streaming, audio streaming or remotely-accessed online
games made available to persons on a rental or subscription basis, but not
transactions where the person pays for the rights of permanent use, where the
right of access is purchased by any person with a billing address in the
Village of East Dundee; and
         (c)   Any other activity, exhibition, performance, participation and
entertainment not herein named, shown, exhibited, staged, or conducted and for
which an admission fee or other charge to the persons, spectators or
participants is made.
      PERSON. Any person, trustee, receiver, administrator, executor,
conservator, assignee, trust in perpetuity, trust, estate, firm, co-
partnership, joint venture, club, company, business trust, domestic or foreign
corporation, association, syndicate, society or any group of individuals acting
as a unit, whether mutual, cooperative, fraternal, nonprofit or otherwise.
   (B)   (1)   There is hereby levied and imposed a tax upon every person who
pays a charge for admission to, or for the right to access, an amusement at the
rate of 5% of each admission fee or charge, exclusive of state or federal
taxes.
      (2)   The tax levied by this section shall be collected from the person
paying such at the time the admission fee or charge is collected, the person
hereinafter being referred to as the “consumer.”
      (3)   The ultimate incidence of and liability for payment of the tax
shall be borne by the consumer who seeks participation, access or admission to
any amusement. It shall be the duty of every person receiving an admission fee
or charge upon which a tax is levied under this section to secure the tax from
the consumer, to act as trustee for and on account of the village and to pay
over to the Village Treasurer the tax under procedures prescribed by the
Village Treasurer or as otherwise provided in this section, the person being
referred to herein as the “taxpayer.”
      (4)   The tax hereby levied and imposed shall not apply to binding
contractual commitments entered in by the taxpayer prior to the effective date
of this section. It shall be the obligation of the taxpayer to provide
documentation supporting this claim to the non-applicability of the tax to the
pre- existing obligations.
      (5)   In the case of amusements that are delivered electronically to
mobile devices, such as video streaming, audio streaming and/or online games,
the requirements of the Illinois Mobile Telecommunications Source Conformity
Act, ILCS Chapter 35, Act 638, §§ 1 et seq., as amended, shall be utilized for
purposes of determining which customers and charges are subject to the tax
imposed by this section.
   (C)   The tax described in division (B) above shall not be applicable to any
amusement shown, exhibited or staged by:
      (1)   A not-for-profit organization which is exempt from taxation
pursuant to Section 501 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended;
      (2)   Any school district;
      (3)   Any governmental entity;
      (4)   Any entity that charges a fee for admission to an amusement on less
than 50% of the days the entity is open and operating its business during each
quarter of the calendar year; and
      (5)   Any entity that generates a majority of its revenue through
charging an admission fee for an instructional class or the participation by a
person in the creation of any type of artwork.
   (D)   (1)   The Village Treasurer is hereby designated as the administration
and enforcement officer of the tax hereby imposed on behalf of the village. It
shall be the responsibility and duty of the Treasurer to collect all amounts
due the village from the taxpayer. A sworn monthly amusement tax return, on a
calendar month basis, shall be filed by each taxpayer with the Treasurer, on
forms prescribed by him or her, showing all receipts from all tickets or
admissions sold during the preceding month. The returns are to be filed within
20 days after the end of the month covered by the return, with the tax herein
imposed due and owing as of the twentieth day of the month following the month
covered by the return.
      (2)   Each return shall be accompanied by payment to the village of all
taxes due and owing for the month covered by the return.
      (3)   (a)   During the normal business hours of any taxpayer, the Village
Treasurer or any person certified by him or her as his or her deputy or
representative may enter the premises of the taxpayer, or remotely inspect the
books and records of the taxpayer, upon reasonable notice, for the purposes of
inspecting and examining its books and records for the proper administration of
this section, and for the enforcement of the collection of the tax hereby
imposed. It is unlawful for any person to prevent, hinder or interfere with the
Treasurer or his or her duly authorized deputy or representative in the
discharge of his or her duties hereunder.
         (b)   It shall be the duty of every taxpayer to keep accurate and
complete books and records and to keep same at the taxpayer’s principle place
of business, containing all information necessary for the collection of the tax
hereby imposed, to which the Treasurer or his or her duly authorized deputy or
representative shall, at all times, have full access, in-person or remotely,
which records shall include a daily sheet showing:
            1.   All tickets or admissions sold, and amusement fees and charges
collected, during the immediately preceding day and the then current day; and
            2.   The actual admission or ticket receipts collected for the
dates in question.
         (c)   In the event that the inspection and examination by the
Treasurer discloses a discrepancy in excess of 5% from the information
furnished by the taxpayer, the cost of the village's inspection and examination
shall be borne by the taxpayer.
   (E)   (1)   Whenever any taxpayer shall fail to pay any taxes herein
provided, the Village Attorney shall, upon request of the Village President or
the Village Administrator, bring or cause to be brought an action to enforce
the payment of the tax on behalf of the village in any court of competent
jurisdiction. If the Village President, after a hearing held by or for him or
her, shall find that any Taxpayer has willfully evaded his or her
responsibility to pay the tax imposed by this section, he or she may suspend or
revoke all village licenses, including, but not limited to any liquor license
issued under the municipal code, held by the person. Hearings to suspend or
revoke a village license shall be held as provided in village ordinances
creating and administering the licenses or as may be established by the
corporate authorities from time to time.
      (2)   Any suspension or conviction resulting from the hearing shall not
relieve or discharge any civil liability for non-payment of the tax due.
   (F)   (1)   In the event of a failure by any taxpayer to pay to the Village
Treasurer the tax required hereunder within ten days after the same shall be
due, interest shall accumulate and be due upon the tax at the rate of 1% per
month commencing as of the first day of the month following the month for which
the tax was to have been collected. In addition, a penalty of 10% of the tax
and interest due shall be assessed and collected against any taxpayer who shall
fail to pay the tax imposed by this section.
      (2)   In addition to the provision of this section, any taxpayer found
guilty in a court of competent jurisdiction of violating, disobeying, omitting,
neglecting or refusing to comply with or resisting or opposing the enforcement
of any provision of this section, upon a finding of liability therefor, shall
be punished by a fine. Each day any violation of any provision of this section
shall continue to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
   (G)   It is unlawful for any person to show, exhibit, stage or conduct any
amusement without payment of the tax accordance with the terms of this section,
except for amusements as described in division (C) above.
   (H)   The obligation to pay the tax, as herein described, shall commence for
each and every amusement showed, exhibited, staged or conducted within the
village.
(1981 Code, § 37.05) (Am. Ord. 94-21, passed 9-19-1994; Am. Ord. 17-13, passed
3-6-2017; Am. Ord. 22-17, passed 4-18-2022)
§ 35.06 HOTEL OPERATORS OCCUPATION TAX.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      HOTEL. Any building or buildings in which the public may, for a
consideration, obtain living quarters, sleeping or housekeeping accommodations.
The term includes motels, tourist homes or courts, lodging houses, rooming
houses and apartment houses.
      OCCUPANCY. The use or possession or the right to the use or possession of
any room or rooms in a hotel for furnishings or to the services and
accommodations accompanying the use and possession of the room or rooms.
      OPERATOR. Any person operating a hotel.
      PERMANENT RESIDENT. Any person who occupied or has the right to occupy
any room or rooms in a hotel for at least 30 consecutive days.
      PERSON. Any natural individual, firm, partnership association, joint
stock company, joint adventure, public or private corporation, or a receiver,
executor, trustee, conservator or other representative appointed by order of
any court.
      RENT or RENTAL. The consideration received for occupancy, valued in
money, whether received in money or property or services of any kind or nature,
but does not include tax charges that are added to prices by hotel operators on
account of the hotel operators’ tax liability under The Hotel Operators’
Occupation Tax Act, ILCS Chapter 35, Act 145, §§ 1 et seq., which tax charges
are separately stated or stated in combination in a single amount.
      ROOM or ROOMS. Any living quarters, sleeping or housekeeping
accommodations.
      TREASURER. The Office of the Village of East Dundee Treasurer.
   (B)   (1)   A tax is imposed upon persons engaged in the village in the
business of renting, leasing or letting rooms in a hotel at the rate of 5% of
the gross rental receipts from the renting, leasing or letting; excluding,
however, from gross rental receipts, the proceeds of the renting, leasing or
letting to permanent residents of that hotel and excluding any tax levied
pursuant to ILCS Chapter 35, Act 145, § 1.
      (2)   The amounts collected by the village pursuant to this section shall
be expended by the village solely to promote tourism and conventions within the
village or otherwise to attract non-resident overnight visitors to the village.
      (3)   No funds received pursuant to this section shall be used to
advertise for or otherwise promote new competition in the hotel business.
      (4)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to authorize a tax to be
imposed upon the privilege of engaging in any business which under the
Constitution of the United States, may not be made the subject of taxation by
the State of Illinois.
      (5)   Persons subject to the tax imposed by this section may reimburse
themselves for their tax liability under this section by separately stating the
tax as an additional charge, which charge may be stated in combination, in a
single amount, with the state tax imposed under The Hotel Operators’ Occupation
Tax Act, ILCS Chapter 35, Act 145, §§ 1 et seq.
      (6)   If any hotel operator collects an amount (however designated) which
purports to reimburse The operator for a hotel operators’ occupation tax
liability measured by receipts which are not subject to hotel operators’
occupation tax, or if any hotel operator, in collecting an amount (however
designated) which purports to tax liability measured by receipt which are
subject to tax under this section, collects more from the customer than the
operators’ hotel operators’ occupation tax liability in the transaction is the
customer shall have a legal right to claim a refund of the amount from the
operator. However, if the amount is not refunded to the customer for any
reason, the hotel operator is liable to pay the amount to the Treasurer.
   (C)   Every operator shall keep separate books or records of his or her
business as an operator so as to show the rents and occupancies taxable under
this section separately from his or her transactions not taxable hereunder. If
any operator fails to keep the separate books or records, he or she shall be
liable to tax at the rate designated in division (B) above upon the entire
proceeds from his or her hotel.
   (D)   (1)   Except as provided hereinafter in this section, on or before the
last day of each calendar month, every person engaged in the business of
renting, leasing or letting rooms in a hotel in the village during the
preceding calendar month shall file a return with the Treasurer, stating:
         (a)   The name of the operator;
         (b)   His or her residence and the address of his or her principal
place of business and the address of the principal place of business (if that
is a different address) from which he or she engages in the business of
renting, leasing or letting rooms during the preceding calendar month;
         (c)   The total amount of rental receipts received by him or her
during the preceding calendar month from renting, leasing or letting rooms to
permanent residents during the preceding calendar month;
         (d)   Total amount of rental receipts received by him or her during
the preceding calendar month from renting, leasing or letting rooms to
permanent residents during the preceding calendar month;
         (e)   Total amount of other exclusions from gross rental receipts
allowed by this section;
         (f)   Gross rental receipts which were received by him or her during
the preceding calendar month and upon the basis of which the tax is imposed;
         (g)   The amount of tax due;
         (h)   The amount of penalty due, if any; and/or
         (i)   Other reasonable information as the Treasurer may require.
      (2)   If the operator’s average monthly tax liability to the Treasurer
does not exceed $100, the Treasurer may authorize his or her returns to be
filed on a quarter annual basis, with the return for January, February and
March of a given year being due by April 30 of the year; with the return for
April, May and June of a given year being due by July 31 of the year; with the
return for July, August and September of a given year being due by October 31
of the year, and with the return for October, November, mid December of a given
year being due by January 31 of the following year.
      (3)   If the operator’s average monthly tax liability to the Treasurer
does not exceed $20, the Treasurer may authorize his or her returns to be filed
on an annual basis, with the return for a given year being due by January 3l of
the following year.
      (4)   The quarterly and annual returns, as to form and substance, shall
be subject to the same requirements as monthly returns.
      (5)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this section concerning the
time within which an operator may file his or her return, in the case of any
operator who ceases to engage in a kind of business which makes him or her
responsible for filing returns under this section, the operator shall file a
final return under this section with the Treasurer not more than one month
after discontinuing the business.
      (6)   Where the same person has more than one business registered with
the Treasurer under separate registrations under this section, the person shall
not file each return that is due as a single return covering all registered
businesses, but shall file separate returns for each registered business.
      (7)   In his or her return, the operator shall determine the value of any
consideration other than money received by him or her in connection with the
renting, leasing or letting of rooms in. the course of his or her business and
he or she shall include the value in his or her return. The determination shall
be subject to review and revision by the Treasurer.
      (8)   Where the operator is a corporation, the return filed on behalf of
the corporation shall be signed by the President, Vice-President, Secretary and
Treasurer, or by the properly accredited agent of the corporation.
      (9)   The person filing the return herein provided for shall, at the time
of filing the return, pay to the Treasurer the amount of tax imposed. All
monies received by the Treasurer, under the provisions of this section, shall
be paid into the Village General Corporate Account.
      (10)   The Treasurer may, upon separate written notice to a taxpayer,
require the taxpayer to prepare and file with the Treasurer within not less
than 60 days after receipt of the notice an annual information return for the
tax year specified in the notice. The annual return to the Treasurer shall
include a statement of gross receipts as shown by the operator’s last state
income tax return. If the total receipts of the business as reported in the
state income tax return do not agree with the gross receipts reported to the
Treasurer for the same period, the operator shall attach to his or her annual
information return a schedule showing a reconciliation of the two amounts and
the reasons for the difference. The operator’s annual information return to the
Treasurer shall also disclose any additional reasonable information which the
Treasurer deems would be helpful in determining the accuracy of the monthly,
quarterly or annual tax returns by such operator as hereinbefore provided for
in this section.
      (11)   The chief executive officer, proprietor, owner or highest ranking
manager shall sign the annual return to certify the accuracy of the information
contained therein. Any person who willfully signs the annual return containing
false or inaccurate information shall be guilty of perjury and punished
accordingly. The annual return form prescribed by the Treasurer shall include a
warning that the person signing the return may be liable for perjury.
      (12)   The foregoing portion of this section concerning the filing of an
annual information return shall not apply to an operator who is not required to
file an income tax return with the United States Government.
   (E)   (1)   Any person engaged in the business of renting, leasing or
letting hotel rooms in the village who fails to make a return, to keep books
and records as required herein, who makes a fraudulent return, who willfully
violates any provision of this section or any officer or agent of a corporation
engaged in the business of renting, leasing or letting hotel rooms in the
village who signs a fraudulent return made on behalf of the corporation shall,
if found guilty, be fined. Each and every day the person is engaged in business
in violation of this section shall constitute a separate offense.
      (2)   Any person who accepts money that is due to the Treasurer under
this section from a taxpayer for the purpose of acting as the taxpayer’s agent
to make the payment to the Treasurer, but fails to remit the payment to the
Treasurer when due, or who purports to make the payment, but fails to do so
because his or her check or other remittance fails to clear the bank or other
depository against which it is drawn, shall, if found guilty, be fined.
      (3)   Any hotel operator who collects or attempts to collect an amount,
however designated, which purports to reimburse the operator for hotel
operator’s occupation tax liability measured by receipts which the operator
knows are not subject to hotel operator’s occupation tax, or any hotel operator
who knowingly over-collects or attempts to over-collect an amount purporting to
reimburse such operator for hotel operator’s occupation tax liability in a
transaction which is subject to the tax that is imposed by this chapter, shall,
if found guilty, be fined.
   (F)   (1)   Where an operator pays hotel operators’ tax to the Treasurer in
error, either as a result of a mistake of fact or an error of law, the operator
may file a claim with the Treasurer upon a form which the Treasurer prescribes
and will issue on request.
      (2)   In addition to proving that he or she did not owe the tax for which
recovery is sought, the claimant must also prove that he or she bore the burden
of the amount of the tax either by not shifting the burden of the tax to anyone
else in the first instance, or by unconditionally refunding any amounts passed
on because of the tax to this customers, who bore the burden thereof.
      (3)   As to any claim filed with the Treasurer on and after each January
1 and July 1, no amount of tax or penalty erroneously paid (either in total or
partial liquidation of a tax or penalty) under this section more than three
years prior to the January 1 and July 1, respectively, shall be credited or
refunded.
      (4)   When any claim is allowed, the Board of Trustees may issue a credit
memorandum to the claimant for the amount so allowed or refund the amount in
the manner as the Board of Trustees shall determine or as set forth in division
(F)(5) below.
      (5)   In case the Board of Trustees determines that the claimant is
entitled to a refund, the refund shall be made only from the budgeted amount as
may be available for that purpose. If it appears unlikely that the amount
budgeted would permit everyone having a claim allowed during the period covered
by the budgeted amount to elect to receive a cash refund, the Board of Trustees
will make refunds only in hardship cases (such as in cases in which the
claimant cannot use a credit memorandum).
(1981 Code, § 37.06) (Am. Ord. 94-21, passed 9-19-1994)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 35.07 MOTOR VEHICLE TAX.
   The provision formerly requiring a license for motor vehicles has been
repealed effective December 31, 2007. Revenue traditionally generated therefrom
will now be included within the assessment of real estate taxes of residents of
the village.
(Ord. 07-10, passed 3-19-2007)
§ 35.08 VIDEO AND AUDIO RECORDING RENTAL TAX.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      GAME CARTRIDGE.  Any device intended or designed to interface with and
provide supplemental data, computational capability or the like to equipment
intended for use as or designed for video and audio amusement.
      GROSS RECEIPTS.  The consideration received for the leasing or rental of
video and audio recordings and game cartridges valued in money whether received
in money or otherwise, including cash, credits, services and property of every
kind and nature, and shall be determined without any deduction on account of
the cost of videocassette, the labor or service costs or any other expenses
whatsoever.
      PERSON. Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership,
association, joint stock company, joint adventure, corporation, municipal
corporation or political subdivision of this state, or a receiver, trustee,
conservator, or other representative appointed by order of any court. Whenever
the term PERSON is used in any clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, the
term as applied to associations shall mean the owners or part-owners thereof,
and as applied to corporations, the officers thereof.
      TAXPAYER.  A person engaged in business within the corporate limits of
the village which business includes the leasing or rental of video and audio
recordings and game cartridges.
      VIDEO AND AUDIO RECORDINGS.  A physical medium, whether in the form of
magnetic tape, laser readable disk or other recording format, on which are
captured video, audio or video and audio images or signals, for the purpose of
the regeneration of same by the person leasing or renting such medium. Included
within this category by way of illustration and not limitation are what are
commonly referred to as videocassettes, laserdiscs, and CD ROM capable of video
and audio reproduction.
   (B)   Imposition of tax. A tax is hereby levied and imposed upon the use and
privilege of leasing or renting a video or audio recording or game cartridge by
a taxpayer at a rate equal to 8% of the fee, revenue or other consideration
received by the taxpayer or charged by the taxpayer each time a video or audio
recording or game cartridge is leased or rented by the taxpayer. The tax
described in this section shall be paid by the taxpayer which leases to or
rents to a person, company, firm or other entity the video or audio recording
or game cartridge and shall be applicable to any such leased or rented on and
after June 1, 1993.
   (C)   Exemptions. The tax described in division (B) above shall not be
applicable to any amusement shown, exhibited or staged by:
      (1)   A not-for-profit organization which is exempt from taxation
pursuant to Section 501 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended;
      (2)   Any school district; or
      (3)   Any government entity.
   (D)   Administration and enforcement.
      (1)   The Village Treasurer is hereby designated as the Administrator and
Enforcement Officer of the tax imposed on behalf of the village. It shall be
the responsibility and duty of the Treasurer to collect all amounts due the
village from the taxpayer. A sworn monthly tax return, on a calendar month
basis, shall be filed by each taxpayer with the Treasurer, on forms prescribed
by him, showing all receipts from each renting or leasing activities during the
preceding month. The returns are to be filed within 20 days after the end of
the month covered by the return, with the tax herein imposed due and owing as
of the twentieth day of the month following the month covered by the return.
      (2)   Each return shall be accompanied by payment to the village of all
taxes due and owing for the month covered by the return.
      (3)   During the normal business hours of any such taxpayer, the
Treasurer or any person certified by him or her as his or her deputy or
representative may enter the premises of any taxpayer for the purpose of
inspecting and examining the taxpayer’s books and records for the proper
administration of this section, and for the enforcement of the collection of
the tax hereby imposed. It is unlawful for any person to prevent, hinder or
interfere with the Treasurer or his or her duly authorized deputy or
representative in the discharge of his or her duties hereunder. It shall be the
duty of every taxpayer to keep accurate and complete books and records,
containing all information necessary for the collection of the tax herein
imposed, to which the treasurer or his or her duly authorized deputy or
representative shall at all times have full access, which records shall include
a daily sheet showing: (a) the number of video and audio recordings and game
cartridges rented during the immediately preceding day and the then current
day; and (b) the actual receipts collected for the dates in question from the
lease or rental of such. In the event that the inspection and examination by
the Treasurer disclose a discrepancy in excess of 5% from the information
furnished by the taxpayer, the cost of the inspection and examination shall be
borne by the taxpayer.
   (E)   Enforcement; suit for collection; revocation of license. Whenever any
taxpayer shall fail to pay any taxes herein provided, the Village Attorney
shall, upon request of the Village President or the Village Administrator,
bring or cause to be brought an action to enforce the payment of the tax on
behalf of the village in any court of competent jurisdiction. If the Village
President, and after a hearing held by or for him or her, shall find that any
Taxpayer has wilfully evaded his or her responsibility to pay the tax imposed
by this section, he or she may suspend or revoke all village licenses,
including but not limited to any liquor license issued under the Municipal
Code, held by such person. Hearings to suspend or revoke a village license
shall be held as provided in village ordinances creating and administering such
licenses or as may be established by the corporate authorities from time to
time. Any suspension or conviction resulting from such hearing shall not
relieve or discharge any civil liability for non-payment of the tax due.
   (F)   Interest and penalties.
      (1)   In the event of a failure by any taxpayer to pay to the Village
Treasurer the tax required hereunder within ten days after the same shall be
due, interest shall accumulate and be due upon the tax at the rate of 1% per
month commencing as of the first day of the month following the month for which
the tax was to have been collected. In addition, a penalty of 10% of the tax
and interest due shall be assessed and collected against any taxpayer who shall
fail to pay the tax imposed by this section.
      (2)   In addition to the provision of this section, any taxpayer found
guilty in a court of competent jurisdiction of violating, disobeying, omitting,
neglecting or refusing to comply with or resisting or opposing the enforcement
of any provision of this section, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by
a fine of not less than $50 nor more than $500 for the first offense, and not
less than $100 nor more than $500 for the second and each subsequent offense.
Each day any violation of any provision of this section shall continue to exist
shall constitute a separate offense.
   (G)   Rules and regulations. The Village Treasurer is authorized to adopt
reasonable rules and regulations relating to the administration of this section
as he or she may deem expedient or otherwise appropriate.
(1981 Code, § 37.04)
§ 35.09 HOME RULE MUNICIPAL AND SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX.
   (A)   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of
selling tangible personal property, other than an item of tangible personal
property titled or registered with an agency of this state’s government, at
retail in the village at the rate of 2% of the gross receipts from such sales
made in the course of such business while this section is in effect; and a tax
is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in this municipality in the business
of making sales of service, at the rate of 2% of the selling price of all
tangible personal property transferred by such serviceperson as an incident to
a sale of service. This “Home Rule Municipal Retailers’ Occupation Tax” and
this “Home Rule Municipal Service Occupation Tax” shall not be applicable to
the sales of food for human consumption which is to be consumed off the
premises where it is sold (other than alcoholic beverages, soft drinks, and
food that has been prepared for immediate consumption) and prescription and
non-prescription medicines, drugs, medical appliances and insulin, urine
testing materials, syringes and needles used by diabetics.
   (B)   The imposition of these Home Rule Taxes is in accordance with
authority generally given under ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, §§ 8-11-1 and 8-11-5 et
seq., of the Illinois Municipal Code.
   (C)   The taxes hereby imposed and all civil penalties that may be assessed
as an incident thereto shall be collected and enforced by the Illinois
Department of Revenue. The Illinois Department of Revenue shall have full power
to administer and enforce the provisions of this section in accordance with the
foregoing terms and conditions.
(Ord. 06-11, passed 5-1-2006; Am. Ord. 06-36, passed 9-5-2006; Am. Ord. 16-09,
passed 3-21-2016)
§ 35.10 HOTEL TAX.
   (A)   Definition. For the purpose of this section, a HOTEL is defined to
include any buildings in which the public may, for a consideration, obtain
living quarters, sleeping or housekeeping accommodations. This term includes
motels, tourist homes or courts, lodging houses, rooming houses and apartment
houses as defined in ILCS Ch. 35, Act 145, § 2.
   (B)   Hotel tax. A tax shall be levied and imposed upon the use and
privilege of renting, leasing or letting of rooms in a hotel as defined by this
section, in the village at the rate of 5% of the gross rental receipts from
such rental, leasing or letting. The ultimate incidence of and liability for
payment of the tax shall be borne by the user, lessee or tenant of said rooms.
The tax levied shall be in addition to any and all other taxes.
   (C)   Payment and collection. The owner and operator of each hotel and the
person to whom the license to operate said hotel shall have been issued by the
village, shall bear jointly and severally, the duty to collect the tax from
each user, lessee or tenant of rooms in such hotel or motel. Every person
required to collect the tax levied by this section shall secure said tax from
the user, lessee or tenant of a room or rooms at the time that he or she
collects the price, charge or rent to which it applies.
   (D)   Administration and enforcement. The Village Treasurer is hereby
designated as the administration and enforcement officer of the tax hereby
imposed on behalf of the village. It shall be the responsibility and duty of
the Village Treasurer to collect all amounts due to the village from the
owners, operators and licensees of hotels in the village. A sworn quarterly
hotel and motel occupancy tax return shall be filed by each owner, operator or
licensee of each hotel in the village with the Village Treasurer, on forms
prescribed by him or her, showing all receipts from each renting, leasing or
letter of rooms during the preceding quarter. The dates upon which said
quarterly returns are to be filed shall be provided by rules and regulations
promulgated by the Village Treasurer.
(Ord. 08-37, passed 7-7-2008)
§ 35.11 BUSINESS DISTRICTS DESIGNATED; RETAILERS’ OCCUPATION TAX AND SERVICE
OCCUPATION TAX IMPOSED THEREIN.
   (A)   Authority. The village is authorized, pursuant to the provisions of
the Business District Development and Redevelopment Act, ILCS Chapter 65, Act
5, §§ 11-74.3 et seq. (the “Act”), to designate business districts to promote
development or redevelopment in the village and to impose a retailers’
occupation tax and a service occupation tax therein and to issue bonds to
provide for the payment of business district project costs.
   (B)   Designation of business districts.
      (1)   Amended Route 72 and Route 25 Business Development District. The
“Village of East Dundee Amended Route 72 and Route 25 Business Development
District” is hereby designated and shall consist of the contiguous territory
legally described in Exhibit B to Ord.11-19,passed 4-11-2011, and outlined on
the map of a portion of the village attached as Exhibit C to Ord. 11-19, passed
4-11-2011, which exhibits are by this reference incorporated herein and made a
part hereof.
      (2)   Dundee Gateway Business District. A business district to be known
and designated as the “Dundee Gateway Business District” is hereby designated
and shall consist of the contiguous territory legally described in Exhibit C to
Ord. 09-30, passed 9-28-2009, and outlined on the map of a portion of the
village attached as Exhibit D to Ord. 09-30, passed 9-28-2009.
   (C)   Approval of business district plans.
      (1)   Amended Route 72 and Route 25 Business Development District. The
Amended Business District Plan, attached as Exhibit D to Ord. 11-19, passed 4-
11-2011, is found to conform to the requirements of the Business District
Development and Redevelopment Act (ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, §§ 11-74.3-1 et
seq.) and to promote the public interest, and is hereby approved.
      (2)   Gateway Business Development District. The Business District Plan,
attached as Exhibit E to Ord. 09-30, passed 9-28-2009, is found to conform to
the requirements of the Business District Development and Redevelopment Act
(ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, §§ 11-74.3-1 et seq.) and to promote the public
interest, and is hereby approved.
   (D)   Imposition of tax; creation of allocation funds.
      (1)   Amended Route 72 and Route 25 Business Development District.
         (a)   Retailers’ Occupation Tax. Pursuant to the Act, a tax is hereby
imposed upon all persons engaged in the Amended Business of selling tangible
personal property, other than an item of tangible personal property titled or
registered with an agency of this state’s government, at retail within the
boundaries of the Amended Business District at the rate of 1% of the gross
receipts from such sales made in the course of such Amended Business while this
section is in effect. Such tax shall not be imposed on the sales of food for
human consumption that is to be consumed off the premises where it is sold
(other than alcoholic beverages, soft drinks, and food that has been prepared
for immediate consumption), prescription and nonprescription medicines, drugs,
medical appliances, modifications to a motor vehicle for the purpose of
rendering it usable by a disabled person, and insulin, urine testing materials,
syringes, and needles used by diabetics for human use. The proceeds of this tax
shall be used for the planning, execution and implementation of the Amended
Business District Plan, the payment of Amended Business District project costs
as set forth in the Amended Business District Plan and the payment of
obligations of the village issued to provide for the payment of Amended
Business District project costs. The proceeds of such tax shall be deposited
into a special fund of the village which is hereby created and designated the
“Amended Route 72 and Route 25 Business Development District Tax Allocation
Fund.” The tax imposed under this section and all civil penalties that may be
assessed as an incident thereto shall be collected and enforced by the Illinois
Department of Revenue. The Department of Revenue shall have full power to
administer and enforce the provisions of this section.
         (b)   Service Occupation Tax. Pursuant to the Act, a tax is hereby
imposed upon all persons engaged within the boundaries of the Amended Business
District in the Amended Business of making sales of service, at the rate of 1%
of the selling price of all tangible personal property transferred by such
serviceman as an incident to a sale of service. Such tax shall not be imposed
on the sale of food for human consumption that is to be consumed off the
premises where it is sold (other than alcoholic beverages, soft drinks, and
food that has been prepared for immediate consumption), prescription and
nonprescription medicines, drugs, medical appliances, modifications to a motor
vehicle for the purpose of rendering it usable by a disabled person, and
insulin, urine testing materials, syringes, and needles used by diabetics for
human use. The proceeds of this tax shall be used for the planning, execution
and implementation of the Amended Business District Plan, the payment of
Amended Business District project costs as set forth in the Amended Business
District Plan and the payment of obligations of the village issued to provide
for the payment of Amended Business District project costs. The proceeds of
such tax shall be deposited into the “Amended Route 72 and Route 25 Business
Development District Tax Allocation Fund.” The tax imposed under this section
and all civil penalties that may be assessed as an incident thereto shall be
collected and enforced by the Illinois Department of Revenue. The Department of
Revenue shall have fall power to administer and enforce the provisions of this
section.
      (2)   Gateway Business Development District. 
         (a)   Retailers’ Occupation Tax. Pursuant to the Business District
Act, there is hereby imposed a retailers’ occupation tax in the Business
District at the rate of 0.5% upon all persons engaged in the selling of
tangible personal property, other than an item of tangible personal property
titled or registered with any agency of this state’s government. Such tax may
also not be imposed on food for human consumption that is to be consumed off
the premises where it is sold (other than alcoholic beverages, soft drinks, and
food that has been prepared for immediate consumption), prescription and
nonprescription medicines, drugs, medical appliances, modifications to a motor
vehicle for the purpose of rendering it usable by a disabled person, and
insulin, urine testing materials, syringes, and needs used by diabetics for
human use. The proceeds of this tax shall be used for the planning, execution
and implementation of the Business District Plan, the payment of Business
District project costs as set forth in the Business District Plan, and the
payment of obligations of the village issued to provide for the payment of
Business District project costs. Such tax shall be collected and enforced by
the Department of Revenue in the same manner as all retailers’ occupation taxes
imposed in the village. The proceeds of such tax shall be deposited into a
special fund of the village which is hereby created and designated as the
“Dundee Gateway Business Development District Tax Allocation Fund.”
         (b)   Service Occupation Tax. Pursuant to the Act, there is hereby
imposed a service occupation tax in the Business District at the rate of 0.5%
upon all persons engaged, in the Business District, in the business of making
sales of service, who, as an incident to making those sales of service,
transfer tangible personal property within the Business District, either in the
form of tangible personal property or in the form of real estate as an incident
to a sale of service. The proceeds of this tax shall be used for the planning,
execution and implementation of the Business District Plan, the payment of
Business District project costs as set forth in the Business District Plan, and
the payment of obligations of the village issued to provide for the payment of
Business District project costs. Such tax shall be collected and enforced by
the Department of Revenue in the same manner as all service occupation taxes in
the village. The proceeds of such tax shall be deposited into a special fund of
the village which is hereby created and designated as the “Illinois Route 72
and Illinois Route 25 Business District Tax Allocation Fund.”
(Ord. 08-57, passed 9-29-2008; Am. Ord. 09-30, passed 9-28-2009; Am. Ord. 11-
19, passed 4-11-2011; Am. Ord. 24-47, passed 12-16-2024)
§ 35.12 MOTOR VEHICLE TRANSFER TAX.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      PERSON. Any person, trustee, receiver, administrator, executor,
conservator, assignee, trust in perpetuity, trust, estate, firm, co-
partnership, joint venture, club, company, business trust, domestic or foreign
corporation, association, syndicate, society or any group of individuals acting
as a unit, whether mutual, cooperative, fraternal, nonprofit or otherwise.
      WHOLESALE. Purchase of any item for purpose of resale.
      WHOLESALER.  Any person offering any item for purchase for the purpose of
resale.
   (B)   A tax is hereby imposed upon the privilege of buying an automobile
which is sold at wholesale within the boundaries of the village.
      (1)   The tax imposed shall be at a rate of $10 per motor vehicle when
the motor vehicle is purchased from any wholesaler that sells more than 2,000
motor vehicles at wholesale in any given calendar year.
      (2)   The tax imposed shall be at a rate of $25 per motor vehicle when
the motor vehicle is purchased from any wholesaler that sells 2,000 or fewer
motor vehicles at wholesale in any given calendar year.
   (C)   The tax levied by this section shall be collected from the person to
whom title to the motor vehicle is transferred at the time of delivery, the
person hereinafter referred to as the "buyer".
   (D)   The ultimate incidence of and liability for payment of the tax shall
be borne by the buyer. It shall be the duty of every wholesaler selling a motor
vehicle upon which a tax is levied under this section to secure the tax from
the buyer, to act as trustee for and on account of the village and to remit
over to the Village Treasurer the tax under procedures prescribed by the
Village Treasurer or as otherwise provided in this section.
   (E)   Procedures for collection; rights and duties of Village Treasurer.
      (1)   The Village Treasurer is hereby designated as the administrator and
enforcement officer of the tax hereby imposed on behalf of the village. It
shall be the responsibility and duty of the Village Treasurer to collect all
amounts due the village from the buyer. A sworn monthly tax return, on a
calendar month basis, shall be filed by each wholesaler with the Village
Treasurer, on forms prescribed by him or her, showing all receipts from the
transfer of motor vehicles during the preceding month. The returns are to be
filed within 20 days after the end of the month covered by the return.
      (2)   Each return shall be accompanied by remittance to the village by
the wholesaler of all taxes collected from the buyer and due and owing for the
month covered by the return.
      (3)   (a)   During normal business hours of any wholesaler, the Village
Treasurer or any person certified by him or her as his or her deputy or
representative may enter the premises of the wholesaler, upon reasonable
notice, for the purpose of inspecting and examining its books and records for
the proper administration of this section, and for the enforcement of the
collection of the tax hereby imposed. It is unlawful for any person to prevent,
hinder or interfere with the Village Treasurer or his or her duly authorized
deputy or representative in the discharge of his or her duties hereunder.
         (b)   It shall be the duty of every wholesaler to keep accurate and
complete books and records and to keep same at the wholesaler's principal place
of business within the village, containing all information necessary for the
collection of the tax hereby imposed.
         (c)   In the event that the inspection and examination by the Village
Treasurer discloses a discrepancy from the information furnished by the
wholesaler, the cost of the inspection and examination shall be borne by the
wholesaler.
   (F)   Fines; penalties; enforcement.
      (1)   Whenever any wholesaler shall fail to remit the taxes collected
from the buyer as herein provided, the Village Attorney shall, upon request of
the Village President or the Village Administrator, bring or cause to be
brought an action to enforce the remittance of the tax on behalf of the village
in any court of competent jurisdiction. If the Village President, after a
hearing held by or for him or her, shall find that any wholesaler has willfully
evaded his or her responsibility to remit the tax imposed by this section, he
or she may suspend or revoke all village licenses. Hearings to suspend or
revoke a village license shall be held as provided in village ordinances
creating and administering the licenses or as may be established by the
corporate authorities from time to time.
      (2)   Any suspension or conviction resulting from the hearing shall not
relieve or discharge any civil liability.
      (3)   In the event of a failure by any wholesaler to remit the tax
collected from the buyer to the Village Treasurer within ten days after the
same shall be due, interest shall accumulate and be due upon the tax at the
rate of 1% per month commencing as of the first day of the month following the
month for which the tax was to have been collected. In addition, a penalty of
10% of the tax and interest due shall be assessed and collected against any
wholesaler who failed to collect and remit the tax imposed by this section.
      (4)   In addition to the provision of this section, any wholesaler found
guilty in a court of competent jurisdiction of violating, disobeying, omitting,
neglecting or refusing to comply with or resisting or opposing the enforcement
of any provisions of this section shall be punished by a fine. Each day any
violation of any provision of this section shall continue to exist shall
constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 12-79, passed 10-1-2012; Am. Ord. 17-01, passed 1-3-2017)
§ 35.13 TAXPAYERS’ BILL OF RIGHTS.
   (A)   The provisions of this section shall apply to the village’s procedures
in connection with all of the village’s locally imposed and administered taxes.
   (B)   Definitions. Certain words or terms herein shall have the meaning
ascribed to them as follows:
      ACT. The “Local Government Taxpayers’ Bill of Rights Act”.
      CORPORATE AUTHORITIES. The village’s President and Board of Trustees.
      LOCAL TAX ADMINISTRATOR. The village’s treasurer, is charged with the
administration and collection of the locally imposed and administered taxes,
including staff, employees or agents to the  extent they are authorized by the
local tax administrator to act in the local tax administrator’s stead. The
local tax administrator shall have the authority to implement the terms of this
section to give full effect to this section. The exercise of such authority by
the local tax administrator shall not be inconsistent with this section and the
Act.
      LOCALLY IMPOSED AND ADMINISTERED TAX or TAX. Each tax imposed by the
village that is collected or administered by the village not an agency or
department of the state. It does not include any taxes imposed upon real
property under the Property Tax Code or fees collected by the village other
than infrastructure maintenance fees.
      NOTICE. Each audit notice, collection notice or other similar notice or
communication in connection with each of the village’s locally imposed and
administered taxes.
      TAX ORDINANCE. Each ordinance adopted by the village that imposes any
locally imposed and administered tax.
      TAXPAYER. Any person required to pay any locally imposed and administered
tax and generally includes the person upon whom the legal incidence of such tax
is placed and with respect to consumer taxes includes the business or entity
required to collect and pay the locally imposed and administered tax to the
village.
      VILLAGE. The Village of East Dundee, Illinois.
   (C)   Notices. Unless otherwise provided, whenever notice is required to be
given, the notice is to be in writing mailed not less than seven calendar days
prior to the day fixed for any applicable hearing, audit or other scheduled act
of the local tax administrator. The notice shall be sent by the local tax
administrator as follows:
      (1)   First class or express mail, or overnight mail, addressed to the
persons concerned at the persons’ last known address; or
      (2)   Personal service or delivery.
   (D)   Late payment. Any notice, payment, remittance or other filing required
to be made to the village pursuant to any tax ordinance shall be considered
late unless it is (a) physically received by the village on or before the due
date, or (b) received in an envelope or other container displaying a valid,
readable U.S. Postmark dated on or before the due date, properly addressed to
the village, with adequate postage prepaid.
   (E)   Payment. Any payment or remittance received for a tax period shall be
applied in the following order:
      (1)   First to the tax due for the applicable period;
      (2)   Second to the interest due for the applicable period; and
      (3)   Third to the penalty for the applicable period.
   (F)   Certain credits and refunds.
      (1)   The village shall not refund or credit any taxes voluntarily paid
without written protest at the time of payment in the event that a locally
imposed and administered tax is declared invalidly enacted or unconstitutional
by a court of competent jurisdiction. However, a taxpayer shall not be deemed
to have paid the tax voluntarily if the taxpayer lacked knowledge of the facts
upon which to protest the taxes at the time of payment or if the taxpayer paid
the taxes under duress.
      (2)   The statute of limitations on a claim for credit or refund shall be
less than four years after the end of the calendar year in which payment in
error was made. The village shall not grant a credit or refund of locally
imposed and administered taxes, interest, or penalties to a person who has not
paid the amounts directly to the village.
      (3)   The procedure for claiming a credit or refund of locally imposed
and administered taxes, interest or penalties paid in error shall be as
follows:
         (a)   The taxpayer shall submit to the local tax administrator in
writing a claim for credit or refund together with a statement specifying:
            1.   The name of the locally imposed and administered tax subject
to the claim;
            2.   The tax period for the locally imposed and administered tax
subject to the claim;
            3.   The date of the tax payment subject to the claim and the
cancelled check or receipt for the payment;
            4.   The taxpayer’s recalculation, accompanied by an amended or
revised tax return, in connection with the claim; and
            5.   A request for either a refund or a credit in connection with
the claim to be applied to the amount of tax, interest and penalties overpaid,
and, as applicable, related interest on the amount overpaid; provided, however,
that there shall be no refund and only a credit given in the event the taxpayer
owes any monies to the village;
         (b)   Within ten days of the receipt by the local tax administrator of
any claim for a refund or credit, the local tax administrator shall either:
            1.   Grant the claim; or
            2.   Deny the claim, in whole or in part, together with a statement
as to the reason for the denial or the partial grant and denial.
      (4)   In the event the local tax administrator grants, in whole or in
part, a claim for refund or credit, the amount of the grant for refund or
credit shall bear interest at the rate of 1% per annum, based on a year of 365
days and the number of days elapsed, from the date of the overpayment to the
date of mailing of a refund check or the grant of a credit.
   (G)   Audit procedure. Any request for proposed audit pursuant to any local
administered tax shall comply with the notice requirements of this section.
      (1)   Each notice of audit shall contain the following information:
         (a)   The tax;
         (b)   The time period of the audit; and
         (c)   A brief description of the books and records to be made
available for the auditor.
      (2)   Any audit shall be conducted during normal business hours and if
the date and time selected by the local tax administrator is not agreeable to
the taxpayer, another date and time may be requested by the taxpayer within 30
days after the originally designated audit and during normal business hours.
      (3)   The taxpayer may request an extension of time to have an audit
conducted. The audit shall be conducted not less than seven days or more than
30 days from the date the notice is given, unless the taxpayer and the local
tax administrator agreed to some other convenient time. In the event taxpayer
is unable to comply with the audit on the date in question, the taxpayer may
request another date within the 30 days, approved in writing, that is
convenient to the taxpayer and the local tax administrator.
      (4)   Every taxpayer shall keep accurate books and records of the
taxpayer’s business or activities, including original source documents and
books of entry denoting the transactions which had given rise or may have given
rise to any tax liability, exemption or deduction. All books shall be kept in
the English language and shall be subject to and available for inspection by
the village.
      (5)   It is the duty and responsibility of every taxpayer to make
available its books and records for inspection by the village. If the taxpayer
or tax collector fails to provide the documents necessary for audit within the
time provided, the local tax administrator may issue a tax determination and
assessment based on the tax administrator’s determination of the best estimate
of the taxpayer’s tax liability.
      (6)   If an audit determines there has been an overpayment of a locally
imposed and administered tax as a result of the audit, written notice of the
amount of overpayment shall be given to the taxpayer within 30 days of the
village’s determination of the amount of overpayment.
      (7)   In the event a tax payment was submitted to the incorrect local
governmental entity, the local tax administrator shall notify the local
governmental entity imposing such tax.
   (H)   Appeal.
      (1)   The local tax administrator shall send written notice to a taxpayer
upon the local tax administrator’s issuance of a protestable notice of tax due,
a bill, a claim denial, or a notice of claim reduction regarding any tax. The
notice shall include the following information:
         (a)   The reason for the assessment;
         (b)   The amount of the tax liability proposed;
         (c)   The procedure for appealing the assessment; and
         (d)   The obligations of the village during the audit, appeal, refund
and collection process.
      (2)   A taxpayer who receives written notice from the local tax
administrator of a determination of tax due or assessment may file with the
local tax administrator a written protest and petition for hearing, setting
forth the basis of the taxpayer’s request for a hearing. The written protest
and petition for hearing must be filed with the local tax administrator within
45 days of receipt of the written notice of the tax determination and
assessment.
      (3)   If a timely written notice and petition for hearing is filed, the
local tax administrator shall fix the time and place for hearing and shall give
written notice to the taxpayer. The hearing shall be scheduled for a date
within 14 days of receipt of the written protest and petition for hearing,
unless the taxpayer requests a later date convenient to all parties.
      (4)   If a written protest and petition for hearing is not filed within
the 45 day period, the tax determination, audit or assessment shall become a
final bill due and owing without further notice.
      (5)   Upon the showing of reasonable cause by the taxpayer and the full
payment of the contested tax liability along with interest accrued as of the
due date of the tax, the local tax administrator may reopen or extend the time
for filing a written protest and petition for hearing. In no event shall the
time for filing a written protest and petition for hearing be reopened or
extended for more than 90 days after the expiration of the forty-five day
period.
   (I)   Hearing.
      (1)   Whenever a taxpayer or a tax collector has filed a timely written
protest and petition for hearing under division (H) of this section, the local
tax administrator shall conduct a hearing regarding any appeal.
      (2)   No continuances shall be granted except in cases where a
continuance is absolutely necessary to protect the rights of the taxpayer. Lack
of preparation shall not be grounds for a continuance. Any continuance granted
shall not exceed 14 days.
      (3)   At the hearing the local tax administrator shall preside and shall
hear testimony and accept any evidence relevant to the tax determination, audit
or assessment. The strict rules of evidence applicable to judicial proceedings
shall not apply.
      (4)   At the conclusion of the hearing, the local tax administrator shall
make a written determination on the basis of the evidence presented at the
hearing. The taxpayer or tax collector shall be provided with a copy of the
written decision.
   (J)   Interest and penalties. In the event a determination has been made
that a tax is due and owing, through audit, assessment or other bill sent, the
tax must be paid within the time frame otherwise indicated.
      (1)   Interest. The village hereby provides for the amount of interest to
be assessed on a late payment, underpayment, or nonpayment of the tax, to be 1%
per month, based on a year of 365 days and the number of days elapsed.
      (2)   Late filing and payment penalties. If a tax return is not filed
within the time and manner provided by the controlling tax ordinance, a late
filing penalty, of 5% of the amount of tax required to be shown as due on a
return shall be imposed; and a late payment penalty of 5% of the tax due shall
be imposed. If no return is filed within the time or manner provided by the
controlling tax ordinance and prior to the village issuing a notice of tax
delinquency or notice of tax liability, then a failure to file penalty shall be
assessed equal to 25% of the total tax due for the applicable reporting period
for which the return was required to be filed. A late filing or payment penalty
shall not apply if a failure to file penalty is imposed by the controlling
ordinance.
   (K)   Abatement. The local tax administrator shall have the authority to
waive or abate any late filing penalty, late payment penalty or failure to file
penalty if the local tax administrator shall determine reasonable cause exists
for delay or failure to make a filing.
   (L)   Installment contracts. The village may enter into an installment
contract with the taxpayer for the payment of taxes under the controlling tax
ordinance. The local tax administrator may not cancel any installment contract
so entered unless the taxpayer fails to pay any amount due and owing. Upon
written notice by the local tax administrator that the payment is 30 days
delinquent, the taxpayer shall have 14 working days to cure any delinquency. If
the taxpayer fails to cure the delinquency within the 14 day period or fails to
demonstrate good faith in restructuring the installment contract with the local
administrator, the installment contract shall be canceled without further
notice to the taxpayer.
   (M)   Statute of limitations. The village, through the local tax
administrator, shall review all tax returns in a prompt and timely manner and
inform taxpayers of any amounts due and owing. The taxpayer shall have 45 days
after receiving notice of the reviewed tax returns to make any request for
refund or provide any tax still due and owing.
      (1)   No determination of tax due and owing may be issued more than four
years maximum after the end of the calendar year for which the return for the
applicable period was filed or for the calendar year in which the return for
the applicable period was due, whichever occurs later.
      (2)   If any tax return is not filed or if during any four-year period
for which a notice of tax determination or assessment may be issued by the
village, the tax paid was less than 75% of the tax due, the statute of
limitations shall be six years maximum after the end of the calendar year in
which return for the applicable period was due or end of the calendar year in
which the return for the applicable period was filed.
      (3)   No statute of limitations shall not apply if a fraudulent tax
return was filed by the taxpayer.
   (N)   Voluntary disclosure. For any locally imposed and administered tax for
which a taxpayer has not received a written notice of an audit, investigation,
or assessment from the local tax administrator, a taxpayer is entitled to file
an application with the local tax administrator for a voluntary disclosure of
the tax due. A taxpayer filing a voluntary disclosure application must agree to
pay the amount of tax due, along with interest of1% per month, for all periods
prior to the filing of the application but not more than four years before the
date of filing the application. A taxpayer filing a valid voluntary disclosure
application may not be liable for any additional tax, interest, or penalty for
any period before the date the application was filed. However, if the taxpayer
incorrectly determined and underpaid the amount of tax due, the taxpayer is
liable for the underpaid tax along with applicable interest on the underpaid
tax, unless the underpayment was the result of fraud on the part of the
taxpayer, in which case the application shall be deemed invalid and void. The
payment of tax and interest must be made by no later than 90 days after the
filing of the voluntary disclosure application or the date agreed to by the
local tax administrator. However, any additional amounts owed as a result of an
underpayment of tax and interest previously paid under this section must be
paid within 90 days after a final determination and the exhaustion of all
appeals of the additional amount owed or the date agreed to by the local tax
administrator, whichever is longer.
   (O)   Publication of tax ordinances. Any locally administered tax ordinance
shall be published via normal or standard publishing requirements. The posting
of a tax ordinance on the Internet shall satisfy the publication requirements.
Copies of all tax ordinances shall be made available to the public upon request
at the Village Clerk’s office.
   (P)   The local tax administrator shall establish an internal review
procedure regarding any liens filed against any taxpayers for unpaid taxes.
Upon a determination by the local tax administrator that the lien is valid, the
lien shall remain in full force and effect. If the lien is determined to be
improper, the local tax administrator shall:
      (1)   Timely remove the lien at the village’s expense;
      (2)   Correct the taxpayer’s credit record; and
      (3)   Correct any public disclosure of the improperly imposed lien.
   (Q)   Application. This section shall be liberally construed and
administered to supplement all of the village’s tax ordinances. To the extent
that any tax ordinance is in conflict with or inconsistent with this section,
this section shall be controlling.
(Ord. 16-14, passed 4-25-2016)
§ 35.14 MUNICIPAL GAS USE TAX.
   (A)   Short title. The tax imposed by this section shall be known as the
Municipal Gas Use Tax and is imposed in addition to all other taxes imposed by
the village, or any other municipal corporation or political subdivision
thereof.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      PERSON. Any individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association,
joint stock company, joint venture, corporation, limited liability company,
municipal corporation or political subdivision of this state, or a receiver,
trustee, conservator or other representative appointed by order of any court.
      PUBLIC UTILITIES ACT. The Public Utilities Act, ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, §§
1101 et seq., as amended.
      PUBLIC UTILITY. A public utility as defined in ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, § 3-
105.
      RETAIL PURCHASER. Any person who purchases gas in a sale at retail.
      SALE AT RETAIL. Any sale of gas by a retailer to a person for use or
consumption, and not for resale. For this purpose the term RETAILER means any
person engaged in the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing or
selling gas.
   (C)   Tax.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided by this section, a tax is imposed on
the privilege of using or consuming gas in the village that is purchased in a
sale at retail at the rate of $0.05 per therm.
      (2)   The ultimate incidence of and liability for payment of the tax is
on the retail purchaser, and nothing in this section shall be construed to
impose a tax on the occupation of distributing, supplying, furnishing, selling
or transporting gas.
      (3)   The retail purchaser shall pay the tax, measured by therms of gas
delivered to the retail purchaser's premises, to the public utility designated
to collect the tax pursuant to division (D) below on or before the payment due
date of the public utility's bill first reflecting the tax, or directly to the
Village Finance Director on or before the fifteenth day of the second month
following the month in which the gas is delivered to the retail purchaser if no
public utility has been designated to collect the tax pursuant to division (D)
below or if the gas is delivered by a person other than a public utility so
designated.
      (4)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to impose a tax upon any
person, business or activity which, under the constitutions of the United
States or State of Illinois, may not be made the subject of taxation by the
village.
      (5)   A person who purchases gas for resale and therefore does not pay
the tax imposed by this section with respect to the use or consumption of the
gas, but who later uses or consumes part or all of the gas, shall pay the tax
directly to the Village Finance Director on or before the fifteenth day of the
second month following the month in which the gas is used or consumed.
      (6)   The tax shall apply to gas for which the delivery to the retail
purchaser is billed by a public utility on or after March 1, 2017.
      (7)   If it shall appear that an amount of tax has been paid which was
not due under the provisions of this section, whether as a result of mistake of
fact or an error of law, then such amount shall be:
         (a)   Credited against any tax due, or to become due, under this
section from the taxpayer who made the erroneous payment; or
         (b)   Subject to a refund if no such tax is due or to become due;
provided that no amounts erroneously paid more than three years prior to the
filing of a claim therefor shall be so credited or refunded.
      (8)   No action to recover any amount of tax due under the provisions of
this section shall be commenced more than three years after the due date of
such amount.
      (9)   Reserved.
   (D)   Collection of tax by public utility. The Village President, Village
Administrator and Village Finance Director are each authorized to enter into a
contract for collection of the tax imposed by this section with any public
utility providing gas service in the village. The contract shall include and
substantially conform with the following provisions:
      (1)   The public utility will collect the tax from retail purchasers as
an independent contractor;
      (2)   The public utility will remit collected taxes to the Village
Finance Director no more often than once each month;
      (3)   The public utility will be entitled to withhold from tax
collections a service fee equal to 3% of the amounts collected and timely
remitted to the Village Finance Director;
      (4)   The Public utility shall not be responsible to the village for any
tax not actually collected from a retail purchaser; and
      (5)   Such additional terms as the parties may agree upon.
   (E)   Books and records. Every taxpayer shall keep accurate books and
records, including original source documents and books of entry, denoting the
activities or transactions that gave rise, or may have given rise to any tax
liability or exemption under this section. All such books and records shall, at
all times during business hours, be subject to and available for inspection by
the village.
(Ord. 16-33, passed 12-5-2016)
§ 35.15 HOME RULE PROPERTY TAX CAP AND BOND LIMITATIONS POLICY.
   (A)   Applicability and purpose. This section shall apply only if the
village is a home rule unit. If the village is not a home rule unit, this
section shall not apply. The purpose of this section is to restrict the
village's authority to levy property taxes and issue bonds payable from the
village's general property tax levy. As set forth in this section, the village
is limited in the amount of property taxes it may increase its levy over the
prior year to the lesser of 5% or the Consumer Price Index. However, the
village reserves the right in this section, as set forth below, to base future
property tax levies on the maximum amount it could have levied in each year,
regardless of whether or not the village actually levied that maximum amount.
   (B)   Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following words and
phrases have the following meanings:
      (1)   AGGREGATE LEVY. The annual levy of property taxes by the village
for all purposes, with the exception of:
         (a)   Amounts levied for the specific purposes of special service
areas and special assessments;
         (b)   Amounts levied for payments of debt service prior to the
effective date of this section; and
         (c)   Other amounts excluded from the aggregate levy under the PTELL
or other state statute.
      (2)   BONDS. Any instrument evidencing the obligation to pay money
authorized or issued by or on behalf of the village under applicable law,
including without limitation, bonds, notes, installment or financing contracts,
certificates, tax anticipation warrants or notes, vouchers, and any other
evidences of indebtedness.
      (3)   CONSUMER PRICE INDEX. The Consumer Price Index for all urban
consumers (CPI-U) for the Midwest Region for all items, published by the United
States Department of Labor.
      (4)   LEVY CAP. The amount of the aggregate levy for the year preceding
the effective date of this section, increased each year thereafter by: (i) the
lesser of 5% or the percentage increase in the annualized Consumer Price Index
from December of two years prior to the current levy year to December of one
year prior to the current year levy year, and (ii) "new property" and
"recovered tax increment value," as both are defined in the PTELL.
      (5)   PTELL. The Illinois Property Tax Extension Limitation Law, as
amended from time to time.
   (C)   Tax cap. The village shall not certify to the Cook County Clerk or to
the Kane County Clerk an aggregate levy in one year that exceeds the levy cap.
Nothing in this section shall be construed to impair any contract executed, or
obligation incurred, prior to the effective date of this section.
   (D)   Limitations on new bonds. After the effective date of this section,
the village shall not issue bonds that are payable from the village's general
property tax levy in an amount greater than the limit in Section 8-5-1 of the
Illinois Municipal Code, ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-5-1, as amended from time to
time. The limitations herein do not apply to bonds that are payable from
incremental property taxes, special service area levies, special assessment
levies, or any other revenue source, except for the village's general property
tax levy.
(Ord. 18-01, passed 2-5-2018)
§ 35.16 MUNICIPAL CANNABIS RETAILIER'S OCCUPATION TAX.
   (A)   Whenever used herein, unless the context requires otherwise, the
words, terms and phrases used herein shall have the meaning ascribed to them in
the Illinois Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, ILCS Chapter 410, Act 705, §§ 1
et seq., as amended.
   (B)   If the village permits the retail sale of cannabis in the village, a
tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of selling
cannabis, other than cannabis purchased under the Illinois Compassionate Use of
Medical Cannabis Program Act, ILCS Chapter 410, Act 130, §§ 1 et seq., at
retail in the village at the rate of 3% of the gross receipts from these sales
made in the course of that business. Retailers may reimburse themselves for
their tax liability hereunder by separately stating the tax as an additional
charge, which charge may be stated in combination, in a single amount, with any
State tax that retailers are required to collect. The imposition of this tax is
in accordance with the provisions of Section 8-11-23 of the Illinois Municipal
Code, ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, § 8-11-23, as amended, which is incorporated as
though fully set forth herein. The tax levied herein is in addition to any and
all other taxes and charges.
   (C)   The tax hereby imposed, and all civil penalties that may be assessed
as an incident thereto, shall be remitted to, collected by and enforced by the
Department of Revenue of the State of Illinois in accordance with the
provisions of Section 8-11-23 of the Illinois Municipal Code, ILCS Chapter 65,
Act 5, § 8-11-23, as amended. The Department of Revenue of the State of
Illinois shall have full power to administer and enforce the provisions of this
section. The failure to timely collect or remit all taxes due hereunder is a
violation of the Village of East Dundee Village Code, and may be subject to the
penalties hereunder.
(Ord. 19-29, passed 9-16-2019; Am. Ord. 20-01, passed 1-13-2020)
§ 35.17 VEHICLE PARKING TAX.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning:
      OPERATOR. Any person conducting the operation of a parking lot or garage,
as defined by this section, or receiving the consideration for parking or
storage of vehicles at such a location.
      PARKING LOT or GARAGE. Any building, structure, premises, enclosure, or
other place, whether enclosed or not, except a public way, and excluding any
village-owned or operated parking lot or garage within the village, with over
20 parking spaces where vehicles are capable of being stored, housed, or parked
for hire, charge, fee, or other valuable consideration.
      PERSON. Any natural person, trustee, receiver, administrator, executor,
conservator, assignee, trust in perpetuity, trust, estate, firm, partnership,
joint venture, club, company, business trust, domestic or foreign corporation,
association, syndicate, society, or any group of individuals acting as a unit,
whether mutual cooperative, fraternal, or otherwise. Whenever the term PERSON
is used in any clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, the term as applied
to associations shall mean the owners or part-owners thereof, and as applied to
corporations, the officers thereof.
      VEHICLE. (1) Any vehicle which is self-propelled, including, but not
limited to: passenger cars, vans and trucks, recreational vehicles, campers,
motorcycles or motor-driven cycles; (2) semi-trailers; and (3) inoperable
vehicles.
   (B)   Tax imposed. A tax is hereby imposed upon the use and privilege of
parking a vehicle in or upon any parking lot or garage in the village in the
amount of 6% of the charge or fee paid for parking in or on a parking lot or
garage. The tax herein levied shall be paid in addition to any and all other
taxes. The ultimate incidence of and liability for payment of said tax is to be
borne by the person who seeks the privilege of occupying space within said
parking lot or garage, said person hereinafter referred to as “recipient.”
   (C)   Collections. It shall be the joint and several duty of the owner,
manager, licensee and operator of each parking lot or garage to collect the tax
from the recipient of the parking privilege and to pay over to the village the
tax required in this section under procedures prescribed by the Village
Administrator and as otherwise provided in this section. Every person required
to collect the tax levied by this section shall secure said tax from the
recipient at the time he collects the price, charge, or rent to which it
applies. If the recipient is given any invoice, receipt, or other statement or
memorandum of said price, charge, or rent paid or payable the tax shall be
stated, charged, and shown separately on said document.
   (D)   Administration. The Village Administrator or their designated agent is
designated as the administration and enforcement officer of the tax hereby
imposed on behalf of the village. It shall be the responsibility and duty of
the Village Administrator or their designated agent to collect all amounts due
the village from the owners, managers, licensees and operators of parking lots
or garages in the village.
   (E)   Returns. A sworn monthly parking lot and garage tax return, on a
calendar month basis, shall be filed by each owner, manager, licensee or
operator of each parking lot and/or garage in the village with the Village
Administrator or their designated agent, regardless of whether there is any tax
due for the month covered by the return, on forms prescribed by the village,
showing the gross receipts from the parking lot and/or garage and the number of
vehicles parked in or on each lot or garage and the tax imposed, if any. Said
returns are to be filed by the last day of the month following the month
covered by said return. The tax herein imposed due and owing shall accompany
the return and shall likewise be due as of the last day of the month following
the month covered by said return.
   (F)   Right of entry. The Village Administrator or their designated agent,
may enter the premises of any parking lot or garage for the purposes of
inspection and examination of its books, records and electronic receipts for
the proper administration of this section, and for the enforcement of the
collection of the tax hereby imposed. It is unlawful for any person to prevent,
hinder, or interfere with the Village Administrator or their designated agent
in the discharge of their duties.
   (G)   Books and records required. It shall be the duty of every owner,
manager, licensee, or operator of any parking lot or garage to keep accurate
and complete books and records, containing all information necessary for the
collection of the tax herein imposed, to which the Village Administrator or
their designated agent shall at all times have full access, which records shall
include a daily sheet showing:
      (1)   The number of vehicles parked in or on each lot or garage during
the 24-hour period; and
      (2)   The actual parking lot and garage tax receipts collected for the
date in question.
   (H)   Tickets, claim checks or electronic receipts. It shall be the duty of
every person operating a parking lot or garage in the village to issue to the
owner or operator of any vehicle left in their custody for parking a
distinctive ticket, claim check, sticker, or electronic receipt. Tickets or
claim checks shall be kept and issued in numerical sequence.
   (I)   Suit for collection; revocation of license.
      (1)   Whenever any person shall fail to pay any taxes herein provided, or
when any owner, manager, licensee, or operator of a parking lot or garage in
the village shall fail to collect the tax hereby imposed from any person who
has the ultimate liability for payment of the same, the Village Attorney shall,
upon request of the village, bring or cause to be brought an action to enforce
the payment of said tax on behalf of the village in any court of competent
jurisdiction.
      (2)   If the Village President, after a hearing held by or for them,
shall find that any parking lot or garage owner, manager, licensee, or operator
has willfully evaded their responsibility to collect the tax imposed by this
section, the Village President may suspend or revoke all village licenses
issued to and held by such person. Said person shall have an opportunity to be
heard at such hearing, to be held not less than five days after notice is given
of the time and place thereof, addressed to their last known place of business.
Pending notice, hearing, and finding, any license of which such person may be
possessed may be temporarily suspended by the Village President. Any suspension
or conviction resulting from such hearing shall not relieve or discharge any
civil liability for nonpayment of the tax due.
   (J)   Interest; penalties.
      (1)   In the event of failure by any parking lot or garage owner,
manager, licensee or operator to collect and pay to the Village Administrator
the tax required under this section within ten days after the same shall be
due, a penalty shall be assessed and interest shall become due, all in
accordance with the Village Code.
      (2)   Interest shall accumulate and be due upon said tax and penalty
amount at the rate of 1% per month, commencing as of the first day of the month
following the month for which the tax was to have been collected until the tax,
penalty, and interest are paid by any parking lot or garage owner, manager,
licensee, or operator who failed to collect and remit the tax imposed by this
section on a timely basis.
   (K)   All proceeds resulting from the imposition of the tax under this
section, including interest and penalties, shall be paid into the treasury of
the village and shall be credited to and deposited in the general fund of the
village.
(Ord. 22-18, passed 4-18-2022; Am. Ord. 23-58, passed 12-18-2023)
§ 35.18 LOCAL MOTOR FUEL TAX.
   (A)   Definitions. Whenever used in this section, unless the context
requires otherwise, the words, terms and phrases used herein shall have the
meaning ascribed to them in the Illinois Motor Fuel Tax Law, ILCS Chapter 35,
Act 505, §§ 1 et seq., as amended.
   (B)   Local motor fuel tax imposed. A tax is hereby imposed, which tax shall
be collected by each dealer upon the privilege of purchasing motor fuel at
retail in the village at the rate of $0.02 per gallon or fraction thereof. The
ultimate incidence and liability for payment of such tax shall be upon the
seller of the motor fuel.
   (C)   Collection and administration.
      (1)   On or before the last day of each month, every person on which the
tax in §
35.18 is imposed shall cause a sworn tax return to be filed with the Treasurer
showing the volume of motor fuel sold during the preceding calendar month,
which return shall be made upon forms prescribed by the Treasurer. At the time
of filing said tax return, such person shall pay or cause to be paid to the
Treasurer all taxes due for the period for which the tax return applies. It is
unlawful and it is declared to be a misdemeanor for any such person to fail to
pay or cause to be paid said tax.
      (2)   If for any reason any tax is not paid when due, interest at the
rate of two percent per month on the amount of tax which remains unpaid shall
be added and collected. Whenever any person shall fail to pay any tax as
provided in this section, upon the request of the Treasurer and at the
direction of the Village Board, the Village Attorney shall bring or cause to be
brought an action to enforce the payment of said tax on behalf of the village
in any court of competent jurisdiction.
   (D)   Registration and maintenance of records. Each person on which the tax
in §
35.18 is imposed shall register with the village on forms provided by the
Treasurer. Each such person shall have the duty to maintain complete and
accurate books, records, and accounts, showing the gross receipts from the sale
of motor fuel and the taxes collected from the purchaser. Subject to the
applicable provisions of § 35.18 of this Code, the Treasurer, or his or her
designee, shall at all reasonable times have full access to said books,
records, and accounts.
   (E)   Suspension or revocation of license. If the Village President, after
hearing, shall find that any person has willfully avoided payment of the tax
imposed by this §
35.18, the Village President may suspend or revoke all village licenses held by
the person. The person shall have the opportunity to be heard at such hearing
not less than five days after notice of the time and place of the hearing has
been sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, to such person at the
last known place of business. The suspension or revocation of any license shall
not release or discharge the person from civil liability for the payment of the
tax or from prosecution for such offense.
(Ord. 24-38, passed 12-2-2024)
§ 35.19 MUNICIPAL GROCERY RETAILERS’ OCCUPATION TAX AND MUNICIPAL GROCERY
SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX.
   (A)   Municipal grocery retailers' occupation tax imposed. A tax is hereby
imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of selling groceries at retail
in the village at the rate of 1% of the gross receipts from such sales made in
the course of such business while this section is in effect. The imposition of
this tax is in accordance with and subject to the provisions of § 8-11-24 of
the Illinois Municipal Code (ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, § 8-11-24).
   (B)   Municipal grocery service occupation tax imposed. A tax is hereby
imposed upon all persons engaged in this municipality in the business of making
sales of service, who, as an incident to making those sales of service,
transfer groceries as an incident to a sale of service. The rate of this tax
shall be the same rate identified in division (A), above. The imposition of
this tax is in accordance with and subject to the provisions of § 8-11-24 of
the Illinois Municipal Code (ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, § 8-11-24).
   (C)   Illinois Department of Revenue to administer both taxes. The taxes
hereby imposed, and all civil penalties that may be assessed as an incident
thereto, shall be collected and enforced by the Department of Revenue of the
State of Illinois. The Illinois Department of Revenue shall have full power to
administer and enforce the provisions of this section.
   (D)   Clerk to file ordinance with Illinois Department of Revenue. As
required under § 8-11-24 of the Illinois Municipal Code (ILCS Chapter 65, Act
5, § 8-11-24), the Clerk is hereby directed to file a certified copy of the
ordinance codified in this section with the Illinois Department of Revenue on
or before October 1, 2025.
   (E)   Effective date. The taxes imposed by this section shall take effect on
January 1, 2026.
(Ord. 24-39, passed 12-2-2024)
CHAPTER 36: ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION
Section
   
36.01   Purpose and creation
   
36.02   Department composition
   
36.03   Ordinance Enforcement Administrator
   
36.04   System Coordinator
   
36.05   Hearing Room Personnel
   
36.06   Issuance of violations
   
36.07   Violation notice
   
36.08   Administrative hearings
   
36.09   Findings, decision and order
   
36.10   Enforcement of judgments
   
36.11   Judicial review
   
36.12   General fines for any ordinance other than Vehicle Code
   
36.13   Fines for violation of the Vehicle Code other than handicapped parking
and regulated parking
   
36.14   Fines for violations of certain regulated parking and handicapped
parking
   
36.15   Authorization to impound, boot or tow motor vehicle
   
36.16   Request for hearing in case of impoundment and towing of motor vehicle
   
36.17   Notice affixed to vehicle in cases of immobilization
   
36.18   Towing of immobilized vehicle
   
36.19   Post-impoundment notice
   
36.20   Hearing in case of vehicle immobilization
   
36.21   Fines and fees for immobilization
   
36.22   Towing services
   
36.23   Eviction, rights of occupants
   
36.24   Defenses to Building Code violations
   
36.25   Sanctions applicable to the building owner
   
36.26   Liability of parent or legal guardian for ordinance violations
§ 36.01 PURPOSE AND CREATION.
   (A)   Purpose. To provide for fair and efficient enforcement of village
ordinances as may be allowed by law and directed by ordinance, through an
administrative adjudication of violations of village ordinances thereby
expediting the prosecution and correction of code violations. To that end,
there is hereby adopted Division 2.1 of Article 1 of the Illinois Municipal
Code (ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, §§ 1-2.1-1 et seq.).
   (B)   Creation. There is hereby established a department of the municipal
government to be known as the Ordinance Enforcement Department to have the
power to enforce compliance with all municipal ordinances, except for any
offense under the Illinois Vehicle Code (adopted by the village under Title VII
of the Village Code) that is a traffic regulation governing the movement of
vehicles other than a violation pursuant to an automated traffic law
enforcement system which shall be enforced pursuant to this chapter and except
for any reportable offense under ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 6-204. The
establishment of the village Ordinance Enforcement Department does not preclude
the Village Board from using any other method to enforce ordinances of the
village.
(Ord. 08-07, passed 3-3-2008; Am. Ord. 08-15, passed 4-21-2008; Am. Ord. 13-30,
passed 8-19-2013)
§ 36.02 DEPARTMENT COMPOSITION.
   (A)   Organization. The village's Ordinance Enforcement Department shall be
composed of a Hearing Officer, an Ordinance Enforcement Administrator, and
System Coordinator and Hearing Room Personnel, all appointed with the advice
and consent of the Village Board by the Village President, with the power and
authority as hereinafter set forth.
   (B)   Hearing Officer.
      (1)   A Hearing Officer must be an attorney licensed to practice law in
the State of Illinois for at least three years.
      (2)   The Hearing Officer shall preside over all adjudicatory hearings
and shall have the following powers and duties:
         (a)   To hear testimony and accept evidence that is relevant to the
existence of a Village Code violation;
         (b)   To preserve and authenticate the record of the hearing and all
exhibits and evidence introduced at the hearing;
         (c)   To issue and sign a written finding, decision and order stating
whether a Village Code violation exists; and
         (d)   To impose penalties, sanctions or such other relief consistent
with applicable Village Code provisions and assess costs upon finding a party
liable for the charged violation, except however, that in no event shall the
Hearing Officer have authority to impose a penalty of incarceration.
   (C)   Prior to conducting administrative adjudication proceedings under this
chapter, the Hearing Officer shall have successfully completed a formal
training program which includes the following:
      (1)   Instruction on the rules of procedure of the administrative
hearings over which the Hearing Officer shall preside;
      (2)   Orientation to each subject area of the code violations that he or
she will adjudicate;
      (3)   Observation of administrative hearings; and
      (4)   Participation in hypothetical cases, including rules on evidence
and issuing final orders.
(Ord. 08-07, passed 3-3-2008; Am. Ord. 08-15, passed 4-21-2008)
§ 36.03 ORDINANCE ENFORCEMENT ADMINISTRATOR.
   The Ordinance Enforcement Administrator is authorized and directed to:
   (A)   Operate and manage the system of administrative adjudication of
village ordinance violations as may be permitted by law and directed by
ordinance.
   (B)   Adopt, distribute and process all notices as may be required under
this chapter or as may be reasonably required to carry out the purpose of this
chapter.
   (C)   Collect moneys paid as fines and/or penalties assessed after a final
determination of liability.
   (D)   Certify copies of final determination of an ordinance violation
adjudicated pursuant to this chapter, and any factual reports verifying the
final determination of any violation liability which was issued in accordance
with this chapter, the laws of the state including ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §11-
208.3 as from time to time amended.
   (E)   Certify reports to the Secretary of State concerning initiation of
suspension of driving privileges in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter as hereinafter set forth, and those of ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 6-306.5.
   (F)   Promulgate rules and regulations reasonably required to operate and
maintain the administrative adjudication system hereby created.
   (G)   Collect unpaid fines and penalties through private collection agencies
and pursuit of all post-judgment remedies available by current law.
(Ord. 08-07, passed 3-3-2008; Am. Ord. 08-15, passed 4-21-2008)
§ 36.04 SYSTEM COORDINATOR.
   The System Coordinator is hereby authorized and directed to operate and
maintain the computer programs, including but not limited to:
   (A)   Inputting of violation notice information.
   (B)   Establishing court dates and notice dates.
   (C)   Recording fine and penalty assessment and payments.
   (D)   Issuing payment receipts.
   (E)   Issuing succeeding notice of hearing dates and/or final determination
of liability; issuing notice of immobilization; issuing notice of impending
impoundment; issuing notice of impending drivers license suspension, as
directed by the Ordinance Enforcement Administrator in accordance with the
provisions hereinafter set forth.
   (F)   Keeping accurate records of appearances and non-appearances at
administrative hearings, pleas entered, judgments entered, sanctions imposed,
if any, fines and penalties assessed and paid.
(Ord. 08-07, passed 3-3-2008; Am. Ord. 08-15, passed 4-21-2008)
§ 36.05 HEARING ROOM PERSONNEL.
   Hearing Room Personnel shall be full-time or part-time personnel to perform
such services as directed by the Hearing Officer and may be authorized and
directed to:
   (A)   Maintain hearing room decorum.
   (B)   Have and execute authority as is granted to courtroom deputies of the
circuit court.
   (C)   Perform such other duties or acts as may reasonably be required and as
directed by the Hearing Officer or Ordinance Enforcement Administrator.
(Ord. 08-07, passed 3-3-2008; Am. Ord. 08-15, passed 4-21-2008)
§ 36.06 ISSUANCE OF VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   Violation notice of any ordinance violation shall be issued by the
persons authorized under this chapter and shall contain information and shall
be certified and constitute prima facie evidence of the violation cited as
hereinafter set forth.
   (B)   All full-time and part-time police officers as well as other specific
individuals authorized by any village official or village department shall have
the authority to issue violation notices.
   (C)   Any individual authorized hereby to issue violation notices and who
detects an ordinance violation authorized to be adjudicated under this Title
III or a violation of any section of any village ordinance, is authorized to
issue notice of violation thereof and shall make service thereof as is
hereinafter set forth.
(Ord. 08-07, passed 3-3-2008; Am. Ord. 08-15, passed 4-21-2008)
§ 36.07 VIOLATION NOTICE.
   (A)   The violation notice shall contain, but shall not be limited to, the
following information:
      (1)   The name of the party violating the ordinance, if known.
      (2)   The date and time of the violation (date of issuance).
      (3)   The type and nature of the violation and the ordinance violated.
      (4)   Vehicle make and state registration number (if applicable).
      (5)   The names of any witnesses to the violation.
      (6)   The signature and identification number of the person issuing the
notice.
      (7)   The date and location of the adjudicating hearing of ordinance
violations which date shall be not less than 30 or more than 90 days after the
date of the violation notice.
      (8)   The legal authority and jurisdiction under which the hearing is to
be held and the penalties for failure to appear at the hearing.
   (B)   The correctness of facts contained in any violation notice shall be
verified by the person issuing said notice by:
      (1)   Signing his or her name to the notice at the time of issuance; or
      (2)   In the case of a notice produced by a computer device, by signing a
single certificate, to be kept by the Ordinance Enforcement Administrator,
attesting to the correctness of all notices produced by the device while under
his or her control.
   (C)   The original or a facsimile of the violation notice shall be retained
by the Ordinance Enforcement Administrator where a docket number shall be
stamped on all copies and a hearing date noted. The notice shall be kept as a
record in the ordinary course of business by the Ordinance Enforcement
Administrator. One copy of the violation notice shall be returned to the person
issuing the notice that he or she may prepare evidence for presentation at the
hearing on the date indicated. One copy of the violation shall be served by
first class mail to the alleged violator along with a summons commanding the
alleged violator to appear.
   (D)   Any violation notice issued, signed and served in accordance herewith,
or a copy of the notice, shall be prima facie correct and shall be prima facie
evidence of the correctness of the facts shown on the notice.
   (E)   Notices issued in accordance with the automated traffic law
enforcement system which records violations covered in the Illinois Vehicle
Code, ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-306, disregard of a traffic control device or
turn on red violations, shall be issued by the village or designated
representative. Written notice of the violation shall be made to the registered
owner or lessee of the vehicle by U.S. mail within 30 days after the Illinois
Secretary of State makes notification of the identity of the registered owner
or lessee of the vehicle, and in no event later than 90 days following the
violation. The village or designated representative shall only be required to
notify a lessee if the leasing company/lessor provides the lessee's name by an
affidavit and a copy of the lease within 60 days of the notice's issuance.
   If the lessee information is not provided within 60 days, the leasing
company/lessor may be found liable. If any notice to an address is returned as
undeliverable, a second notice shall be sent to the last known address recorded
in a United States Post Office approved database of the owner or lessee of the
cited vehicle. An automated traffic law violation shall require a review of the
associated recorded image by an Ordinance Enforcement Administrator, who shall
inspect the image and determine whether the motor vehicle was being operated in
violation or whether a legitimate defense is visible. Upon determination that
the recorded image captures a violation and that no defense applies, the notice
of violation shall be served upon the registered vehicle owner in the manner
provided above. The Ordinance Enforcement Administrator shall retain a copy of
all violation notices, recorded images and other correspondence mailed to the
owner of the vehicle. Each notice of violation shall constitute evidence of the
facts contained in the notice and is admissible in any proceeding alleging a
violation of the above noted statutory and local provisions and shall be prima
facie evidence of a violation, subject to rebuttal on the basis of the defenses
established by law. The notice of violation shall be issued by the village or
designated authority and shall include the following information:
      (1)   Name and address of the registered owner or lessee of the vehicle,
as indicated by the records of the Secretary of State, or, if such information
is outdated or unattainable, then the last known address recorded in the United
States Post Office approved database;
      (2)   The make (only if discernable) and registration number of the motor
vehicle involved in the violation;
      (3)   Violation charged;
      (4)   The location where the violation occurred;
      (5)   Date and time of violation;
      (6)   A copy of recorded images;
      (7)   The amount of civil penalty is $100 and the date by which the
penalty should be paid (14 days from the date of issuance), if a hearing is not
requested, and a statement that the payment of the fine shall operate as a
final disposition of the violation;
      (8)   A statement that a failure to pay the civil penalty by the date
noted will result in a late fee of $100 being assessed against the owner or
lessee;
      (9)   The amount of late fee is $100;
      (10)   A statement that failure to pay by the date specified will result
in a final determination of liability and may result in the suspension of
driving privileges for the registered owner of the vehicle;
      (11)   A statement that the recorded images constitute prima facie
evidence of violation;
      (12)   A statement that the person may elect to proceed by paying the
fine or challenging the charge, by mail or by administrative hearing; and
      (13)   A statement of how an administrative hearing may be requested.
   (F)   Service of any violation notice shall be:
      (1)   In the case of violation of the Village Traffic Code, service shall
be made no less than 15 days prior to the date set for a hearing and shall be
by:
         (a)   Affixing the original or a facsimile of the notice to an
unlawfully standing or parked vehicle, unstickered vehicle, or vehicle
violating any compliance regulation;
         (b)   Handing the notice to the registered owner, operator, or lessee
of the vehicle, if present; or
         (c)   Mailing the notice by first class mail to the person responsible
for the ordinance violation, along with a summons commanding the individual to
appear at the hearing.
      (2)   In the case of violation of any other provision of this Code
relating to buildings or structures, service shall be made no less than 15 days
prior to the date set for a hearing and shall be by:
         (a)   First class mail on the owner of the structure, along with a
summons commanding the owner to appear at the hearing.
         (b)   If the name of the owner of the structure cannot be ascertained
or if service on the owner cannot be made by mail, service may be made on the
owner by posting or mailing a copy of the notice on the front door of the
structure where the violation if found.
      (3)   In the case of any ordinance violation other than a violation of
the Village Traffic Code or Building Code, service shall be made by mailing the
notice by first class mail to the person responsible for the ordinance
violation, along with a summons commanding the individual to appear at the
hearing.
(Ord. 08-07, passed 3-3-2008; Am. Ord. 08-15, passed 4-21-2008; Am. Ord. 09-20,
passed 8-3-2009; Am. Ord. 11-02, passed 1-18-2011; Am. Ord. 13-30, passed 8-19-
2013)
§ 36.08 ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS.
   (A)   Subpoenas. At any time prior to the date set for the hearing, the
Hearing Officer assigned to hear the violation, at the request of the
authorized person issuing the violation notice or the alleged violator, may
direct witnesses to appear and give testimony at the hearing.
   (B)   Continuances. No continuances shall be authorized by the Hearing
Officer in proceedings under this Title III except in cases where a continuance
is absolutely necessary to protect the rights of the alleged violator. Lack of
preparation shall not be grounds for a continuance. Any continuance authorized
by a Hearing Officer under this chapter shall not exceed 25 days.
   (C)   Hearing and evidence.
      (1)   At the hearing, a Hearing Officer shall preside, shall hear
testimony, and shall accept any evidence relevant to the existence or
nonexistence of a village code violation. The strict rules of evidence
applicable to judicial proceedings shall not apply to hearings authorized by
this chapter.
      (2)   The case for the village may be presented by an attorney designated
by the Village President or by any other village employee, except that the case
for the village shall not be presented by an employee of the Ordinance
Enforcement Department. The case for the alleged violator may be presented by
the alleged violator, his or her attorney, or any other agent or representative
of the defendant.
      (3)   If on the date set for hearing the alleged violator or his or her
attorney fails to appear, the Hearing Officer may find the alleged violator in
default and shall proceed with the hearing and accept evidence relevant to the
existence of a code violation.
      (4)   Upon finding the alleged violator in default, the Ordinance
Enforcement Administrator shall send or cause to be sent notices by first class
mail, postage prepaid, to the violator who received the notice of an ordinance
violation; or the registered owner or operator of the "cited vehicle" at the
address as is recorded with the Secretary of State, and shall be sent to the
lessee of the "cited vehicle" at the address last known to the lessor of the
"cited vehicle" at the time of the lease. Service of notices sent in accordance
herewith shall be complete as of the date of deposit in the United States mail.
(Ord. 08-07, passed 3-3-2008; Am. Ord. 08-15, passed 4-21-2008)
§ 36.09 FINDINGS, DECISION AND ORDER.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/16574ba874f17dfbd958615eed907c929c4100f2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7683.jpg]Publisher's Note: This Section has been AMENDED by new
legislation (Ord. 25-59, adopted 12-8-2025). The text of the amendment will be
incorporated below when the ordinance is codified.
   (A)   At the conclusion of the hearing, the Hearing Officer shall make a
determination on the basis of the evidence presented at the hearing as to
whether or not a code violation exists. The determination shall be in writing
and shall be designated as the findings, decision, and order.
   (B)   The findings, decision, and order shall include: the Hearing Officer’s
findings of fact, a decision of whether or not a code violation exists based
upon the findings of fact, and, an order that states the sanction or dismisses
the case if a violation is not proved.
   (C)   In the case of a Building Code violation only, the administrative
hearing officer must enter an order ordering the owner to correct the Building
Code violation and imposing a fine or dismissing the case if a Building Code
violation is not proved. In the case of a Building Code violation, if a
Building Code violation is proved, the order may also impose the sanctions that
are provided in the Building Code for the Building Code violation.
   (D)   (1)   In the case of a violation of a special use permit or its
conditions as set forth under §
157.224(D) of the village code that are proven to exist or have existed by a
preponderance of the evidence, an administrative hearing officer must order:
         (a)   The owner and/or permit holder to immediately abate the
violations of the special use permit or its conditions; and/or
         (b)   Revocation of the special use permit; and/or
         (c)   A fine or penalty in the amount of $500 per day for every day
the violation of the special use permit or its conditions exists, up to a
maximum of $50,000 for one violation for which daily fines are assessed.
      (2)   If an order is issued to a property owner and/or special use permit
holder under (D)(1)(a) only of this section, and the property owner and/or
special use permit holder fails to abate the violation of the special use
permit or conditions as set forth in the order, upon a subsequent notice and
hearing held pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, and a determination by
the administrative hearing officer sustaining the violation(s), the
administrative hearing officer must order revocation of the special use permit
pursuant to (D)(1)(b) of the section and must impose at least a one-day minimum
fine pursuant to (D)(1)(c) of this section.
   (E)   A monetary sanction for a violation under this Title III shall not
exceed $5,000 per violation per day, up to a maximum of $50,000 for one
violation for which daily fines are assessed, for all code violations relating
to building or structures.
   (F)   A copy of the findings, decision, and order shall be served on the
violator after it is issued. Service shall be by first class mail. Payment of
any penalty or fine and the disposition of fine money shall be in the same
manner as set forth in the Village Code.
(Ord. 08-07, passed 3-3-2008; Am. Ord. 08-15, passed 4-21-2008; Am. Ord. 13-30,
passed 8-19-2013; Am. Ord. 19-04, passed 2-4-2019; Am. Ord. 24-33, passed 10-7-
2024)
§ 36.10 ENFORCEMENT OF JUDGMENTS; DEBT DUE VILLAGE.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/16574ba874f17dfbd958615eed907c929c4100f2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7683.jpg]Publisher's Note: This Section has been AMENDED by new
legislation (Ord. 25-59, adopted 12-8-2025). The text of the amendment will be
incorporated below when the ordinance is codified.
   (A)   Any fine, other sanction, or costs imposed, or part of any fine, other
sanction, or costs imposed, remaining unpaid after the exhaustion of, or the
failure to exhaust, judicial review procedures under the Illinois
Administrative Review Law are a debt due and owing the village and may be
collected in accordance with applicable law.
   (B)   After expiration of the period in which judicial review under the
Illinois Administrative Review Law may be sought for a final determination of a
code violation, unless stayed by a court of competent jurisdiction, the
findings, decision, and order of the Hearing Officer may be enforced in the
same manner as a judgment entered by a court of competent jurisdiction.
   (C)   In any case in which a defendant has failed to comply with a judgment
ordering a defendant to correct a code violation or imposing any fine or other
sanction as a result of a code violation, any expenses incurred by a village to
enforce the judgment, including, but not limited to, attorney’s fees, court
costs, and costs related to property demolition or foreclosure, after they are
fixed by a Hearing Officer, shall be a debt due and owing the village and may
be collected in accordance with applicable law. Prior to any expenses being
fixed by a Hearing Officer pursuant to this division (C), the village shall
provide notice to the defendant that states that the defendant shall appear at
a hearing before the administrative Hearing Officer to determine whether the
defendant has failed to comply with the judgment. The notice shall set the date
for such a hearing, which shall not be less than seven days from the date that
notice is served. If notice is served by mail, the seven-day period shall begin
to run on the date that the notice was deposited in the mail.
   (D)   Upon hearing recorded in the manner required by Article XII of the
Code of Civil Procedure or by the Uniform Commercial Code, a lien shall be
imposed on the real estate or personal estate, or both, of the defendant in the
amount of any debt due and owning the village under this section. The lien may
be enforced in the same manner as a judgment lien pursuant to a judgment of a
court of competent jurisdiction.
   (E)   A Hearing Officer may set aside any judgment entered by default and
set a new hearing date, upon a petition filed within 21 days after the issuance
of the order of default, if the Hearing Officer determines that the
petitioner’s failure to appear at the hearing was for good cause or at any time
if the petitioner establishes that the village did not provide proper service
of process. If any judgment is set aside pursuant to this division (E), the
Hearing Officer shall have authority to enter an order extinguishing any lien
which has been recorded for any debt due and owing the village as a result of
the vacated default judgment.
   (F)   A notice of impending suspension of a persons’s driver’s license shall
be sent to any violator determined to be liable for the payment of any fine or
penalty that remains due and owning on ten or more vehicular standing or
parking regulation violations:
      (1)   The notice shall state that the failure to pay the fine or penalty
owning within 45 days of the date of notice will result in the village
notifying the Secretary of State that the person is eligible for initiation of
suspension proceedings under ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 6-306.5.
      (2)   The notice of impending drivers license suspension shall be sent by
first class mail, postage prepaid, to the address recorded with the Secretary
of State.
      (3)   A warning that failure to pay the fine and any penalty due and
owing the village within the time specified may result in proceeding with
collection procedures in the same manner as a judgment entered by any court of
competent jurisdiction.
      (4)   A warning that the vehicle owned by the person and located within
the village may be immobilized and impounded for failure to pay fines or
penalties for ten or more vehicular standing or parking regulation violations.
(Ord. 08-07, passed 3-3-2008; Am. Ord. 08-15, passed 4-21-2008; Am. Ord. 13-30,
passed 8-19-2013)
§ 36.11 JUDICIAL REVIEW.
   The findings, decision, and order of the Hearing Officer shall be subject to
review in the Circuit Court of Kane County. The provisions of the
Administrative Review Law, and the rules adopted pursuant thereto, shall apply
to and govern every action for the judicial review of the findings, decision,
and order of the Hearing Officer under this chapter.
(Ord. 08-07, passed 3-3-2008; Am. Ord. 08-15, passed 4-21-2008)
§ 36.12 GENERAL FINES FOR ANY ORDINANCE OTHER THAN VEHICLE CODE.
   For violation of any village ordinance other than a violation under
Municipal Code Title VII, fines and penalties shall be as established from time
to time by the Village Board but in no event more than the amount prescribed by
the Illinois Legislature for local ordinance violations for home rule
municipalities.
(Ord. 08-07, passed 3-3-2008; Am. Ord. 08-15, passed 4-21-2008)
§ 36.13 FINES FOR VIOLATION OF THE VEHICLE CODE OTHER THAN HANDICAPPED PARKING
AND REGULATED PARKING.
   For violation of any provision of Municipal Code Title VII; or any
compliance violation; or, violation of any other village ordinance regulating,
restricting or prohibiting the standing or parking of motor vehicles along the
streets, by-ways, alleyways, regulated parking lots or such other locations as
may be controlled by off-street parking agreements, located within the
geographical boundaries of this village, other than for handicapped parking,
the fine shall be a maximum of $750.
(Ord. 08-07, passed 3-3-2008; Am. Ord. 08-15, passed 4-21-2008)
§ 36.14 FINES FOR VIOLATIONS OF CERTAIN REGULATED PARKING AND HANDICAPPED
PARKING.
   For violation of any village ordinance regulating, restricting or
prohibiting the standing or parking of motor vehicles along the streets, by-
ways, alleyways, regulated parking lots or such other locations as may be
controlled by off-street parking agreements, located within the geographical
boundaries of this village for areas specifically designated for handicapped
parking, the fine shall be a maximum of $750. A person violating ILCS Ch. 625,
Act 5, § 11-306 and such violation is documented with use of the automated
traffic system, the fine shall be $100 for each offense. Failure to pay the
fine within 14 days of issuance of the notice of final determination shall
result in an additional $100 late payment fine.
(Ord. 08-07, passed 3-3-2008; Am. Ord. 08-15, passed 4-21-2008; Am. Ord. 13-30,
passed 8-19-2013)
§ 36.15 AUTHORIZATION TO IMPOUND, BOOT OR TOW MOTOR VEHICLE.
   Any motor vehicle whose registered owner has been determined to be liable
for ten or more vehicular standing or parking regulation violations, for which
the fines or penalties assessed remain unpaid, may be immobilized, booted or
towed and impounded if:
   (A)   The Ordinance Enforcement Administrator has determined that a person
has been determined to be liable for ten or more ordinance violations, for
which the fines or penalties remain unpaid.
   (B)   The person determined to be liable for ten or more violations is the
registered owner of a motor vehicle located within the village geographical
boundaries.
   (C)   A seizure notice has been sent to the registered owner of the motor
vehicle located within the geographical boundaries of the village which
contains, but shall not be limited to the following:
      (1)   A final determination has been made on ten or more ordinance
violations, for which the fines and penalties remain unpaid;
      (2)   A listing of the violations for which the person has been
determined to be liable, which shall include for each violation:
         (a)   The ordinance violation notice number;
         (b)   Date of issuance; and
         (c)   Total amount of fines and penalties assessed;
      (3)   The motor vehicle owned by the person and located within the
village is subject to immobilization and/or towing and impoundment if the fines
and penalties are not paid within, but not later than 15 days of the date of
the notice;
      (4)   Date of immobilization;
      (5)   Date of impending towing and impoundment;
      (6)   The registered owner may contest the validity of the notice by
appearing in person before the Ordinance Administrator within 15 days of the
date of the notice and submitting evidence which would conclusively disprove
liability, such as the following:
         (a)   The registered owner was not the owner or lessee of the vehicle
on the date or dates the notices of violation were issued;
         (b)   The fines or penalties for the violations cited in the notice
were paid in full; or
         (c)   The registered owner has not accumulated ten or more ordinance
violation notices which are unpaid, not adjudicated or for which no appearance
was made;
      (7)   The motor vehicle of the registered owner to whom notice is sent
has failed to make payment of the fines or penalties as specified in the notice
and has failed to appear with evidence to conclusively disprove liability
before the Ordinance Enforcement Administrator to contest the validity of the
notice;
      (8)   Criminal violations authorizing seizure/impoundment. A motor
vehicle, operated with the permission, express or implied, of the owner of
record, that is used in connection with the following violations, shall be
subject to seizure and impoundment by the village, and the owner of record of
said vehicle shall be liable to the village for an administrative penalty of
$500, in addition to costs of prosecution and any towing and storage fees as
herein after provided:
         (a)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission or
attempted commission of any offense for which a motor vehicle may be seized and
forfeited pursuant to ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 36-1;
         (b)   Driving while under the influence of alcohol, other drug or
drugs, intoxicating compound or compounds or any combination thereof, ILCS Ch.
625, Act 5, § 11-501;
         (c)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in connection with the
commission or attempted commission of any misdemanor or felony offense;
         (d)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in connection with the
commission or attempted commission of any violation of the provisions of the
Illinois Cannabis Control Act, ILCS Ch. 720, Act 550, § 1;
         (e)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in connection with the
commission or attempted commission of any offense in violation of the Illinois
Controlled Substances Act, ILCS Ch. 720, Act 570, § 100;
         (f)   Unlawful use of a weapon in violation of ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, §
24-1; aggravated discharge of a firearm in violation of ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, §
24-3.1;
         (g)   Driving while license, permit or privilege to operate a motor
vehicle is suspended or revoked, ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 6-303. Vehicles shall
not be subject to seizure impoundment if the suspension is due to failure to
comply with emission testing;
         (h)   Operating a motor vehicle without a valid drivers license, ILCS
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 6-101:
            1.   Except a person that had a valid driver's license that is
expired for less than 12 months; and
            2.   Except a person who is less than 17 years of age operating a
motor vehicle on any street or highway when in violation of state law; and
         (i)   Operating a motor vehicle, when the registration is cancelled,
suspended or revoked, ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 3-702 or ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 3-
708; however, the vehicle shall not be subject to seizure impoundment, if the
suspension is due to failure to comply with emission testing;
         (j)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in
the attempt to commit a theft or retail theft in violation of ILCS Ch. 720, Act
5, §§ 16-1 and 16-25;
      (9)   Criminal violations authorizing seizure/impoundment and forfeiture
- release fee. The owner of record of any motor vehicle for which lawful
forfeiture proceedings have been initiated in conjunction with any violation
noted in division (C)(8) above shall be subject to payment to the village of an
administrative fee of $250 for the release of the vehicle as a result of a
court or other action.
(Ord. 08-07, passed 3-3-2008; Am. Ord. 08-15, passed 4-21-2008; Am. Ord. 11-02,
passed 1-18-2011; Am. Ord. 23-06, passed 2-6-2023)
§ 36.16 REQUEST FOR HEARING IN CASE OF IMPOUNDMENT AND TOWING OF MOTOR VEHICLE.
   Upon the receipt of the request for hearing to contest the validity of the
immobilization or towing and impoundment, the Ordinance Enforcement
Administrator shall schedule an administrative hearing to contest the validity
of the immobilization or towing and impoundment on the next scheduled hearing
date or, if sooner, scheduled by the Ordinance Enforcement Administrator for
good cause shown, but in no case shall the hearing be scheduled later than 30
days after the request for hearing is filed and shall serve notice of the
hearing date upon the registered owner by first class mail, postage prepaid to
the address as is set forth on the request for hearing. Service of the notice
shall be complete on the date it is placed in the United States mail.
(Ord. 08-07, passed 3-3-2008; Am. Ord. 08-15, passed 4-21-2008)
§ 36.17 NOTICE AFFIXED TO VEHICLE IN CASES OF IMMOBILIZATION.
   Upon immobilization of an eligible vehicle, a notice shall be affixed to the
vehicle in a conspicuous place. Such notice shall warn that the vehicle is
immobilized and that any attempt to move the vehicle may result in its damage.
The notice shall also state that the unauthorized removal of or damage to the
immobilizing restraint is a violation of ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, §§ 16-1 and 21-1.
The notice also shall provide the following information specifying that a
release of the immobilizing restraint may be had by:
   (A)   Paying all the fines and penalties, if any, on the outstanding
complaints for which notice has been sent prior to the date of the
immobilization; or
   (B)   Completing appearance forms on all outstanding parking violation
complaints for which notice had been sent prior to the date of the
immobilization and depositing collateral in the amount of 50% of the total
fines for these outstanding parking violation complaints, or $500, whichever is
less.
(Ord. 08-07, passed 3-3-2008; Am. Ord. 08-15, passed 4-21-2008)
§ 36.18 TOWING OF IMMOBILIZED VEHICLE.
   Except where the vehicle is otherwise subject to towing, if the immobilizing
restraint has not been released as hereinabove provided within 72 hours of its
placement, the vehicle shall be towed and impounded.
(Ord. 08-07, passed 3-3-2008; Am. Ord. 08-15, passed 4-21-2008)
§ 36.19 POST-IMPOUNDMENT NOTICE.
   Within ten days after a vehicle has been impounded, notice of impoundment
shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the registered
owner of the vehicle. The notice shall state that the owner has the right to a
post-immobilization and post-towing hearing as provided in this chapter and
that if the vehicle is not claimed within 30 days from the date of the notice,
the vehicle may be sold or otherwise disposed of in accordance with the
Illinois Vehicle Code, ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5.
(Ord. 08-07, passed 3-3-2008; Am. Ord. 08-15, passed 4-21-2008)
§ 36.20 HEARING IN CASE OF VEHICLE IMMOBILIZATION.
   The owner of an immobilized vehicle or other interested person shall have
the right to a hearing to determine whether the immobilization or any
subsequent towing was erroneous or whether the vehicle was properly included on
an immobilization list, if the owner files a written demand for a hearing
before the Ordinance Enforcement Administrator within 14 days after issuance of
the notice specified in this chapter or within 14 days of immobilization,
whichever is later. A hearing shall be conducted on any business day within 48
hours of receipt of a written demand for hearing, unless otherwise mutually
agreed by the parties. Failure to request or attend a scheduled hearing shall
be deemed a waiver of the right to a hearing. In the event of such failure, any
amount deposited pursuant to this chapter shall be forfeited. A hearing
provided by this section shall not determine the validity of or otherwise
adjudicate any citation or notice of ordinance violation issued relative to the
immobilized vehicle, but shall only relate to whether the vehicle was properly
immobilized or towed by determining whether the owner previously submitted
evidence required by this chapter.
(Ord. 08-07, passed 3-3-2008; Am. Ord. 08-15, passed 4-21-2008)
§ 36.21 FINES AND FEES FOR IMMOBILIZATION.
   The fine for immobilization shall be $250 and the fine for impoundment shall
be $250. The owner of the vehicle shall also be charged reasonable storage and
towing fees should the vehicle be removed to a private storage facility,
provided that no fees shall be assessed for any immobilization or tow which has
been determined to be erroneous.
(Ord. 08-07, passed 3-3-2008; Am. Ord. 08-15, passed 4-21-2008)
§ 36.22 TOWING SERVICES.
   The Ordinance Enforcement Administrator shall appoint or retain the services
of a company or companies to tow and impound vehicles in accordance herewith,
provided that that individual, agency or company is fully insured and licensed
according to local or state law and has available a secured impound area within
which to retain vehicles impounded hereunder. For the purpose of this section a
secured area shall mean an area bounded by a fence, chainlink or otherwise, of
a sufficient height and with locking gates so as to minimize or prevent
unauthorized entry into the impounded vehicles.
(Ord. 08-07, passed 3-3-2008; Am. Ord. 08-15, passed 4-21-2008)
§ 36.23 EVICTION, RIGHTS OF OCCUPANTS.
   In the case of a Building Code violation relating to buildings or
structures, no action for eviction, abatement of a nuisance, forcible entry and
detainer or other similar proceeding shall be threatened or instituted against
an occupant of a dwelling solely because such occupant agrees to testify or
testifies at a code violation hearing.
(Ord. 13-30, passed 8-19-2013)
§ 36.24 DEFENSES TO BUILDING CODE VIOLATIONS.
   It shall be a defense to a Building Code violation if the owner, his or her
attorney, or any other agent or representative proves to the Hearing Officer’s
satisfaction that:
   (A)   The code violation alleged in the notice does not in fact exist, or at
the time of the hearing the violation has been remedied or removed.
   (B)   An occupant or resident of the dwelling has refused entry to the owner
or his or her agent to all or a part of the dwelling for the purpose of
correcting the code violation.
(Ord. 13-30, passed 8-19-2013)
§ 36.25 SANCTIONS APPLICABLE TO THE BUILDING OWNER.
   The order to correct a code violation relating to buildings or structure and
the sanctions imposed by a village as the result of a finding of a code
violation shall attach to the property as well as to the owner of the property,
so that a finding of a code violation against one owner cannot be avoided by
conveying or transferring the property to another owner. Any subsequent
transferee or owner of property takes subject to the findings, decision, and
order of a Hearing Officer.
(Ord. 13-30, passed 8-19-2013)
§ 36.26 LIABILITY OF PARENT OR LEGAL GUARDIAN FOR ORDINANCE VIOLATIONS.
   The parent or legal guardian for an unemancipated minor who resides with
such parent or legal guardian is liable for any judgment rendered against such
minor for violation of any section of this Code, provided that such parent or
legal guardian has been served with summons or notice to appear in the cause.
For purposes of this section, LEGAL GUARDIAN  shall mean a person appointed
guardian, or given custody, of a minor by a Circuit Court of this state, but
does not include a person appointed guardian, or given custody, of a minor
under the Illinois Juvenile Court Act of 1987. For purposes of this section,
the term MINOR shall mean a person who is above the age of 12 years but not yet
18 years of age.
(Ord. 13-30, passed 8-19-2013)
CHAPTER 37: FEES AND FINES
Section
   
37.01   Fee and fine schedule
§ 37.01 FEE AND FINE SCHEDULE.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/16574ba874f17dfbd958615eed907c929c4100f2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7683.jpg]Publisher's Note: This Section has been AMENDED by new
legislation (Ord. 25-24, adopted 2-3-2025). The text of the amendment will be
incorporated below when the ordinance is codified.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/16574ba874f17dfbd958615eed907c929c4100f2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7683.jpg]Publisher's Note: This Section has been AMENDED by new
legislation (Ord. 25-25, adopted 2-3-2025). The text of the amendment will be
incorporated below when the ordinance is codified.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/16574ba874f17dfbd958615eed907c929c4100f2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7683.jpg]Publisher's Note: This Section has been AMENDED by new
legislation (Ord. 25-26, adopted 2-3-2025). The text of the amendment will be
incorporated below when the ordinance is codified.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/16574ba874f17dfbd958615eed907c929c4100f2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7683.jpg]Publisher's Note: This Section has been AMENDED by new
legislation (Ord. 25-27, adopted 2-3-2025). The text of the amendment will be
incorporated below when the ordinance is codified.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/16574ba874f17dfbd958615eed907c929c4100f2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7683.jpg]Publisher's Note: This Section has been AMENDED by new
legislation (Ord.25-28, adopted 2-3-2025). The text of the amendment will be
incorporated below when the ordinance is codified.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/16574ba874f17dfbd958615eed907c929c4100f2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7683.jpg]Publisher's Note: This Section has been AMENDED by new
legislation (Ord.25-29, adopted 2-3-2025). The text of the amendment will be
incorporated below when the ordinance is codified.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/16574ba874f17dfbd958615eed907c929c4100f2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7683.jpg]Publisher's Note: This Section has been AMENDED by new
legislation (Ord. 25-30 adopted 2-3-2025). The text of the amendment will be
incorporated below when the ordinance is codified.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/16574ba874f17dfbd958615eed907c929c4100f2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7683.jpg]Publisher's Note: This Section has been AMENDED by new
legislation (Ord. 25-31, adopted 2-3-2025). The text of the amendment will be
incorporated below when the ordinance is codified.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/16574ba874f17dfbd958615eed907c929c4100f2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7683.jpg]Publisher's Note: This Section has been AMENDED by new
legislation (Ord. 25-45, adopted 10-6-2025). The text of the amendment will be
incorporated below when the ordinance is codified.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/16574ba874f17dfbd958615eed907c929c4100f2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7683.jpg]Publisher's Note: This Section has been AMENDED by new
legislation (Ord. 25-53, adopted 11-17-2025). The text of the amendment will be
incorporated below when the ordinance is codified.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/16574ba874f17dfbd958615eed907c929c4100f2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7683.jpg]Publisher's Note: This Section has been AMENDED by new
legislation (Ord. 25-62, adopted 12-8-2025). The text of the amendment will be
incorporated below when the ordinance is codified.
   FEE SCHEDULE
   The fines in this
Chapter 37 are minimum amounts.
   (A)   Taxation (
Chapter 35).
      (1)   Returned and NSF checks: $35 plus all related bank charges
      (2)   Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) fees:
         (a)   Black and white, letter or legal sized copies
            1.   First 50 pages are free: No fee
            2.   Additional pages over 50 pages: $.15 per page
         (b)   Color or all other sized copies: Actual cost of copying
         (c)   Electronic copies: Actual cost of electronic device used
      (3)   Collection fee and penalties: Collection fees and penalties may be
imposed for debts due and owing the Village pursuant to §
10.20, Debts due and owing the village, of the village code.
      (4)   Accounts receivable interest: $5 minimum monthly charge or 1.5%
monthly interest rate, whichever is greater
      (5)   Lien fees:
         (a)   Cost of placing the lien on the property: $35
         (b)   Cost of removing the lien on the property: $35
         (c)   Administrative charge: $80
      (6)   Fingerprinting fee: $20 per person
      (7)   Extraordinary police services/special detail rate. Police services
will be equal to time and one-half pay rate for top step patrol officer, as
established for that fiscal year on a two-hour minimum basis.
   (B)   Departments, commissions and other organizations (
Chapter 32).
      (1)   Application fee for police eligibility list: $30
   (C)   Administrative adjudication (
Chapter 36).
      (1)   Impound fee: $500 plus applicable prosecution, towing and storage
fees
   (D)   Garbage and refuse (
Chapter 50).
      (1)   Pickup of recyclables by unauthorized person(s): $100
      (2)   All other garbage and refuse violations: $60
         (a)   Prepayment reduction of fine. Full fine amount is due and may be
payable by mail within 30 days of issue. 50% of the fine amount may be paid by
mail if done so within 15 days of issue date.
      (3)   Each dwelling unit to which the village garbage collector provides
waste material collection shall be billed bi-monthly. Rates and any rebates
provided to village residents shall be set and approved as necessary by policy
adopted by resolution of the Village Board of Trustees.
   (E)   Water service (
chapter 51).
      (1)   Water meter: Actual cost
      (2)   Water service permit:
         (a)   Residential:
            1.   Basic fee: $50
            2.   Inspection fee: $40
         (b)   Commercial, institutional/governmental and industrial:
            1.   Basic fee: $100 plus connection fee
            2.   Inspection fee: $50
      (3)   Illegal watering: $60
         (a)   Prepayment reduction of fine. Full amount is due and may be
payable by mail within 30 days of issue. 50% of fine amount may be paid by mail
if done so within 15 days of issue date.
      (4)   Reconnection of service fee:
         (a)   Fee to turn on during 7:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m., Monday through
Friday: $75 plus account settlement and collection costs
         (b)   Fee to turn on before 7:00 a.m. or after 3:00 p.m. and on
Saturday and Sunday: $150 plus account settlement and collection costs.
      (5)   Water user charge per 1,000 gallons:
         (a)   Resident rate: As provided by the Water and Wastewater (Sewer)
Fee Schedule
         (b)   For-profit rate, outside corporate limits: 150% of the resident
rate set forth in §
37.01(E)(5)(a)
         (c)   Non-profit and government rate, outside of corporate limits:
Resident rate set forth in §
37.01(E)(5)(a)
         (d)   Residential rate, outside of corporate limits: 150% of the
resident rate set forth in §
37.01(E)(5)(a)
      (6)   Water availability fixed charge: As provided by the Water and
Wastewater (Sewer) Fee Schedule.
      (7)   Water service connection fee:
         (a)   Within corporate limits:
            1.   Base minimum: $4,350/unit plus water service line fee
            2.   Water service line fee:
               a.   Up to 1":    $3,125
               b.   Up to 1½":    $6,250
               c.   Up to 2":    $10,000
               d.   Up to 3":    $20,000
               e.   Up to 4":    $31,250
               f.   Up to 6":    $62,500
               g.   Up to 8":    $100,000
            3.   Water service line upgrade. When an existing service line is
being upgraded, the difference between the fee applicable to the existing
service line and the fee applicable to the upgraded service line will be the
fee charged. The base minimum fee will not apply.
            4.   Sprinkler system availability fee: $250 per inch of pipe
         (b)   Outside the corporate limits: 150% of the fees set forth above
         (c)   Fee clarification. Fees do not include the cost of valves, valve
boxes, valve vaults and actual labor and material costs for connection of the
main pipes, or for commercial or industrial water meters. All such costs shall
be paid by the owner, builder, or developer.
      (8)   Water hydrant rental fee (excluding homeowners who rent the meter
to fill their pools): $50 plus the cost of water
   (F)   Sewers (Chapter 53).
      (1)   Wastewater service permit
         (a)   Residential:
            1.   Basic fee:       $50
            2.   Inspection fee:    $40
         (b)   Commercial, institutional/governmental and industrial:
            1.   Basic fee:       $100 plus connection fee
            2.   Inspection fee:    $50
      (2)   Private sewer permit:
         (a)   Basic fee:          $50 plus health department costs
         (b)   Inspection fee:       $40
      (3)   Wastewater user charge per 1,000 gallons:
         (a)   Resident rate: As provided by the Water and Wastewater (Sewer)
Fee Schedule
         (b)   Residential rate, outside corporate limits: 150% of the resident
rate set forth in §
37.01(F)(3)(a)
         (c) Non-profit and government rate, outside corporate limits: Resident
rate set forth in §
37.01(F)(3)(a)
         (d)   For-profit rate, outside corporate limits: 150% of the resident
rate set forth in §
37.01(F)(3)(a)
      (4)   Monthly waste water availability fixed charge: As provided by the
Water and Wastewater (Sewer) Fee Schedule adopted by Ord. 19-15, An Ordinance
Amending the Water and Wastewater (Sewer) Rates, and updated annually.
      (5)   Waste water service connection fee:
         (a)   Within corporate limits:
            1.   Base fee minimum: $3,850/unit plus waste water service line
fee
            2.   Waste water service line fee:
               a.   For up to 1":       $2,750
               b.   For up to 1½":    $5,500
               c.   For up to 2":       $8,800
               d.   For up to 3":       $17,600
               e.   For up to 4":       $27,500
               f.   For up to 6":       $55,000
               g.   For up to 8":       $88,000
         (b)   Outside the corporate limits: 150% of the fees set forth above
         (c)   Fee clarification. Fees do not include the cost of valves, valve
boxes, valve vaults and actual labor and material costs for connection of the
main pipes, or for commercial or industrial water meters. All such costs shall
be paid by the owner, builder, or developer.
      (6)   Commercial and industrial surcharge rates for biological oxygen
demand (BOD) and suspended solids (SS): As determined by the Director of Public
Works.
   (G)   Connection of utility facilities in rights-of-way (
Chapter 54) and Small Wireless Facilities (
Chapter 59).
      (1)   Annual registration: No fee
      (2)   Small cell permit application fee:
         (a)   Request to collocate a small wireless facility that includes the
installation of a new utility pole: $1,000
         (b)   Request to collocate a single small wireless facility on an
existing utility pole or wireless support structure: $650
         (c)   Request to collocate multiple small wireless facilities on
existing utility poles or wireless support structures addressed in a single
application: $350 per small wireless facility
   (H)   Groundwater protection (
Chapter 58).
      (1)   Operating permit application fee: $100
      (2)   Operating permit annual renewal fee: $25
      (3)   Closure permit application fee: $100
   (I)   Traffic Code general provisions (
Chapter 70).
      (1)   Vehicle code violations eligible for prepayment reduction of fine:
         (a)   Parked in posted no parking zone: $60
         (b)   Parked blocking a public or private driveway: $60
         (c)   Parked blocking or on a sidewalk: $60
         (d)   Parked within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection: $60
         (e)   Parked blocking or on a crosswalk: $60
         (f)   Parked within 30 feet upon the approach of a traffic signal or
stop sign: $60
         (g)   Parked within an intersection: $60
         (h)   Parked in a posted fire lane: $60
         (i)   Parked within 15 feet of a fire hydrant: $60
         (j)   Parked on a roadway with expired registration: $60
         (k)   Parked in a public parking lot with expired registration: $60
         (l)   Parked left wheels to curb: $60
         (m)   Parked on a roadway more than 12 inches away from curb: $60
         (n)   Where prohibited, parking on village roadways between 0200 -
0600 hours: $60
         (o)   Parking on village roadways with snowfall in excess of three
inches: $60
         (p)   Skateboarding or rollerblading where prohibited: $60
         (q)   Unlawful operation of a motor-driven cycle: $60
         (r)   Solicitation on roadways: $60
         (s)   Excessive idling: $60
         (t)   Unauthorized use of parking places reserved for electric
vehicles: $75
      (2)   Prepayment reduction of fine. Full fine amount is due and may be
payable by mail within 30 days of issue. 50% of fine amount may be paid by mail
if done so within 15 days of issue date.
      (3)   Vehicle code violations not eligible for prepayment reduction of
fine:
         (a)   Parked in a posted handicapped space: $250
         (b)   No front/rear license plate: $50
         (c)   Improper display license plate/sticker or tinted obscured
plastic covers: $50
         (d)   Operation of motor vehicle with expired registration sticker:
$50
         (e)   Driver's license expired less than one year: $50
         (f)   Driver's license not on person: $50
         (g)   Failure to notify Secretary of State of address/name change: $50
         (h)   All violations of ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, Chapter 12: $50
         (i)   No valid safety sticker: $50
         (j)   Overwidth: $50
         (k)   Overlength: $50
         (l)   Spilling load on highway or not secure: $50
         (m)   Failure to cover load when required: $50
         (n)   Clinging to motor vehicles: $50
         (o)   Negligent driving: $100
         (p)   All other violations of Title 7 of this Code shall be subject to
the general penalty
      (4)   Fourth Street residential parking permits:
         (a)   Quarterly fee: $75
         (b)   Annual fee: $250
      (5)   Restricted roadways:
         (a)   Overweight vehicle: $500
         (b)   Overlength vehicle: $500
   (J)   Parking Regulations (
Chapter 72).
      (1)   All violations of
Chapter 72: $60
         (a)   Prepayment reduction of fine. Full fine amount is due and may be
payable by mail within 30 days of issue. 50% of fine amount may be paid by mail
if done so within 15 days of issue date.
   (K)   Alarm systems (
Chapter 90).
      (1)    Alarm user permit:
         (a)   Initial two-year user permit: $15.
         (b)   Two-year renewal user permit: $10.
      (2)   Alarm activation when alarm user permit not issued: $300.
      (3)   Alarm reinstatement fee: $75.
      (4)   False alarms in a calendar year:
         (a)   For each false alarm in excess of four (five through eight):
$150 each.
         (b)   For each false alarm in excess of eight (nine and ten): $200
each.
         (c)   For more than ten false alarms: $250 each.
   (L)   Streets, alleys and sidewalks (
Chapter 91).
      (1)   Material in streets permit: $25 per 48-hour period
      (2)   Excavation and trenching permit: $100 for each 100 feet plus $10
for each additional 100 feet or portion thereof
      (3)   Depositing debris and material in the street: $60 plus cost of
removal
         (a)   Prepayment reduction of fine. Full fine amount is due and may be
payable by mail within 30 days of issue. 50% of fine amount may be paid by mail
if done so within 15 days of issue date.
   (M)   Animals (
Chapter 92).
      (1)    Cost of impounding: contracted cost to village
      (2)   Coop permit fees: $50
   (N)   Nuisances (
Chapter 93).
      (1)   Unlawful use, possession or display of fireworks: $100
      (2)   Noxious plants/high weeds: $60 plus contracted cost the village to
mow and lien fee if applicable
         (a)   Fee discount. Full fine amount in this section is due and may be
payable within 30 days of issue; however, 50% of the fine amount may be paid by
mail or at the Village Hall, if done so within 15 days of issue date
      (3)   Unlawful burning of materials: $150
      (4)   Prohibited noise (excluding §
93.11(E)(2)): $100
   (O)   General licensing provisions (
Chapter 110).
      (1)   Annual business license registration fee: $50
      (2)   Business license location transfer fee: $10
   (P)   Massage establishments and services (
Chapter 111).
      (1)   Massage establishment permit filing fee: $100
      (2)   Masseur permit filing fee: $50
      (3)   Annual massage establishment and masseur permit fee: $100
   (Q)   Amusements (
Chapter 112).
      (1)   Billiard and pool room license fee: $10 per table
      (2)   Bowling alley license fee: $25 per lane
      (3)   Circus and carnival license fee: $500 per day
      (4)   Penalty: Fees double if use starts before obtaining license
   (R)   Food truck licenses (
Chapter 113).
      (1)   New application: $150
      (2)   Renewal: $150
   (S)   Solicitors, peddlers and transient and itinerant merchants (
Chapter 114).
      (1)   Solicitor registration fee: $35
      (2)   Hawker and peddler registration fee: $35
      (3)   Transient and itinerant merchant registration fee: $50
      (4)   Soliciting, peddling, or operating without registering: $100
   (T)   Telecommunications (
Chapter 115).
      (1)   Telecommunications carrier registration fee: $100
      (2)   License and franchise application and review fee: $50
      (3)   Annual license and franchise fee: $100
      (4)   Construction permit fee: $100
   (U)   Alcoholic beverages (
Chapter 116).
      (1)   Liquor license fees. Liquor licenses issued on January 1 of each
year and the fees for licenses issued shall be prorated based for issue date,
determined as follows:
         (a)   January 1 - March 31: Not prorated
         (b)   April 1 - June 30: 75% of liquor license fee
         (c)   July 1 - September 30: 50% of liquor license fee
         (d)   October 1 - December 31: 25% of liquor license fee
         (e)   Annual license fees:
            1.   Class A (tavern): $2,000
            2.   Class A-1 (tavern/beer garden): $3,000
            3.   Class A-2 (beer/wine on-premises/beer garden): $2,500
            4.   Class B (package liquor): $2,000
            5.   Class B-1 (supermarket and drug store): $2,000
            6.   Class B-2 (incidental sales - beer and wine): $1,200
            7.   Class B-3 (mail order sales): $300
            8.   Class B-4 (incidental sales - beer, wine and hard liquor):
$1,500
            9.   Class B-5 (incidental sales - package and on-premises
consumption): $2,000
            10.   Class C (incorporated not-for-profit): $750
            11.   Class C-1 (public golf course restaurant): $2,500
            12.   Class D (outdoor amusement parks): $1,250 plus $375 per
additional point of distribution
            13.   Class E (restaurants): $2,500
            14.   Class E-1 (restaurants with service bar only): $1,500
            15.   Class E-2 (restaurants with beer and wine only): $1,000
            16.   Class E-3 (restaurant with beer and wine only and packaged
sales): $2,500
            17.   Class E-4 (restaurant with bar and packaged sales): $2,800
            18.   Class F (special events license): $100 per day
            19.   Class G (banquet license): $2,500 plus $750 per additional
point of distribution
            20.   Class H (entertainment venue license): $3,000
            21.   Class I (specialty food and beverage establishment): $1,000
            22.   Class J (village caterer): $500
            23.   Class J-1 (caterer with business location outside of
village): $300
            24.   Class K (caboose concession stand): $500, application fee
waived
            25.   Class L (brew pub): $2,500
      (2)   Liquor license application fee: $500
      (3)   Fee for additional license. A licensee who desires, qualifies for,
and receives more than one class of license for any one establishment shall pay
the full cost of the license having the highest fee, and the additional fee for
the second license shall be $1,000 or the actual fee, whichever is less.
      (4)   Endorsement fees.
         (a)   Adjoining village sidewalk service endorsement: $100
         (b)   Adjoining village right-of-wav service endorsement: No fee
      (5)   Consumption of alcohol by a person under 21: $100
   (V)   Rental license (
Chapter 119).
      (1)   Rental license fees:
         (a)   Single-family dwelling: $100
         (b)   Multifamily building: $75 per dwelling unit
         (c)   Nonresidential: $115
      (2)   Reinspection fee: $75/unit
      (3)   Delinquent reinsertion administrative fee: $25 plus 6% interest
      (4)   Inspection cancellation fee $30
   (W)   General offenses general provisions (
Chapter 130).
      (1)   Administrative bond fee: $30
   (X)   Offenses against public morality (
Chapter 133). No less than:
      (1)   Disorderly conduct: $100
      (2)   Urinating/defecating in public: $100
      (3)   Unlawful possession of cannabis 10 grams and under: $150
      (4)   Possession of tobacco or alternative nicotine products by a minor:
$50
      (5)   Unlawful possession of drug paraphernalia: $150
      (6)   Curfew violation: $60
         (a)   Prepayment reduction of fine. Full fine amount is due and may be
payable by mail within 30 days of issue. 50% of fine amount may be paid by mail
if done so within 15 days of issue date.
   (Y)   Offenses against public health and safety (
Chapter 136).
      (1)   Dumping or depositing of litter: $100
      (2)   Dumping or depositing of litter from motor vehicle: $100
   (Z)   Video gaming (
Chapter 137).
      (1)   Annual supplemental video gaming establishment license fee: $1,000
      (2)    Annual video gaming terminal fee: $250 per machine (50% paid by
the terminal operator and 50% paid by the licensed establishment per ILCS Ch.
230, Act 40, § 65)
   (AA)   Weapons (
Chapter 138).
      (1)   Unlawfully possessing or discharging an air gun on public way: $100
   (BB)   Smoking ban (
Chapter 139).
      (1)   Violation of smoking regulations by an individual: $100
      (2)   Violation of smoking regulations by a business:
         (a)   First offense within 12 months: $250
         (b)   Second offense within 12 months: $500
         (c)   Third offense within 12 months: $2,500
   (CC)   Building regulations; construction (
Chapter 151).
      (1)   Building permit fees. The total fee for building permits includes
the permit fee, which pays for inspections and the plan review fee, which pays
for the plan examination. The building permit fees are based on cost of
construction. These fees are based on either the contractor's estimated
building valuation or the building officials assigned valuation, which shall be
calculated using building area from the plans and building valuation data from
a national source. When there is a difference between the contractor's
valuation and the assigned valuation, the higher valuation will be used. The
plan review fee must be paid at the time the plans are submitted for review and
is nonrefundable. The permit fee must be paid at the time the permit is issued.
There is a minimum permit fee of $50 (plus plan review fee) to cover basic
administrative and inspection costs associated with any building project. Fees
for all trades shall be rounded to the next whole dollar.
         (a)   Building permit fees; commercial and residential for
construction, remodel and additions.
Minimum Valuation Maximum Valuation Permit Fee
Minimum Valuation Maximum Valuation Permit Fee
$0                $1,000            $50
$1,001            $2,000            $64
$2,001            $3,000            $78
$3,001            $4,000            $92
$4,001            $5,000            $120
$5,001            $6,000            $134
$6,001            $7,000            $148
$7,001            $8,000            $162
$8,001            $9,000            $176
$9,001            $10,000           $190
$10,001           $11,000           $204
$11,001           $12,000           $218
$12,001           $13,000           $232
$13,001           $14,000           $246
$14,001           $15,000           $260
$15,001           $16,000           $274
$16,001           $17,000           $288
$17,001           $18,000           $302
$18,001           $19,000           $316
$19,001           $20,000           $330
$20,001           No limit          $330 plus $10 for each additional $1,000
                                    over $20,000 or fraction thereof
 
         (b)   Electrical, HVAC and plumbing permit fees: Commercial and
residential for construction, remodel and additions (per job).
 
Minimum Valuation Maximum Valuation Permit Fee
$0                $1,000            $55
$1001             $3,000            $75
$3,001            $6,300            $100
$6,001            $50,000           1.58% of valuation
$50,001              No limit    $790 plus 1.05% of valuation over $50,000
 
         (c)   Miscellaneous permit fees:
            1.   Moving structure permit: $150
            2.   Demolition permit:
               a.   Single-family or two-family garage: $50
               b.   Single-family or two-family: $100
               c.   Multi-family and commercial up to and including 5,000
square feet gross: $150
               d.   Multi-family and commercial over 5,000 square feet gross:
$200
            3.   Above ground swimming pool permit: $50
            4.   In ground pool permit: Based on valuation
            5.   Other miscellaneous residential permits:
               a.   Driveways: $50
               b.   Sidewalks, stoops, porches: $50
               c.   Fences: $50
               d.   Roofs: $50
               e.   Sheds: $50
               f.   Decks: $50
               g.   Air conditioner: $50
               h.   Furnace: $50
               i.   Water heater: $55
               j.   Water valve: $55
               k.   Electrical upgrade up to 100 AMP: $100
               l.   Electrical upgrade up to 200 AMP: $200
            6.   Carnival and amusement permit (building and electrical
inspections): $50
            7.   Temporary structure and tent permit: $50
            8.   Sign permits:
               a.   Freestanding, pylon and billboard type signs: $100
               b.   Wall signs, painted signs, monument signs: $50
               c.   Temporary signs: $25
               d.   Alteration of sign face: $25
         (d)   Plan reviews fees:
            1.   Minimum fee: $50
            2.   Fees for commercial and multi-family plan examination
including new base buildings, build-outs, alterations and remodeling:
               a.   Up to 60,000 cubic feet in area: $350
               b.   60,001 to 80,000 cubic feet in area: $400
               c. 80,001 to 100,000 cubic feet in area: $450
               d.   100,001 to 200,000 cubic feet in area: $600
               e.   Over 200,001 cubic feet in area: $650 plus $7.50 per 10,000
cubic feet over 200,001 cubic feet
               f.   Electrical, mechanical and Illinois Accessibility Code plan
review fee: 0.5 times the base review fee
               g.   Plumbing Code plan review fee: $200 plus $3.00 per plumbing
fixture
         (e)   Plumbing Code inspection fee: $55 per inspection
      (2)   Planning and Zoning Commission public hearing: $100
      (3)   Professional fees. The applicant shall pay all fees for special
inspectors, plan reviews and all other fees incurred by outside agencies
      (4)   Certificate of occupancy:
         (a)   Residential: $50
         (b)   Commercial: $100
         (c)   Temporary: $50
      (5)   Penalties. Commencing work without permit-double fee or $250
whichever is greater
      (6)   Reinspection fee: $50
      (7)   Waiver of fees. Waiver of building permit fees as set forth in this
schedule may be granted by action ofthe Village Board pursuant to the following
standards:
         (a)   That the applicant be a not-for-profit corporation duly
organized under the laws of any state and authorized to do business in the
State of Illinois whose action or service will benefit the citizens of the
village, and does not have any uncorrected building or zoning violations and
has not started any construction without the properly approved permits.
         (b)   That the applicant has a currently effective determination from
the Internal Revenue Service that it qualifies as an organization subject to
the provisions of Internal Revenue Code, (Section 50l)(c)(3).
         (c)   As to all such qualifying applicants, the following fee shall
apply:
            1.   An amount equal to 75% of the village internal permit and
inspection fees attributable to the village staff inspectors may be waived
            2.   The applicant shall be required to pay 100% of fees and costs
incurred by the village in the course of such inspections, including but not
limited to, outside consultant fees, professional review fees, and inspectors
hired as third party contractors by the village for purposes of review,
including all site inspections and inspections completed by the East Dundee and
Countryside Fire Protection District.
            3.   Any duly organized for profit or not-for-profit corporation
authorized to do business in the State of Illinois, which is not qualified
under division (c)(2) above shall be reviewed on a case-by-case basis. If the
Village Board, in its sole discretion, makes the determination that such
organizations substantially serve a public purpose, including charitable or
educational purposes, or that such organizations substantially further an
important public interest, then the Board may waive fees as provided herein.
         (d)   Waiver of fees. A waiver of building permit related fees for
government and duly organized not-for-profit corporation may be granted by
action of the Village Board and will be reviewed on a case-by-case basis.
         (e)   Annual vacant building fee: $50
   (DD)   Flood plain regulations (
Chapter 152).
      (1)   Flood plain application fee (nonrefundable): $200
      (2)   Variance to flood plain regulations: As listed in zoning fees
   (EE)   Storm water control and detention regulations (
Chapter 154).
      (1)   Storm water application filing fee: $200
      (2)   Variance fee: $200
   (FF)   Subdivisions (
Chapter 155).
      (1)   Preliminary plan filing fees:
         (a)   15 Lots or less: $250
         (b)   Each lot in excess of 15 lots: $10
         (c)   Deposit: $25
      (2)   Final plan filing fee: $100
      (3)   Additional meeting fee: $100
      (4)   Soil erosion control permits fees per permitted acres:
         (a)   Less than 1 acre: $25 plus contracted professional review fees
         (b)   1.0 acres to 4.99 acres: $30 plus contracted professional review
fees
         (c)   5.0 acres to 14.99 acres: $35 plus contracted professional
review fees
         (d)   15.0 acres to 29.99 acres: $40 plus contracted professional
review fees
         (e)   30.0 acres to 49.99 acres: $45 plus contracted professional
review fees
         (f)   50.0 acres to 74.99 acres: $50 plus contracted professional
review fees
         (g)   75.0 acres to 99.99 acres: $75 plus contracted professional
review fees
         (h)   Over 99.99 acres: $2 per acre plus contracted professional
review fees
   (GG)   Signs (
Chapter 156).
      (1)   Village electronic sign rental:
         (a)   Businesses within corporate limits: No fee
         (b)   Nonprofit corporations serving corporate limits: No fee
         (c)   Governmental entities: No fee
   (HH)   Zoning (
Chapter 157).
      (1)   Fees and deposits for variations, special uses, and map amendments:
         (a)   All Single-Family Residential Districts (E, R-I, R-2, and R-
3 Districts):
            1.   Non-refundable fee: $75
            2.   Deposit: $150
         (b)   All Residential Multiple Family District (R-4 and R-
5 Districts):
            1.   Non-refundable fee: $100
            2.   Deposit: $250
         (c)   All Business Districts (B-1, B-2, B-3 and B-4 Districts):
            1.   Non-refundable fee: $150
            2.   Deposit: $250
         (d)   Other Districts: (AG-l, OD, M-l, and M-2) - fees and deposits
for variations, special uses, and map amendments (all zoning districts):
            1.   Non-refundable fee: $200
            2.   Deposit: $1,000
      (2)   Planned Unit Development fees (all zoning districts):
         (a)   Non-refundable fee for first two acres: $500
         (b)   Non-refundable fee for each additional acre: $20
         (c)   Deposit: $1,000
      (3)   Miscellaneous fees and costs; (all zoning districts):
         (a)   The petition in each of the foregoing shall be liable to the
village for the payment of all incurred costs and expenses incurred by the
village, including but not limited to engineering fees, attorney's fees, staff
time, planning and landscape consultant fees. The petitioner shall be required
to execute an agreement with the village prior to filing such petition whereby
all such costs incurred by the village shall be paid and/or reimbursed by the
petitioner, the petitioner shall deposit with the village an amount equal to
the estimate cost as determined by the Building Department. Any unused funds
will be returned to the petitioner.
         (b)   All petitioners shall be required to deposit a sum as set forth
above to be applied by the village to reimburse its costs incurred in taking a
transcript of the proceedings of the Plan Commission related to such petition.
         (c)   When residential petition requests both a zoning amendment as
well as a special use, only one application fee shall be charged.
         (d)   When the petitioner requests an amendment to a previously
approved planned unit development, the fee charged shall be the same as that
set forth above as to all acreage affected by such amendment.
      (4)   Prohibited parking in front yard: $60
         (a)   Prepayment reduction of fine. Full fine amount is due and may be
payable by mail within 30 days of issue. Fifty percent of fine amount may be
paid by mail if done so within 15 days of issue date.
   (II)   Use of the Depot and Depot Park:
      (1)   Depot and Depot Park: $50 for resident, $100 for non-resident per
day.
      (2)   Depot or Depot Park: $25 for resident, $50 for non-resident per
day.
      (3)   Power access for musicians: $25 per day.
(Ord. 17-09, passed 2-6-2016; Am. Ord. 17-10, passed 2-13-2017; Am. Ord. 17-40,
passed 8-7-2017; Am. Ord. 17-42, passed 8-7-2017; Am. Ord. 17-58, passed 12-18-
2017; Am. Ord. 18-06, passed 4-16-2018; Am. Ord. 18-08, passed 5-7-2018; Am.
Ord. 18-11, passed 6-18-2018; Am. Ord. 18-12, passed 6-18-2018; Am. Ord. 18-18,
passed 7-16-2018; Am. Ord. 18-34, passed 10-15-2018; Am. Ord. 18-35, passed 10-
15-2018; Am. Ord. 19-04, passed 2-4-2019; Am. Ord. 19-15, passed 4-15-2019; Am.
Ord. 19-28, passed 8-19-2019; Am. Ord. 19-33, passed 10-21-2019; Am. Ord. 19-
37, passed 12-16-2019; Am. Ord. 19-38, passed 12-16-2019; Am. Ord. 20-09,
passed 4-20-2020; Am. Ord. 20-12, passed 5-4-2020; Am. Ord. 20-14, passed 5-4-
2020; Am. Ord. 20-20, passed 5-18-2020; Am. Ord. 21-03, passed 1-18-2021; Am.
Ord. 22-02, passed 1-24-2022; Am. Ord. 22-03, passed 1-24-2022; Am. Ord. 22-09,
passed 3-7-2022; Am. Ord. 22-19, passed 5-16-2022; Am. Ord. 22-29, passed 6-6-
2022; Am. Ord. 22-31, passed 7-18-2022; Am. Ord. 22-37, passed 8-8-2022; Am.
Ord. 23-03, passed 1-23-2023; Am. Ord. 23-45, passed 10-2-2023; Am. Ord. 23-57,
passed 12-18-2023; Am. Ord. 24-07, passed 2-19-2024; Am. Ord. 24-31, passed 9-
23-2024; Am. Ord. 24-41, passed 12-2-2024; Am. Ord. 24-48, passed 12-16-2024;
Am. Ord. 25-09, passed 2-3-2025)
Editor’s note:
   Division (D) of this section shall automatically sunset, and be null and
void, on April 30, 2021, unless otherwise extended by the President and Board
of Trustees.
   Ord. 19-28 as it amends division (R) shall automatically sunset, and be null
and void, on December 31, 2020, as extended by Ord. 19-37
FINE SCHEDULE
   Fines shall be no less than the following, and administrative fines shall be
determined by the hearing officer:
Municipal Code Section Violation Fine
Municipal
Code      Violation                                                                        Fine
Section
50.02     Garbage and refuse                                                               $60/30
50.09     Pick-up of recyclables by unauthorized persons                                   $100
51.21(B)  Illegal watering                                                                 $60/30
70.01(B)  Parked in posted no parking zone                                                 $60/30
70.01(B)  Parked blocking a public or private driveway                                     $60/30
70.01(B)  Parked blocking or on a sidewalk                                                 $60/30
70.01(B)  Parked within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection                          $60/30
70.01(B)  Parked blocking or on a crosswalk                                                $60/30
70.01(B)  Parked within 30 feet upon the approach of a traffic signal or stop sign         $60/30
70.01(B)  Parked within an intersection                                                    $60/30
70.01(B)  Parked in a posted fire lane                                                     $60/30
70.01(B)  Parked within 15 feet of a fire hydrant                                          $60/30
70.01(B)  Parked in a posted handicapped space                                             $250
70.01(B)  Parked on a roadway with expired registration                                    $60/30
70.01(B)  Parking in a public parking lot with expired registration                        $60/30
70.01(B)  Parked left wheels to curb                                                       $60/30
70.01(B)  Parked on a roadway more than 12 inches away from curb                           $60/30
          Violations of adopted Illinois Vehicle Code
             * No front/rear license plate (ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 3-413(a))
             * Improper display license plate/sticker or tinted obscured plastic covers
          (ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 3-413(b))
             * Operation of motor vehicle with expired registration sticker (ILCS Ch. 625,
          Act 5, § 3-413(f))
             * Driver's license expired less than one year (ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 6-101)
70.01(B)     * Driver's license not on person (ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 6-112)           $50
             * Failure to notify SOS of address/name change (ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 6-116)
             * All sections (ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, Ch.12)
             * No valid safety sticker (ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 13-111)
             * Overwidth (ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 15-102)
             * Overlength (ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 15-107)
             * Spilling load on highway or not secure (ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 15-109)
             * Failure to cover load when required (ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 15-109.1)
70-11-    No parking on village roadways between 0200 - 0600 hours                         $60/30
1303
70-11-    No parking - snowfall in excess of three inches                                  $60/30
1303
70-11-    Clinging to motor vehicles                                                       $50
1490
70-11-    Skateboarding/rollerblading prohibited                                           $60/30
1491
70-11-590 Negligent driving                                                                $100
70.06     Unlawful operation of motor-driven cycle                                         $60/30
70.07     Solicitation on roadways                                                         $60/30
70.10     Excessive idling                                                                 $60/30
90.15     Alarm-related violations                                                         $50
92.04     Limitation of dogs and cats                                                      $50
92.07 (5- Dog/cat at large                                                                 $75
9)
92.07 (5- Bitch in heat                                                                    $75
9-2)
92.07 (5- Animals making noise                                                             $75
9-3)
92.07 (5- Nuisance feeding prohibited                                                      $75
9-4)
92.07 (5- Potentially dangerous dog                                                        $75
16-1)
92.07 (5- Biting dog                                                                       $75
16-2)
92.07 (5- Damage to property                                                               $75
16-3)
92.07 (5-
15, 5-    Dangerous animals                                                                $75
16., 5-
16-1)
92.07 (5- Vicious animals                                                                  $75
15)
92.07 (5- Failure to clean animal waste                                                    $75
37)
93.01     Unlawful use/possession of fireworks                                             $100
93.11     Prohibited noise (§                                                             $100
          93.11(B)(3)(e)(2))
93.07(A)  High weeds                                                                       $60/30
93.08(A)  Unlawful burning of materials                                                    $100
114.45    Solicitation without a permit                                                    $100
116.37    Consumption of alcohol by a person under 21 - alcohol                            $100
133.001   Disorderly conduct                                                               $100
113.001   Urinating/defecating in public                                                   $100
(A)(17)
133.030   Curfew violation (under 17 2300 2600, Sun - Thurs, Midnight to 0600, Fri - Sat)  $60/30
133.063   Unlawful possession of cannabis - 10 grams or under                              $150
133.098   Possession of tobacco or alternative nicotine products by persons under 18       $50
133.100   Unlawful possession of drug paraphernalia                                        $150
136.02    Dumping/littering prohibited                                                     $100
136.03    Littering prohibited from motor vehicle                                          $100
138.12    Possessing or illegal discharging an air gun on the public way                   $100
139.99(A) Violation of smoking ban                                                         $100
          Violation of smoking ban (business violation)                                     
139.99(B)    * First offense within 12 months                                           $250
             * Second offense within 12 months                                          $500
             * Third offense within 12 months                                           $2,500
157.091   Prohibited parking in front yard (off pavement of driveway                       $60/30
(B)(5)
Administrative Fines
70-11-    Damage to village property (traffic)                                             Admin
1492
92.07 (5- Biting dog                                                                       Admin
16-2)
92.07 (5-
15, 5-    Dangerous animals                                                                Admin
16., 5-
16-1)
92.07 (5- Vicious animals                                                                  Admin
15)
93.01     Public nuisance prohibited                                                       Admin
93.05(B)  Abandoned motor vehicle                                                          Admin
93.10     Inoperable motor vehicle                                                         Admin
93.11(B)
(3)(e)    Noise - prohibited noises                                                        Admin
( 2)
116.08(M) Unlawful sale of alcohol after hours (business violation)                        Admin
116.09(D) Consumption of alcohol after hours (business violation)                          Admin
116.33    Misrepresentation of age by persons under 21                                     Admin
116.34    Unlawful possession of alcohol by person under 21                                Admin
116.35(A) Permitting a gathering of persons under 21 to consume alcohol                    Admin
131.03(A) Trespass to land                                                                 Admin
(1)
131.04    Damaging village property (non-traffic)                                          Admin
133.096   Misrepresentation of age by person under 18 - tobacco products or alternative    Admin
          nicotine products
133.097   Unlawful sale of tobacco or alternative nicotine productsto person under 18      Admin
138.05    Illegal hunting within the village                                               Admin
 
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
Chapter
   
50.   GARBAGE AND REFUSE
   
51.   WATER
   
52.   CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL
   
53.   SEWERS
   
54.   CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE RIGHTS-OF-WAY
   
55.   CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEE AND PEG ACCESS SUPPORT FEE
   
56.   CABLE AND VIDEO CUSTOMER PROTECTION LAW
   
57.   STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS
   
58.   GROUNDWATER PROTECTION
   
59.   SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES
CHAPTER 50: GARBAGE AND REFUSE
Section
General Provisions
   
50.01   Definitions
   
50.02   Regulations
   
50.03   Three or less dwelling units
   
50.04   Other buildings or premises
   
50.05   Village garbage collector
   
50.06   Responsibility
   
50.07   [Reserved]
   
50.08   Temporary trash containers
   
50.09   Pick-up of recyclables by unauthorized persons
   
50.10   Rebate program for senior citizens
Pollution Control Facilities
   
50.30   Applicability
   
50.31   Definitions
   
50.32   Notice requirement and filing fee
   
50.33   Content of application
   
50.34   Filing procedures
   
50.35   Hearing procedures
 
   
50.99   Penalty
Editor’s note:
   Ord. 17-40, which replaced §§
50.01 -
50.05 and
50.07 in full, shall automatically sunset, and be null and void, on April 30,
2021 as extended by Ord. 20-09, unless otherwise extended by the President and
Board of Trustees.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 50.01 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words and phrases, when used in this chapter shall have the
meanings as hereinafter specified.
   BULK MATERIALS. Any items set forth as refuse which are too large to fit
into an approved refuse container or which exceed, in total, 50 pounds in
weight. Examples include sofas, large tables and chairs, dressers, televisions,
bookcases, mattresses and box springs, other large household furniture, and
large appliances which do not contain CFC or HCFC refrigerant gas, PCB
containing capacitors, mercury switches, or other hazardous components.
   CURB SIDE. Positions immediately behind the curb and within the parkway are
used for the collection of refuse, yard waste, and recycling containers.
   HOUSEHOLD CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION DEBRIS. Materials from "do-it-
yourself" interior and exterior household construction, remodeling, and repair
projects, including, but not limited to, drywall, plywood, paneling, lumber,
and other building materials; cabinets; carpeting; disassembled household
fixtures; and small amounts of sod, earth, clay, sand, concrete, rocks, and
similar materials.
   HOUSEHOLD GARBAGE.  
      (1)   All organic household or kitchen wastes, such as rejected or unused
food and food residues, paper used in wrapping food, household rubbish,
inorganic and incombustible household waste (i.e. cans, metal ware, broken
glass, crockery, stoneware and similar waste resulting from the regular
operation of the household) empty cartons and crates, discarded toys, discarded
clothing and furniture, and similar materials.
      (2)   Housing garbage shall not include waste from any manufacturing
process, construction materials, broken concrete, lumber, large rocks, and
other similar materials.
   REFUSE. Household garbage, household construction and demolition debris, and
bulk materials.
   REFUSE CONTAINERS. Refuse containers shall include:
      (1)   TOTER. A wheeled plastic container with a tight-fitting top, not to
exceed 95 gallons in size, requiring a semi-automated mechanism for collection.
All toters must be approved by and shall be initially supplied by the village
garbage collector. All additional toters shall be purchased by the user.
      (2)   KRAFT PAPER BAG. A special biodegradable paper bag not to exceed 35
gallons in size, which will shred and degrade quickly in the composting
process.
      (3)   BUNDLE. Any material allowed under the definition of YARD WASTE
such as limbs, branches, or other loose items which do not exceed four feet in
length and 50 pounds in weight. Each branch shall not exceed two inches in
diameter, with the total diameter of the bundle not to exceed 24 inches.
   RECYCLABLES (also referred to as RECYCLABLE MATERIALS). Materials which have
a useful second life in the economic cycle if they are successfully collected,
separated, processed, and marketed for return to the economic mainstream.
Recyclable materials shall include, but not be limited to glass, aluminum cans,
bi-metal cans, glass containers, mixed paper, card paper, newspaper and other
paper products.
   YARD WASTE. Grass and garden clippings, leaves, pruning of small diameter
stemmed shrubs, weeds, plant material, limbs, branches, or other loose items
which do not exceed four feet in length and 50 pounds in weight.
   VILLAGE GARBAGE COLLECTOR. The contractor hired by the village pursuant to §
50.05.
   WASTE MATERIALS. Refuse, recyclables and yard waste.
(1981 Code, § 13.01) (Ord. 17-40, passed 8-7-2017; Am. Ord. 18-06, passed 4-16-
2018; Am. Ord. 20-09, passed 4-20-2020)
§ 50.02 REGULATIONS.
   (A)   All waste materials shall be collected at least once each week
throughout the year in accordance with §§
50.03 and
50.04.
   (B)   No collection of waste materials shall be made by the village garbage
collector at or from any store, restaurant or other place of business, nor from
any mill, industrial or manufacturing plant, nor any property zoned
residential-business, nor any property containing more than three dwelling
units.
   (C)   Refuse shall be placed for curbside collection in such a manner that
it will not blow or scatter during the storage period or allow moisture to
spill when the material is removed.
   (D)   All recyclables shall be placed in a toter for curbside collection in
a manner that it will not blow or scatter during the storage period.
   (E)   No waste materials shall be deposited, thrown away or permitted to
accumulate or remain in any street or alley or any other public place or in any
condition where its presence would constitute a nuisance to others or a
potential or actual hazard to health, sanitation or safety.
   (F)   Yard waste materials shall be placed in toters, containers, garbage
cans or kraft paper bags not exceeding a capacity of 35 gallons. All yard waste
material not suitable for placement in toters, containers, garbage cans or
kraft paper bags shall be placed in bundles. Only those garbage cans containing
yard waste marked with an "X" shall be collected.
   (G)   No waste materials shall be placed upon the tree bank, parkway,
driveway or front yards earlier than 12:00 p.m. (noon) on the evening before
the scheduled collection date. All containers must be removed from the tree
bank, parkway, driveway or front yards no later than 12:00 p.m. (noon) on the
day after the scheduled collection. This division does not include commercial
properties with private refuse pick-up service.
   (H)   In the event that a holiday falls on a weekday, waste material
collection services shall be delayed one day after the recognized holiday.
(1981 Code, § 13.02) (Am. Ord. 07-47, passed 11-19-2007; Am. Ord. 17-40, passed
8-7-2017; Am. Ord. 18-06, passed 4-16-2018; Am. Ord. 20-09, passed 4-20-2020)
Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.03 THREE OR LESS DWELLING UNITS.
   The following provisions apply only to occupied buildings containing three
or less dwelling units.
   (A)   All waste materials will be collected by the village garbage
collector; provided, however, that no collection shall be made unless all of
the provisions of §
50.02 and this chapter are fully complied with.
   (B)   All waste materials must be placed on the parkway adjacent to a public
or private street in front of the owner's premises and must be easily
accessible to the village garbage collector on the day of collection. On all
days excepting the day of collection, containers must be stored on the owner's
premises away from the parkway on the premises behind the front building line
in the side yard or rear yard behind the building line setback out of sight
from the public right-of-way screened or behind the primary structures.
   (C)   Each dwelling unit to which the village garbage collector provides
waste material collection shall be billed bi-monthly at the rate set forth in
Chapter 37: Fees and Fines of the Village Code subject to §
51.38: Billing Provisions of the Village Code.
(1981 Code, § 13.03) (Am. Ord. 00-25, passed 11-6-2000; Am. Ord. 09-06, passed
3-16-2009; Am. Ord. 13-01, passed 1-7-2013; Am. Ord. 17-40, passed 8-7-2017;
Am. Ord. 18-06, passed 4-16-2018; Am. Ord. 20-09, passed 4-20-2020)
§ 50.04 OTHER BUILDINGS OR PREMISES.
   The following regulations pertain to all buildings and premises other than
occupied residential buildings containing three or less dwelling units, as
defined in §
50.03:
   (A)   All buildings and premises shall be served by licensed private
scavengers as often as may be required to prevent a nuisance or a threat to
public health, welfare and safety, but, in no event, shall the service be less
than once a week.
   (B)   The standards for collection shall meet all requirements of health,
sanitation and safety set by the Board of Trustees.
(1981 Code, § 13.04) (Am. Ord. 00-25, passed 11-6-2000; Am. Ord. 17-40, passed
8-7-2017; Am. Ord. 18-06, passed 4-16-2018; Am. Ord. 20-09, passed 4-20-2020)
§ 50.05 VILLAGE GARBAGE COLLECTOR.
   (A)   A garbage collector shall be hired upon a contract with the village to
collect and dispose of waste materials.
   (B)   The garbage collector shall do all of the work and furnish all
necessary equipment and labor to cause to be removed waste materials as
hereinbefore specified.
   (C)   The garbage collector shall furnish a truck for the purpose which
shall be suitably covered and shall have a suitable body so as to prevent any
waste materials either to leak through the truck or to spill over the same and
to, at all times when not actually engaged in the business of collecting waste
materials, keep the truck covered and particularly to keep the same covered
while driving to or from a garbage route.
   (D)   The garbage collector may retain as many employees as he or she may
see fit, but shall, in all respects, be personally responsible for the
performance of his or her duties in compliance with the contract.
(1981 Code, § 13.05) (Ord. 17-40, passed 8-7-2017; Am. Ord. 18-06, passed 4-16-
2018; Am. Ord. 20-09, passed 4-20-2020)
§ 50.06 RESPONSIBILITY.
   Provision for the disposal of all garbage collected shall be arranged by the
garbage collector and the village shall, in no manner, be responsible for the
ultimate disposition thereof; provided, however, that in removing or disposing
of all substances and matters required to be removed, the same shall be removed
and disposed of by the garbage collector in a manner safe to persons and
property and not injurious to the health and no part of the substances and
matters shall be disposed of within the established limits of the village.
(1981 Code, § 13.06)
§ 50.07 [RESERVED]
§ 50.09 PICK-UP OF RECYCLABLES BY UNAUTHORIZED PERSONS.
   (A)   No persons or entities other than the village's authorized waste
removal company, its agents and employees, successors and assigns shall be
authorized to pick up allowable recyclable materials set out by village
residents in the designated recycling bins or recycling bags. Allowable
recycling materials shall include:
      (1)   Mixed paper:
         (a)   Computer paper, white and colored; no carbon paper;
         (b)   Junk mail, including white envelopes;
         (c)   Magazines and catalogs;
         (d)   Paper grocery bags;
         (e)   Chipboard/paperboard, with windows, liners and handles removed;
and
         (f)   Corrugated cardboard, flattened and placed under recycling bin;
pieces not larger than two feet by two feet.
      (2)   Newspaper:
         (a)   Newspapers; and
         (b)   Packing papers, clean, thin paper only.
      (3)   Commingles recyclables:
         (a)   Glass bottles and jars (rinsed);
         (b)   Aluminum cans, foils and trays (rinsed);
         (c)   Tin cans (rinsed);
         (d)   Plastic #1 through #7 (rinsed);
         (e)   Plastic 6-pack and 12-pack rings;
         (f)   Milk/juice cartons (rinsed); and
         (g)   Drink boxes (rinsed).
   (B)   Any unauthorized person or entity found to be collecting recycling
materials as indicated herein shall be in violation of this section.
   (C)   A person or entity having been found in violation of this section
shall be subject to a fine by the village of not less than $100 nor more than
$250 for each violation thereof.
(Ord. 08-13, passed 4-7-2008)
§ 50.10 REBATE PROGRAM FOR SENIOR CITIZENS.
   Any person aged 65 or older who receives a bill for refuse collection
service in said person's name in addition to Village Green and Gardiner Place
senior apartment facilities shall be eligible to receive a rebate of 25% of any
amount paid by said person for the cost for services for the period of August
1, 2017 through April 30, 2018 provided that said person completes an
application for the rebate on a form provided by the Village Clerk by April 30,
2018.
(Ord. 17-41, passed 8-7-2017)
POLLUTION CONTROL FACILITIES
§ 50.30 APPLICABILITY.
   This section applies to applications for site location approval of certain
new pollution control facilities [as defined by Section 3.32 of the Illinois
Environmental Protection Act (ILCS Chapter 415, Act 5, §3.32)]. Specifically,
it is intended to apply to applications for site location approval for a
"transfer station", as defined in Section 3.83 of the Illinois Environmental
Protection Act (ILCS Chapter 415, Act 5, §3.83) designed and intended to accept
municipal waste (as defined herein) for temporary storage or consolidation, and
further transfer to a waste disposal, treatment or storage facility. To the
extent a facility described in an application proposes to manage material which
is not waste [as defined by Section 3.53 of the Illinois Environmental
Protection Act (ILCS Chapter 415, Act 5, §3.53)], or proposes to conduct an
activity which is excluded from the definition of a pollution control facility
as defined by the Illinois Environmental Protection Act (ILCS Chapter 415, Act
5, §39.2), or proposes to conduct an activity which does not require a permit
from the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, this section does not govern
such application, and authorization to locate such a facility shall be
determined by the village's other ordinances and codes, including but not
limited to those related to zoning, special use, building or environmental
requirements, as applicable.
(Ord. 06-19, passed 6-19-2006)
§ 50.31 DEFINITIONS.
   All words used in this subchapter shall have the same meanings and
definitions as the same terms are defined in the Environmental Protection Act,
ILCS Chapter 415, Act 5, §§1 et seq., and the implementing and interpreting
administrative rules and regulations in effect as of the date hereof, and as
said statute and regulations and rules may be amended or modified from time to
time.
   ACT. The Illinois Environmental Protection Act, ILCS Chapter 415, Act 5, §§1
et seq.
   APPLICANT. Any person, group of persons, partnership, firm, association,
corporation, company or organization of any kind that files an application for
local siting approval pursuant to this subchapter.
   APPLICATION. The document(s) filed by the applicant requesting local siting
approval for a facility.
   CLERK. The Village Clerk for the Village of East Dundee, Illinois.
   FACILITY. A new pollution control facility, as defined in the Act.
   HEARING OFFICER. The attorney appointed by the President of the Village to
preside over the public hearing(s) associated with a siting application.
   IEPA. The Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
   MUNICIPAL WASTE. Garbage, general household and commercial waste, industrial
lunchroom or office waste, landscape waste, and construction or demolition
debris [as defined in Section 3.21 of the Act (ILCS Chapter 415, Act 5,
§3.21)]. "Special Waste," including, but not limited to, potentially infectious
medical waste, hazardous waste, industrial process or pollution control waste,
and empty containers in which special waste has been stored, and as
specifically defined in Section 3.45 of the Act (ILCS Chapter 415, Act 5,
§3.45) shall be excluded from the definition of MUNICIPAL WASTE.
   TRANSFER STATION. A site or facility that accepts waste for temporary
storage or consolidation, and further transfer to a waste disposal, treatment
or storage facility, as defined in Section 3.83 of the Act (ILCS Chapter 415,
Act 5, §3.83).
   VILLAGE. The Village of East Dundee, Illinois, an Illinois Municipal
Corporation.
(Ord. 06-19, passed 6-19-2006)
§ 50.32 NOTICE REQUIREMENT AND FILING FEE.
   (A)   No later than 14 days prior to submittal of an application for site
location approval, applicant shall cause notice of intent to submit such an
application to all owners of property within 250 feet in each direction of the
lot line of the subject property line, and to all members of the General
Assembly from the legislative district in which the site is located.
Notification must be in conformance with the provisions of Section 39.2 of the
Act (ILCS Chapter 415, Act 5, §39.2). Proof of compliance with the above-stated
notification requirements must be submitted with the application.
   (B)   (1)   Each application for a new pollution control facility to be
processed pursuant to this subchapter shall include a $200,000 application fee.
This fee shall be waived if the applicant is a duly constituted Illinois
municipality in good standing.
      (2)   The applicable filing fee is intended to defray the reasonable and
necessary costs of addressing and processing all aspects of the application,
including, but not limited to, pre-filing review matters, cost of site
inspections, clerical expenses, copying costs, space rental, hearing officer
compensation, court reporter expenses, transcription costs, public notice
expenses, staff review time, reasonable attorney fees, times and consultants
retained by the village (such as qualified professional engineers, planners,
appraisers, environmental counsel, etc.) including test analysis, exhibit
examination and other testimony (if any) provided by such consultants and
professionals, as well as all other reasonable costs and expenses incurred by
village staff in review and evaluation of the application, as well as all other
relevant costs incident to consideration of all aspects of the application, the
costs incident to preparing the record for appeal, and the cost of representing
the village on appeal in case of an appeal of the granting and/or denial of
site location approval (the "village's costs").
      (3)   Any portion of the application fee that remains unexpended upon
final resolution of the siting process (including appeals to the Illinois
Pollution Control Board, Appellate Courts, Illinois Supreme Court, Federal
Courts and any other administrative review) shall be returned to the applicant.
Should there be any additional costs incurred by the village in excess of the
application fee, the applicant shall bear any and all additional costs, and
shall promptly pay the same within 30 days following written notice thereof.
Applicant shall further be responsible to reimburse the village for expenses
and reasonable attorney's fees incurred by the village as a result of any
collection activity or litigation necessarily instituted by the village to
collect such additional costs.
(Ord. 06-19, passed 6-19-2006)
§ 50.33 CONTENT OF APPLICATION.
   The following is a listing of the minimum content of applications for site
location approval for a transfer station to be located within the Village of
East Dundee. The applicant may, at its discretion, provide additional
information with its application.
Note: * denotes that a graphic presentation or figure is required with the
text.
Written Presentation:
   I.   The facility is necessary to accommodate the waste needs of the area it
is intended to serve.
A.   Introduction
B.   Economic benefits of facility
C.   Service area identification*
D.   Demographics of service area
E.   Waste generation rates of service area
F.   Existing waste disposal network for service area
G.   Future waste disposal network for service area
H.   Conclusion, signed by professional expert
   II.   The facility is so designed, located and proposed to be operated that
the public health, safety and welfare will be protected.
A.   Introduction
B.   Site legal and general description*
1.   Survey plat with existing structures*
2.   Identification of property owners
3.   Existing topography of site (minimum two foot contours)*
4.   Title search of property
C.   Existing conditions of site and adjacent properties*
1.   Historical property uses
D.   Location standards
1.   Residential properties*
2.   Floodplain limits*
3.   Archaeological study
4.   Airport study
5.   Groundwater study
6.   Endangered species study
7.   List covenants recorded with the property deed
8.   Identification of wetlands on property
E.   Site design
1.   Entrance*
2.   Landscaping plan*
3.   Access roads and interior traffic circulation*
4.   Security measures to be implemented
5.   Weight station location and design*
6.   Parking on site*
7.   Vehicle stacking procedures*
8.   Utilities on site*
9.   Office structures
10.   Transfer station structure and detailed floor plan*
11.   Water supply, water capacity, and facility's water requirements
12.   Stormwater management measures
a.   Two year, 24 hour design
b.   100 year, 24 hour design
c.   Basin design and release rate
            d.   Sediment control measures
e.   Erosion control measures (on-site and off-site)
f.   Drainage flow off-site*
g.   Site location on USES 7.5 Minute Quadrangle Map*
      F.   Operations
1.   Hours of operation
2.   Quantity of waste accepted
3.   Anticipated quantities of waste received by waste type
4.   Identification of acceptable waste types
5.   Waste screening procedures
6.   Waste transfer operational plan*
7.   Overnight storage of waste on site
8.   Waste volume throughput analysis
9.   Identification of disposal sites and permits
10.   Identification of proposed railroad activities
11.   Recycling activities on site
12.   Equipment requirements
13.   Facility cleaning procedures
14.   Load checking program
15.   Traffic pattern (on-site)*
16.   Facility for employees
17.   Fueling procedures
18.   Litter control
19.   Vector control procedures
20.   Indoor air quality
21.   Outdoor air quality
22.   Odor control procedures
23.   Noise control procedures
24.   Training personnel
25.   Fire control protection
26.   Lockout/tagout procedures
27.   Insurance coverage
28.   Record keeping procedures
a.   Daily tonnage receipts by waste type
b.   In-county daily tonnage receipts
c.   All regulatory correspondence
d.   All environmental and regulatory inspections
e.   Wastewater generation and disposal records
f.   Load inspection and load discrepancy records
g.   Accident records
         29.   Wastewater generation and handling
a.   Wastewater generation calculations
b.   Wastewater storage procedures
c.   Wastewater disposal/treatment procedures
         30.   Operational contingency plans
a.   Equipment failure
b.   Interruption of utility service
            c.   Inclement weather
d.   Labor strikes
31.   Proposed life of facility
32.   Final closure
a.   Waste removal
b.   Equipment removal
c.   Equipment cleaning
d.   Cost estimate
e.   Schedule
      G.   Operator information and experience
1.   Articles of incorporation
2.   Audited financial statements
3.   Transfer station experience within Illinois
4.   Summary of all transfer station violations in Illinois
5.   Transfer station experience outside Illinois
6.   Resume of facility manager
      H.   Conclusion, signed by professional expert
   III.   The facility is located so as to minimize incompatibility with the
character of the surrounding area and to minimize the effect on the value of
the surrounding property.
      A.   Introduction
      B.   Land use/zoning/planning study
1.   Site zoning
2.   Adjacent and surrounding zoning*
3.   Adjacent and surrounding land uses*
4.   Landscape plan*
5.   Setbacks*
6.   Conformity with the Kane County 2020 Land Resource Management Plan
      C.   Real estate impact study
1.   Proposed improvements
2.   Chicago Metropolitan Area data and Kane County Area data
3.   Transfer site area study
4.   Property value impact study
      D.   Conclusion, signed by professional expert
   IV.   The facility is located outside the boundary of the 100 year flood
plain or the site is flood-proofed.
      A.   Introduction
      B.   Location of 100 year floodplain*
      C.   Conclusion, signed by professional expert
   V.   The plan of operations for the facility is designed to minimize the
danger to the surrounding area from fire, spills or other operational
accidents.
A.   Introduction
B.   Fire prevention measures
C.   Spill prevention measures
D.   Accident prevention/risk management
E.   Operational contingency plan
F.   Conclusion, signed by professional expert
   VI.   The traffic patterns to, or from, the facility are so designed as to
minimize the impact on existing traffic flows.
A.   Introduction
B.   Methodology used
1.   Traffic characteristics of the facility
2.   Traffic assignment and analysis
3.   Roadway and site access requirements
      C.   Site accessibility
1.   Site location*
2.   Area roadways*
3.   Proposed roadway improvements*
4.   Existing traffic volumes
      D.   Develop traffic characteristics
1.   Directional distribution
2.   Estimated site traffic generation
3.   Future growth
E.   Accident history of key intersections to, and from, facility
F.   Traffic impact analysis
   1.   Site access
G.   Identification of routing to disposal facility
H.   Gap study
I.   Conclusion, signed by professional expert
   VII.   If the facility will be treating, storing or disposing of hazardous
waste, an emergency response plan exists for the facility which Includes
notification, containment and evacuation procedures to be used in case of an
accidental release.
A.   Introduction
B.   Emergency response plan
C.   Conclusion, signed by professional expert
   VIII.   If the facility is to be located in a county where the County Board
has adopted a solid waste management plan consistent with the planning
requirements of the Local Solid Waste Disposal Act or the Solid Waste Planning
and Recycling Act, the facility is consistent with that plan.
A.   Introduction
B.   Benefits of facility
C.   Consistency with the solid waste plan
D.   Conclusion, signed by professional expert
   IX.   If the facility will be located within a regulated recharge area, any
applicable requirements specified by the Board for such areas have been met.
A.   Introduction
B.   Location of regulated recharge
C.   Conclusion, signed by professional expert
(Ord. 06-19, passed 6-19-2006)
§ 50.34 FILING PROCEDURES.
   (A)   The applicant for site location approval shall file 25 copies of the
application, including ten full-sized copies of exhibits and 15 reduced copies
of all exhibits, with the Village Clerk, together with the appropriate site
review application fee. The applicant is to provide up to ten additional copies
of the application to the village upon request.
   (B)   The Clerk, upon receiving said application, shall do the following:
      (1)   Accept for filing, and date stamp as filed, any application that is
filed. The date on the date stamp of the Clerk shall be considered the official
filing date for all time limit purposes. Receipt and acceptance of an
application by the Clerk is pro forma, and does not constitute an
acknowledgment that the applicant has complied with the Act or this subchapter.
      (2)   Upon the filing of an application, the Clerk shall immediately
distribute copies of the application to each member of the Village Board of
Trustees then holding office, a copy to the President of the Village, a copy to
the Village Administrator for the village and a copy to the Village Attorney
for the village, and the Director of Public Works for the village.
      (3)   The Clerk shall make available a copy of the application and public
record concerning the application for public inspection during the normal
business hours of the Clerk's Office. Additionally, the Clerk shall provide to
any person so requesting, copies of the application or the public record, upon
such person's payment of the actual cost of reproduction.
   (C)   Form of applications.
      (1)   All applications shall be in writing on 8-1/2 x 11 inch, 8-1/2 x 14
inch, or 11 x 17 inch paper.
      (2)   The pages of the application shall be consecutively numbered, and
all exhibits shall be clearly marked and identified.
      (3)   The text portion of the application including exhibits or graphic
presentations shall be furnished in electronic format. The electronic copy of
the application documents should be on a compact disk (CD) or digital video
disk (DVD) that is readable by a standard IBM-compatible personal computer
(PC). The format should be in Adobe PDF format or in another widely available
format acceptable to the village.
   (D)   Proof of service evidencing that copies of said application were
served upon each municipality whose official boundaries are within 1-1/2 miles
of the property line of the proposed facility.
   (E)   Proof of notice, pursuant to Section 39.2(b) of the Act (ILCS Chapter
415, Act 5, §39.2(b)).
(Ord. 06-19, passed 6-19-2006)
§ 50.35 HEARING PROCEDURES.
   (A)   For each application filed, the President shall appoint a Hearing
Officer to conduct the public hearing for that application. The appointments
shall be confirmed by the full Village Board of Trustees of the village within
40 days of the receipt of each application.
   (B)   The Hearing Officer shall preside over the public hearing, and shall
make decisions concerning the admission of evidence and the manner in which the
hearing is conducted. The Hearing Officer shall make all rulings in accordance
with fundamental fairness and statutory and constitutional requirements. The
Hearing Officer shall prepare a statement of findings at the conclusion of the
public hearing and following the submittal of additional comments for the 30-
day period following the public hearing.
   (C)   Within 45 days of the receipt of the application, the Hearing Officer
shall meet and schedule the date(s), location and time for the public hearing.
The public hearing shall be scheduled by the Hearing Officer to be conducted at
a location which is reasonably expected to be large enough to accommodate the
number of persons anticipated to attend.
   (D)   Within 60 days of the receipt of the application, the Village Clerk
shall notify the applicant, in writing, of scheduled public hearing date(s),
location and time.
   (E)   Within 65 days of the receipt of the application, the applicant shall
publish notice of public hearing date(s), location and time, in a local
newspaper(s) and notify, by certified mail, all members of the District General
Assembly in which the proposed facility is located.
   (F)   No sooner than 90 days, but no longer than 120 days, from the date of
receipt of the application, the Hearing Officer shall commence public hearings
which are adequate to establish the facts in the case, provided that said
hearing shall be conducted within the required time periods. All public
hearings shall be conducted as follows:
      (1)   A pretrial conference hearing shall be held not less than three
days prior to the date established for commencement of the hearing. At that
time, the applicant, the village and any other participants of record shall
participate in such pre-conference hearing. The Hearing Officer shall establish
the date, time and manner in which such pre-hearing conference shall be
conducted. The pre-hearing conference may (at the discretion of the Committee)
be conducted either in person or by teleconference. The purpose of the pre-
conference hearing shall include (but not necessarily be limited to) the
following:
         (a)   Determination of the criterion which will be placed in issue by
any of the parties to the hearing;
         (b)   To the extent necessary and practicable, address any pre-hearing
issues which may have arisen, and
         (c)   Address any pre-hearing motion which has been filed or any
motions which will be presented on the first day of the hearing prior to the
commencement of evidentiary testimony.
      (2)   All persons desiring to be formal participants in the hearing,
including members of the public, shall file their written appearance with the
Village Clerk not less than seven business days prior to the date scheduled for
commencement of the hearing on the application, with copies of such appearance
being provided by the participant to the applicant, the Village, and any other
participants of record. Any person so appearing at such public hearing shall
have the right to present testimony and witnesses. Any such person shall have
the right to be represented by an attorney at said public hearing. Opportunity
for any persons appearing at said public hearing to cross-examine any witness
may be reasonably limited in time and duration by the Hearing Officer, to
assure completion of the hearings in accordance with the deadlines of the Act.
The Hearing Officer may propound questions to any witness or to the applicant
to clarify the record established by the participants at the hearing or to
bring out relevant information. If the Village is not the applicant, the
Village shall be deemed a participant and a party to all proceedings, and shall
proceed last with its case and cross- examination.
      (3)   The applicant and the village's counsel shall be allowed to cross-
examine witnesses by right, subject to such reasonable limitation as may be set
by the Hearing Officer. Cross-examination by the village shall not be limited
to matters contained in the application. Parties represented by attorneys shall
be allowed to cross-examine in the discretion of the Hearing Officer. Other
persons shall be allowed to submit questions to the Hearing Officer, who shall
exercise discretion in the manner in which such questions are to be posed to
witnesses. Sufficient examination of witnesses is to be allowed so as to
provide for fundamental fairness.
      (4)   All witnesses shall testify under oath. Testimony may include the
use of prepared statements and exhibits. If testimony is by prepared statement,
copies of such prepared statements shall be made available at the hearings (or,
prior to the first hearing date, at the office of the Village Clerk) at least
one day in advance of such testimony being given. All witnesses shall be
subject to reasonable examination as follows: direct, cross-examination,
redirect and re-cross.
      (5)   Public comment. The Hearing Officer may exercise discretion to
allow public comment at each hearing or may set one time for public comment.
      (6)   Verbal recording shall be made of the public hearing and a written
verbatim transcript prepared by a certified court reporter or a certified short
hand reporter shall be made available, at cost, upon request. Written
transcripts will be provided to all Village Trustees, Village Administrator for
the village, Director of Public Works for the Village, the Village Attorney,
and outside counsel retained by the village to represent its interests during
the siting process.
      (7)   Applicant shall submit proof of notification of the public hearing
as required in ILCS Chapter 415, Act 5, §39.2, and the procedures included in
division (E) above.
   (G)   At any time prior to completion by the applicant of the presentation
of the applicant's factual evidence and an opportunity for cross-questioning by
the village, and any participants, the applicant may file not more than one
amended application. In such a case, the time limitation for final action set
forth in the Environmental Protection Act, ILCS Chapter 415, Act 5, § 39.2(e),
as amended, shall be extended for an additional period of 90 days. The Hearing
Officer shall, in the Hearing Officer's discretion and to the extent reasonably
practicable, permit the village, the applicant and any other formal participant
(party) to file Proposed Findings of Fact and Conclusion of Law.
   (H)   (1)   Submission of demonstrative evidence and exhibits. Any exhibits
that a participant, other than the applicant, anticipates using during the
pubic hearing shall be submitted to the village at least one day prior to its
anticipated use. All participants shall submit at least three copies of all
exhibits. The village shall furnish one copy to the applicant.
      (2)   Members of the public who participate in the public comment time
held during the public hearing shall submit any exhibits they expect to use to
the village prior to the time designated for the public to speak. At least
three copies of all such exhibits shall be submitted. The applicant shall be
provided one of the three copies.
      (3)   Any additional exhibits to be used by the applicant during the
public hearing and not a part of the application shall be submitted at least 24
hours prior to their anticipated introduction at the public hearing. Any
additional exhibit used by the applicant that in any way materially changes the
proposed design, location and/or operation of the facility shall be considered
an amendment to the application, and all sections of this subchapter pertaining
to amendments shall take effect.
      (4)   The time limits for submission of evidence may be waived by the
Hearing Officer if he/she determines that the participant could not reasonably
have anticipated the use of said exhibit at the time that submission was due.
   (I)   (1)   Between 120 and 180 days of receipt of the application,
transcripts from public hearings shall be forwarded to the Village Clerk,
Village Board of Trustees, Village Administrator, Director of Public Works for
the village, and the Village Attorney for review. Upon the conclusion of the
public hearing(s), the village shall publish in a local newspaper notice
informing the public of the deadline for written comments. Written comments
submitted to the Village Clerk within 30 days of the final public hearing shall
be made a part of the record of proceedings and considered. Copies of all
comments received by the Village Clerk shall be forwarded to all Village
Trustees, the applicant and the Village Attorney. Copies of comments shall be
distributed to the Village Administrator for the Village and other persons upon
request.
      (2)   Additional work sessions and meetings may be held by the Hearing
Officer, if necessary, prior to referral of its findings and recommendation to
the Village Board of Trustees. All work sessions and meetings shall be open to
the public, but may not allow public participation in the work sessions and
meetings.
   (J)   Upon completion of the evidentiary hearing, interested Village Staff
shall have 30 days thereafter in which to file their final reports and
recommendations with the Hearing Officer. Copies of the final reports shall be
available for public inspection in the office of the Village Clerk for three
working days prior to the Hearing Officer's decision. Members of the public
shall be allowed to obtain a copy of said documents upon payment of the cost of
reproduction.
   (K)   Decisions.
      (1)   The hearing officer shall make findings and recommendations, reduce
same to writing and submit it to the Village President & Board of Trustees for
its decision as the ultimate approval or disapproval of the proposed
application.
      (2)   The Village Board of Trustees shall make a decision based upon the
record from the public hearing and review of the findings and recommendation of
the Hearing Officer. The decision of the Village Board of Trustees shall be by
duly adopted resolution, in writing, specifying the reasons for the decision,
such reasons to be in conformity with Section 39.2(a) of the Act (ILCS Chapter
415, Act 5, § 39.2(a)). In granting site location approval, the Village Board
of Trustees may impose such conditions as may be reasonable and necessary to
accomplish the purposes of the Act, to the extent that said conditions are not
inconsistent with the Act and the regulations promulgated by the Illinois
Pollution Control Board. Such decision shall be available for public inspection
at the office of the Village Clerk, and may be copied upon payment of the cost
of reproduction. If there is no final action by the Village Board of Trustees
within 180 days after the filing of the application for site location approval,
the applicant may deem the application approved.
      (3)   Within seven days after the Village Board of Trustees approves or
denies the application, the decision, and basis for the decision, shall be
provided to the applicant in writing, and shall be further forwarded to the
Illinois Environmental Protection Agency by the Village Clerk.
      (4)   Within 35 days after the Village Board of Trustees approves or
denies the application, any appeal of the Village Board of Trustees decision
(by applicant, objector, public or anyone affected by the proposal) must be
filed with the Illinois Pollution Control Board.
      (5)   An applicant may not file an application for site location approval
which is substantially the same as a request which was disapproved, pursuant to
a finding against the applicant under any criteria of Section 39.2(a) of the
Act (ILCS Chapter 415, Act 5, §39.2(a)), within two years of the time of the
disapproval.
(Ord. 06-19, passed 6-19-2006)
§ 50.99 PENALTY.
   Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter
shall be fined not less than $25, nor more than $750, for each offense. A
separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a
violation occurs or continues.
(1981 Code, § 13.08)
CHAPTER 51: WATER
Section
General Provisions
   
51.01   Water system
   
51.02   Management of waterworks system
   
51.03   Definitions
Usage Requirements
   
51.15   Use required
   
51.16   Extension of water mains
   
51.17   Connections to water facilities
   
51.18   Service pipes
   
51.19   Use of water facilities
   
51.20   Private water supply
   
51.21   Protection from damage
Administration and Enforcement
   
51.35   Powers and authority of inspectors
   
51.36   Water service charges
   
51.37   Rates
   
51.38   Billing provisions
   
51.39   Notice of delinquency
   
51.40   Revenues
   
51.41   Accounts
   
51.42   Utility disconnection
 
   
51.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Cross-Connection Control, see
Chapter 52
   Groundwater Protection, see
Chapter 58
   Planning and Zoning Commission, see
Chapter 150
   Plumbing Code, see §
151.012.
   Sewers, see
Chapter 53
   Stormwater Control and Detention Regulations, see
Chapter 154
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 51.01 WATER SYSTEM.
   (A)   The water supply and distribution system consisting of a source of
water supply with storage facilities, together with all pumps and pumping
equipment, distribution and transmission facilities, comprising water main,
valves, meters, meter boxes and all appurtenances and appliances necessary for
the pumping, storage and distribution of water shall be designated as the
waterworks system of the village and shall be operated by the village as a
utility; and all improvements and extensions of the waterworks systems shall be
considered as improvements and extensions to the utility.
   (B)   (1)   There is hereby established the Water Department, hereinafter
called the Department, within the Department of Public Works.
      (2)   The Department shall consist of a Director of Public Works and
other members of the Department as may from time to time be provided for by the
President and Board of Trustees.
      (3)   The Department shall be in charge of all matters relating to the
water facilities, including the connection thereto and the extension thereof,
and to read the meters of all consumers of village water on a bi-monthly basis.
   (C)   All connections and all water used shall be furnished upon the express
conditions that the village shall not be liable, nor will any claim be made
against it for damage or injury caused by reason of the breaking of any main,
connections, service pipes or apparatus or appurtenances connected therewith or
any part or portion of the system or plant, or for any interruption of the
supply or by the reason of the breakage of machinery, or by reason of stoppage
for repairer alterations or extensions or renewals.
   (D)   The Department may from time to time adopt policies procedures
necessary to implement the requirements of this chapter.
(1981 Code, § 6.01)
§ 51.02 MANAGEMENT OF WATERWORKS SYSTEM.
   (A)   (1)   The Director of Public Works or his or her designate shall have
the supervision, management, control, maintenance and operation of the
waterworks system of the village, subject to the direction of the Board of
Trustees.
      (2)   The Director of Public Works shall report to the Board of Trustees
the violation of all ordinances concerning the waterworks system.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of the Director of Public Works or his or her
designate, at the time the application, as herein required, is made, to enter
in a book to be kept for that purpose the statements and representations of the
applicant as to the place, location, kind and extent of the connection to be
made, the purpose for which the water is to be used and all the plumbing and
plumbing work in any manner or way connected therewith as by this chapter
required of the applicant to be given specifically and in detail.
   (C)   All water connections plumbing work shall be done subject to the
approval of the Director of Public Works or his or her designate and no work
underground shall be covered up until examined by him or some person under his
or her direction.
   (D)   It shall be the duty of the Director of Public Works to provide
information to the Village Administrator on all accounts and records of all
services connected with the waterworks system.
   (E)   The regulations of this chapter govern every user of the village water
facilities and shall be a part of the contract between the village and every
user. In making application for water service, every user shall agree, in
writing, to be bound thereby. It is the duty of the Director to enforce these
regulations.
(1981 Code, § 6.02)
§ 51.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADMINISTRATOR. The Administrator of the U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency.
   APPROVING AUTHORITY. The Director of Public Works.
   BI-MONTHLY. Once every two months.
   BUILDING SERVICE PIPE. The pipe which is connected to the curb stop and
extends from the property line into the building.
   CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT CHARGE. A charge levied on users to improve, extend or
reconstruct the waterworks facilities.
   COMMERCIAL USER. Transit lodging, retail and wholesale establishments or
places engaged in selling merchandise or rendering service.
   CONNECTION FEE. The same as the CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT CHARGE.
   CORPORATION STOP. The water supply shut off at the point where the service
pipe is connected to the water main.
   CURB STOP. The water shut off located at or near the property line to each
building being serviced.
   DEBT SERVICE CHARGE. The amount to be paid each billing period for payment
of interest, principal and costs and expenses of outstanding loans or bonds.
   DIRECTOR. The Director of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
   DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS. The Director of Public Works of the village or his
or her authorized deputy, agent or representative.
   DWELLING or RESIDENTIAL DWELLING UNIT. Each individual living unit such as
house, mobile homes, apartments and permanent multi-family dwelling units.
   EASEMENT. A legal right for the use of land owned by others.
   IEPA. The Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
   INDUSTRIAL USERS. Establishments engaged in manufacturing activities
involving the mechanical or chemical transformation of materials of substance
into products.
   INSTITUTIONAL/GOVERNMENTAL USER. Schools, churches, penal institutions and
users associated with federal, state and local governments.
   LOCAL CAPITAL COST CHARGE. Charges for costs other than the operation,
maintenance and replacement costs, such as debt service and capital improvement
costs.
   MAY. The act referred to is permissive.
   METER. A device for measuring water to each customer.
   PERSON. Any and all persons, natural or artificial including any individual,
firm, company, municipal or private corporation, association, society,
corporation or group, institution, enterprise, governmental agency or other
entity and their successor, administrators, heirs and assigns.
   PRIVATE WATER SUPPLY. A water source other than the village’s public water
source, developed and maintained by private individuals.
   REPLACEMENT. Expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment,
accessories or appurtenances which are necessary during the useful life of the
waterworks to maintain the capacity and performance for which the works were
designed and constructed. The term OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE includes
REPLACEMENT.
   RESIDENTIAL USER. All dwelling units such as houses, mobile homes,
apartments and permanent multi-family dwelling.
   SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.
   USER CHARGE. A charge levied on users of waterworks for the cost of
operation, maintenance and replacement.
   USER CLASS. The industrial, commercial or residential users defined herein.
   VILLAGE. The Village of East Dundee, Illinois.
   WATER FACILITIES. The same as WATERWORKS SYSTEM.
   WATER FUND. The principal accounting designation for all revenues received
in the operation of the waterworks system.
   WATER MAIN. The pipe which distributes water from the pumping station
throughout the village’s water system.
   WATER QUALITY STANDARDS. As defined in the Water Pollution Regulations of
the State of Illinois and other applicable regulatory agencies.
   WATER SERVICE CHARGE. The charge per billing period levied on all users of
the waterworks facilities. The service charge shall be computed as outlined in
this chapter and shall consist of the total of the user charge, the local
capital cost.
   WATER SERVICE PIPE. The pipe which extends from the corporation stop at the
water main to the curb stop located at the property line.
   WATER SYSTEM. The same as WATERWORKS SYSTEM.
   WATERWORKS SYSTEM. The structures, equipment and processes required to
distribute, pumps store and treat water for consumption within the village.
(1981 Code, § 6.03)
USAGE REQUIREMENTS
§ 51.15 USE REQUIRED.
   (A)   The owner of real estate located in the village and containing houses,
buildings, properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other
purposes for which an occupancy permit is issued by the village and abutting on
any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now located or may in the
future be located any public water main of the village, is hereby required at
his or her expense to make a connection to the water facilities of the village
in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, within 12 months after date
of official notice to do so; provided that, the public water main is within 300
feet of the property line of the real estate.
   (B)   The owner of any real estate containing a private water source within
the village, or within one mile from the village limits, shall cease using the
private water source and shall obtain water from the waterworks system of the
village provided a water main is within 300 feet of the nearest point of the
property line on which the source is located. The village shall notify the
owner of any private water source of the requirements of this section, but
failure to so notify shall not relieve the owner of the obligation to comply
with this section. Upon completion of the connection to the village waterworks
system the owner of the private water source shall close up the private source
so that it cannot be used as a source of water and will not be a danger to the
public or an attractive nuisance. This procedure shall be done in accordance
with all rules and regulations of the Kane County Department of Public Health.
(1981 Code, § 6.04)
Penalty, see § 51.99
§ 51.16 EXTENSION OF WATER MAINS.
   (A)   No person shall uncover make any connection with or opening into, use,
alter or disturb any public water main of the village for the purpose of
extending same without first making application to the village for making the
extension and to have the proposed extension approved by the Village Board of
Trustees.
   (B)   Persons desiring the extension shall be required to extend the
waterworks system to the farthest limits of his or her property and connect to
it at his or her expense, according to the village specifications and
requirements.
   (C)   Persons desiring the extension of the water system shall file with the
village the following documents:
      (1)   Detailed plans and specifications for the extension prepared by a
registered professional engineer licensed to practice in the state;
      (2)   Illinois Environmental Protection Agency permit application, with
supporting documents as are required by the Illinois Environmental Protection
Agency, completed and ready for village signature; and
      (3)   Detailed estimate of cost of the extension.
   (D)   After approval of the plans and specifications by the village and
receipt of an Illinois Environmental Protection Agency permit, the applicant
shall submit to the village the following documents prior to starting the
extension:
      (1)   A guarantee for completion of the work by filing with the Village
Clerk an instrument, in the form approved, in writing, by the Village Attorney,
in the principal amount of 110% of the estimated cost as approved by the
Village Engineer, and secured by an instrument of the type permitted in § 3 of
the Illinois Public Construction Bond Act, ILCS Chapter 30, Act 550, § 3, as
amended from time to time;
      (2)   A maintenance bond, escrow account or irrevocable letter of credit
in an amount equal to 15% of the approved estimated cost of the improvements or
not less than $1,000, which ever is greater, for a period of 15 months after
completion of the construction. The funds in the escrow accounts or letter of
credit for maintenance purposes shall be directly available for draw by the
village prior to substitution of a maintenance bond for a completion bond and
the security therefor;
      (3)   Copies of all permits required;
      (4)   Certificates of insurance protecting the village from any liability
or damage whatsoever from injury, including death, to any person or property.
   (E)   The applicant shall agree as follows:
      (1)   To pay all reasonable engineering and legal costs incurred by the
village in the review of the project; (Payment shall be made to the village
prior to commencing the extension.)
      (2)   To pay all reasonable costs of inspection; (The estimated cost of
inspection, 2% of the estimated construction cost approved by the village,
shall be deposited with the Clerk prior to the start of work. The permittee,
however, shall pay only the actual costs of the services based on standard
engineering fees.)
      (3)   Materials and construction methods shall be in conformance with
standards and specifications established by the village; and
      (4)   The engineer designing the extension shall provide field stakeout
and general supervision and shall prepare as built drawings.
   (F)   The village shall refund and/or release the completion bond as set
forth in § 3 of the Illinois Public Construction Bond Act, ILCS Chapter 30, Act
550, § 3, as amended from time to time. The completion bond will not be
released until the following documents are filed with the Director of Public
Works and approved by the village:
      (1)   As-built drawings, one reproducible set and two sets of prints;
      (2)   Release of all permits; and
      (3)   Copies of all tests required by the Village Engineer or Director of
Public Works.
(1981 Code, § 6.05) (Am. Ord. 18-17, passed 7-9-2018)
§ 51.17 CONNECTIONS TO WATER FACILITIES.
   (A)   No person shall make a connection to the water facilities of the
village without first making application to the village for the privilege of
making the connection and to have a written permit approved by the Director of
Public Works and to pay all applicable fees.
   (B)   (1)   Persons desiring the connection to the water facilities of the
village shall, in addition to making application, fully state all purposes for
which water is required and answer all questions put to them by the Director of
Public Works relating to the proposed water consumption. In case of fraudulent
representation on the part of the user, the payment will be forfeited and the
use of the supply of water stopped.
      (2)   No permit will be issued unless the permittee:
         (a)   Pays the capital connection fees as prescribed in this chapter;
         (b)   Pays the cost of the meter;
         (c)   Secures a street opening permit in conformance with the
provisions of
Chapter 91 of this code of ordinances;
         (d)   Agrees to pay all costs of the installation including the
connection to the water main;
         (e)   Agrees to give the Director of Public Works 24 hours notice
prior to the start of the
installation of the service and when the service shall be ready for inspection,
except that no inspections will be made at times other than during regular
village working hours;
         (f)   Agrees to pay all cost of inspection if such inspection is
deemed necessary by the Director of Public Works;
         (g)   Agrees that the materials used and the method of installation
shall be in conformance with specifications established by the village;
         (h)   Agrees to conform to all rules governing plumbers and to the
regulations of the Illinois State Plumbing Code; and
         (i)   Agrees to secure and protect the village from any liability or
damage whatsoever for injury, including death, to any person or property and
files with the village liability insurance certificates.
   (C)   All underground water connections plumbing works shall be done subject
to the approval of the Director of Public Works and no work underground shall
be covered up until examined by him, her or some person under his or her
direction.
   (D)   No water shall be turned on to a connection until meters are installed
and the applicant shall have paid the fees due. All plumbers are strictly
prohibited from turning the water on to any connections unless first permitted
to do so by the Director of Public Works. This shall not prohibit any plumber
admitting the water temporarily to test the pipes and plumbing work for which
purpose only the water may be turned on.
   (E)   Water metes are to be billed to customers at the village’s then
current cost.
   (F)   A fee, as established by the annual fee schedule, shall be charged for
termination of water service which shall include turning the water service back
on.
(1981 Code, § 6.06) (Am. Ord. 95-09, passed 2-20-1995; Am. Ord. 13-52, passed
12-16-2013) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.18 SERVICE PIPES.
   (A)   (1)   The water service pipe extends from the public water main to,
and includes the curb stop, which shall be located in a public street or an
easement as directed by the Director of Public Works. The pipe, valves and
fittings used for the service pipe shall be as specified or as provided by the
village.
      (2)   The village may also make the tap to the water main.
      (3)   The permittee shall pay all costs of installing the service pipe,
including material and services provided by the village.
      (4)   The village will not maintain the water service pipe.
   (B)   (1)   The building service pipe extends from the curb stop to the
building and shall be installed by the user at his or her expense, using state
licensed plumbers. The building service pipe shall be the same size and
material as the water service pipe and shall be inspected by the Director of
Public Works.
      (2)   Persons taking water must do so at their own expense and must keep
the building service pipe in good repair, protect it from frost or damage in
any other manner and prevent all waste of water.
      (3)   It shall be the duty of the user to maintain the building service
pipe from the curb stop to the house. If the user fails to properly maintain
the building service pipe, the Director of Public Works shall have the
authority to enter onto to the property and provide maintenance on the next
water bill for the cost of the maintenance on the next water bill or, at the
direction of the Village Administrator, shut the water off until proper
maintenance is completed.
   (C)   A separate water service pipe is required for every building or
residence. Where a building contains more than one commercial or industrial
user or where the building contains a combination of commercial or industrial
and residential users, there shall be separate services for each use.
(1981 Code, § 6.07)
§ 51.19 USE OF WATER FACILITIES.
   (A)   Meters required.
      (1)   No persons shall be allowed to receive water from the village for
any purpose, except fire protection without first having a proper water meter
installed to measure the amount of water consumed.
      (2)   Meters shall conform to specifications fixed by the Director of
Public Works as to size, capacity and construction. All meters shall be
installed at a location approved by the Director of Public Works.
      (3)   In the event a building contains more than one use, a meter is
hereby required for each use unless the building contains only residential
dwelling units and the use of a single meter for the building is approved by
the Director of Public Works.
      (4)   No person shall remove a meter for the purpose of having it
repaired without first contacting the Director of Public Works and having the
meter read before it is removed and after it has been replaced. Whenever a
meter is removed, a replacement meter shall be installed to provide for
continuous metering of the water supply. If a replacement meter is not
available, the water charges for the period for which no meter was in service
shall be based on the average use for a previous comparable period as
determined by the Clerk.
      (5)   Outside remote water meter readers shall be installed in all new
residences and in all residences where it is deemed necessary by the Director
of Public Works to replace existing meters.
      (6)   After meters are installed on the premises of a consumer and
connected with the water system, it shall be unlawful for any consumer, his or
her agents or employees to remove, repair, injure, deface, mar or in any manner
interfere with any meter.
   (B)   Meter certification on large meters (larger than one inch) required.
      (1)   The village hereby adopts the state Public Service Commission
Regulation IL Rule #I.A.C.83, Part 600, concerning the periodic testing of
water meters larger than one inch diameter andlarger (herein “large meter”), as
it may be amended from time to time.
      (2)   It is the responsibility of each person required to have a large
meter under this section to verify that meter’s accuracy in accordance with the
American Waterworks Association (“AWWA”) standards at least every four years.
      (3)   The village shall notify each person required to have a large meter
certified when that meter is due for such recertification.
      (4)   Each person may thereupon choose to have such large meter tested to
meet AWWA standards or replace such meter with a meter that meets village
specifications.
      (5)   In the event a tested meter fails such test, the meter must be
repaired, retested, and recertified before being placed back into service.
      (6)   In the event, after notification of the need for testing, a person
does not respond to the village with verification of a date for meter testing
or replacement, which testing or replacement shall occur within one month of
such notice, the village shall send a second notice. If no response is received
within two weeks of such second notice, a door hanger will be physically placed
at the premises served by such meter. Such hanger will indicate that the water
service will be disconnected within 48 hours if no response is made to the
village identifying a date for meter verification. If no date certain is
provided to the village for meter verification within such 48-hour period, the
village may discontinue water service. Water service will not be resumed until
verification of meter testing appointment is made to the village and all
accrued fees and charges are paid to the village.
      (7)   In the event meter testing or replacement is not completed as
provided herein within five days of the verified appointment set forth above,
the 48-hour disconnection process set forth above will commence.
   (C)   Fire hydrants.
      (1)   All hydrants constructed in the village for the purpose of
extinguishing fires are hereby declared to be public hydrants. No persons other
than members of the East Dundee and Countryside Fire Protection District and
those authorized by the Director of Public Works shall open any hydrant or
attempt to draw water from same or in any manner interfere with or injure any
hydrants.
      (2)   No person shall obstruct the use of any fire hydrant or place any
material in front thereof. Any material forming the obstruction may be removed
by the village. The cost of removal shall be borne by the owner thereof.
      (3)   No person shall use any water hydrant wrenches without the
permission of the Director of Public Works.
      (4)   The fee for the rental of a water hydrant meter and the water used
from a hydrant shall be as established in the annual fee schedule.
(1981 Code, § 6.08) (Am. Ord. 03-26, passed 11-17-2003; Am. Ord. 14-14, passed
7-7-2014) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.20 PRIVATE WATER SUPPLY.
   (A)   Whenever a public water main is not available under the provisions of
§ 51.15, the building service pipe shall be connected to a private water supply
complying with provisions of this section.
   (B)   Whenever an industrial user requires water for industrial purposes and
the village determines that the public water facilities has inadequate capacity
to provide the volume or rate flow required by the industry, the user may be
required to install a private water supply complying with the provisions of
this section; provided, however, that the private water supply not be used for
any purpose, except for industrial purposes.
   (C)   A private water supply shall not be used for domestic purposes for any
building containing more than one use or more than one dwelling unit for more
than a single building.
   (D)   Before commencement of construction of a private water supply, the
owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by the Director of Public
Works. The application for the permit shall be made on a form furnished by the
village; which the applicant shall supplement by any plans, specifications
prepared and other information as are deemed necessary by the Director of
Public Works. A permit and inspection fee, as found in the annual fee schedule,
shall be paid to the Clerk at the time the application is filed.
   (E)   The owner shall operate and maintain the private water supply in a
sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the village.
   (F)   Whenever any portion of water pumped from a private water supply is
discharged to the wastewater facilities of the village, a meter shall be
installed to measure the amount of water pumped from the private water supply.
Wastewater billed shall be based upon the total of the water pumped and the
water purchased from the village unless a flow meter is approved. Where flow
meters are approved, the meter requirement on private wells may be waived by
the village.
   (G)   At such time as a public water main becomes available to a property
served by a private water supply, as provided for in this chapter, a direct
connection shall be made to the public water main in compliance with this
chapter, the private source shall be abandoned and filled with suitable
materials, in accordance with the Kane County Department of Public Health.
(1981 Code, § 6.09)
Penalty, see § 51.99
§ 51.21 PROTECTION FROM DAMAGE.
   (A)   No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently
break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure,
appurtenances or equipment which is a part of the water facilities. No
unauthorized person shall repair, remove or replace any equipment,
appurtenances or property of the water facilities.
(B)   The Village President shall have the authority by proclamation to
restrict the use of water in the village in order to ensure adequate water
supplies.
      (1)   (a)   When watering restrictions are in force, all outside use of
water shall be limited to between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. each
morning and between 6:00 p.m. and 10:00 p.m. each evening. Outside use of water
for any purpose shall be prohibited at all other hours when the limitations are
in effect, except hand-on hose water uses, which are permitted at all times.
         (b)   For the purpose of this division (B)(1), the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
            HAND-ON-HOSE WATER USAGE. Watering of trees or other non-grass
ornamentals when the hose is held by the user at all times. Home and car
maintenance is permitted when using an automatic flow control device that shuts
off the water when not in use and is only on when held by the user.
            OUTSIDE USE OF WATER.  Watering of lawns and outside vegetation,
filling of swimming pools, and the like.
      (2)   The restriction on water usage shall be enforced as follows:
         (a)   All residential, commercial, industrial and institutional
properties designated by a street address with an even number shall be
permitted to use outside use of water on even numbered days of the month only.
         (b)   All residential, commercial, industrial and institutional
properties designated by a street address with an odd number shall be permitted
to use outside use of water on odd numbered days of the month only.
         (c)   Any exceptions to the above restrictions shall require a special
village permit. The exceptions shall only be authorized by the Superintendent
of Public Works or the Village Board.
      (3)   Signage placed within the village announcing the watering
restrictions shall have the following meanings:
         (a)   Green: unrestricted watering;
         (b)   Yellow: the above described even/odd days restrictions apply.
Hand-on-hose is permitted without restriction; and
         (c)   Red: all outside water use is strictly prohibited. Hand-on-hose
water usage hours of allowed use may be permitted or prohibited by the Village
President at time of red restriction declaration.
      (4)   Signage for watering shall be posted at major intersections as set
by the village.
   (C)   In case of making repairs or alterations or constructing new
facilities or for any other reason, the village reserves the right to shut off
the water at once and keep it shut off as long as may be necessary by giving
reasonable notice thereof as shall be practicable to users. No claim shall be
made against the village by reason of the above or by reason of the breakage or
failure of any pump or other portion of the water system.
(1981 Code, § 6.10) (Am. Ord. 02-02, passed 4-1-2002; Am. Ord. 06-22, passed 6-
19-2006; Am. Ord. 07-04, passed 2-19-2007)
Penalty, see § 51.99
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 51.35 POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS.
   (A)   (1)   The Director of Public Works and other duly authorized employees
of the village, the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency and the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency bearing proper credentials and identification
shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purpose of inspection,
observation, measurement, sampling and testing, in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter.
      (2)   The Director of Public Works or his or her representative shall
have no authority to inquire into any processes, including metallurgical,
chemical, oil refining, ceramic, paper or other industries beyond that point
having direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the waterway or
water source for the village.
   (B)   While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to
in this chapter, the Director of Public Works or duly authorized employees of
the village, the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency and the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency shall observe all safety rules applicable to
the premises established by the company and the company shall be held harmless
for injury or death to the village employees and the village shall indemnify
the company against liability claims and demands for bodily injury or property
damage asserted against the company by the village’s employees and growing out
of the gauging and sampling operation, except as such may be caused by
negligence or failure of the company to maintain conditions as required in this
chapter.
   (C)   (1)   The Director of Public Works and persons authorized by him or
her shall be permitted to enter and have free access, at all reasonable hours,
to buildings, premises or places containing any water connections, service
pipes or plumbing work connected with the water system to ascertain the
location and condition thereof and all fixtures connected therewith.
      (2)   If, upon inspection or otherwise, it is found that on account of
negligence or for want of repairs there is a waste of water in the connections,
service pipes, plumbing or plumbing work and the owner or person in possession
of charge thereof fails to have the defects immediately remedied and the waste
stopped, it shall be the duty of the Director of Public Works or some person
directed by him or her to leave a notice of the waste of water at the premises
with someone in possession thereof, or if no one is found in possession, by
posting the same upon the premises and if the defects are not remedied and the
waste stopped with 24 hours after giving or posting the notice, the water shall
be shut off and shall not be turned on again until the sum should be as
provided in the village annual fee schedule, in addition to all rents due, has
been paid to the village.
   (D)   The Director of Public Works and other duly authorized employees of
the village bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to
enter all private properties through which the village holds a duly negotiated
easement for the purpose of, but not limited to inspection, observation,
measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the waterworks
system lying within the easement, shall be done in full accordance with the
terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property
involved.
(1981 Code, § 6.11)
§ 51.36 WATER SERVICE CHARGES.
   (A)   The water service charge for the use of and for service supplied by
the waterworks facilities of the village shall consist of a user charge for the
operation and maintenance plus replacement, a debt service charge and other
charges as the village deems necessary.
   (B)   (1)   The user charge is levied on all users to recover the operation,
maintenance, plus replacement costs, and shall be based on water usage as
recorded by water meters.
      (2)   The user charge shall be computed as follows:
         (a)   Estimate the annual water volume to be treated;
         (b)   Estimate the projected annual revenue required to operate and
maintain the waterworks facilities, including a replacement fund for the year,
for all work categories;
         (c)   Proportion the estimated OM&R costs to each user class; and
         (d)   Compute costs per 1,000 gallons.
      (3)   The user charge is computed by dividing the number of units of flow
of water from all sources into the annual revenue required. The resultant
charge is expressed in dollars per 1,000 gallons of water.
   (C)   The debt service charge is levied on all users and may be computed by
apportioning the annual debt service in one of the following methods:
      (1)   As a charge per 1,000 gallons;
      (2)   As a fixed charge per billing period; and
      (3)   As a fixed charge plus a charge per 1,000 gallons.
   (D)   The capital improvement charge is levied as a connection fee on users
to provide for the capital improvements, extensions or reconstruction of the
waterworks facilities. The capital improvement charge is computed and assessed
as a fixed charge per P.E. estimated to be used by the user.
   (E)   The village may declare a rate to provide funds for such other costs
as may be applicable to the water facilities. The rate, if established, shall
be applicable to all users.
   (F)   The adequacy of the water service charge shall be reviewed, not less
often than annually, by certified public accountants for the village in their
annual audit report. The water service charge shall be revised periodically to
reflect a change in local OM&R costs.
   (G)   The users of the waterworks services will be notified annually, in
conjunction with a regular bill, of the rate and that portion of the user
charges which are attributable to the water operation, maintenance and
replacement.
   (H)   The volume of flow used for computing basic user charges shall be
metered water consumption read to the lowest even increments of 1,000 gallons.
(1981 Code, § 6.12)
§ 51.37 RATES.
   (A)   There shall be and there is hereby established a monthly user charge/
fee on a fiscal year basis, as established in the annual fee schedule, per
1,000 gallons to each user of the waterworks facility within the corporate
limits.
   (B)   There shall be and there is hereby established a monthly fixed charge/
fee on a fiscal year basis including debt service based on the size of the
water meter as established in the annual fee schedule to each user of the
waterworks facility.
   (C)   There shall be and there is hereby established a capital improvement
charge (connection fee) as established in the annual fee schedule. When an
existing service line is being upgraded, the difference between the existing
service line and the upgraded service line size will be the fee charged. The
water permit connection fee will have been paid at the time of the original
installation and will not be considered in calculations for the connection fee
when upgrading service lines.
   (D)   (1)   A minimum charge may be established in the annual fee schedule
shall be applied to all users whose consumption does not exceed a set gallonage
per billing period. This minimum charge shall be established in the annual fee
schedule. Usage in excess of the set gallonage per billing period will be
charged a fee, as established in the annual fee schedule, per 1,000 gallons.
      (2)   Where a connection services more than one dwelling unit on a
property either within the corporate limits or outside of the corporate limits,
the minimum charge shall be the number of dwelling units served by the service
times the minimum bill or the actual number of gallons used, multiplied by the
currently established water rate plus the other current charges, whichever is
greater.
   (E)   The rates and service charges established for user charges shall be
effective on bills to be rendered for the next succeeding billing period after
approval and authorization of the Village Board. A copy of the water service
charges shall be filed in the office of the Village Clerk and shall be deemed
notice to all owners of real estate of their liability for service supplied to
any user of the service of the water facilities of the village on their
properties.
   (F)   The method for computation of rates and service charges established
for user charges shall be made available to a user within 14 days of receipt of
a written report for such. Any disagreement over the method used or in the
computations thereof shall be remedied by the Director of Public Works within
14 days after notification of a formal written appeal outlining the
discrepancies.
   (G)   All rates for service to residential and for-profit properties outside
the village corporate limits shall be 150% of the rates set forth in the annual
fee schedule. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to require or obligate
the village to provide the service.
   (H)   All rates for service to non-profit or governmental properties outside
the village corporate limits shall be the residential rates set forth in the
annual fee schedule. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to require or
obligate the village to provide the service.
(1981 Code, § 6.13) (Am. Ord. 95-09, passed 2-20-1995; Am. Ord. 03-21, passed
10-20-2003; Am. Ord. 06-47, passed 10-16-2006; Am. Ord. 17-25, passed 5-1-2017;
Am. Ord. 25-09, passed 2-3-2025)
§ 51.38 BILLING PROVISIONS.
   (A)   It is hereby made the duty of the Director of Finance or his or her
designee to render bills for service and for all rates and charges in
connection therewith and to collect all monies due thereon.
   (B)   (1)   The rates or charges for service shall be payable bi-monthly
depending upon the classification of service for which bills are rendered.
      (2)   The owner of the premises, the occupant thereof and the user of the
service shall be jointly and severally liable to pay for the service to such
premises and the service furnished to the premises by the village only upon the
condition that the owner of the premises, occupant and user of the services are
jointly and severally liable therefor to the village.
      (3)   All water bills are due and payable 21 days after being sent out.
   (C)   A 10% late penalty shall be assessed to the account if payment is not
received prior to issuance of the next bill.
   (D)   A penalty sum established in the annual fee schedule for any check
returned for non-sufficient funds shall be added to any bill to which attempted
prior payment was made by the non-sufficient check. If there are two checks
returned from the bank within a one-year time period, no further checks shall
be accepted from the customer unless the checks are certified, until there is
an acceptable payment history for a continuous one-year period.
   (E)   Whenever a bill for water service remains unpaid for three consecutive
billing cycles for the bi-monthly service after it has been rendered it shall
be deemed and is hereby declared delinquent, as provided by law. The Director
of Finance or his or her designee may, in his or her discretion, send the
unpaid invoices to a collection agency, proceed with water service termination,
file with the county recorder of deeds a statement of lien claim or proceed
with any other remedy available to the village under this code or state or
federal law.
   (F)   Shut-off for nonpayment.
      (1)   If payment is not received by the due date of the bill, a late
penalty fee as set forth in division (C) shall be assessed to the account at
the time set forth in division (C). The customer shall have one more billing
cycle to make payment on the past due amount. If the past due amount owed is
not paid by the due date on the third billing statement, the Director of
Finance or his or her designee is hereby authorized to notify, in writing, the
owner of the premises, the occupant thereof and the user of the service that
the delinquency exists and that service shall be disconnected without further
notice. If a payment plan is required and obtained, the late fee shall be
waived after successful repayment.
      (2)   The Director of Finance or his or her designee shall also cause a
shutoff notice to be posted on the property.
      (3)   Ten days after the shut off notice has been posted, and payment not
received, all applicable utility services shall be terminated.
   (G)   Upon the disconnection of any services, a charge should be as provided
for in the village annual fee schedule shall be made for reconnecting the same
after settlement of the delinquent account.
   (H)   Any person wishing to discontinue service shall give notice to the
Director of Finance or his or her designee prior to the expiration of the time
for which payment has been made or become due and remaining unpaid; otherwise,
he or she shall be liable for the charge for the ensuing billing period.
(1981 Code, § 6.14) (Am. Ord. 02-02, passed 2-20-1995; Am. Ord. 07-19, passed
4-16-2007; Am. Ord. 22-29, passed 6-6-2022)
§ 51.39 NOTICE OF DELINQUENCY.
   (A)   Whenever a bill for water service remains unpaid for three consecutive
billing cycles for the bi- monthly service after it has been rendered, the
Director of Finance or his or her designee may file with the County Recorder of
Deeds, a statement of lien claim. This statement shall contain the legal
description of the premises served, the amount of the unpaid bill and a notice
that the village claims a lien for this amount as well as for all charges
subsequent to the period covered by the bill. If the user whose bill is unpaid
is not the owner of the premises and the village has notice of this, notice
shall be mailed to the owner of the premises if his or her address be known to
the village, whenever the bill remains unpaid for the three consecutive billing
cycles for a bi-monthly bill after it has been rendered. The failure of the
Director of Finance or his or her designee to record the lien or to mail the
notice or the failure of the owner to receive the notice shall not affect the
right to foreclose the lien for unpaid bill as mentioned in the foregoing
section. The cost of filing the lien shall be paid by the persons responsible
for the charges covered by the unpaid bill.
   (B)   Property subject to a lien for unpaid charges shall be sold for non-
payment of the same and the proceeds of the sale shall be applied to pay the
charges, after deducting costs, as is the case in the foreclosure of statutory
liens. The foreclosure shall be by bill-in equity in the name of the village.
The Village Attorney is hereby authorized and directed to institute the
proceedings in the name of the village in any court having jurisdiction over
such matters against any property for which the bill has remained unpaid for a
time period as specified in the ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, § 11-139-8.
(1981 Code, § 6.15) (Am. Ord. 22-29, passed 6-6-2022)
§ 51.40 REVENUES.
   (A)   All revenues and monies derived from the operation of the waterworks
system shall be deposited in the Water Account of the Water Fund. All revenues
and monies shall be held by the Village Treasurer separate and apart from his
or her private funds and separate and apart from all other funds of the village
and all of the sum, without any deductions whatever, shall be delivered to the
Village Treasurer not more than two days receipt of same or at more frequent
intervals as from time to time be directed by the President and Board of
Trustees. The Village Treasurer shall receive all revenues from the waterworks
system and all other funds and monies incident to the operation of the system
as the same may be delivered to him or her and deposit the same in the account
of the fund designated as the Water Fund of the village. The Treasurer shall
administer the Fund in every respect in the manner provided by state statute.
   (B)   All revenue and monies derived from connection fees and other fees
shall be deposited in the Water Improvement Fund. The Fund shall be used solely
for the improvement, extension or the betterment of the waterworks facilities.
(1981 Code, § 6.16)
§ 51.41 ACCOUNTS.
   (A)   The Village Treasurer shall establish a proper system of accounts and
shall keep proper books, records and accounts in which complete and correct
entries shall be made of all transactions relative to the waterworks system
and, at regular annual intervals, he or she shall cause to be made an audit by
an independent auditing concern of the books to show the receipts and
disbursements of the waterworks system. In addition to the customary operating
statements, the annual audit report shall also reflect the revenues and
operating expenses of the waterworks facilities, including a replacement cost,
to indicate that water service charges under the system do in fact meet these
regulations.
   (B)   Concurrently with the preparation of the annual audit, the Director of
Public Works shall prepare an operating summary of the waterworks facilities
for the fiscal year including the following data and other information as
deemed necessary:
      (1)   Pumping data to show total number of gallons pumped for the current
fiscal year;
      (2)   Billing data to show total number of gallons billed per fiscal
year;
      (3)   Debt service for the next succeeding fiscal year;
      (4)   Number of users connected to the water system;
      (5)   Number of non-metered wastewater users, if any; and
      (6)   A list of users with private water supplies, if any.
   (C)   The IEPA or its authorized representative shall have access to any
books, documents, papers and records of the village which are applicable to the
village system of user charges for the purpose of making audit, examination,
excerpts and transcriptions thereof to insure compliance with the terms of any
special and general conditions to any state grant or state loan.
(1981 Code, § 6.17)
§ 51.42 UTILITY DISCONNECTION.
   (A)   It is the policy of the city to discontinue utility service to
customers by reason of nonpayment of bills only after notice and a meaningful
opportunity to be heard on disputed bills. The city’s form for application for
utility service and all bills shall contain, in addition to the title, address,
apartment or unit number, and telephone number of the official in charge of
billing, clearly visible and easily readable provisions to the effect:
      (1)   That all bills are due and payable on or before the date set forth
in the notice of termination provided for by §
51.38; and
      (2)   That any customer disputing the correctness of the bill shall have
a right to a hearing at which time the customer may be represented in person
and by counsel or any other person of his or her choosing and may present
orally or in writing his or her complaint and contentions to the city official
in charge of utility billing. This official shall be authorized to order that
the customer’s service not be discontinued and shall have the authority to make
a final determination of the customer’s complaint.
   (B)   Requests for delays or waiver of payment will not be entertained; only
questions of proper and correct billing will be considered. In the absence of
payment of the bill rendered or resort to the hearing procedure provided
herein, service will be discontinued at the time specified, but in no event
until the charges have been due and unpaid for at least 30 days.
   (C)   When it becomes necessary for the city to discontinue utility service
to a customer for nonpayment of bills, service will be reinstated only after
all bills for service then due have been paid, along with a turn-on charge as
determined from time to time by the Board of Trustees.
   (C)   When it becomes necessary for the city to discontinue utility service
to a customer for nonpayment of bills, service will be reinstated only after
all bills for service then due have been paid, along with a turn-on charge as
determined from time to time by the Board of Trustees.
(Am. Ord. 22-29, passed 6-6-2022)
§ 51.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   (1)   Any person found to be violating any provisions of this chapter
shall be served by the village with written notice stating the nature of the
violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction
thereof.
      (2)   The offender shall, within the period of time stated in the notice,
permanently cease all violations.
      (3)   The village may revoke any permit for water service as a result of
any violation of any provision of this chapter.
   (B)   Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit
provided for in this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, on
conviction thereof, shall be fined in an amount not less than $25, nor more
than $750, for each violation. Each day in which any violations shall continue
shall be deemed a separate offense.
   (C)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall
become liable to the village for any expense, loss or damage occasioned the
village by reason of the violation.
(1981 Code, § 6.19)
   (D)   Any person, firm or corporation violating §
51.21 shall be subject to a fine not less than $50, nor more than $750, for
each offense. Each day that the violation exists shall constitute a separate
offense.
(Am. Ord. 02-02, passed 4-1-2002)
CHAPTER 52: CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL
Section
   
52.01   Purpose and intent
   
52.02   Authority
   
52.03   Cross-Connection Control Policy Manual
§ 52.01 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   The purpose of this program is to protect the public potable water supply
from the possibility of contamination or pollution by eliminating or protecting
actual or potential cross-connection in the water distribution and to provide
for the operation of a continuing program to systematically and effectively
prevent a contamination or pollution of the public water supply distribution
system through cross- connections.
(Ord. 04-10, passed 4-19-2004)
§ 52.02 AUTHORITY.
   (A)   In accordance with the Federal Safe Drinking Water Act (“SDWA”), the
National Interim Primary Drinking Water Regulations were promulgated on
December 24, 1975, and became effective on June 24, 1977. These regulations
replaced the Public Health Service Drinking Water Standard of 1962. It is
stated in Appendix A of the rule that “minimum protection should include
programs that result in...prevention of health hazards, such as cross-
connections.”
   (B)   The state is granted primacy over the water program and the Illinois
Environmental Protection Agency (Illinois EPA) is designated the implementing
agency for all purposes of the Safe Drinking Water Act (42 USC 300f et seq.) by
the Illinois Environmental Protection Act (ILCS Chapter 415, Act 5).
   (C)   Pursuant to the Illinois Environmental Protection Act (ILCS Chapter
415, Act 5), the Pollution Control Board Rules (“Board”) and the Safe Drinking
Water Act (42 USC 300f et seq.), owners and official custodians of a public
water supply in the state shall provide continuous operation and maintenance of
public water supply facilities so that the water shall be assuredly safe in
quality, clean, adequate in quantity, and of satisfactory mineral
characteristics for ordinary domestic consumption.
   (D)   Title 35, Subtitle F, Chapter II, Subpart H, Section 651.102 of the
Illinois Administrative Code defines CROSS-CONNECTION as “any physical
connection or arrangement between two otherwise separate piping systems, one of
which contains potable water and the other contains water of unknown or
questionable safety or steam, gases, or chemicals if there may be a flow from
one system to the other.” The definition includes any arrangement of piping
where a potable water line is connected to non-potable water. It may be a pipe-
to-pipe connection where potable and non-potable water lines are directly
connected or a pipe-to-water connection where the potable water outlet is
submerged in non- potable water. If the potable and non-potable sources are
separated by gate valves, check valves or devices other than the appropriate
backflow preventer as outlined in the regulation, a cross-connection exists.
Bypass arrangements, jumper connections, swivel or changeover assemblies, or
other temporary or permanent assemblies through which or because of which
backflow may occur are considered to be cross-connections.
   (E)   The public water system purveyor is required to adopt and enforce an
active cross-connection control program that contains the minimum components
specified in Title 35, Subtitle F, Chapter II, Subpart H, Section 653.801. As
required by the Illinois Environmental Protection Act and the regulations of
the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, this cross-connection control
ordinance and the cross-connection control policy manual have been officially
adopted by the President and Board of Trustees of the village to protect the
public potable water supply from potential contamination through cross-
connections.
(Ord. 04-10, passed 4-19-2004)
§ 52.03 CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL POLICY MANUAL.
   (A)   The Village of East Dundee Cross-Connection Control Policy Manual is
hereby approved and adopted and contains all requirements, responsibilities,
and special water service connection maintenance fees associated with this
cross-connection control program.
   (B)   All persons and facilities receiving water from the village public
potable water system, all cross- connection control device inspectors, all
installers of backflow prevention assemblies or devices, and any others
involved or associated with cross-connection control and backflow prevention
within the jurisdiction of the village will adhere to and comply with the
latest approved version of the Village of East Dundee Cross-Connection Control
Policy Manual. Those failing to comply with the requirements established in the
aforesaid policy manual will be subject to the penalties and enforcement
actions established within the policy manual.
(Ord. 04-10, passed 4-19-2004)
CHAPTER 53: SEWERS
Section
General Provisions
   
53.001   Sewer system
   
53.002   Management of sewer system
   
53.003   Definitions
Usage Requirements
   
53.010   Use of public sewers required
   
53.011   Extension of sanitary sewers
   
53.012   Connections to wastewater facilities
   
53.013   Service lines
   
53.014   Building sewers
   
53.015   Discharge of sanitary and industrial waste prohibited
Wastewater Treatment and Pretreatment Regulations
   
53.020   Conditions for discharge to the system
   
53.021   Prohibitive discharge standards
   
53.022   Specific limitations on discharge
   
53.023   Incorporation of national categorical pretreatment standards
   
53.024   Village's right of revision
   
53.025   Pretreatment
   
53.026   Prohibition of improper dilution
   
53.027   Variances
   
53.028   Spill containment and reporting
   
53.029   Separators
   
53.030   Wastewater haulers
Discharge Permits
   
53.040   Discharges
   
53.041   Permits
   
53.042   Reporting requirements for permittee
   
53.043   Denial of permit and appeal procedure
   
53.044   Monitoring facilities
   
53.045   Inspection, sampling, and records keeping
   
53.046   Confidential information
   
53.047   Private sewage disposal
   
53.048   Protection of sewage works from damage
Administration and Enforcement
   
53.060   Powers and authority of inspectors
   
53.061   Wastewater service charges
   
53.062   Rates
   
53.063   Billing provisions
   
53.064   Lien—notice of delinquency
   
53.065   Revenues
   
53.066   Accounts
   
53.067   Validity
Enforcement Procedures and Penalties
   
53.080   General
   
53.081   Voluntary compliance procedures
   
53.082   Compulsory compliance procedures
   
53.083   Suspension of service and revocation of permit
   
53.084   Variance
   
53.085   Upsets
Penalties and Costs
   
53.090   General
   
53.091   Injunctive relief
   
53.092   Restraining orders
   
53.093   Show cause hearing
   
53.094   Remedies non-exclusive
   
53.095   Falsification
   
53.096   Public notification of significant violators
   
53.097   Additional remedies
   
53.098   Immediate disconnection of service
   
53.099   Elimination of discharge/reinstatement
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 53.001 SEWER SYSTEM.
   (A)   Sewerage system. The sanitary sewerage system consisting of the
collecting pipelines, a wastewater treatment plant, and related facilities
shall be designated as the “Sewerage System of the Village of East Dundee” and
shall be operated by this village as a utility; and all improvements and
extensions of the sewerage systems shall be considered as improvements and
extensions to said utility.
   (B)   Sewer Department. There is hereby established a Sewer Department
(hereinafter called the “Department”) within the Department of Public Works.
The Department shall consist of a Director of Public Works and such other
members of the Department as may from time to time be provided for by the
President and Board of Trustees.
   (C)   Duties of the Department. The Department shall be in charge of all
matters relating to the wastewater facilities including the connection thereto
and extension thereof.
   (D)   Village liability. All connections and all wastewater service shall be
furnished upon the express conditions that the village shall not be liable, nor
will any claim be made against it, for damage or injury caused by reason of the
breaking of any main, connections, service pipes, or apparatus or appurtenances
connected therewith or any part or portion of the system or plant, or for any
interruption of the service, or by the reason of the breakage of machinery, or
by the reason of stoppage for repairs, alterations, or extensions or renewals.
   (E)   Policies and procedures. The Department may from time to time adopt
policies and procedures necessary to implement the requirements of this
chapter.
(Ord. 03-19, passed 10-20-2003)
§ 53.002 MANAGEMENT OF SEWER SYSTEM.
   (A)   Director of Public Works. The Director of Public Works, or his or her
designate, shall have the supervision, management, control, maintenance, and
operation of the sewerage system of the village, subject to the direction of
the Board of Trustees. The Director of Public Works shall report to the Board
of Trustees the violation of all ordinances concerning the sewerage system.
   (B)   Record of connections. It shall be the duty of the Director of Public
Works, or his or her designate, at the time the application as herein required
is made, to enter in a book to be kept for that purpose the statements and
representations of the applicant as to the place, location, kind, and extent of
the connection to be made, the purpose for which the sewer is to be used, and
all the plumbing and plumbing work in any manner or way connected therewith as
by this chapter required of such applicant to be given specifically and in
detail.
   (C)   Approval of connections. All sewer connections plumbing work shall be
done subject to the approval of the Director of Public Works, or his or her
designate, and no work underground shall be covered up until examined by the
Director or some person under his or her direction.
   (D)   Accounts and records. It shall be the duty of the Director of Public
Works to provide information to the Village Administrator on all accounts and
records of all services connected with the wastewater system.
   (E)   Regulations applicable. The regulations of this chapter govern every
user of the village wastewater facilities and shall be a part of the contract
between the village and every such user. In making application for sewer
service, every user shall agree in writing to be bound thereby. It is the duty
of the Director of Public Works to enforce these regulations.
(Ord. 03-19, passed 10-20-2003)
Penalty, see §§ 53.090 through
53.099
§ 53.003 DEFINITIONS.
   Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms
used in this ordinance shall be as follows:
   (A)   Abbreviations. The following abbreviations shall have the designated
meanings:
   BOD   Biochemical oxygen demand (5-day)
   CFR   Code of Federal Regulations
   COD   Chemical oxygen demand
   FOG   Fats, oils, and grease
   IEPA   Illinois Environmental Protection Agency
   mg/L   Milligrams per liter
   NCPS   National categorical pretreatment standards
   NPDES   National pollution discharge elimination systems
   POTW   Publicly owned treatment works
   PSES   Pretreatment standards for existing sources
   PSNS   Pretreatment standards for new sources
   RCRA   Resource Conservation and Recovery Act
   SIC   Standard industrial classification
   SWDA   Solid Waste Disposal Act, 42 USC 6901 et seq.
   TSS   Total suspended solids
   TTO   Total toxic organics
   USC   United States Code
   USEPA   United States Environmental Protection Agency
   (B)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      ACT. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, 33 USC 1251 et seq.
      ADMINISTRATOR. The Administrator of the U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency.
      APPLICABLE PRETREATMENT STANDARDS or PRETREATMENT STANDARDS. For any
specified pollutant, the village’s prohibitive discharge standards, the
village's specific limitations on discharge, the state pretreatment standards,
or the national categorical pretreatment standards (when effective), whichever
standard is most stringent.
      AUTHORITY. The village.
      AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF INDUSTRIAL USER.
         (a)   A principal executive officer of at least the level of vice-
president, if the industrial user is a corporation;
         (b)   A general partner or proprietor if the industrial user is a
partnership or proprietorship, respectively;
         (c)   A duly authorized representative of the individual designated
above. A person is a duly authorized representative only if the authorization
is made in writing to the village by a person described above.
      APPROVING AUTHORITY. The Director of Public Works.
      BASELINE REPORT. That required by 40 CFR 403.12(b)(1) through (7).
      BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND or BOD. The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in
5 days at 20 degrees C., expressed in milligrams per liter.
      BOARD OF TRUSTEES or BOARD. The Board of Trustees of the village.
      BOD. See BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND.
      BUILDING DRAINAGE SEWER. A sewer which carries storm drainage, surface
water, foundation drainage, and roof drainage, but excludes sewage and
industrial wastes from the building plumbing to a public storm sewer or natural
outlet.
      BUILDING SANITARY SEWER. A sewer which carries only sewage and industrial
wastes from the building plumbing to the public sanitary sewer.
      BYPASS. Intentional diversion of waste streams from any portion of an
industrial user’s treatment facility.
      CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT CHARGE. A charge levied on users to improve, extend,
or reconstruct the sewage treatment works.
      CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND or COD. The quantity of oxygen consumed from a
chemical oxidant (standard potassium dichromate solution) under standard
laboratory procedures as described in Standard Methods.
      COD. See CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND.
      COMBINED SEWER. A sewer which is designed and intended to receive
wastewater, storm, and surface and groundwater drainage.
      COMBINED WASTE STREAM FORMULA. The formula as found in 40 CFR 403.6(e)(1)
(i).
      COMMERCIAL USER. Includes transit lodging, retail and wholesale
establishments, or places engaged in selling merchandise or rendering service.
      COOLING WATER. The water discharged from any use such as air
conditioning, cooling, or refrigeration or to which the only pollutant added is
heat.
      COMPATIBLE POLLUTANT. Biochemical oxygen demand, chemical oxygen demand,
FOG, suspended solids, pH, and fecal coliform bacteria, plus any additional
pollutants identified in the village’s POTW NPDES permit where the POTW treats
such pollutants and, in fact, does treat such pollutants to the degrees
required by the POTW’s NPDES permit.
      COMPOSITE SAMPLE. A sample of wastewater based on a flow proportional or
time proportional method.
      CONSISTENT POTW TREATMENT WORK REMOVAL, POLLUTANT REMOVAL, or REMOVAL.
Reduction in the amount of a pollutant or alteration of the nature of a
pollutant in the influent of the POTW to a less incompatible or harmless state
in the effluent. Consistent village removal efficiency shall be the difference
between the average concentration of the pollutant in the influent of the
treatment plant and the average concentration of the pollutant in the effluent
of the treatment plan divided by the average concentration of the pollutant in
the influent.
      CONTROL AUTHORITY. USEPA, until IEPA has an approved pretreatment
program, at which time IEPA shall be the control authority, provided that the
village will be the control authority when the submission of its pretreatment
program under 40 CFR 403.11 has been approved as provided in said section.
      CONTROL MANHOLE. A structure located on a site from which industrial
wastes are discharged. Where feasible, the manhole shall have an interior drop.
The purpose of a CONTROL MANHOLE is to provide access for the village
representative to sample and/or measure discharges.
      DEBT SERVICE CHARGE. The amount to be paid each billing period for
payment of interest, principal, and costs and expenses of outstanding loans or
bonds.
      DIRECTOR. The Director of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
      DISCHARGE. See INDIRECT DISCHARGE.
      EASEMENT. A legal right for the use of land owned by others.
      EFFLUENT CRITERIA. As defined in any applicable NPDES permit.
      EXISTING SOURCE. Any building, structure, facility, or installation from
which there is or may be discharge, which is not a new source.
      FATS, OILS, OR GREASE or FOG. Any hydrocarbons, fatty acids, soaps, fats,
waxes, oils, and any other material that is extracted by any oil and grease
test method contained in the latest edition of Standard Methods for the
Examination of Water and Wastewater.
      FECAL COLIFORM. Any number of organisms common to the intestinal tract of
man and animals whose presence in sanitary sewage is an indicator of pollution.
      FEDERAL ACT. The Federal Clean Water Act, 33 USC 1251 et seq., as
amended.
      FEDERAL GRANT. The U.S. government participation in the financing of the
construction of treatment works, as provided for by USC Title 33, Chapter 26,
Subchapter II, Grants for Construction of Treatment Works of the Act (33 USC
1281 et seq.), and implementing regulations.
      FLOATABLE OIL. Oil, fat, or grease in a physical state such that it will
separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment
facility. A wastewater shall be considered free of floatable fat if it is
properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with the collection
system.
      FLOW. Volume of wastewater per unit of time.
      FOG. See FATS, OILS, OR GREASE.
      GARBAGE. Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation,
cooking, and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage, and sale of
food.
      GENERAL MANAGER. The Director of Public Works of the village.
      GENERAL PRETREATMENT REGULATIONS. General pretreatment regulations for
existing and new sources, 40 CFR Part 403, as amended.
      GRAB SAMPLE. A sample which is taken from a waste stream on a onetime
basis with no regard to the flow in the waste stream and without consideration
of time.
      INCOMPATIBLE POLLUTANT. All pollutants other than COMPATIBLE POLLUTANTS,
as defined in this section.
      INDIRECT DISCHARGE or DISCHARGE. The introduction of pollutants into a
POTW from any non-domestic source regulated under Section 307(b), (c), or (d)
of the Act (33 USC 1317(b), (c), or (d)).
      INDUSTRIAL USERS. Includes establishments engaged in manufacturing
activities involving the mechanical or chemical transformation of materials or
substance into products.
      INDUSTRIAL WASTES. Any solid, liquid, or gaseous substance discharged,
permitted to flow, or escaping from any industrial, manufacturing, commercial,
or business establishment or process or from the development, recovery, or
processing of any natural resource as distinct from sanitary sewage.
      INTERFERENCE. A discharge which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge
from other sources, both:
         (a)   Inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or
operations, or its sludge processes, use, or disposal; and
         (b)   Therefore is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the
POTW’s NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a
violation) or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance
with the following statutory provisions and regulations or permits issued
thereunder (or under more stringent state or local regulations): Section 405 of
the Clean Water Act (33 USC 1345 et seq.), the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SDWA)
(42 USC 6901 et seq.) (including Title II, more commonly referred to as the
Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA) and including state regulations
contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D
of the SDWA), the Clean Air Act (42 USC 7401 et seq.), the Toxic Substances
Control Act (15 USC 2601 et seq.), and the Marine Protection, Research, and
Sanctuaries Act (16 USC 1431 et seq. and 33 USC 1401 et seq.).
      INSTITUTIONAL/GOVERNMENTAL USER. Includes schools, churches, penal
institutions, and users associated with federal, state, and local governments.
      LOCAL CAPITAL COST CHARGE. Charges for costs other than the operation,
maintenance, and replacement costs—that is, debt service and capital
improvement costs.
      MAJOR CONTRIBUTING INDUSTRY. An industrial user of the publicly owned
treatment works that:
         (a)   Has a flow of 50,000 gallons or more per average work day.
         (b)   Has a flow greater than 10% of the flow carried by the municipal
system receiving the waste.
         (c)   Has in its waste a toxic pollutant in toxic amounts as defined
in standards issued under the Federal Act.
         (d)   Is found by the permit issuing authority, in connection with the
issuance of the NPDES permit to the publicly owned treatment works receiving
the waste to have significant impact, either singly or in combination with
other contributing industries, on that treatment works or upon the quality of
effluent from the treatment works.
      MAY. The term is permissive.
      MILLIGRAMS PER LITER. A unit of the concentration of water or wastewater
constituent. It is 0.001 g of the constituent in 1,000 ml of water. It has
replaced the unit formerly used commonly, parts per million, to which it is
approximately equivalent, in reporting the results of water and wastewater
analysis.
      NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD. Any pretreatment standard
specifying quantities or concentrations of pollutants which may be discharged
to a POTW by industrial users in specific industrial subcategories as
established in regulations promulgated by the USEPA in 40 CFR Chapter I,
SubchapterN.
      NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM PERMIT or NPDES PERMIT. A
permit issued under the national pollutant discharge elimination system for
discharge of wastewaters to the navigable waters of the United States pursuant
to the Act.
      NATURAL OUTLET. Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or
other body surface or ground water.
      NEW SOURCE.
         (a)   Any building, structure, facility, or installation from which
there is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which
commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under
Section 307(c) of the Act (33 USC 1317(c)) which will be applicable to such
source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that
section, provided that:
            1.   The building, structure, facility, or installation is
constructed at a site at which no other source is located; or
            2.   The building, structure, facility, or installation totally
replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of
pollutants at an existing source; or
            3.   The production or wastewater generating processes of the
building, structure, facility, or installation are substantially independent of
an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are
substantially independent, factors, such as the extent to which the new
facility is integrated with the existing plant and the extent to which the new
facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source
should be considered.
         (b)   Construction on a site at which an existing source is located
results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not
create a new building, structure, facility, or installation meeting the
criteria of subsections (a)(2) and (3) above of this definition but otherwise
alters, replaces, or adds to existing process or production equipment.
         (c)   Construction of a new source as defined under this definition
has commenced if the owner or operator has:
            1.   Begun or caused to begin as part of a continuous onsite
construction program:
               a.   Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or
equipment;
               b.   Significant site preparation work, including clearing,
excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities which
is necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of new source
facilities or equipment; or
            2.   Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase
of facilities or equipment or contracts which can be terminated or modified
without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and
design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this section.
      NPDES PERMIT. See NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM PERMIT.
      ORDINANCE. This chapter.
      PASS THROUGH. A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the United
State in quantities or concentration which, alone or in conjunction with a
discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any
requirement of the POTW’s NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude
or duration of a violation).
      PERMITTED WASTEWATER HAULER VEHICLE. A vehicle used for hauling
wastewater which has been granted a permit under the requirements of the
village's applicable ordinances and/or state’s applicable laws or regulations.
      PERSON. Any and all persons, natural or artificial, including any
individual, firm, company, municipal or private corporation, association,
society, corporation, or group, institution, enterprise, governmental agency,
or other entity, and their successors, administrators, heirs, and assigns.
      pH. The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen-ion
concentration expressed by one of the procedures outlined in the IEPA Division
of Laboratories Manual of Laboratory Methods.
      POLLUTANT. Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage,
garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, heat,
wrecked or discharged equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, and industrial,
municipal, and agricultural waste discharged into water.
      POLLUTANT REMOVAL. See CONSISTENT POTW TREATMENT WORK REMOVAL.
      POPULATION EQUIVALENT. A term used to evaluate the impact of industrial
or other waste on a treatment works or stream. One population equivalent is 100
gallons of sewage per day, containing .17 pounds of BOD and .22 pounds of
suspended solids.
      POTW. See PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS.
      POTW TREATMENT PLANT. That portion of the POTW designed to provide
treatment to wastewater and sludges produced.
      ppm. Parts per million by weight.
      PRETREATMENT. The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination
of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in
wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharging or
otherwise introducing such pollutants into a POTW.
      PRETREATMENT COORDINATOR. That person designated by the General Manager
of the village or the person designed by the General Manager who is responsible
for the operations of the village’s pretreatment program.
      PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS. Any substantive or procedural requirement
related to pretreatment, other than a national categorical pretreatment
standard, imposed on an industrial user.
      PRETREATMENT STANDARDS. See APPLICABLE PRETREATMENT STANDARDS.
      PROHIBITIVE DISCHARGE STANDARD. Any regulations developed under the
authority of Section 307(b) of the Act (33 USC 1317(b)) and 40 CFR 403.5.
      PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE. The wastes from the preparation, cooking, and
dispensing of food that have been shredded to such degree that all particles
will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public
sewers, with no particles greater than one-half inch (1.27 centimeters) in any
dimension.
      PUBLIC SEWER. A sewer provided by or subject to the jurisdiction of the
village. It shall also include sewers within or outside the village boundaries
that serve one or more persons and ultimately discharge into the village
sanitary sewer system, even though those sewers may not have been constructed
with village funds.
      PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS or POTW. A treatment works as defined by
Section 212 of the Act (33 USC 1292), owned by the District. This definition
includes any interceptor sewers that convey wastewater to the POTW treatment
plan regardless of ownership but does not include pipes, sewers, or other
conveyances not connected to a facility providing treatment. For the purposes
of this chapter, POTW shall also include any sewers that convey wastewaters to
the POTW from persons outside the District who are, by contract or agreement
with the District, users of the District’s POTW.
      QUALIFIED PROFESSIONAL. An individual with working knowledge of facility
processes and wastewater discharge.
      REGIONAL ADMINISTRATOR. The regional administrator for the USEPA for
Region V.
      REPLACEMENT. Expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment,
accessories, or appurtenances which are necessary during the useful life of the
treatment works to maintain the capacity and performance for which such works
were designed and constructed. The term “operation maintenance” includes
REPLACEMENT.
      REMOVAL. See CONSISTENT POTW TREATMENT WORK REMOVAL.
      RESIDENTIAL USER. All dwelling units, such as houses, mobile homes,
apartments, and permanent multi-family dwellings.
      SANITARY SEWER. A sewer, which conveys sewage or industrial wastes or a
combination of both and into which storm, surface, and groundwaters or polluted
industrial waste are not intentionally admitted.
      SEVERE PROPERTY DAMAGE. Substantial physical damage to property, damage
to the treatment facilities which causes them to become inoperable, or
substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be
expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. SEVERE PROPERTY DAMAGE does not
mean economic loss caused by delays in production.
      SEWAGE. Used interchangeably with wastewater.
      SEWAGE WORKS. All facilities for collecting, pumping, treating, and
disposing of sewage.
      SEWER. A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage or any other waste liquids,
including storm, surface, and groundwater discharge.
      SEWER FUND. The principal accounting designation for all revenues
received in the operation and pumping of sewage.
      SEWERAGE. The system of sewers and appurtenances for the collection,
transportation, and pumping of sewage.
      SHALL. The term is mandatory.
      SIGNIFICANT VIOLATION. A violation of the chapter which remains
uncorrected 45 days after notification of noncompliance; which is part of a
pattern of noncompliance over a 12-month period; which involves failure to
accurately report noncompliance; or which resulted in the District exercising
its emergency authority under §§53.075 et seq.
      SLUDGE. The settleable solids separated from the liquids during the
wastewater treatment processes.
      SLUG. Any discharge of water or wastewater which in concentration of any
given pollutant, as measured by a grab sample, exceeds more than five times the
allowable concentrations as given in §53.022(A), “...or any pollutant,
including oxygen demanding pollutants (BOD and the like) released in a
discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which will cause
interference with the POTW.”
      SS. See SUSPENDED SOLIDS.
      STANDARD METHODS. The laboratory procedures set forth in the latest
edition, at the time of analysis, of Standard Methods for the Examination of
Water and Wastewater, prepared and published jointly by the American Public
Health Association, the American Water Works Association, and the Water
Pollution Control Federation and any other procedures recognized by the USEPA
and IEPA.
      STATE ACT. The Illinois Anti-Pollution Bond Act of 1970, ILCS Chapter 30,
Act 40, §§1 et seq.
      STATE GRANT. The state participation in the financing of the construction
of treatment works as provided for by the Illinois Anti-Pollution Bond Act,
ILCS Chapter 30, Act 40, §§1 et seq.,and for making such grants as filed with
the Secretary of State of the state.
      STORM SEWER or STORM DRAIN. A sewer which carries storm and surface
waters and drainage, but excludes sewage and polluted industrial wastes, other
than unpolluted cooling water.
      STORM WATER RUNOFF. That portion of the precipitation that is drained
into the sewers.
      SURCHARGE. The assessment in addition to the basic user charge and debt
service charge which is levied on those persons whose wastes are greater in
strength than the concentration values established in this chapter.
      SUSPENDED SOLIDS or SS. Solids which either float on the surface of or
are in suspension in water, sewage, or industrial waste and which are removable
by a laboratory filtration device. Quantitative determination of suspended
solids shall be made in accordance with procedures set forth in the IEPA
Division of Laboratories Manual of Laboratory Methods.
      TOTAL METAL. The sum of the concentration of copper, nickel, total
chromium, and zinc.
      TOTAL SOLIDS. The sum of suspended and dissolved solids.
      TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLIDS or TSS. Total suspended matter, expressed in
milligrams per liter, that either floats on the surface of or is in suspension
in water, wastewater, or other liquids and is removable by laboratory
filtration using a Reeve Angel type 9344A or 9534H glass fiber filter disc as
prescribed in Standard Methods.
      TOTAL TOXIC ORGANICS. The summation of all quantified values greater than
0.01 milligrams per liter for the toxic organics as specified in the applicable
regulations.
      TSS. See TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLIDS.
      UNITED STATES ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY or USEPA. Includes the
Administrator or other duly authorized official of said agency, as appropriate.
      UNPOLLUTED WATER. Water of quality equal to or better than the IEPA
effluent criteria in effect, or water that would not cause violation of
receiving water quality standards and would not be benefited by discharge to
the sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided.
      UPSET. An exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and
temporary noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards because of
factors beyond the reasonable control of the industrial user. An UPSET does not
include noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly
designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of
preventive maintenance, or careless or improper operation.
      USER. Any person who contributes, causes, or permits the contribution of
wastewater into the District's POTW.
      USER CHARGE. A charge levied on users of treatment works for the cost of
operation, maintenance, and replacement.
      USER CLASS. The industrial, commercial or residential users defined
herein.
      VILLAGE. The village of East Dundee.
      VILLAGE ENGINEER. The Chief Engineer of the village registered as a
professional engineer by the state.
      WASTEWATER. The combination of the liquid and water carried wastes from
residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants, and institutions,
including polluted cooling water.
         (a)   COMBINED WASTEWATER. Wastewater, including sanitary wastewater,
industrial wastewater, storm water, infiltration, and inflow carried to the
POTW treatment facilities by a sewer.
         (b)   INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER. A combination of liquid and water carried
waste discharged from any industrial establishment and resulting from any trade
or process carried on in that establishment, including the wastewater from
pretreatment facilities and polluted cooling water.
         (c)   SANITARY WASTEWATER. The combination of liquid and water carried
wastes discharged from toilets and other sanitary plumbing facilities.
      WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT. The document or documents allowing discharge
to the POTW issued to a user by the village in accordance with the terms of
this Chapter.
      WASTEWATER FACILITIES. The structures, equipment, and processes required
to collect, carry away, and treat domestic and industrial wastes and transport
effluent to a watercourse.
      WASTEWATER HAULER. Any person, partnership, or corporation engaged in
transporting sanitary wastewater as a commercial venture.
      WASTEWATER SERVICE CHARGE. The charge per billing period levied on all
users of the wastewater facilities. The service charge shall be computed as
outlined in this chapter and shall consist of the total user charge, the local
capital cost, and a surcharge, if applicable.
      WASTEWATER TREATMENT WORKS. Any arrangement of devices and structures
used for treating wastewater, industrial wastes, and sludge. Sometimes used and
synonymous with “waste treatment plant” or “wastewater treatment plant” or
“pollution control plant” or “sewage treatment plant.”
      WATERS OF THE STATE OF ILLINOIS. All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes,
water courses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation
systems, drainage systems, and all other bodies or accumulations of water,
surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are
contained within, flow through, or border upon the state or any portion
thereof.
      WATER QUALITY STANDARDS. As defined in the water pollution regulations of
the state and other applicable regulatory agencies.
      WATERCOURSE. A channel in which there is a flow of water course, either
continuously or intermittently.
(Ord. 03-19, passed 10-20-2003)
USAGE REQUIREMENTS
§ 53.010 USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED.
   (A)   Unlawful to deposit objectionable waste. It shall be unlawful for any
person to place, deposit, or permit to be deposited in an unsanitary manner
upon public or private property within the village, or in any area under the
jurisdiction of the village, any human or animal excrement, garbage, or other
objectionable waste.
   (B)   Unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet. It shall be unlawful to
discharge to any natural outlet within the village, or in any area under the
jurisdiction of the village, any sewage, or other polluted waters, except where
suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions
of this ordinance.
   (C)   Unlawful to construct privy or septic system. Except as hereinafter
provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault,
septic tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of
sewage.
   (D)   Requirement to install within 300 feet. The owner of real estate
located in the village and containing houses, buildings, or properties used for
human occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purposes for which an
occupancy permit is issued by the village and abutting on any street, alley, or
right-of-way in which there is now located or may in the future be located any
public sanitary sewer of the village, is hereby required at his or her expense
to install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect such facilities
directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter, within 12 months after date of official notice to do so, provided that
said public sewer is within 300 feet of the property line of such real estate.
(Ord. 03-19, passed 10-20-2003)
Penalty, see §§ 53.090 through
53.099
§ 53.011 EXTENSION OF SANITARY SEWERS.
   (A)   Application and approval of extension. No person shall uncover, make
any connection with or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sanitary
sewer of the village for the purpose of extending same without first making
application to the village for making said extension and to have the proposed
extension approved by the village.
   (B)   Extension to farthest limits of property. Persons desiring such
extension shall be required to extend the wastewater system to the farthest
limits of his or her property and connect to it as his or her expense,
according to village specifications and requirements.
   (C)   Documents to be filed with application. Persons desiring such
extension of the sewer system shall file with the village the following
documents:
      (1)   Detailed plans and specifications for the extension prepared by a
registered professional engineer licensed to practice in the state.
      (2)   Illinois Environmental Protection Agency permit application, with
such supporting documents as are required by the Illinois Environmental
Protection Agency, completed and ready for village signature.
      (3)   Detailed estimate of cost extension.
   (D)   Document required prior to starting extension. After approval of the
plans and specifications by the village and receipt of an Illinois
Environmental Protection Agency permit, the applicant shall submit to the
village the following documents prior to starting the extension:
      (1)   A guarantee for completion of the work by filing with the Village
Clerk an instrument, in the form approved in writing by the Village Attorney,
in the principal amount of 110% of the estimated cost as approved by the
Village Engineer, and secured by an instrument of the type permitted in § 3 of
the Illinois Public Construction Bond Act, ILCS Chapter 30, Act 550, § 3, as
amended from time to time.
      (2)   A maintenance bond, escrow account, or irrevocable letter of credit
in an amount equal to 15% of the approved estimated cost of the improvements or
not less than $1,000, whichever is greater, for a period of 15 months after
completion of the construction. The funds in the escrow accounts or letter of
credit for maintenance purposes shall be directly available for draw by the
village. Approval shall be granted by the village prior to substitution of a
maintenance bond for a completion bond and the security therefor.
      (3)   Copies of all permits required.
      (4)   Certificates of insurance protecting the village from any liability
or damage whatsoever from injury (including death) to any person or property.
   (E)   Requirements of applicant. The applicant shall agree as follows:
      (1)   To pay all reasonable engineering and legal costs incurred by the
village in the review of the project. Payment shall be made to the village
prior to commencing the extension.
      (2)   To pay all reasonable costs of inspection. The estimated cost of
inspection, 2% of the estimated construction cost approved by the village,
shall be deposited with the Utility Clerk prior to the start of work. The
permittee, however, shall pay only the actual costs of such services based on
standard engineering fees.
      (3)   Materials and construction methods shall be in conformance with
standards and specifications established by the village.
      (4)   The engineer designing the extension shall provide field stakeout
and general supervision and shall prepare as-built drawings.
   (F)   Requirements for release of completion bond. The village shall refund
and/or release the completion bond as set forth in § 3 of the Illinois Public
Construction Bond Act, ILCS Chapter 30, Act 550, § 3, as amended from time to
time. The completion bond will not be released until the following documents
are filed with the Director of Public Works and approved by the village:
      (1)   As-built drawings. One reproducible set and two sets of prints.
      (2)   Release of all permits.
      (3)   Copies of all tests required by the Village Engineer or Director of
Public Works.
   (G)   No extension allowed without capacity. No extension will be allowed to
the sanitary sewer system if the village determines that the wastewater
facilities have inadequate available capacity.
(Ord. 03-19, passed 10-20-2003; Am. Ord. 18-17, passed 7-9-2018)
Penalty, see §§ 53.090 through
53.099
§ 53.012 CONNECTIONS TO WASTEWATER FACILITIES.
   (A)   No connections without permit. No unauthorized person shall uncover,
make any connections with or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public
sewer or appurtenances thereof without first obtaining a written permit from
the Director of Public Works.
   (B)   Requirements for connection and permit.
      (1)   Persons desiring to construct a new waste source and connect same
to the wastewater facilities of the village shall, in addition to making
application, state the quantity, quality, and rate of discharge of the
wastewater to be discharged to the sewer. In case of fraudulent representation
on the part of the user, the payment will be forfeited and the use of the sewer
stopped.
      (2)   No permit will be issued unless the permittee:
         (a)   Pays the capital connection fees as prescribed in this chapter.
         (b)   Secures a street opening permit in conformance with the
provisions of Chapter 91 of this Municipal Code.
         (c)   Agrees to pay all costs of the installation, including the
connection to the public sewer.
         (d)   Agrees to give the Director of Public Works 24 hours notice
prior to the start of any underground piping and when the underground piping
will be ready for inspection, except that no inspections will be made at times
other than during regular village working hours.
         (e)   Agrees to pay all costs of inspection if such inspection is
deemed necessary by the Director of Public Works.
         (f)   Agrees to secure and protect the village from any liability or
damage whatsoever for injury (including death) to any person or property and
files with the village liability insurance certificates.
   (C)   Compliance with federal, state, and local standards. All disposal by
any person into the sewer system is unlawful except those discharges in
compliance with federal standards promulgated pursuant to the Federal Act and
more stringent state and local standards.
   (D)   Classes and fees of building sewer permits. There shall be two classes
of building sewer permits:
      (1)   For residential, wastewater service the fee shall be as adopted in
the annual fee schedule.
      (2)   To commercial, institutional/governmental, or industrial wastewater
service. In all cases the owner or his or her agent shall make application on a
special form furnished by the village. It shall be supplemented by plans,
specifications, and other information considered pertinent by the Director of
Public Works. The permit and inspection fee found in the annual fee schedule
shall be paid to the Utility Clerk at the time the application is filed. The
industry, as a condition of permit authorization, must provide information
describing its wastewater constituents, characteristics, and type of activity.
   (E)   No permit without adequate facilities. A building sewer permit will
only be issued and a sewer connection shall only be allowed if it can be
demonstrated that the downstream sewerage facilities, including sewers, pump
stations, and wastewater treatment facilities, have sufficient reserve capacity
to adequately and efficiently handle the additional anticipated waste load.
   (F)   Unlawful to connect downspouts, etc. No person(s) shall make
connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation drains, areaway drains, or
other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or building
drain, which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary
sewer.
(Ord. 03-19, passed 10-20-2003; Am. Ord. 13-37, passed 9-16-2013) Penalty, see
§§
53.090 through
53.099
§ 53.013 SERVICE LINES.
   The sewer service line extends from the public sewer main to the building.
The line for the service line shall be as specified or as provided by the
village. The permittee shall pay all costs of installing the service line,
including such material and services provided by the village. The village will
not maintain the sewer service line.
(Ord. 03-19, passed 10-20-2003)
§ 53.014 BUILDING SEWERS.
   (A)   Separate and independent building sewers. A separate and independent
building sanitary sewer shall be provided for every building, except where one
building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private
sanitary sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through
an adjoining alley, court, yard, or driveway; the building sanitary sewer from
the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole
considered as one building sanitary sewer.
   (B)   Old building sewers for connections. Old building sewers may be used
in connection with new buildings only when they are found on examination and
test by the Director of Public Works to meet all requirements of this
ordinance.
   (C)   Size, slope, alignment, and materials. The size, slope, alignment,
materials of construction of a building sewer, and the methods to be used in
excavating, placing of pipe, jointing, testing, and backfilling the trench
shall conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or the
standards and specifications of the village and shall be subject to the
approval of the Director of Public Works, but the slope of such sewer pipe
shall be not less than 1%.
   (D)   Building sewer elevations. Whenever possible the building sewers shall
be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all
buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the
public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by
approved artificial means and discharged to the building sewer. No building
sewer shall be laid parallel to or within three feet of any bearing wall, which
thereby be weakened. The depth shall be sufficient to afford protection from
frost. The building sewer shall be laid at uniform grade and in straight
alignment insofar as possible. Changes in direction shall be made only with
properly curved pipe and fittings.
   (E)   Compliance with building codes. The connection of the building sewer
into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the building and
plumbing codes, or other applicable standards and specifications of the
village, or the procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the
American Society of Testing Materials, Water Pollution Control Federation
Manual of Practice No. 9 and Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main
Construction in Illinois. All such connections shallbe made gastight and
watertight. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials mustbe
approved by the Director of Public Works beforeinstallation.
   (F)   Notification for inspection. The applicant for the building sewer
permit shall notify the Director of Public Works when the building sewer is
ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connectionshall be
made under the supervision of the Director of Public Works or his or her
representative.
   (G)   Protection of excavations. All excavations for building sewer
installation shall be adequately guarded by the applicant with barricades and
lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways
and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored
in a manner satisfactory to the village.
(Ord. 03-19, passed 10-20-2003)
Penalty, see §§ 53.090 through
53.099
§ 53.015 DISCHARGE OF SANITARY AND INDUSTRIAL WASTE PROHIBITED.
   No person, firm, corporation or other entity shall discharge any sanitary
waste or industrial waste water into any storm sewer or drainage facility
constructed as part of the Route 72 improvement, said limits of improvement
being between Rock Road and Beverly Road, and a portion of which passes through
the village.
(Ord. 12-28, passed 6-18-2012)
WASTEWATER TREATMENT AND PRETREATMENT REGULATIONS
§ 53.020 CONDITIONS FOR DISCHARGE TO THE SYSTEM.
   (A)   Public wastewater collection facilities are required to be used for
deposit of human waste, garbage, or wastes that do not meet IEPA NPDES
standards.
   (B)   Except as provided in village ordinance, no person shall connect or
cause to be connected any building or facility on property or any part thereof
to any sewer unless the entire property shall first be situated within the
corporate limits of the village.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or discharge or to
cause to be deposited or discharged to any wastewater collection facilities any
solid, liquid, or gaseous waste unless through a connection approved by the
village.
   (D)   Any person owning improved property within the village which abuts any
street, alleyway, or right-of-way in which a sewer is located shall, if the
improvements are used or are intended to be used for any type of human use or
employment and if the sewer is within 100 feet of the nearest property line of
the property, at his or her expense, install therein suitable toilet and waste
disposal facilities and within 90 days after such sewer is in service connect
such facilities of the sewer in accordance with village ordinances; provided,
however, that in the event compliance with this section causes sever economic
hardship to said person, he or she may apply to the village for exemption from
this section. Such applications shall state in detail the circumstances which
are claimed to cause such economic hardship. Such exemptions shall only be
granted to residential users, shall not apply to other users, and shall be
granted only for such time as the demonstrated hardship exists.
   (E)   Such person as described in divisions (C) and (D) above shall not
avoid connection to such sewer by reasons of actual distance from a building or
structure to the connection point of such sewer.
   (F)   It shall be unlawful to discharge wastewater without an NPDES permit
to any natural outlet within the POTW or in any area under its jurisdiction.
(Ord. 03-19, passed 10-20-2003)
Penalty, see §§ 53.090 through
53.099
§ 53.021 PROHIBITIVE DISCHARGE STANDARDS.
   (A)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any storm water,
foundation drain water, groundwater, roof runoff, surface drainage, cooling
waters, or any other unpolluted water to any sanitary sewer unless specifically
authorized by the Village Administrator.
   (B)   No user shall contribute or cause to be contributed, directly or
indirectly, any pollutant or wastewater which interferes with or passes through
the POTW. The following general prohibitions shall apply to all users to the
village’s POTW whether or not a user is subject to national categorical
pretreatment standards or any other national, state, or local pretreatment
standards or requirements. A user may not contribute the following substances
to the village’s POTW:
      (1)   Any liquids, solids, or gases which by reason of their nature or
quantity are or may be sufficient either alone or by interaction with other
substances to cause fire or explosion or be injurious or hazardous in any other
way to the POTW or to the operation of the POTW, including but not limited to
waste streams with a closed cup flashpoint of less than 140°F or 60°C using the
test methods specifiedin 40 CFR 261.21. At no time shall two successive
readings on a meter capable of reading L.E.L. (lower explosive limit) at a
point at the nearest accessible point to the POTW in a sanitary sewer, at the
point of discharge into the POTW, or at any point in the POTW be more than 5%
nor any single reading greater than 10%. The following materials may not be
added to the sewer in detectable quantities unless specifically permitted or
limited in the user’s wastewater discharge permit: gasoline, kerosene, naphtha,
benzene, toluene, xylene, ethers, alcohols, ketones, aldehydes, peroxides,
chlorates, prechlorates, bromates, polychlorinated biphenyls, polybrominated
biphenyls, carbides, hydrides, Stoddard solvents, and sulfides. The permitting
of these items in no way relieves the user of prohibitions of discharges of
explosive hazardous or injurious substances.
      (2)   Solid or viscous substances which may cause obstruction to the flow
in a sewer or other interference with the operation of the wastewater treatment
facilities, such as but not limited to: grease, garbage with particles greater
than one-half inch in any dimension, any material which can be disposed of as
trash, animal guts, or tissues, whole blood, sand, spent lime, metal, straw,
grass clippings, rags, wood plastics, tar, asphalt residues from refinishing or
processing of fuel or lubricating oil, mud, or tumbling and deburring stones.
      (3)   Any wastewater which will cause corrosive structural damage to the
POTW but in no case any wastewater having a pH beyond the limits set in §
53.023.
      (4)   Any wastewater containing incompatible pollutants in sufficient
quantity, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, to injure or
interfere with any wastewater treatment process, to constitute a hazard to
humans or animals, to create an incompatible effect in the receiving water of
the POTW, to exceed the limitations set forth in a national categorical
pretreatment standard (when effective) or in §§
53.020 et seq., or to create a public nuisance. An incompatible pollutant shall
include but not be limited to any pollutant identified pursuant to Section 307
(a) of the Act (33 USC 1317(a)).
      (5)   Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, or solids which either
singly or by interaction with other wastewaters are sufficient to create a
public nuisance or hazard to life or are sufficient to prevent entry into sewer
for their maintenance and repair.
      (6)   In no case shall a substance discharged to the POTW cause the POTW
to be in noncompliance with sludge use or disposal criteria, guidelines, or
regulations developed under Section 405 of the Act (33 USC 1345); any criteria
guidelines or regulations affecting sludge use or disposal developed pursuant
to the RCRA and SWDA (42 USC 6901 et seq.), the Clean Water Act (33 USC 1251 et
seq.), the Toxic Substance Control Act (15 USC 2601 et seq.); or state criteria
applicable to the sludge management method being used.
      (7)   Any substance, which will cause the POTW to violate its NPDES
permit or the receiving water quality standards.
      (8)   Any wastewater having a temperature at the point of discharge to
the POTW which will inhibit biological activity in the POTW treatment plant
resulting in interference; in no case shallwastewater be introduced to the POTW
which exceeds 65°C (157°F) or which exceeds 40°C (104°F) at the POTW treatment
plant.
      (9)   Any pollutant(s), including but not limited to petroleum oil,
nonbiodegradable cutting oil, products of mineral oil origin, or compatible
pollutants, released at a flow or pollutant concentration which will interfere
with the operation of or pass through the POTW.
      (10)   Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes of
such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by state or
federal regulations.
      (11)   Any pollutant(s) which result in the presence of toxic gases,
vapors, or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker
health and safety problems.
      (12)   Any wastewater containing BOD, total solids, or suspended solids
of such character and quantity that unusual attention or expense is required to
handle such materials at the sewage treatment plant, provided, however, that a
user may be permitted by specific written agreement with the village, which
agreement to discharge such BOD or TSS may provide for special charges,
payments, or provisions for treating and testing equipment and such agreement
to be negotiated with the village prior to the discharge of any such
wastewater.
      (13)   Ammonia nitrogen in amounts that would cause a violation of the
water quality standards of the receiving waters of the POTW.
      (14)   Any discharge exceeding the standards established in 35 Illinois
Administrative Code 307 from time to time.
      (15)   Any slug discharged to the POTW.
      (16)   Detergents, surface-active agents, or other substances which may
cause excessive foaming atthe POTW.
      (17)   Trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points
designated by the Village Administrator in accordance with §53.030.
      (18)   Sludges, screening, or other residues from the pretreatment of
industrial wastes.
      (19)   Wastewater which has a COD over 5,000 mg/L and a BOD which is less
than 20% of the COD cannot be discharged to the POTW unless the discharge is
either specifically permitted in the industrial user's operating permit or
specifically permitted by written authorization from the Village Administrator.
Additional charges for treating such overstrength wastes shall be determined by
the village.
      (20)   Wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed by the
treatment process, such as but not limited to dye wastes and vegetable tanning
solutions, which consequently imparts color to the treatment plant’s effluent.
      (21)   Medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by the village
in a discharge permit.
      (22)   Wastewater causing, along or in conjunction with other sources,
the treatment plant’s effluent to fail a toxicity test.
   (C)   Pollutants, substances, or wastewater prohibited by this section shall
not be processed or stored in such a manner that they could be discharged to
the POTW.
(Ord. 03-19, passed 10-20-2003)
Penalty, see §§ 53.090 through
53.099
§ 53.022 SPECIFIC LIMITATIONS ON DISCHARGE.
   (A)   Measured separate discharges. Discharges from each separate discharge
of a user, as measured under the provisions of this chapter, shall not contain
in excess of the following concentrations based upon a 24-hour composite
sample. Pollutant concentrations shall be measured based upon total
concentrations—that is, the total of dissolved and suspended matter shall be
measured.
 
Pollutant Maximum Concentration of User Discharge Permitted
Ammonia   50.00  mg/L
Arsenic   .25    mg/L
Barium    2.00   mg/L
BOD       300.00 mg/L
Boron     1.00   mg/L
Cadmium   .015   mg/L
Chromium  .10    mg/L
Copper    50.00  mg/L
Cyanide   0.10   mg/L
FOG       100.00 mg/L
Fluoride  15.00  mg/L
 
Pollutant Maximum Concentration of User Discharge Permitted
Iron      2.00          mg/L
Lead      .20           mg/L
Manganese 1.00          mg/L
Mercury   .0005         mg/L
Nickel    1.00          mg/L
Phenols   .10           mg/L
Selenium  1.0           mg/L
Silver    .10           mg/L
TSS       300.00        mg/L
Zinc      1.00          mg/L
Ph        5.50 to 10.00 units
 
   (B)   Grab samples. Discharges from each separate discharge of a user, as
measured under the provisions of this chapter, shall not at any time contain in
excess of the following concentrations based upon grab samples. Pollutant
concentrations shall be measured based upon total concentrations—that is, the
total of dissolved and suspended matter shall be measured.
 
Pollutant Maximum Concentration of User Discharge Permitted
Ammonia   75.00  mg/L
Arsenic   .375   mg/L
Barium    3.00   mg/L
BOD       450.00 mg/L
Boron     1.50   mg/L
Cadmium   .20    mg/L
Chromium  .15    mg/L
Copper    .75    mg/L
Cyanide   .15    mg/L
FOG       150.00 mg/L
Fluoride  22.50  mg/L
 
Pollutant Maximum Concentration of User Discharge Permitted
Iron      3.00          mg/L
Lead      .30           mg/L
Manganese 1.50          mg/L
Mercury   .00075        mg/L
Nickel    1.50          mg/L
Phenols   .15           mg/L
Selenium  1.50          mg/L
Silver    .15           mg/L
TSS       450.00        mg/L
Zinc      1.50          mg/L
Ph        5.50 to 10.00 units
 
   (C)   Composite limits also applicable. When a representative composite
sample is not provided by the user, or the sampler has not been operated in
accordance with procedures approved by the village, 24-hour composite limits
shall also apply to grab samples for all of the listed pollutants.
(Ord. 03-19, passed 10-20-2003)
§ 53.023 INCORPORATION OF NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS.
   (A)   Upon the promulgation of the national categorical pretreatment
standards (NCPS) for a particular user, the said standard, if more stringent
than the limitations imposed under this chapter for sources in that category,
shall, when effective, immediately supersede the limitations, conditions and
enforcement provisions imposed under this chapter. The General Manager shall
notify all known affected users of the applicable reporting requirements under
40 CFR 403.12.
   (B)   When the village calculates end of pipe limits, combined waste stream
limits, mass of pollutant limits, or equivalent concentration limits based upon
data supplied by the user, these shall be enforceable as pretreatment
requirements. Any industrial user operating under any of these alternative
limits shall notify the village within two business days after the user has a
reasonable basis to know that the data used to calculate the limit are not
accurate.
(Ord. 03-19, passed 10-20-2003)
Penalty, see §§ 53.090 through
53.099
§ 53.024 VILLAGE'S RIGHT OF REVISION.
   The village reserves the right to establish, by ordinance or in wastewater
discharge permits, more stringent limitations or requirements on discharges to
the POTW.
(Ord. 03-19, passed 10-20-2003)
§ 53.025 PRETREATMENT.
   (A)   New sources shall install, have in operating condition, and “start-up”
all pollution control equipment required to meet applicable pretreatment
standards before beginning to discharge. Within the shortest feasible time (not
to exceed 90 days), new sources must meet all applicable pretreatment
standards.
   (B)   Users shall provide necessary wastewater pretreatment as required to
comply with this chapter and shall achieve compliance with all applicable
pretreatment requirements and standards within the time limitations as
specified by appropriate statutes, regulations, and ordinance. National
categorical pretreatment standards shall be added to this chapter as
amendments.
   (C)   Any facilities required to pre-treat wastewater to a level acceptable
to the village shall be provided, properly operated, and maintained at the
user’s expense. Detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities shall be
submitted to the village for review and must be acceptable to the village
before construction of the facility. The user shall obtain all necessary
construction operating permits from the IEPA. Such pretreatment facilities
shall be under the control and direction of an IEPA certified wastewater
treatment operator. The review of such plans shall in no way relieve the user
from the responsibility of modifying its facility as necessary to produce an
effluent acceptable to the village under the provisions of this chapter.
   (D)   Within a reasonable time after the completion of the wastewater
treatment facility, the user shall furnish its operations and maintenance
procedures for the village to review. Any subsequent, significant changes in
the pretreatment facilities or method of operation shall be reported to and be
accepted by the village prior to the user’s initiation of the changes.
   (E)   Whenever deemed necessary, the Village Administrator may require users
to restrict their discharge during peak flow periods, designate that certain
wastewater be discharged only into specific sewers, relocate and/or consolidate
points of discharge, separate sewage waste streams from industrial waste
streams, and such other conditions as may be necessary to protect the POTW and
determine the user’s compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
   (F)   Users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may be
required to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection meter.
(Ord. 03-19, passed 10-20-2003)
Penalty, see §§ 53.090 through
53.099
§ 53.026 PROHIBITION OF IMPROPER DILUTION.
   No user shall increase the use of process water or, in any way, attempt to
dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate
pretreatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained in the
national categorical pretreatment standards (NCPS) (when effective) or in any
other pollutant-specific limitation developed by the village or state. The
Village Administrator may impose mass limitations on users who may be using
dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements or in cases
when the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate.
(Ord. 03-19, passed 10-20-2003)
Penalty, see §§ 53.090 through
53.099
§ 53.027 VARIANCES.
   Users seeking variances from standards found in this chapter may petition
the Board for variation from such standards in accordance with the procedures
set forth in §
53.064.
(Ord. 03-19, passed 10-20-2003)
§ 53.028 SPILL CONTAINMENT AND REPORTING.
   (A)   Accidental discharges.
      (1)   Each industrial user having the ability to cause interference with
the POTW treatment plant or to violate the regulatory provisions of this
chapter shall provide protection from accidental discharge to the POTW of
prohibited materials or other substances regulated by this chapter. Facilities
to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited materials shall be provided and
maintained at the owner of user’s own cost and expense.
      (2)   All industrial users whose wastewater includes or could include
compatible or incompatible pollutants in amounts great enough to cause
interference with the POTW must, when required by the village, have detailed
plans on file at the village showing facilities and operating procedures to
provide this protection. Plans shall be approved by the village and meet 40 CFR
Part 403, Spill Prevention Control and Countermeasure Plan, conditions before
construction of the facility.
      (3)   No user shall be permitted to introduce pollutants into the system
until accidental discharge facilities and procedures, as appropriate, have been
approved by the village and installed by the industrial user. Review and
approval of such plans and operating procedures shall not relieve the
industrial user from the responsibility to modify its facility as necessary to
meet the requirements of this chapter.
   (B)   Immediate notification. In the case of an accidental or deliberate
discharge of compatible or incompatible pollutants, which cause interference at
the POTW or violate regulatory requirements of this chapter, it shall be the
responsibility of the industrial user to immediately telephone and notify the
village of the incident. The notification shall include name of caller,
location and time of discharge, type of wastewater, concentration, volume, and
any corrective actions taken by the user.
   (C)   Written report. Within 15 days following such an accidental or
deliberate discharge the industrial user shall submit to the Village
Administrator a detailed written report, describing the cause of the discharge
and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences.
Follow- up reports may be required by the village as needed. Such report, or
reports, shall not relieve the industrial user of any expense, loss, damage or
other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, fish
kills, or any other damage to person or property nor shall such report relieve
the user of any fines, civil penalties, or other liability which may be imposed
by this chapter or otherwise. Failure to report accidental or deliberate
discharges may, in addition to any other remedies available to the village,
result in the revocation of the discharger's wastewater discharge permit.
   (D)   Interim measures. The industrial user shall control production or all
discharges to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with all applicable
regulations upon reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until
the facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided.
This requirement includes the situation where, among other things, the primary
source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost, or fails.
   (E)   Notice to employees. A notice in English and the language of common
use shall be permanently posted on the user’s bulletin board or other prominent
place advising employees whom to call in the event of a discharge of a
prohibitive material. Employers shall insure that all employees who are in a
position to cause, discover, or observe such an accidental discharge are
advised of the emergency notification procedures.
(Ord. 03-19, passed 10-20-2003)
Penalty, see §§ 53.090 through
53.099
§ 53.029 SEPARATORS.
   (A)   Whenever required by the village, users of any property serviced by a
sanitary sewer carrying wastewater shall install separators as necessary for
the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease, sand, oil, or any other
matters that may violate the provisions of §
53.021.
   (B)   When required, all sanitary sewers of the user into which waste
products are discharged shall be directed to one or more such separators before
connecting with the public sanitary sewers. Such separators shall be installed
by the user and be accessible for maintenance purposes and, when feasible,
shall be located outside the building. It shall be the user's responsibility to
clean and maintain such separator or separators at a regular frequency so as to
ensure efficient operation. The construction of separators shall be in strict
accordance with applicable state and local plumbing codes.
   (C)   All new or altered installation serving institutions or commercial
establishments in which grease, fats, culinary oil, grease, or fats in the
above type establishments shall be directed to one or more separators (grease
traps) located outside the building and shall be accessible for maintenance
purposes. Use of other separators (grease traps) shall require proof of being
at least equal to what is prescribed above. See illustration in the Illinois
State Plumbing Code (77 Illinois Administrative Code 890).
   (D)   All new or altered restaurants that require separator (grease trap)
shall install a minimum 1,000 gallon unit. Sandwich bars and carry-out services
which only prepare cold sandwiches (not cooked foods) shall install a minimum
400 gallon unit.
   (E)   The Board of Trustees of the village may after reviewing pertinent
information allow the installation of a grease trap having a lesser volume than
400 gallons. The sizing of this grease trap shall be determined by the village.
   (F)   No person shall reintroduce into the sewer system of the village
materials which have been removed from the sewer system by catch basins, grease
traps, and other pretreatment devices. Physical, chemical, or biological agents
shall not be introduced into catch basins, grease traps or other pretreatment
devices for the purpose of re-suspending, dissolving, emulsifying, or rendering
soluble any pollutants or other materials removed from a waste stream by such
pretreatment devices and reintroducing these materials into the sewer system.
(Ord. 03-19, passed 10-20-2003)
Penalty, see §§ 53.090 through
53.099
§ 53.030 WASTEWATER HAULERS.
   Wastewater haulers shall not be allowed to dump at all or at any time.
(Ord. 03-19, passed 10-20-2003)
Penalty, see §§ 53.090 through
53.099
DISCHARGE PERMITS
§ 53.040 DISCHARGES.
   It shall be unlawful for any industrial user to discharge wastewater to the
village without a permit, or contrary to the conditions of a permit, issued by
the village in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 03-19, passed 10-20-2003)
Penalty, see §§ 53.090 through
53.099
§ 53.041 PERMITS.
   (A)   Generally. Written reports and applications will be deemed to have
been submitted on the date received by the village.
   (B)   Discharge permits. All industrial users proposing to connect to or
contribute to the POTW shall obtain a general industrial wastewater discharge
permit before connecting to or contributing flow to the POTW. Exceptions to
this requirement may be granted by the village’s pretreatment coordinator.
Industries excepted from this requirement may be required to obtain a permit
after being given 30 days notice by the village. All existing and new
significant industrial users shall obtain supplementary permits in addition to
general permits if requested by the village. All industrial users, which become
significant as a result of newly promulgated national categorical pretreatment
standards, shall apply for supplemental permits within 180 days after the
promulgation of such standards, unless a shorter period of time is required by
the applicable pretreatment standards.
   (C)   General industrial wastewater discharge permit application. Users
required to obtain a general industrial wastewater discharge permit shall
complete and file with the village, an application in a form to be prescribed
and furnished by the village, and accompanied by a fee to be determined by the
Board. Proposed new significant users shall apply at least 90 days prior to
discharging to the POTW. In case of conflict between application deadlines for
significant industrial users in division (A) above and this division, the
stricter deadline shall apply. In support of the application, the user shall
submit, in units and terms appropriate for evaluation, the following
information:
      (1)   Name, address, and location.
      (2)   SIC number according to the Standard Industrial Classification
Manual, Bureau of the Budget, 1972, as amended.
      (3)   Wastewater constituents and characteristics, including but not
limited to those set forth in §53.022, as determined by a reliable analytical
laboratory; sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with
procedures established by the USEPA pursuant to Section 304(g) of the Act (33
USC 1314(g)) and contained in 40 CFR Part 136, as amended.
      (4)   Time and duration of contribution.
      (5)   Average and maximum wastewater flow rates, including monthly and
seasonal variation, if any.
      (6)   Site plans showing all pipe sizes, manholes, and location of
sanitary and storm sewers leaving the building or premises, together with all
connections to lateral sanitary and storm sewers.
      (7)   Listing of each process activity.
      (8)   Line diagram and basic information, including capacity, of existing
or proposed spill containment areas and installation.
      (9)   Total number of employees and, hours of operation of a plant.
      (10)   Proposed or actual hours of operation of pretreatment system and
the name of the IEPA certified pretreatment operator.
      (11)   Name of authorized representative of the industrial user.
      (12)   User's source of intake water together with the types of usage and
disposal sources of water and the estimated volumes in each category.
      (13)   Listing of raw materials and chemicals that are used in the
manufacturing process and are capable of being discharged into the POTW.
      (14)   If additional user operation and maintenance or pretreatment
techniques or installations will be required to meet the applicable
pretreatment standards, the user will provide the shortest schedule which will
provide such additional pretreatment. The completion date in this schedule
shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable
pretreatment standard.
         (a)   The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the form of
dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the
construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to
meet the applicable pretreatment standards (such as hiring an engineer,
completing preliminary plans, completing final plans, executing contract for
major components, commencing construction, completing construction, and the
like).
         (b)   No increment referred to in subdivision (14)(a) above shall
exceed six months.
         (c)   Not later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and
the final date for compliance, the user shall submit a progress report to the
General Manager, including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the
increment of progress to be met on such date and, if not, the date on which it
expects to comply with this increment of progress, the reason for delay, and
the steps being taken by the user to return the construction to the schedule
established. In no event shall more than six months elapse between such
progress reports to the General Manager.
      (15)   Any other information as may be deemed by the village to be
necessary to evaluate the permit application. The village will evaluate the
data furnished by the user and may require additional information within 90
days of submission by the user. After evaluation and acceptance of the data
furnished, the Board may issue a general industrial wastewater discharge permit
subject to terms and conditions provided herein. Users submitting information
required in this section shall not be deemed to have a permit until the Board
issues such a permit under the provisions of division (B) above. The Board may
deny any application for a wastewater discharge permit.
   (D)   Supplemental wastewater discharge permits are ancillary to the general
wastewater discharge permit of the permittee and, when issued, shall become
part of the permittee’s general wastewater discharge permit or supplemental
permits shall constitute grounds for revocation of the general wastewater
discharge permit as set forth herein and for any other enforcement actions
available to the village under village ordinances found elsewhere. Within 180
days after the effective date of a national categorical pretreatment standard,
or 180 days after a final administrative decision has been made upon a
categorical determination submission in accordance with 40 CFR 403.3(a)(4) of
the general pretreatment regulations, whichever is later, existing industrial
users subject to such national categorical pretreatment standards and currently
discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the village’s POTW shall obtain a
supplemental wastewater discharge permit. Industrial users required to obtain a
supplemental wastewater discharge permit shall complete and file with the
village an application in a form to be prescribed and furnished by the village
and accompanied by a fee to be determined by the Board. New sources, when
subject to a national categorical pretreatment standard, shall apply for a
supplemental wastewater discharge permit at least 90 days prior to discharging
to the POTW. New sources are also required to include in this report
information on the method of pretreatment the source intends to use to meet
applicable pretreatment standards. New sources can provide verifiable estimate
values for subdivisions (4) and (5) of this division (D). The village will
evaluate the data furnished by the industrial user and may require additional
information within 45 days of submission by the industrial user. After
evaluation and acceptance of the date furnished, the village may issue a
supplemental wastewater discharge permit prior to the compliance date for the
applicable national categorical pretreatment standard. In support of the
supplemental permit application/baseline report, the industrial user shall
submit, in units and terms specified in the application, the following
information:
      (1)   Name and address of the facility, including the name of the
operator and owners.
      (2)   List of any environmental control permits held by or for the
facility.
      (3)   Brief description of the nature, average rate of production, and
standard industrial classification of the operation(s) carried out by such
user. This description shall include a schematic process diagram indicating
points of discharge to the POTW from the regulated processes.
      (4)   Information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily
flow in gallons per day to the POTW from each of the following:
         (a)   Regulated process streams; and
         (b)   Other streams as necessary to allow user of the combined waste
stream formula of 40 CFR 403.6(e) of the General Pretreatment Regulations.
      (5)   The industrial user shall identify the national categorical
pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated process and shall:
         (a)   Submit the results of sampling and analysis identifying the
nature and concentration (or mass, where required by the village or
pretreatment standards) of regulated pollutants in the village from each
regulated process. Both daily maximum and average concentration (or mass, where
required by the village or pretreatment standards) shall be reported. The
sample shall be representative of daily operations.
         (b)   A minimum of four grab samples must be used of pH, cyanide,
total phenols, oil and grease, sulfide, and volatile organics. For all other
pollutants, 24-hour composite samples must be obtained through flow-
proportional composite sampling techniques where feasible. The village may
waive flow-proportional composite sampling for any industrial user that
demonstrates that flow- proportional sampling is infeasible. In such cases,
samples may be obtained through time-proportional composite sampling techniques
or through a minimum of four grab samples where the user demonstrates that this
will provide a representative sample of the effluent being discharged.
         (c)   The user shall take a minimum of one representative sample to
compile that data necessary to comply with the requirements of this section.
         (d)   Take the samples immediately downstream from pretreatment
facilities if such exist, or immediately downstream from the regulated process
if no pretreatment exists. If other wastewaters are mixed with the regulated
wastewater prior to pretreatment, in order to evaluate compliance with the
national categorical pretreatment standards, the industrial user shall measure
the flows and concentrations necessary to allow use of the combined waste
stream formula of 40 CFR 403.6(e) of the General Pretreatment Regulations.
Where an alternate concentration or mass limit has been calculated in
accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(e) of the General Pretreatment Regulations, this
adjusted limit, along with supporting data, shall be submitted to the village.
         (e)   Sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with the
techniques prescribed in 40 CFR Part 136 and amendments thereto. Where 40 CFR
Part 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant
in question, or where the Administrator determines that the Part 136 sampling
and analytical techniques are inappropriate for the pollutant in question,
sampling and analysis shall be performed by using validated analytical methods
or any other applicable sampling and analytical procedures, including
procedures suggested by the POTW or other parties, approved by the
Administrator.
         (f)   Submit only with village authorization a supplemental permit
application/baseline report which utilizes only historical data, so long as the
data provides information sufficient to determine the need for industrial
pretreatment measures.
         (g)   Provide for each report the time, date, and place of sampling
methods of analysis and certification that such sampling and analysis is
representative of normal work cycles and expected pollutant discharges to the
POTW.
      (6)   The industrial user shall provide a statement, reviewed by an
authorized representative of the industrial user and certified by a qualified
professional, indicating whether national categorical pretreatment standards
are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, whether additional operation
and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional pretreatment is required for the user
to meet the national categorical pretreatment standards and requirements; and
      (7)   If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be required to meet the
national categorical pretreatment standards, the user will provide the shortest
schedule which will provide such additional pretreatment and/or O&M. The
completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date
established for the applicable national categorical pretreatment standard.
         (a)   Where the industrial user’s national categorical pretreatment
standard has been modified by a removal allowance (40 CFR 403.7), or the
combined waste stream formula (40 CFR 4016(e)), or net-gross calculations (40
CFR 403.15), at the time the industrial user submits a baseline report, the
information required in subdivisions (6) and (7) of this division (D) shall
pertain to the modified limits.
         (b)   If the national categorical pretreatment standard for the
industrial user is modified after the application for a supplemental wastewater
discharge permit is submitted, the user shall make any necessary amendments to
information provided as a response to subdivisions (6) and (7) of this division
(D) and submit them to the village within 60 days after the modified limit is
approved.
      (8)   The following conditions shall apply to any schedule submitted in
response to subdivision (7) of this subdivision (D):
         (a)   The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the form of
dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the
construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to
meet the applicable categorical pretreatment standards (such as hiring an
engineer, completing preliminary plans, completing final plans, executing
contract for major components, commencing construction, completing
construction, and the like).
         (b)   No increment referred to in subdivision (8)(a) of this division
(D) shall exceed nine months.
         (c)   Not later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and
the final date for compliance, the user shall submit a progress report to the
village including, at a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment
of progress to be met on such date and, if not, the date on which it expects to
comply with this increment of progress, the reason for delay, and the steps
being taken by the industrial user to return the construction to the schedule
established. In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such
progress reports to the village.
      (9)   Such other information as may be reasonably requested by the POTW.
      (10)   The village will evaluate the data furnished by the industrial
user and may require additional information within 90 days of submission by the
industrial user. After evaluation and acceptance of the data furnished, the
village may issue a supplemental wastewater discharge permit.
   (E)   Permit modifications.
      (1)   General industrial wastewater discharge permits issued to an
industrial user will be supplemented by the incorporation of supplemental
wastewater discharge permits for a user, which has manufacturing processes
regulated by national categorical pretreatment standards. This modification
will include the limits on average and daily maximum pollutant concentrations
from the applicable national categorical pretreatment standard and serve to
include them into the general industrial wastewater discharge permit.
      (2)   Where the national categorical pretreatment limits are modified,
the combined waste stream formula (40 CFR 403.6(e) of the General Pretreatment
Regulations), or a fundamentally different factors variance (40 CFR 403.13 of
the General Pretreatment Regulations), the limits as modified shall be made a
part of the supplemental wastewater discharge permit.
      (3)   Where an industrial user has manufacturing processes which are
regulated by more than one national categorical pretreatment standard at the
same permitted discharge location, the limitation in the supplemental
wastewater discharge permit shall be adjusted consistent with USEPA guidelines
and regulations.
   (F)   Permit conditions. Discharge permits shall be expressly subject to all
provisions of this chapter and all other applicable regulations, user charges,
and fees established by the village. General and supplemental permits may
contain the following:
      (1)   The wastewater discharge permit shall include the limits on daily
maximum and average pollutant concentrations from the applicable pretreatment
standard (which includes federal, state, and local limits) whichever is more
stringent.
      (2)   Limits on average and maximum rate and time of discharge or
requirements for flow regulations and equalization for each separate discharge
of a user.
      (3)   Requirements for installation and operation of inspection,
sampling, and monitoring facilities.
      (4)   Specifications for monitoring programs, which may include sampling
locations, frequency of sampling, number, types and standards for tests, and
reporting schedule.
      (5)   Compliance schedule.
      (6)   Requirements for submission of technical reports or discharge
reports.
      (7)   Requirements to retain for a minimum of three years any records of
monitoring activities and results relating to wastewater discharge and for
affording the village access to said records.
      (8)   Requirement for notification of the village of any new introduction
of wastewater constituents or any substantial change in the volume or character
of the wastewater constituents being introduced into the wastewater treatment
system.
      (9)   Requirements of notification of slug discharges as contained in
this chapter.
      (10)   Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the village to ensure
compliance with this chapter.
      (11)   Requirements that permittee allow the POTW or its representatives
ready access upon presentation of credentials at reasonable times to all parts
of its premises in which a discharge source or treatment systems is located or
in which records required by this chapter are kept for the purposes of
inspection, sampling, examination, and photocopying of said records and for the
performance of any of their duties.
      (12)   Requirements that permittee provide such information to the POTW
as may reasonably be required from time to time.
   (G)   Change in condition. In the event the type, quality, or volume of
wastewater from the property for which a discharge permit was previously
granted is expected to materially and substantially change as determined by the
permittee or the village, the person previously granted such permit shall give
30 days notice in writing to the village and shall make a new application to
the village prior to said change, in the same manner and form as originally
made, provided that information previously submitted and unchanged need not be
resubmitted by permittee. No permittee shall materially and substantially
change the type, quality, or volume of its wastewater beyond that allowed by
its permit without prior approval of the village.
   (H)   Duration. Permits shall be issued for a specified time period, not to
exceed five years. The user shall apply, on a form provided by the village, for
reissuance of the permit. Upon reissuance, any applicable provisions of the
supplemental wastewater discharge permit issued during term of the expiring
general wastewater discharge permit shall be incorporated as conditions of the
new general water discharge permit. The terms and conditions of the permit may
be subject to modification by the Board during the term of the permit as
limitations or requirements as identified in §53.041 are modified or other just
cause exists. Where the national categorical pretreatment standards are
modified by a removal allowance (40 CFR 403.7) or fundamentally different
factor variance for non-toxics (40 CFR 403.13) of the General Pretreatment
Regulations, the limits as modified shall be made a part of the wastewater
discharge permit and shall be adjusted consistent with USEPA guidelines and
regulations. The user shall be informed of any proposed changes in his or her
permit at least 30 days prior to the effective date of change. Where any
changes are made in user’s permit, a reasonable time shall be given to achieve
compliance.
   (I)   Transfer. Wastewater discharge permits are issued to a specific user
for the process activity specified in the permit. A wastewater discharge permit
shall not be assigned, transferred, or sold to a new owner or new user in
different premises or to a new or changed operation in the same or different
premises without the approval of the village. If the premises are sold or
otherwise transferred by the permittee to a new owner who will maintain the
operation in the same premises, then the permit held by the seller shall be
reissued by the Board to the new owner as a temporary permit, provided that the
new owner shall immediately apply for a new permit in accordance with this
chapter and further provided that the temporary permit shall only be effective
for 90 days after the date of sale or transfer. The village shall have the same
remedies for violation of temporary permits as it has for violation of other
discharge permits.
   (J)   Notification of the discharge of hazardous waste. The industrial user
shall notify the POTW, the EPA Regional Waste Management Division Director, and
state hazardous wastes authorities of any discharge into the POTW of a
substance, which is a listed or characteristic waste under Section 3001 of RCRA
(42 USC 6921). Such notification must include a description of any such wastes
discharged, specifying the volume and concentration of such wasters and the
type of discharge (continuous, batch, or other), identifying the hazardous
constituents contained in the listed wastes, and estimating the volume of
hazardous wastes expected to be discharged during the following 12 months. This
requirement shall not apply to pollutants already reported under the self-
monitoring requirements of 40 CRF 403.12(b), (d), and (e). This provision does
not create a right to discharge any substance not otherwisepermitted to be
discharged by this chapter, a permit issued thereunder, or any applicable
federal or state law.
(Ord. 03-19, passed 10-20-2003)
Penalty, see §§ 53.090 through
53.099
§ 53.042 REPORTING REQUIREMENTS FOR PERMITTEE.
   (A)   Compliance date report. Within 90 days following the date for final
compliance with applicable categorical pretreatment standards or in the case of
a new source following the commencement of the introduction of wastewater into
the POTW, any industrial user subject to pretreatment standards and
requirements shall submit to the village a report containing the information
described in §
53.041(D)(4) through (6). For industrial users subject to equivalent mass or
concentration limits established by the village in accordance with the
procedures in 40 CFR 403.6(c), this report shall contain a reasonable measure
of the user’s long term production rate. For all other industrial users subject
to categorical pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant
discharge per unit of production (or other measure of operation), this report
shall include the user's actual production during the appropriate sampling
period.
   (B)   Continued compliance reports.
      (1)   Any user required by the national pretreatment standard of the
village, after the compliance date of such pretreatment standard, or in the
case of a new source, after commencement of the discharge into the POTW, shall
submit to the village a report indicating the nature and concentration of
pollutants in the effluent. The frequency of this report typically will be
semiannually, although more frequent reports may be required by the village of
the national pretreatment standard.
      (2)   At the discretion of the village, this report shall also include
concentrations of BOD/COD/TSS or other pollutants specified by the village.
      (3)   At the discretion of the Village Administrator and in consideration
of such factors as local high or low flow rate, holidays, or budget cycles, the
Village Administrator may agree to alter the months during which the above
reports are submitted.
      (4)   Where the village has imposed mass limitations on industrial users
as provided for by 40 CFR 403.6(c), the report required by division (B)(1)
shall contain a reasonable measure of the user’s long term production rate. For
all other industrial users subject to categorical pretreatment standards
expressed only in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production
(or other measure of operation), the report required by division (B)(1) shall
include the user's actual average production rate for the reporting period.
   (C)   Notice of potential problems, including slug loading. All categorical
and non-categorical industrial discharges that could cause problems to the POTW
immediately of all including any slug loadings, as defined by 40 CFR Part 404,
by the industrial user.
   (D)   Monitoring and analysis to demonstrate continued compliance.
      (1)   The reports required in divisions (A) and (B) of this section shall
contain the results of sampling and analysis of the discharge, including the
flow, the nature and concentration, or production and mass, where requested by
the village, of pollutants contained therein which are limited by the
applicable pretreatment standards. At the village's discretion, this sampling
and analysis may be performed by the village in lieu of the industrial user.
Where the POTW performs the required sampling and analysis in lieu of the
industrial user, the user will not be required to submit the compliance
certification required under 40 CFR 403.12(b)(6) and 403.12(d). In addition,
where the POTW itself collects all the information required for the report,
including flow data, the village may waive the requirement of the industrial
user to submit the report.
      (2)   If sampling performed by an industrial user indicates a violation,
the user shall notify the village within 24 hours of becoming aware of the
violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the
results of the repeat analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to
the village within 30 days after becoming aware of the violation, except that
the industrial user is not required to resample if:
         (a)   The village performs sampling of the industrial user at a
frequency of at least once per month;or
         (b)   The village performs sampling of the user between the time when
the user performs its initial sampling and the time when the user receives the
results of this sampling.
      (3)   The reports in division (B) of this section shall be based upon
data obtained through appropriate sampling and analysis performed during the
period covered by the report, which data is representative of conditions
occurring during the reporting period. The village shall require that frequency
of monitoring necessary to assess and assure compliance by industrial users
with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements.
      (4)   All analysis shall be performed in accordance with procedures
established by the Administrator pursuant to Section 304(h) of the Act (33 USC
1314(h)) and contained in 40 CFR Part 136 and amendments thereto or with any
other test procedures approved by the Administrator. (See 40 CFR Part 136.4 and
136.5). Sampling shall be performed in accordance with the techniques approved
by the Administrator. Where 40 CFR Part 136 does not include sampling or
analytical techniques for the pollutants in question, or where the
Administrator determines that Part 136 does not include sampling or analytical
techniques for the pollutants in question or where the Administrator determines
that the Part 136 sampling and analytical techniques are inappropriate for the
pollutant in question, sampling and analyses shall be performed using validated
analytical methods or any other sampling and analytical procedures, including
procedures suggested by the POTW or other parties approved by the
Administrator.
      (5)   If an industrial user subject to the reporting requirement in
division (B) of this section monitors any pollutant more frequently than
required by the village, using the procedures prescribed in division (D)(4) of
this section, the results of this monitoring shall be included in the report.
   (E)   Reporting requirements for industrial users not subject to categorical
pretreatment standards. The village shall require appropriate reporting from
those industrial users with discharges that are not subject to categorical
pretreatment standards.
   (F)   Notification of change discharge. All industrial users shall promptly
notify the POTW in advance of any substantial change in the volume or character
of pollutants in their discharge, including the listed or characteristic
hazardous wastes for which the user has submitted initial notification under 40
CFR 403.12(p).
   (G)   Signatory reports for industrial user reports. The reports required by
divisions (A) and (B) of this section shall include the certification statement
as set forth in 40 CFR 403.6(a)(2)(ii) and shall be signed as follows:
      (1)   By a responsible corporate officer if the industrial user
submitting the reports required by divisions (A) and (B) of this section is a
corporation. For the purpose of this division, a responsible corporate officer
means:
         (a)   A president, secretary, treasurer, or vice-president of the
corporation in charge of a principal business function or any other person who
performs similar policy- or decision-making functions for the corporation; or
         (b)   The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or
operation facilities employing more than 250 persons or having gross annual
sales or expenditures exceeding $25 million (in second-quarter 1980 dollars),
if authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manger in
accordance with corporate procedures.
      (2)   By a general partner or proprietor if the industrial user
submitting the reports required by divisions (A) and (B) of this section is a
partnership or sole proprietorship respectively.
   (H)   Provisions governing fraud and false statements. The reports required
by paragraphs of 18 USC 1001 relating to fraud and false statements and the
provisions of Section 309(c)(2) of the Act (33 USC 1319(c)(4)) governing false
statements, representations, or certifications in reports required under the
Act.
(Ord. 03-19, passed 10-20-2003)
Penalty, see §§ 53.090 through
53.099
§ 53.043 DENIAL OF PERMIT AND APPEAL PROCEDURE.
   (A)   No discharge permit shall be issued by the village to any person whose
discharge of material to sewers, whether shown upon his or her application or
determined after inspection and testing conducted by the village, is not in
conformity with village ordinances and regulations, unless a variance of such
nonconformity is granted by the Board in the manner set forth in this chapter.
The pretreatment coordinator shall state the reason or reasons for denial or
requirement for variance in writing, which shall be mailed or personally
delivered to the applicant within five days after denial or determination of a
need for a variance. Where a variance is required, users shall follow the
procedures set forth in §
53.064. Such petition for variance shall be filed within 15 days of the receipt
of the Pretreatment Coordinator's requirement for a variance.
   (B)   If the application is deemed unsatisfactory by the pretreatment
coordinator, or if the discharge indicated from the permit application or
inspection is not in accordance with the requirements of this chapter, the user
may obtain review of the denial by the Board, provided that the user shall give
written notice of this request therefor within 30 days after receipt of such
denial. The Board shall review the permit application, the written denial, and
such other evidence and matters as the applicant and the village’s pretreatment
coordinator shall present at the Board's next regular meeting following receipt
of request for review, and the decision of the Board rendered publicly at said
meeting shall be final.
   (C)   In the event it is determined by the village pretreatment coordinator
that any discharge of wastewater to a sewer materially and substantially
differs in type and volume from those characteristics set forth in the
application and wastewater discharge permit issued based on said application,
the user shall be subject to revocation of the wastewater discharge permit,
disconnection, fine, and other penalties as herein provided.
(Ord. 03-19, passed 10-20-2003)
Penalty, see §§ 53.090 through
53.099
§ 53.044 MONITORING FACILITIES.
   (A)   Each industrial user whose wastewater discharge(s) has by sampling of
wastewater or other means of inspection been found to contain or have the
potential to contain incompatible priority pollutants in amounts or
concentrations which may cause interference with the wastewater treatment works
process or operation shall provide and maintain at all times monitoring
facilities, including but not limited to a manhole, as required by the village
at each applicable building sewer discharge which will allow for inspections,
sampling, and flow measurement of the discharge to the village sewer line. Such
monitoring facility shall be provided and maintained by the user on each
building sewer discharge, which contains or has the potential to contain
incompatible priority pollutants; provided, however, that an industrial user,
subject to the provisions of the national categorical pretreatment standards
shall sample and/or monitor in accordance with such standards. The village
maintains the right to require installation of monitoring facilities on
existing lines for cause.
      (1)   The monitoring facilities shall be located on the industrial user’s
premises, provided that if such location would be impractical or cause undue
hardship to the industrial user, the village may allow the facility to be
constructed in the public street or sidewalk area. Monitoring facilities
located in public streets or sidewalks shall not obstruct the flow of traffic.
Said facility shall be located so that samples may be taken safely and easily
and shall not be obstructed by landscaping, parked vehicles, or other activity
of the industrial user. Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy
access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed
by the user at the written or verbal request of the Director of Public Works or
designated representative and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such
access shall be borne by the user.
      (2)   All monitoring facilities must meet all local and village
construction codes and must be approved by the village prior to construction.
      (3)   There shall be ample room in and near such monitoring facilities to
allow accurate sampling and monitoring equipment to be installed and to prepare
samples for analysis. Such facilities shall be accessible to authorized
representatives of the village at all times upon representation of suitable
identification without delay from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., seven days per week,
provided that authorized representatives of the village personnel shall under
exceptional circumstances have access upon presentation of suitable
identification at all times, without limitation.
      (4) When requested by the village, the user shall make the entrance or
manhole to such monitoring facilities securable by a breakaway locking device.
The village shall provide complete control of access to the monitoring
facility. When required by an industrial user, village personnel shall be
available to open the monitoring facilities on 90 minute notice upon good cause
shown. Alternative means of adequately securing such monitoring facilities may
be approved by the Village Administrator upon recommendation of the Director of
Public Works. This determination shall be made when requested by the industrial
user.
      (5)   The village may require that monitoring facilities shall contain
the following equipment installed in a permanently fixed position by the
industrial user:
         (a)   Flow monitoring equipment approved by the village.
         (b)   A recording and totalizing register for measurement of the
liquid quantity; or at the discretion of the village the metered water supply
to the industrial user may be used as the liquid quantity where it is
substantiated to the Director of Public Works that the metered water supply and
waste quantities are approximately the same, or where a measurable adjustment
agreed to by the village is made in the metered water supply to determine the
liquid waste quantity.
         (c)   A dedicated source of electrical power to the monitoring
facilities of sufficient voltage and amperage to operate all equipment in the
sampling chamber. An appropriate device shall be installed by user to indicate
a power failure and length of time of such failure. Such device shall be
specified by the village and furnished by user.
      (6)   Automatic composite sampling devices provided by the user will be
installed and operated in the monitoring facility on a 24-hour basis seven days
per week. Samples will be collected by village personnel five days per week and
analyzed on a routine basis. The village will provide a split of each sample
taken from said monitoring facility upon written request of the industrial
user.
      (7)   When required, time composite samples shall be taken at a frequency
determined by the village, and properly refrigerated and preserved in
accordance with Standard Methods and 40 CFR Part 136, and shall be composited
in proportion to the flow for a representative 24-hour sample. Such sampling
shall be done as prescribed by the village.
      (8)   When a sampler has been required of a user, that user shall develop
and implement procedures that guarantee the sample collected shall be
representative of its daily effluent. The user shall inform the Director of
Public Works within one business day if a sample collected is not
representative of its daily flow.
      (9)   The frequency of sampling, sampling chamber, metering device,
sampling methods, and analyses of samples shall be subject, at any time, to
inspection and verification by the village.
   (B)   All measurements, tests, and analyses to which reference is made in
this chapter shall be determined and performed in accordance with the
procedures established by the Administrator of the United States Environmental
Protection Agency (hereafter “Administrator”) pursuant to Section 304(g) of the
Act (33 USC 1314(g)) and contained in 40 CFR Part 136 and amendments thereto or
with any other test procedures approved by the Administrator. Sampling shall be
performed in accordance with the techniques approved by the Administrator.
Where 40 CFR Part 136 does not include sampling or analytical techniques for
the pollutants in question, or where the Administrator determines that the Part
136 sampling and analytical techniques are inappropriate for the pollutant in
question, sampling and analyses shall be performed using validated analytical
methods or any other sampling and analytical procedures, including procedures
suggested by the POTW or other parties, approved by the Administrator.
(Ord. 03-19, passed 10-20-2003)
Penalty, see §§ 53.090 through
53.099
§ 53.045 INSPECTION, SAMPLING, AND RECORDS KEEPING.
   (A)   (1)   The village may inspect the facilities of users to ascertain
whether the purposes of this chapter are being met and if all requirements of
the chapter are being complied with. Persons or occupants of premises in which
a discharge source or treatment system is located or in which records are kept
shall allow the POTW or its representative, without delay, ready access upon
presentation of credentials at reasonable times to all parts of said premises
for the purpose of inspection, sampling, examination and photocopying of
records required to be kept by this chapter, and in the performance of any of
its duties.
      (2)   The village shall have the right to set up on the user’s property
such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling, monitoring, and metering
operations.
      (3)   (a)   Where a user has security or safety measures in force which
would require clearance, training, or wearing of special protective gear, the
user shall make necessary arrangements at its own expense, to enable authorized
representatives of the village, state, and USEPA to enter and inspect the
premises as guaranteed by this division.
         (b)   Where a user has security measures in force which require proper
identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the user shall
make necessary prior arrangements with its security guards so that upon
presentation of suitable identification, village representatives will be
permitted to enter without delay for the purposes of performing specific
responsibilities.
         (c)   Unreasonable delays in allowing village representatives access
to the user’s premises shall be a violation of this ordinance.
   (B)   Users and the village shall maintain records of all information
resulting from any monitoring activities required by this chapter or, in the
case of industrial users, by 40 CFR 403.12(o) of the General Pretreatment
Regulations. The village and industrial users shall maintain such records for a
minimum of three years. This period of retention shall be extended during the
course of any unresolved litigation regarding the discharge of pollutants by
the industrial user or operation of the village’s pretreatment program or when
requested by the Administrator. Such records shall include for all samples:
      (1)   The date, sampling location, sampling method, name of person(s)
collecting sample, and time of sampling.
      (2)   The dates analyses were performed, the analyst’s name in analytical
methods used, and the results.
(Ord. 03-19, passed 10-20-2003)
Penalty, see §§ 53.090 through
53.099
§ 53.046 CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION.
   (A)   Information and data relating to an industrial user obtained from
reports, questionnaires, permit applications, permits and monitoring programs
and from inspections shall be available to the public or other governmental
agency without restriction unless the user specifically requests, and is able
to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the village, that the release of such
information would divulge information, processes or methods of production
entitled to protection as trade secrets of the user. Any such request must be
asserted at the time of submission of the information or data. When requested
by the person furnishing a report, and until such time as the Board determines
that the information requested is not entitled to confidential treatment, the
portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes
shall not be made available for inspection by the public, but shall be made
available upon written request to governmental agencies for uses related to
this chapter, the national pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES)
permit, and the pretreatment programs; provided, however, that such portions of
a report shall be available for use by the State or any state agency in
judicial review or enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the
report.
   (B)   Wastewater constituents and characteristics and other “effluent data”
as defined by 40 CFR 2.302 will not be recognized as confidential information
and will be made available to the public without restriction, provided,
however, that if there is a conflict between the provisions of this section and
regulations under 40 CFR 403.14(b) the latter shall control.
   (C)   Information accepted by the village as confidential shall not be
transmitted to the general public by the POTW except in accordance with the
Illinois Freedom of Information Act. The POTW shall implement measures to
prevent the negligent release of confidential information; however, neither the
POTW nor its employees shall be held legally responsible for release of
information if they have acted in good faith.
(Ord. 03-19, passed 10-20-2003)
§ 53.047 PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL.
   (A)   Use of private sewage disposal system. Where a public sanitary sewer
is not available under the provisions of this chapter the building sewer shall
be connected to a private sewage disposal system complying with the following
provisions except that:
      (1)   No person shall construct a wastewater treatment facility within
the village or in any area under the jurisdiction of the village for the
purpose of treating domestic wastewater and discharging same to a watercourse.
      (2)   No person shall construct a wastewater treatment facility within
the village or in any area under the jurisdiction of the village for the
purpose of treating industrial wastes and discharging same to a watercourse
unless the village determines that the public wastewater facilities have
inadequate capacity, and issues a permit for the construction and operation of
a wastewater treatment facility. No village permit shall become effective
until:
         (a)   All Illinois Environmental Protection Agency permits to
construct and operate the facility havebeen received.
         (b)   An NPDES permit has been received.
         (c)   The Village Engineer has approved the plans and specifications
in writing.
      (3)   No person shall construct a private wastewater treatment facility
with subsurface disposal of the effluent if the population to be served exceeds
15 persons or the system is intended to serve more than one building.
         (a)   Permit required for private system. Before commencement of
construction of a private sewage disposal system, the owner shall first obtain
a written permit signed by the Director of Public Works. The application for
such permit shall be made on a form furnished by the village which the
applicant shall supplement by plans, specifications prepared and sealed by a
professional engineer, and other information as are deemed necessary by the
Director of Public Works. A permit and inspection fee as found in the annual
fee schedule shall be paid to the Utility Clerk at the time the application is
filed.
         (b)   Permit not effective until installation complete. A permit for a
private sewage disposal system shall not become effective until the
installation is completed to the satisfaction of the Director of Public Works.
He or she shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction
and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the Director of
Public Works when the work is ready for final inspection, and before any
underground portions are covered. The inspection shall be made within 453 hours
of the receipt of notice by the Director of Public Works.
         (c)   Type, capacities, location, and layouts. The type, capacities,
location, and layout of a private sewage disposal system shall comply with all
recommendations of the State of Illinois Private Sewage Disposal Licensing Act
(ILCS Chapter 225, Act 225, §§1 et seq.) and code with the state Environmental
Protection Agency. No permit shall be issued for any private sewage disposal
system employing subsurface soil absorption facilities where the area of the
lot is less than 43,560 square feet. No septic tank or cesspool shall be
permitted to discharge to any public sewer or natural outlet.
         (d)   Future connection required to public sewer. At such times as
public sanitary sewer becomes available to a property served by a private
sewage disposal system, as provided for in this chapter, a direct connection
shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with this ordinance, and any
septic tanks, cesspools, and similar private sewage disposal facilities shall
be abandoned and filled with suitable materials.
         (e)   Operation and maintenance of private system. The owner shall
operate and maintain the private sewage disposal system in a sanitary manner at
all times, at no expense to the village.
         (f)   Requirement of Kane County Public Health. No statement contained
in the section shall be construed to interface with any additional requirements
that may be imposed by the Kane County Department of Public Health.
         (g)   When public sewer becomes available. When a public sewer becomes
available, the building sewer shall be connected to said sewer within 12 months
and the private sewage disposal system shall be cleaned of sludge and filled
with clean bank-run gravel or dirt.
(Ord. 03-19, passed 10-20-2003)
§ 53.048 PROTECTION OF SEWAGE WORKS FROM DAMAGE.
   (A)   Damage or repair by unauthorized persons. No unauthorized person shall
maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface
or tamper with any structure, appurtenances, or equipment which is a part of
the sewerage works. No unauthorized person shall repair, remove, or replace any
equipment, appurtenances, or property of the wastewater facilities.
   (B)   Emergency limitations—wastewater. In case of making repairs or
alterations or constructing new facilities or for any other reason, the Village
President reserves the right to limit the discharge of wastewater to the
wastewater facilities for as long as may be necessary by giving such reasonable
notice thereof as shall be practicable to the user. No claim shall be made
against the village by reason of the above or by reason of the breakage or
failure of any portion of the wastewater facilities.
   (C)   Access to equipment. No person shall in any manner obstruct access to
any valve, manhole, flow measuring equipment, or any other equipment necessary
to the operation of the wastewater facilities which is located in any public
street, alley, or easement.
(Ord. 03-19, passed 10-20-2003)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 53.060 POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS.
   (A)   Permitted to enter all properties. The Director of Public Works and
other duly authorized employees of the village or the Illinois Environmental
Protection Agency bearing the proper credentials and identification shall be
permitted to enter all properties for the purpose of inspection, observation,
measurement, sampling, and testing in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter. The Director of Public Works or his or her representative shall have
no authority to inquire into any processes, including metallurgical, chemical,
oil refining, ceramic, paper, or other industries beyond that point having
direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the sewers or waterway or
facilities for waste treatment.
   (B)   Work on private property. While performing the necessary work on
private properties referred to in this chapter, the Director of Public Works or
duly authorized employees of the village, the Illinois Environmental Protection
Agency, and the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency shall observe all safety
rules applicable to the premises established by the company shall be held
harmless for injury or death to the village employees, and the village shall
indemnify the company against liability claims and demands for bodily injury or
property damage asserted against the company by the village's employees and
growing out of the gauging and sampling operation, except as such may be caused
by negligence or failure of the company to maintain conditions as required in
this chapter.
   (C)   Access to premises at all reasonable hours. The Director of Public
Works and such persons authorized by him or her shall be permitted to enter and
have free access at all reasonable hours to buildings, premises, or places
containing any water or sewer connections, branches, or plumbing or plumbing
work connected with the water or sewer system to ascertain the location and
condition thereof and all fixtures connections therewith. If upon such
inspection or otherwise it is found that on account of negligence or for want
of repairs there is a waste of water in such connections, branches, plumbing or
plumbing work, and the owner or person in possession in charge thereof fails to
have such defects immediately remedied and such waste stopped, it shall be the
duty of the Director of Public Works or some person directed by him or her to
leave a notice of such waste of water at the premises with someone in
possession thereof, or if no one is found in possession, by posting the same
upon such premises, and if such defects are not remedied and such waste stopped
with 24 hours after giving or posting such notice, the water shall be shut off
and shall not be turned on again until the sum as provided in the village
annual fee schedule, in addition to all rents due, has been paid to the
village.
   (D)   Work on easements. The Director of Public Works and other duly
authorized employees of the village bearing proper credentials and
identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which
the village holds a duly negotiated easement for the purpose of, but not
limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair, and
maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying within said easement. All
entry and subsequent work, if any, on said easement, shall be done in full
accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the
private property involved.
(Ord. 03-19, passed 10-20-2003)
§ 53.061 WASTEWATER SERVICE CHARGES.
   (A)   Basis for wastewater service charges. The wastewater service charge
for the use of and for service supplied by the wastewater facilities of the
village shall consist of a user charge for the operation and maintenance plus
replacement, a debt service charge, a surcharge if applicable, and such other
charges as the village deems necessary.
   (B)   User charge levied on all users.
      (1)   The user charge is levied on all users to recover the operation,
maintenance plus replacement (O,M,&R) costs and shall be based on water usage
as recorded by water meters or sewage meters for wastes having the following
normal domestic concentrations:
         (a)   A five-day, 20°C, biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) of 300 mg/l.
         (b)   A suspended solids content of 300 mg/l.
      (2)   The user charge shall be computed as follows:
         (a)   Estimate the annual wastewater volume, pounds of BOD, and pounds
of SS to be treated.
         (b)   Estimate the projected annual revenue required to operate and
maintain the wastewater facilities, including a replacement fund for the year,
for all work categories.
         (c)   Proportion the estimated O,M,&R costs to each user class by
volume, BOD, and SS.
         (d)   Compute costs per 1,000 gallons for normal domestic strength.
         (e)   Compute surcharge costs per pound for BOD and SS concentrations
in excess of normal domestic strengths.
      (3)   The user charge is computed by dividing the number of units of flow
of wastewater from all sources into the annual revenue required less the
estimated surcharge payments to be received. The resultant charge is expressed
in dollars per thousand gallons of wastewater.
   (C)   Debt service charge. The debt service charge is levied on all users
and may be computed by apportioning the annual debt service by one of the
following methods:
      (1)   As a charge per 1,000 gallons.
      (2)   As a fixed charge per billing period.
      (3)   As a fixed charge plus a charge per 1,000 gallons.
   (D)   Capital improvement charge (connection fee). The capital improvement
charge is levied as a connection fee on users to provide for the capital
improvements, extensions, or reconstruction of the sewage treatment works. The
capital improvement charge is computed and assessed as a fixed charge per P.E.
estimated to be used by the user.
   (E)   Surcharge.
      (1)   A surcharge will be levied to all users whose waters exceed the
normal domestic concentrations of BOD (300 mg/l) and SS (300 mg/l). The
surcharge will be based on water usage as recorded by water meters for all
wastes which exceed the 300 mg/l and 300 mg/l concentrations for BOD and SS
respectively and set by the Director of Public Works.
      (2)   The concentration of wastes used for computing surcharges shall be
established by waste sampling. Waste sampling shall be performed as often as
may be deemed necessary by the Director of Public Works and shall be binding as
a basis for surcharges.
   (F)   Other charges. The village may declare a rate to provide funds for
such other costs as may be applicable to the wastewater facilities. Such rate,
if established, shall be applicable to all users.
   (G)   Adequacy of wastewater service charge. The adequacy of the wastewater
service charge shall be reviewed, not less often than annually, by certified
public accountants for the village in their annual audit report. The wastewater
service charge shall be reviewed periodically to reflect a change in local
O,M,&R costs.
   (H)   Notification of rates. The users of the wastewater treatment services
will be notified annually, in conjunction with a regular bill, of the rate and
that portion of the user charges, which are attributable to the wastewater
operation, maintenance, and replacement.
   (I)   Measurement of flow. The volume of flow used for computing basic user
charges and surcharges shall be metered water consumption read to the lowest
even increments of 1,000 gallons.
      (1)   If the person discharging waste into the public sewers procure any
part, any part, or all, of his or her water from sources other than the public
waterworks system, all or part of which is discharged into the public sewers,
the person shall install and maintain, at his or her expense, water meters of a
type approved by the Director of Public Works for the purpose of determining
the volume of water obtained from these other sources.
      (2)   Devices for measuring the volume of waste discharged may be
required by the Director of Public Works if these volumes cannot otherwise be
determined from the metered water consumption records.
      (3)   Metering devices for determining the volume of waste shall be
installed, owned, and maintained by the person. Following approval and
installation, such meters may not be removed, unless service is cancelled,
without the consent of the Director of Public Works.
(Ord. 03-19, passed 10-20-2003)
§ 53.062 RATES.
   (A)   Wastewater sewer user charge. There shall be and there is hereby
established a monthly user charge/fee on a fiscal year basis as established in
the annual fee schedule per 1,000 gallons to each user of the wastewater
facility.
   (B)   Fixed charge. There shall be and there is hereby established a monthly
fixed charge/fee on a fiscal year basis including debt service based on the
size of the water meter as established in the annual fee schedule to each user
of the wastewater facility.
   (C)   Capital improvement charge (connection fee). There shall be and there
is hereby established a capital improvement charge (connection fee) as
established in the annual fee schedule by dwelling unit for residential, and
per P.E. for all other users of the wastewater facility.
   (D)   Minimum charge.
      (1)   A minimum charge may be established in the annual fee schedule and
shall be applied to all users whose consumption does not exceed a set gallonage
per billing period. This minimum charge shall be established in the annual fee
schedule.
      (2)   Usage in excess of the set gallonage per billing period will be
charged a fee as established in the annual fee schedule per 1,000 gallons.
      (3)   Where a connection services more than one dwelling unit on a
property either within the corporate limits or outside of the corporate limits,
the minimum charge shall be the number of dwelling units served by the service
times the minimum bill or the actual number of gallons used, multiplied by the
currently established sewer rate plus the other current charges, whichever is
greater.
   (E)   Non-metered users. All non-metered users of the wastewater facilities
shall pay a flat rate charge as established in the annual fee schedule. In the
event use of the wastewater facilities is determined by the Director of Public
Works to be in excess of 20,000 gallons per billing period, the Director of
Public Works may require flat rate users to install metering devices on the
water supply or sewer main to measure the amount of service supplied.
   (F)   Surcharge rates. The rates of surcharges for BOD and SS shall be as
established by the Director of Public Works.
   (G)   Effective date of rates. The rates and service charges established for
user charges shall be effective on bills to be rendered for the next succeeding
billing period after approval and authorization of the Village Board. A copy of
said wastewater service charges shall be filed in the office of the Village
Clerk and shall be deemed notice to all owners of real estate of their
liability for service supplied to any user of the service of the wastewater
facilities of the village, on their properties.
   (H)   Appeals. The method for computation of rates and service charges
established for user charges shall be made available to a user within 14 days
of receipt of a written request for such. Any disagreement over the method used
or in the computations thereof shall be remedied by the Director of Public
Works within 14 days after notification of a formal written appeal outlining
the discrepancies.
   (I)   Sewer debt reduction fee. All sewer accounts connected to the
village’s sewer system will be assessed a fee as stated in the fee schedule.
This fee will expire after the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency loan
entered into in 1997, is paid in full after the fiscal year ending April 30,
2018, or until the loan is paid off.
(Ord. 03-19, passed 10-20-2003; Am. Ord. 09-21, passed 8-3-2009; Am. Ord. 17-
25, passed 5-1-2017)
§ 53.063 BILLING PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Billing duties. It is hereby made the duty of the Director of Finance
or his or her designee to render bills for service and for all rates and
charges in connection therewith and to collect all monies due thereon.
   (B)   Manner of billing.
      (1)   Said rates or charges for service shall be payable bimonthly
depending upon the classification of service for which bills are rendered. The
owner of the premises, the occupant thereof, and the user of the service shall
be jointly and severally liable to pay for the service to such premises, and
the service is furnished to the premises by the village only upon the condition
that the owner of the premises, occupant, and user of the services are jointly
and severally liable therefor to the village.
      (2)   All sewer bills are due and payable 21 days after being sent out.
   (C)   Late penalty fee. A 10% late penalty shall be assessed to the account
if payment is not received prior to issuance of the next bill.
   (D)   Non-sufficient funds fee. A penalty sum of (established in the annual
fee schedule) for any check returned for non-sufficient funds shall be added to
any bill to which attempted prior payment was made by such non-sufficient
check. If there are two checks returned from the bank within a one-year time
period, no further checks shall be accepted from the customer unless the checks
are certified, until there is an acceptable payment history for a further one-
year period.
   (E)   Whenever a bill for utility service remains unpaid for three
consecutive billing cycles after it has been rendered it shall be deemed and is
hereby declared delinquent, as provided by law. The Director of Finance or his
or her designee may, in his or her discretion, send the unpaid invoices to a
collection agency, proceed with utility service termination, file with the
county recorder of deeds a statement of lien claim or proceed with any other
remedy available to the village under this code or state or federal law.
   (F)   Disconnection/termination of service.
      (1)   If the rates or charges for service or industrial cost recovery are
not paid for three consecutive billing cycles, the Director of Finance or his
or her designee, is hereby authorized to notify in writing the owner of the
premises, the occupancy thereof, and the user of the service, that such
delinquency exists and that service shall be disconnected without further
notice.
      (2)   The Director of Finance or his or her designee shall also cause a
disconnection notice to be posted on the property.
      (3)   Ten days after the shut off notice has been posted, and payment not
received, all applicable utility services shall be terminated.
   (G)   Discontinuing service. Any person wishing to discontinue service shall
give notice to the Director of Finance or his or her designee prior to the
expiration of the time for which payment has been made or become due and
remaining unpaid; otherwise, he or she shall be liable for the charge for the
ensuing billing period.
(Ord. 03-19, passed 10-20-2003; Am. Ord. 22-29, passed 6-6-2022)
§ 53.064 LIEN—NOTICE OF DELINQUENCY.
   (A)   Lien—notice of delinquency.
      (1)   Whenever a bill for sewer service remains unpaid for three
consecutive billing cycles for the bi-monthly service after it has been
rendered, the Director of Finance or his or her designee may file with the
County Recorder of Deeds, a legal statement of lien claim. This statement shall
contain the legal description of the premises served, the amount of the unpaid
bill, and a notice that the village claims a lien for this amount as well as
for all charges subsequent to the period covered by the bill.
      (2)   If the user whose bill is unpaid is not the owner of the premises
and the village has notice of this, notice shall be mailed to the owner of the
premises if his or her address be known to the village, whenever such bill
remains unpaid for three consecutive billing cycles for a bi-monthly bill after
it has been rendered.
      (3)   The failure of the Director of Finance or his or her designee to
record such lien or to mail such notice or the failure of the owner to receive
such notice shall not affect the right to foreclose the lien for unpaid bill as
mentioned in this section.
   (B)   Foreclosure of lien. Property subject to a lien for unpaid charges
shall be sold for non-payment of the same, and the proceeds of the sale shall
be applied to pay the charges, after deducting costs, as is the case in the
foreclosure of statutory liens. Such foreclosure shall be bill-in equity in the
name of the village. The Village Attorney is hereby authorized and directed to
institute such proceedings in the name of the village in any court having
jurisdiction over such matters against any property for which the bill has
remained unpaid for a time period as specified in the ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, §
11-139-8.
(Ord. 03-19, passed 10-20-2003; Am. Ord. 22-29, passed 6-6-2022)
§ 53.065 REVENUES.
   (A)   Revenues.
      (1)   All revenues and monies derived from the operation of the sewage
system shall be deposited in the sewerage account of the sewerage fund. All
such revenues and monies shall be held by the Village Treasurer separate and
apart from his or her private funds and separate and apart from all other funds
of the village and all of said sum, without any deductions whatever, shall be
delivered to the Village Treasurer not more than two days receipt of same, or
at such more frequent intervals as from time to time be directed by the
President and Board of Trustees.
      (2)   The Village Treasurer shall receive all such revenues from the
sewerage system and all other funds and monies incident to the operation of
such system as the same may be delivered to him or her and deposit the same in
the account of the fund designated as the sewerage fund of the village. Said
Treasurer shall administer such fund in every respect in the manner provided by
state statute.
   (B)   Capital connection gees and other fees. All revenues and monies
derived from connection fees and other fees shall be deposited in a wastewater
improvement fund. Said fund shall be used solely for the improvement,
extension, or the betterment of the wastewater facilities.
(Ord. 03-19, passed 10-20-2003)
§ 53.066 ACCOUNTS.
   (A)   System of accounts.
      (1)   The Village Treasurer shall establish a proper system of accounts
and shall keep proper books, records, and accounts in which complete and
correct entries shall be made of all transactions relative to the sewerage
system, and at regular annual intervals he or she shall cause to be made an
audit by an independent auditing concern of the books to show the receipts and
disbursements of the sewerage system.
      (2)   In addition to the customary operating statements, the annual
report shall also reflect the revenues and operating expenses of the wastewater
facilities, including a replacement cost, to indicate that sewer service
charges under the waste cost recovery system do in fact meet these regulations.
   (B)   Operating summary report. Concurrently with the preparation of the
annual audit, the Director of Public Works shall prepare an operating summary
of the wastewater facilities for the fiscal year including the following data
and such other information as deemed necessary:
      (1)   Flow data showing total gallons received at the wastewater plan for
the current fiscal year.
      (2)   Billing data to show total number of gallons billed per fiscal
year.
      (3)   Debt service for the next succeeding fiscal year.
      (4)   Number of users connected to the wastewater system.
      (5)   Number of non-metered wastewater users.
      (6)   A list of the users discharging non-domestic and industrial wastes
and volume of waste discharged.
      (7)   A list of users with private wastewater facilities, if any.
      (8)   A list of users charged a surcharge with a summary of charges.
   (C)   Access to records. The IEPA or its authorized representative shall
have access to any books, documents, papers and records of the village which
are applicable to the village system of user charges for the purpose of making
audit, examination, excerpts, and transcriptions thereof to insure compliance
with the terms of any special and general conditions to any state grant or
state loan.
(Ord. 03-19, passed 10-20-2003)
§ 53.067 VALIDITY.
   If any section, paragraph, clause, or provision of this chapter shall be
held to be invalid, or unenforceable for any reason, the invalidity or
unenforceability of such section, paragraph, or clause of this provision shall
not affect any of the remaining provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 03-19, passed 10-20-2003)
ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES AND PENALTIES
§ 53.080 GENERAL.
   Should analysis by the village of the discharge of any user show that such
discharge exceeds standards specified in §§53.021 through 53.023 or any
condition of a user's general or supplemental wastewater discharge permit, the
village may, at its option, institute voluntary compliance proceedings as
outlined in §53.081, or take such other actions as are authorized by this
chapter, statutes, regulations at law or in equity. Additionally, should the
village at its option, elect to begin voluntary compliance proceedings as
outlined in §53.081 and then determine that such proceedings are ineffective or
futile or are likely to be ineffective or futile if continued, it may terminate
said voluntary compliance proceedings at such point and, at the option of the
Board of Trustees, require the user to attend a standards meeting as outlined
in §53.082(B), or proceed with any other remedies authorized by this chapter,
statutes, regulations, at law or in equity.
(Ord. 03-19, passed 10-20-2003)
§ 53.081 VOLUNTARY COMPLIANCE PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Voluntary user program—user initiated. Should a user present to the
village, at any time prior to being required to do so by the village,
information, data, plans, schedules, and the like relating to a proposed
procedure for the prevention of discharges in violation of the provisions of
this chapter, the village may receive such material and initiate procedures for
the preparation of a compliance directive relating to that user without the
need for review and standards meetings. Neither the presentation of material to
the village nor the acceptance of such material by the village nor the
commencement of procedures for the issuance of a compliance directive shall
prevent the village from issuing any notice of violation nor does it exempt any
user from the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   Voluntary program—village initiated.
      (1)   The following voluntary proceedings between the village and a user
whose wastewater has been shown to violate the user's wastewater discharge
permit or any provisions of §§53.021 through 53.023 may be followed by the
village in an effort to assist the user and to ensure compliance with this
chapter short of court action. The proceedings outlined in this section are
voluntary and are not to be construed as conditions precedent for the village
using any of the remedies set forth in this chapter, or by law.
      (2)   Should analysis by the village indicate that the limitations or
discharge have been exceeded in the discharge of a user, a violation is
presumed to have occurred. The village shall notify the user, in writing,
(which writing is hereinafter called “Notice of Review”) as to the particulars
of such presumed violation and set a time and place for a meeting (hereinafter
called a “Review Meeting”) to be attended by representatives of the village and
the user. The purpose of this meeting shall be to discuss and establish means
of preventing violations of any of the limitation on discharge.
(Ord. 03-19, passed 10-20-2003)
§ 53.082 COMPULSORY COMPLIANCE PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Generally.
      (1)   When the village finds that a user has violated, or continues to
violate any provision of this chapter, a discharge permit or order issued
hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the village may
serve upon that user a written notice of violation. Within 15 days of receipt
of this notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory
correction and prevention thereof, to include specific required actions, shall
be submitted by the user to the village.
      (2)   Submission of this plan in no way relieves the user of liability
for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of
violation. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the village to
take any action, including emergency actions or any other enforcement action,
without first issuing a notice of violation.
   (B)   Standards meeting. Should a violation by a user occur following the
issuance of a notice of violation or after a review meeting with that user, the
village shall notify the offending user, in writing, through a “notice of
standards meeting” as to the particulars of such violation or violations and
set a time and place for a meeting (hereinafter called a “standards meeting”)
to be attended by representatives of the village and the user. The village may,
upon determination that a violation has occurred, send the user notice of
standards meeting without first having a review meeting or follow any
procedures under §
53.081 hereof. The purpose of such a meeting shall be to establish such
procedure, investigations, and studies as the village deems necessary and
desirable for the determination of such action as it may require of the user to
control and prevent discharges in violation of the limitations on discharge.
   (C)   Compliance directive. Following the completion of the investigation
and studies described in division (A) above, the village may direct and require
the user to take such action as may be required to control and prevent
discharges in violation of the limitations on discharge, including pretreatment
of those wastewaters which contain or may contain pollutants subject to
limitations on discharge. If the village has sufficient information at the time
of the standards meeting to determine necessary action, it may, at the time of
the standards meeting, direct and require the user to take such action,
including pretreatment, without further investigation or study, and the user
shall comply. The user shall cooperate fully with the village in making such
investigations and studies as may be required. Following a directive in
writing, hereinafter called “compliance directive,” by the village to require
the user to take necessary action, the user shall within 90 days, submit to the
village for review, a schedule for compliance and preliminary information
regarding any pretreatment facilities to be provided. Such preliminary
information shall include, without limitation, the nature and type of
facilities and equipment proposed, their general location and the degree of
treatment anticipated. The village shall review and discuss the schedule and
preliminary information with the user. Final acceptance by the village,
following discussions with the user, shall be within 30 days of the submittal
of an acceptable schedule and plans to the village. Such approval does not
release the user from responsibility for compliance with the provisions of this
chapter, either before or after any pretreatment facilities are operational,
nor does such approval constitute a liability of the village should be
facilities fail to produce an acceptable pollutant concentration. The user
shall keep the village informed as to the progress of work to provide required
pretreatment. Failure to comply with a compliance directive of the village
regarding pretreatment facilities or failure to comply with the schedule, as
approved, shall be deemed a violation of the provisions of this chapter and may
be grounds for revocation of the user’s wastewater discharge permit.
   (D)   Variance; procedures. Any user issued a compliance directive under the
provisions of this section relevant to §
53.022 shall apply for a variance at least five days prior to the next Board
meeting, and petition the Board for a variance or variances in accordance with
§
53.084. Failure to apply shall be a violation of the chapter and subject the
user to the penalties provided in §§ 53.075 et seq. Except as provided in §
53.084, no variance granted pursuant to the terms of this chapter may allow
discharge greater than 2.5 times the limitation on discharge for specific
pollutants or shall last longer than the term of a compliance directive issued
in accordance with division (C) above.
(Ord. 03-19, passed 10-20-2003)
§ 53.083 SUSPENSION OF SERVICE AND REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   (A)   Responsibility of the Board of Trustees. The Board shall have
responsibility for reviewing all requests for revocation of wastewater
discharge permits, disconnection of users from the village POTW, revocation of
variance granted under provisions of this chapter and appeals under the
procedures established in §
53.065. Only the Board shall have the authority to approve such revocation of
permits, variances, and disconnection of building sanitary sewers, and only the
Board shall be empowered to take final action on appeals.
   (B)   Conditions for revocatition. Any user who violates this chapter, or
applicable state and federal statutes and regulations, or the following, is
subject to having its permit revoked in accordance with the procedures of this
section.
      (1)   Failure of a user to report factually the wastewater constituents
and characteristics of its discharge as determined by the use’s or the
village’s analysis.
      (2)   Failure of the user to provide prior notification of significant
changes in process activity or wastewater constituents and characteristics.
      (3)   Refusal of reasonable access to the user’s premises by village
representatives for the purpose of inspection or monitoring.
      (4)   Tampering with, disrupting, or destroying village equipment as
determined by the Board, by a preponderance of evidence, which determination
shall be final.
      (5)   Failure to report an accidental discharge of a pollutant in a
reportable quantity.
      (6)   Failure to report an upset of user’s treatment facilities.
      (7)   Violations of conditions of the permit.
      (8)   Discharges which present or may present an endangerment to the
environment or which threatens to interfere with the operation of the POTW.
      (9)   Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the wastewater discharge
permit application.
      (10)   Misrepresentation of or failure to disclose fully all relevant
facts in the wastewater discharge permit application.
      (11)   Falsifying self-monitoring reports.
      (12)   Failure to meet effluent limitations or compliance schedules.
      (13)   Failure to pay fines or sewer use charges. Wastewater discharge
permits shall be voidable upon cessation of operations or transfer of business
ownership. All wastewater discharge permits issued to a particular user are
void upon the issuance of a new wastewater discharge permit to that user.
   (C)   Show cause hearing.
      (1)   The General Manager may order any user who causes or allows an
unauthorized discharge to show cause before the Board why the proposed
enforcement action should not be taken. A notice shall be served on the user
specifying the time and place of hearing to be held by the Board regarding the
violation, the reasons why the action is to be taken, and the proposed
enforcement action, and directing the user to show cause before the Board why
the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the hearing
shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail, return receipt
requested, at least five days before the hearing. Service may be made on any
agent or officer of a corporation.
      (2)   The Board shall develop rules of procedure and evidence for the
conduct of such hearings. The Board may itself conduct the hearing and take the
evidence or may designate any of its members or any member of its legal staff
to:
         (a)   Issue, in the name of the Board, notices of hearings requesting
the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of evidence
relevant to any matter involved in such hearing.
         (b)   Take the evidence.
         (c)   Transmit a report of the evidence and hearing, including
transcripts and other evidence, together with recommendations to the Board for
action thereon.
      (3)   At any hearing held pursuant to this chapter, testimony taken must
be under oath and recorded stenographically. The transcript, so recorded, will
be made available to any member of the public or any party to the hearing upon
payment of the usual charges therefor.
      (4)   After the Board has reviewed the evidence, it may issue an order to
the user responsible for the discharge directing either:
         (a)   That the wastewater discharge permit be revoked and the service
be disconnected; or
         (b)   That following a specified time, the permit shall be revoked and
sewer service disconnected or discontinued unless adequate treatment
facilities, devices, or other related appurtenances have been installed and
operate properly to comply with the wastewater discharge permit; or
         (c)   That the permit be revoked and the user directed to cease the
unauthorized discharge effective after a specified period of time; or
         (d)   That such other relief as deemed necessary, including but not
limited to disconnection of service and levy of fines, as deemed necessary by
the Board to abate the discharge be granted. Further orders and directives as
necessary may be issued.
      (5)   Following an order or revocation, the user shall cease to discharge
wastewater, other than sanitary wastewater, to the village POTW. Failure to do
so shall be evidence of continuing harm to the village and provide grounds for
an order of disconnection or for the granting of injunctive relief or temporary
restraining orders.
(Ord. 03-19, passed 10-20-2003)
§ 53.084 VARIANCE.
   (A)   To the extent consistent with the applicable provisions of the Act and
the Illinois Environmental Protection Act (ILCS Chapter 415 , Act 5, §§ 1 et
seq., as amended from time to time), the Board may grant individual variances
beyond the limitations prescribed in §
53.022. The maximum variances on limitation on discharge (hereinafter “maximum
variance”) shall be 2.5 times the limitation on dischargefor specific
pollutants, provided, however, that the Board may, upon a showing by a
petitioner, that said maximum variance would be insufficient.
   (B)   In granting a variance, the Board may impose such conditions,
exceptions, time limitations, duration, and other limitations as the policies
of this chapter, the Illinois Environmental Protection Act, and the Act may
require. Except as provided by this section, any variance granted by the Board
shall not exceed two years and shall be granted upon the condition that the
person who received such variance shall make such periodic progress reports as
the Board shall specify. Such variance may be extended from year to year by
affirmative action of the Board for up to a maximum of five years but only if
satisfactory progress has been shown.
   (C)   Any person seeking a variance shall do so by filing a petition for
variance with the General Manager on forms provided by the village. The village
shall specify information required to be submitted by the petitioner. The
General Manager shall investigate such petition, consider the views of persons
who might be adversely affected by the granting of a variance, and make a
report to the Board of the disposition of the petition. If the Board, in its
discretion, concludes that a hearing would be advisable or if the General
Manager or any other person files a written objection to the granting of such
variance within 15 days, then a hearing shall be held under the provisions of
§53.083(C) and the burden of proof shall be on the petitioner.
(Ord. 03-19, passed 10-20-2003)
§ 53.085 UPSETS.
   (A)   Compliance requirements. An upset shall constitute an affirmative
defense to an action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment
standards if the user can demonstrate that it has been in consistent compliance
with all applicable pretreatment standards and if the requirements of divisions
(B), (C) and (D) below are met.
   (B)   User requirements. An industrial user who wishes to establish the
affirmative defense of upset shall demonstrate, through properly signed,
contemporaneous operating logs, or other relevant evidence that:
      (1)   An upset occurred and the industrial user can identify the cause(s)
of the upset.
      (2)   The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and
workmanlike manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance
procedures; and
      (3)   The industrial user has submitted the following information to the
village and control authority immediately (within 24 hours) upon becoming aware
of the upset (if this information is provided orally, a written submission must
be provided within five days):
         (a)   A description of the indirect discharge and cause of
noncompliance;
         (b)   The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times or,
if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to
continue; and
         (c)   Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate, and
prevent recurrence of the compliance.
   (C)   Burden of proof. In any enforcement proceeding the industrial user
seeking to establish the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof.
   (D)   User responsibility in case of upset. The industrial user shall
control production or all discharges to the extent necessary to maintain
compliance with all applicable regulations upon reduction, loss, or failure of
its treatment facility until the facility is restored or an alternative method
of treatment is provided. This requirement applies in the situation where,
among other things, the primary source of power of the treatment facility is
reduced, lost, or fails.
(Ord. 03-19, passed 10-20-2003)
PENALTIES AND COSTS
§ 53.090 GENERAL.
   Any user who is found to have violated an order of the Board of Trustees or
who has failed to comply with any provision of this chapter or the orders,
rules, regulations, and permits issued hereunder may be fined in an amount not
less than $50 and not to exceed $1,000 dollars for each violation in accordance
with the terms and provisions of Section 6.1 of the “Sanitary District of 1917”
(ILCS Chapter 70, Act 2405, § 6.1). For the purpose of this section, each day
in which any such violation shall occur, shall be deemed a separate violation,
and a separate violation shall be deemed to have occurred for each constituent
listed in §§
53.021 through
53.023 of this chapter found to exceed the limits established in this chapter
during any such day. For each separate violation, each such person may be fined
an amount not less than $50 and not to exceed $1,000. In addition to the
penalties provided herein, the village may recover reasonable attorney’s fees,
court costs, and other expenses of litigation by appropriate court action
against the person found to have violated this chapter or the orders, rules,
regulations, and permits issued hereunder.
(Ord. 03-19, passed 10-20-2003)
§ 53.091 INJUNCTIVE RELIEF.
   In addition to the fine levied upon conviction of a violator, the Board of
Trustees may, where the circumstances of the particular case so dictate, direct
the attorney for the village to seek injunctive relief to prohibit the user
from discharging into the sanitary sewer system, or to provide such affirmative
relief as may be appropriate.
(Ord. 03-19, passed 10-20-2003)
§ 53.092 RESTRAINING ORDERS.
   The village may upon discovering an ongoing or potential discharge of
pollutants to village POTW which reasonably appears to present an imminent
danger to the health of welfare of persons, seek and obtain from the Circuit
Court of Kane County a temporary restraining order or halt to prohibit such
discharge. Prior to the filling of such petition, the discharger shall be given
informal notice of the village's intention to file such action. Methods of
informal notice shall include, but not be limited to, any of the following:
personal conversation between discharger and village employees, telephone
calls, letters, hand-delivered messages or notices posted at the discharger's
premises or point of discharge. Personal contact between village personnel and
the discharger shall be attempted but shall not be condition precedent to the
village's petition for and obtaining of a temporary restraining order.
(Ord. 03-19, passed 10-20-2003)
§ 53.093 SHOW CAUSE HEARING.
   The village may, upon discovering an ongoing or potential discharge to the
village POTW which presents or may present a danger to the environment or which
threatens to interfere with the operation of the POTW, immediately issue an
order to the discharger to show cause before the Board of Trustees why the
village should not suspend service, revoke the discharger's wastewater
discharge permit, disconnect the user from the POTW, or seek injunctive relief
to prohibit the discharger from making the discharge. Procedures to be followed
by the Board of Trustees in the show cause hearing and in subsequent actions by
the Board shall be in accordance with §§
53.083(C)(2) through (C)(5), except thatnotice of the hearing shall be served
personally or by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, no
less than 24 hours nor more than 72 hours before the hearing. In show cause
hearings called under this section, the person making personal service shall
note the time of delivery of the noticeon the return.
(Ord. 03-19, passed 10-20-2003)
§ 53.094 REMEDIES NON-EXCLUSIVE.
   The remedies hereinabove provided shall not be exclusive, and the village
may seek whatever other remedies are authorized by statue, at law or in equity,
against any person violating the provision of this chapter,
(Ord. 03-19, passed 10-20-2003)
§ 53.095 FALSIFICATION.
   Any person who knowingly makes any false statements, representation, or
certification in any application, records, report, plan, or other document
filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this chapter or wastewater
discharge permit, or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders
inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this chapter, shall
be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction be punished by a fine of not
more than $1,000 or shall be incarcerated in a penal institution other than the
penitentiary for a period not be exceed six months.
(Ord. 03-19, passed 10-20-2003)
§ 53.096 PUBLIC NOTIFICATION OF SIGNIFICANT VIOLATORS.
   The village shall annually publish in a newspaper of general circulation
within the village a list of industrial users who are classed as being in
significant noncompliance (as per 40 CFR Part 403) of any pretreatment
requirements or standards during the previous 12 months. The notification may
also summarize any enforcement actions taken against the user(s) during the
same 12 months.
(Ord. 03-19, passed 10-20-2003)
§ 53.097 ADDITIONAL REMEDIES.
   (A)   In addition to remedies available to the village set forth elsewhere
in this chapter, if the village is fined by the IEPA or USEPA for violation of
the village's NPDES permit or violation of water quality standards as the
result of an industrial spill or intentional slug discharge of a compatible or
incompatible pollutant, then the fine, including all village legal, sampling,
analytical testing costs and any other related costs shall be charged to the
responsible industry. Such charge shall be in addition to, and not in lieu of,
any other remedies the village may have under this chapter, statutes,
regulations, at law or in equity.
   (B)   If the discharge from any industrial user causes a deposit,
obstruction, or damage to any of the POTW wastewater facility, the POTW shall
cause the deposit or obstruction to be promptly removed or cause the damage to
by promptly repaired. The cost for such work, including materials, labor, and
supervision, shall be borne by the person or industrial user causing such
deposit, obstruction, or damage.
(Ord. 03-19, passed 10-20-2003)
§ 53.098 IMMEDIATE DISCONNECTION OF SERVICE.
   (A)   Conditions for immediate disconnection of service. Any industrial user
is subject to immediate disconnection of service under either of the following
conditions:
      (1)   Whenever immediate disconnection is required to halt or prevent any
discharge of pollutants to the POTW which reasonably appears to the General
Manager to present an imminent endangerment to the health or welfare of
persons, the environment, or the POTW; or
      (2)   Whenever the industrial user's wastewater discharge permit is
revoked.
   (B)   Procedures for immediate disconnection. Notwithstanding §§
53.082 and
53.083, the General Manager shall have authority, after informal notice to the
industrial user, immediately and effectively to halt or prevent any discharge
of pollutants to the POTW that reasonably appears to present an imminent
endangerment to the health or welfare of persons. When the General Manager
determines that such an emergency situation exists, he or she shall issue a
verbal order (followed immediately by a written order) to the industrial user
stating the problem and requiring immediate cessation of the discharge. The
General Manager's actions may include disconnection of wastewater collection
service. The General Manager shall obtain the concurrence of the POTW attorney
before initiating action. Methods of informal notice shall include, but not be
limited to, any of the following: personal conversation between the industrial
user and POTW employees, telephone calls, letters, hand-delivered messages, or
notices posted at the industrial user's premises or point of discharge.
(Ord. 03-19, passed 10-20-2003)
§ 53.099 ELIMINATION OF DISCHARGE/REINSTATEMENT.
   Any industrial user notified of a disconnection of wastewater treatment
service under §§
53.082 and
53.083 and/or revocation or suspension of its wastewater discharge permit shall
immediately stop or eliminate the discharge. In the event of a failure of the
industrial user to comply voluntarily with the disconnection or revocation or
suspension order, the POTW shall take such steps as deemed necessary, including
immediate blockage or severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize
damage to the POTW system or danger to any person. If the General Manager
exercises authority under §
53.083(A)(1), the General Manager shall reinstate the wastewater treatment
service upon proof of the elimination of the non-complying discharge.
Reinstatement shall be accomplished by the discharger under the supervision of
the General Manager or designated agent and at the expense of the discharger.
(Ord. 03-19, passed 10-20-2003)
CHAPTER 54: CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE RIGHTS-OF-WAY
Section
   
54.01   Purpose and scope
   
54.02   Definitions
   
54.03   Annual registration required
   
54.04   Permit required; applications and fees
   
54.05   Action on permit applications
   
54.06   Effect of permit
   
54.07   Revised permit drawings
   
54.08   Insurance
   
54.09   Indemnification
   
54.10   Security
   
54.11   Permit suspension and revocation
   
54.12   Change of ownership or owner's identity or legal status
   
54.13   General construction standards
   
54.14   Traffic control
   
54.15   Location of facilities
   
54.16   Construction methods and materials
   
54.17   Vegetation control
   
54.18   Removal, relocation, or modifications of utility facilities
   
54.19   Clean-up and restoration
   
54.20   Maintenance and emergency maintenance
   
54.21   Variances
   
54.22   Enforcement
 
   
54.99   Penalty
§ 54.01 PURPOSE AND SCOPE.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to establish policies and
procedures for constructing facilities on rights-of-way within the village's
jurisdiction, which will provide public benefit consistent with the
preservation of the integrity, safe usage, and visual qualities of the village
rights-of-way and the village as a whole.
   (B)   Intent. In enacting this chapter, the village intends to exercise its
authority over the rights-of-way in the village and, in particular, the use of
the public ways and property by utilities, by establishing uniform standards to
address issues presented by utility facilities, including without limitation:
      (1)   Prevent interference with the use of streets, sidewalks, alleys,
parkways and other public ways and places;
      (2)   Prevent the creation of visual and physical obstructions and other
conditions that are hazardous to vehicular and pedestrian traffic;
      (3)   Prevent interference with the facilities and operations of the
village's utilities and of other utilities lawfully located in rights-of-way or
public property;
      (4)   Protect against environmental damage, including damage to trees,
from the installation of utility facilities;
      (5)   Protect against increased stormwater run-off due to structures and
materials that increase impermeable surfaces;
      (6)   Preserve the character of the neighborhoods in which facilities are
installed;
      (7)   Preserve open space, particularly the tree-lined parkways that
characterize the village's residential neighborhoods;
      (8)   Prevent visual blight from the proliferation of facilities in the
rights-of-way; and
      (9)   Assure the continued safe use and enjoyment of private properties
adjacent to utility facilities locations.
   (C)   Facilities subject to this chapter. This chapter applies to all
facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the rights-
of-way within the jurisdiction of the village. A facility lawfully established
prior to the effective date of this chapter may continue to be maintained,
repaired and operated by the utility as presently constructed and located,
except as may be otherwise provided in any applicable franchise, license or
similar agreement.
   (D)   Franchises, licenses, or similar agreements. The village, in its
discretion and as limited by law, may require utilities to enter into a
franchise, license or similar agreement for the privilege of locating their
facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the village
rights-of-way. Utilities that are not required by law to enter into such an
agreement may request that the village enter into such an agreement. In such an
agreement, the village may provide for terms and conditions inconsistent with
this chapter.
   (E)   Effect of franchises, licenses, or similar agreements.
      (1)   Utilities other than telecommunications providers. In the event
that a utility other than a telecommunications provider has a franchise,
license or similar agreement with the village, such franchise, license or
similar agreement shall govern and control during the term of such agreement
and any lawful renewal or extension thereof.
      (2)   Telecommunications providers. In the event of any conflict with, or
inconsistency between, the provisions of this chapter and the provisions of any
franchise, license or similar agreement between the village and any
telecommunications provider, the provisions of such franchise, license or
similar agreement shall govern and control during the term of such agreement
and any lawful renewal or extension thereof.
   (F)   Conflicts with other chapters. This chapter supersedes all chapters or
parts of chapters adopted prior hereto that are in conflict herewith, to the
extent of such conflict.
   (G)   Conflicts with state and federal laws. In the event that applicable
federal or state laws or regulations conflict with the requirements of this
chapter, the utility shall comply with the requirements of this chapter to the
maximum extent possible without violating federal or state laws or regulations.
   (H)   Sound engineering judgment. The village shall use sound engineering
judgment when administering this chapter and may vary the standards,
conditions, and requirements expressed in this chapter when the village so
determines. Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the ability of the
village to regulate its rights-of-way for the protection of the public health,
safety and welfare.
(Ord. 07-55, passed 12-17-2007)
§ 54.02 DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this chapter and unless the context clearly requires otherwise,
the words and terms listed shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this
section. Any term not defined in this section shall have the meaning ascribed
to it in 92 Ill. Adm. Code § 530.30, unless the context clearly requires
otherwise.
   AASHTO. American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials.
   ANSI. American National Standards Institute.
   APPLICANT. A person applying for a permit under this chapter.
   ASTM. American Society for Testing and Materials.
   BACKFILL. The methods or materials for replacing excavated material in a
trench or pit.
   BORE or BORING. To excavate an underground cylindrical cavity for the
insertion of a pipe or electrical conductor.
   CABLE OPERATOR. That term as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 522(5).
   CABLE SERVICE. That term as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 522(6).
   CABLE SYSTEM. That term as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 522(7).
   CARRIER PIPE. The pipe enclosing the liquid, gas or slurry to be
transported.
   CASING. A structural protective enclosure for transmittal devices such as:
carrier pipes, electrical conductors, and fiber optic devices.
   CLEAR ZONE. The total roadside border area, starting at the edge of the
pavement, available for safe use by errant vehicles. This area may consist of a
shoulder, a recoverable slope, a non-recoverable slope, and a clear run-out
area. The desired width is dependent upon the traffic volumes and speeds, and
on the roadside geometry. Distances are specified in the AASHTO Roadside Design
Guide.
   COATING. Protective wrapping or mastic cover applied to buried pipe for
protection against external corrosion.
   CODE. The Village of East Dundee Code of Ordinances.
   CONDUCTOR. Wire carrying electrical current.
   CONDUIT. A casing or encasement for wires or cables.
   CONSTRUCTION or CONSTRUCT. The installation, repair, maintenance, placement,
alteration, enlargement, demolition, modification or abandonment in place of
facilities.
   COVER. The depth of earth or backfill over buried utility pipe or conductor.
   CROSSING FACILITY. A facility that crosses one or more right-of-way lines of
a right-of-way.
   DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS. The Village Director of Public Works or his or her
designee.
   DISRUPT THE RIGHT-OF-WAY. For the purposes of this chapter, any work that
obstructs the right-of-way or causes a material adverse effect on the use of
the right-of-way for its intended use. Such work may include, without
limitation, the following: excavating or other cutting; placement (whether
temporary or permanent) of materials, equipment, devices, or structures; damage
to vegetation; and compaction or loosening of the soil, and shall not include
the parking of vehicles or equipment in a manner that does not materially
obstruct the flow of traffic on a highway.
   EMERGENCY. Any immediate maintenance to the facility required for the safety
of the public using or in the vicinity of the right-of-way or immediate
maintenance required for the health and safety of the general public served by
the utility.
   ENCASEMENT. Provision of a protective casing.
   ENGINEER. The Village Engineer or his or her designee.
   EQUIPMENT. Materials, tools, implements, supplies, and/or other items used
to facilitate construction of facilities.
   EXCAVATION. The making of a hole or cavity by removing material, or laying
bare by digging.
   EXTRA HEAVY PIPE. Pipe meeting ASTM standards for this pipe designation.
   FACILITY. All structures, devices, objects, and materials (including, but
not limited to, track and rails, wires, ducts, fiber optic cable, antennas,
vaults, boxes, equipment enclosures, cabinets, pedestals, poles, conduits,
grates, covers, pipes, cables, and appurtenances thereto) located on, over,
above, along, upon, under, across, or within rights-of-way under this chapter.
For purposes of this chapter, the term FACILITY shall not include any facility
owned or operated by the village.
   FREESTANDING FACILITY. A facility that is not a crossing facility or a
parallel facility, such as an antenna, transformer, pump, or meter station.
   FRONTAGE ROAD. Roadway, usually parallel, providing access to land adjacent
to the highway where it is precluded by control of access to a highway.
   HAZARDOUS MATERIALS. Any substance or material which, due to its quantity,
form, concentration, location, or other characteristics, is determined by the
Village Director of Public Works to pose an unreasonable and imminent risk to
the life, health or safety of persons or property or to the ecological balance
of the environment, including, but not limited to explosives, radioactive
materials, petroleum or petroleum products or gases, poisons, etiology
(biological) agents, flammables, corrosives or any substance determined to be
hazardous or toxic under any federal or state law, statute or regulation.
   HIGHWAY CODE. The Illinois Highway Code, ILCS Ch. 605, Act 5, §§ 1-101 et
seq., as amended from time to time.
   HIGHWAY. A specific type of right-of-way used for vehicular traffic
including rural or urban roads or streets. HIGHWAY includes all highway land
and improvements, including roadways, ditches and embankments, bridges,
drainage structures, signs, guardrails, protective structures and appurtenances
necessary or convenient for vehicle traffic.
   HOLDER. A person or entity that has received authorization to offer or
provide cable or video service from the ICC pursuant to the Illinois Cable and
Video Competition Law, ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-401.
   IDOT. Illinois Department of Transportation.
   ICC. Illinois Commerce Commission.
   JACKING. Pushing a pipe horizontally under a roadway by mechanical means
with or without boring.
   JETTING. Pushing a pipe through the earth using water under pressure to
create a cavity ahead of the pipe.
   JOINT USE. The use of pole lines, trenches or other facilities by two or
more utilities.
   J.U.L.I.E. The Joint Utility Locating Information for Excavators utility
notification program.
   MAJOR INTERSECTION. The intersection of two or more major arterial highways.
   OCCUPANCY. The presence of facilities on, over or under right-of-way.
   PARALLEL FACILITY. A facility that is generally parallel or longitudinal to
the centerline of a right-of-way.
   PARKWAY. Any portion of the right-of-way not improved by street or sidewalk.
   PAVEMENT CUT. The removal of an area of pavement for access to facility or
for the construction of a facility.
   PERMITTEE. That entity to which a permit has been issued pursuant to §§
54.04 and
54.05.
   PRACTICABLE. That which is performable, feasible or possible, rather than
that which is simply convenient.
   PRESSURE. The internal force acting radially against the walls of a carrier
pipe expressed in pounds per square inch gauge (psig).
   PETROLEUM PRODUCTS PIPELINES. Pipelines carrying crude or refined liquid
petroleum products including, but not limited to, gasoline, distillates,
propane, butane, or coal-slurry.
   PROMPT. That which is done within a period of time specified by the village.
If no time period is specified, the period shall be 30 days.
   PUBLIC ENTITY. A legal entity that constitutes or is part of the government,
whether at local, state or federal level.
   RESTORATION. The repair of a right-of-way, highway, roadway, or other area
disrupted by the construction of a facility.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY or RIGHTS-OF-WAY. Any street, alley, other land or waterway,
dedicated or commonly used for pedestrian or vehicular traffic or other similar
purposes, including utility easements, in which the village has the right and
authority to authorize, regulate or permit the location of facilities other
than those of the village. RIGHT-OF-WAY or RIGHTS-OF-WAY shall not include any
real or personal village property that is not specifically described in the
previous two sentences and shall not  include village buildings, fixtures and
other structures or improvements, regardless of whether they are situated in
the right-of-way.
   ROADWAY. That part of the highway that includes the pavement and shoulders.
   SALE OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS AT RETAIL. The transmitting, supplying, or
furnishing of telecommunications and all services rendered in connection
therewith for a consideration, other than between a parent corporation and its
wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, when the gross
charge made by one such corporation to another such corporation is not greater
than the gross charge paid to the retailer for their use or consumption and not
for sale.
   SECURITY FUND. That amount of security required pursuant to §
54.10.
   SHOULDER. A width of roadway, adjacent to the pavement, providing lateral
support to the pavement edge and providing an area for emergency vehicular
stops and storage of snow removed from the pavement.
   SOUND ENGINEERING JUDGMENT. A decision(s) consistent with generally accepted
engineering principles, practices and experience.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS. This term includes, but is not limited to, messages or
information transmitted through use of local, toll and wide area telephone
service, channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter service, computer
exchange service, private line services, mobile radio services, cellular mobile
telecommunications services, stationary two-way radio, paging service and any
other form of mobile or portable one-way or two-way communications, and any
other transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar means,
between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio,
satellite, or similar facilities. PRIVATE LINE means a dedicated non-traffic
sensitive service for a single customer that entitles the customer to exclusive
or priority use of a communications channel, or a group of such channels, from
one or more specified locations to one or more other specified locations.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall not include value added services in which computer
processing applications are used to act on the form, content, code and protocol
of the information for purposes other than transmission. TELECOMMUNICATIONS
shall not include purchase of telecommunications by a telecommunications
service provider for use as a component part of the service provided by such
provider to the ultimate retail consumer who originates or terminates the end-
to-end communications. TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall not include the provision of
cable services through a cable system as defined in the Cable Communications
Act of 1984 (47 U.S.C. Sections 521 and following), as now or hereafter
amended, or cable or other programming services subject to an open video system
fee payable to the village through an open video system as defined in the Rules
of the Federal Communications Commission (47 C.F.R. § 76.1500 and following),
as now or hereafter amended.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER. Any person that installs, owns, operates or
controls facilities in the right-of-way used or designed to be used to transmit
telecommunications in any form.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS RETAILER. Includes every person engaged in making sales
of telecommunications at retail as defined herein.
   TRENCH. A relatively narrow open excavation for the installation of an
underground facility.
   UTILITY. The individual or entity owning or operating any facility as
defined in this chapter.
   VENT. A pipe to allow the dissipation into the atmosphere of gases or vapors
from an underground casing.
   VIDEO SERVICE. That term as defined in the Illinois Cable and Video
Competition Law of 2007, ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-201(v).
   VILLAGE. The Village of East Dundee.
   WATER LINES. Pipelines carrying raw or potable water.
   WET BORING. Boring using water under pressure at the cutting auger to soften
the earth and to provide a sluice for the excavated material.
(Ord. 07-55, passed 12-17-2007)
§ 54.03 ANNUAL REGISTRATION REQUIRED.
   Every utility that occupies right-of-way within the village shall register
on January 1 of each year with the Director of Public Works, providing the
utility's name, address and regular business telephone and telecopy numbers,
the name of one or more contact persons who can act on behalf of the utility in
connection with emergencies involving the utility's facilities in the right-of-
way and a 24-hour telephone number for each such person, and evidence of
insurance as required in §
54.08, in the form of a certificate of insurance.
(Ord. 07-55, passed 12-17-2007) Penalty, see §
54.99
§ 54.04 PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATIONS AND FEES.
   (A)   Permit required. No person shall construct (as defined in this
chapter) any facility on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within
any village right-of-way which changes the location of the facility, adds a new
facility, disrupts the right-of-way (as defined in this chapter), or materially
increases the amount of area or space occupied by the facility on, over, above,
along, under, across or within the right-of-way, without first filing an
application with the Director of Public Works and obtaining a permit from the
village therefor, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. No permit shall
be required for installation and maintenance of service connections to
customers' premises where there will be no disruption of the right-of-way.
   (B)   Permit application. All applications for permits pursuant to this
chapter shall be filed on a form provided by the village and shall be filed in
such number of duplicate copies as the village may designate. The applicant may
designate those portions of its application materials that it reasonably
believes contain proprietary or confidential information as "proprietary" or
"confidential" by clearly marking each page of such materials accordingly.
   (C)   Minimum general application requirements. The application shall be
made by the utility or its duly authorized representative and shall contain, at
a minimum, the following:
      (1)   The utility's name and address and telephone and telecopy numbers;
      (2)   The applicant's name and address, if different than the utility,
its telephone, telecopy numbers, e-mail address, and its interest in the work;
      (3)   The names, addresses and telephone and telecopy numbers and e-mail
addresses of all professional consultants, if any, advising the applicant with
respect to the application;
      (4)   A general description of the proposed work and the purposes and
intent of the facility and the uses to which the facility will be put. The
scope and detail of such description shall be appropriate to the nature and
character of the work to be performed, with special emphasis on those matters
likely to be affected or impacted by the work proposed;
      (5)   Evidence that the utility has placed on file with the village:
         (a)   A written traffic control plan demonstrating the protective
measures and devices that will be employed consistent with the Illinois Manual
on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, to prevent injury or damage to persons or
property and to minimize disruptions to efficient pedestrian and vehicular
traffic; and
         (b)   An emergency contingency plan which shall specify the nature of
potential emergencies, including, without limitation, construction and
hazardous materials emergencies, and the intended response by the applicant.
The intended response shall include notification to the village and shall
promote protection of the safety and convenience of the public. Compliance with
ICC regulations for emergency contingency plans constitutes compliance with
this section unless the village finds that additional information or assurances
are needed;
      (6)   Drawings, plans and specifications showing the work proposed,
including the certification of an engineer that such drawings, plans, and
specifications comply with applicable codes, rules, and regulations;
      (7)   Evidence of insurance as required in §
54.08;
      (8)   Evidence of posting of the security fund as required in §
54.10;
      (9)   Any request for a variance from one or more provisions of this
chapter (see §
54.21); and
      (10)   Such additional information as may be reasonably required by the
village.
   (D)   Supplemental application requirements for specific types of utilities.
In addition to the requirements of division (C) of this section, the permit
application shall include the following items, as applicable to the specific
utility that is the subject of the permit application:
      (1)   In the case of the installation of a new electric power,
communications, telecommunications, cable television service, video service or
natural gas distribution system, evidence that any Certificate of Public
Convenience and Necessity or other regulatory authorization that the applicant
is required by law to obtain, or that the applicant has elected to obtain, has
been issued by the ICC or other jurisdictional authority;
      (2)   In the case of natural gas systems, state the proposed pipe size,
design, construction class, and operating pressures;
      (3)   In the case of water lines, indicate that all requirements of the
Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, Division of Public Water Supplies,
have been satisfied;
      (4)   In the case of sewer line installations, indicate that the land and
water pollution requirements of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency,
Division of Water Pollution Control and the Metropolitan Water Reclamation
District [other local or state entities with jurisdiction], have been
satisfied; or
      (5)   In the case of petroleum products pipelines, state the type or
types of petroleum products, pipe size, maximum working pressure, and the
design standard to be followed.
   (E)   Applicant's duty to update information. Throughout the entire permit
application review period and the construction period authorized by the permit,
any amendments to information contained in a permit application shall be
submitted by the utility in writing to the village within 30 days after the
change necessitating the amendment.
   (F)   Application fees. Unless otherwise provided by franchise, license, or
similar agreement, all applications for permits pursuant to this chapter shall
be accompanied by a fee in an amount as set forth in the annual fee schedule of
the village. No application fee is required to be paid by any electricity
utility that is paying the municipal electricity infrastructure maintenance fee
pursuant to the Electricity Infrastructure Maintenance Fee Act.
(Ord. 07-55, passed 12-17-2007) Penalty, see §
54.99
§ 54.05 ACTION ON PERMIT APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   Village review of permit applications. Completed permit applications,
containing all required documentation, shall be examined by the Director of
Public Works within a reasonable time after filing. If the application does not
conform to the requirements of applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules, and
regulations, the Director of Public Works shall reject such application in
writing, stating the reasons therefor. If the Director of Public Works is
satisfied that the proposed work conforms to the requirements of this chapter
and applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules, and regulations, the Director of
Public Works shall issue a permit therefor as soon as practicable. In all
instances, it shall be the duty of the applicant to demonstrate, to the
satisfaction of the Director of Public Works, that the construction proposed
under the application shall be in full compliance with the requirements of this
chapter.
   (B)   Additional village review of applications of telecommunications
retailers.
      (1)   Pursuant to the Telephone Company Act, ILCS Ch. 220, Act 65, § 4, a
telecommunications retailer shall notify the village that it intends to
commence work governed by this chapter for facilities for the provision of
telecommunications services. Such notice shall consist of plans,
specifications, and other documentation sufficient to demonstrate the purpose
and intent of the facilities, and shall be provided by the telecommunications
retailer to the village not less than ten days prior to the commencement of
work requiring no excavation and not less than 30 days prior to the
commencement of work requiring excavation. The Director of Public Works shall
specify the portion of the right-of-way upon which the facility may be placed,
used and constructed.
      (2)   In the event that the Director of Public Works fails to provide
such specification of location to the telecommunications retailer within either
ten days after service of notice to the village by the telecommunications
retailer in the case of work not involving excavation for new construction or
25 days after service of notice by the telecommunications retailer in the case
of work involving excavation for new construction, the telecommunications
retailer may commence work without obtaining a permit under this chapter.
      (3)   Upon the provision of such specification by the village, where a
permit is required for work pursuant to §
54.04 the telecommunications retailer shall submit to the village an
application for a permit and any and all plans, specifications and
documentation available regarding the facility to be constructed. Such
application shall be subject to the requirements of division (A) of this
section.
   (C)   Additional village review of applications of holders of state
authorization under the Cable and Video Competition Law of 2007. Applications
by a utility that is a holder of a state-issued authorization under the Cable
and Video Competition Law of 2007 shall be deemed granted 45 days after
submission to the village, unless otherwise acted upon by the village, provided
the holder has complied with applicable village codes, ordinances, and
regulations.
(Ord. 07-55, passed 12-17-2007)
§ 54.06 EFFECT OF PERMIT.
   (A)   Authority granted; no property right or other interest created. A
permit from the village authorizes a permittee to undertake only certain
activities in accordance with this chapter on village rights-of-way, and does
not create a property right or grant authority to the permittee to impinge upon
the rights of others who may have an interest in the rights-of-way.
   (B)   Duration. No permit issued under this chapter shall be valid for a
period longer than six months unless construction is actually begun within that
period and is thereafter diligently pursued to completion.
   (C)   Pre-construction meeting required. No construction shall begin
pursuant to a permit issued under this chapter prior to attendance by the
permittee and all major contractors and subcontractors who will perform any
work under the permit at a pre-construction meeting. The pre-construction
meeting shall be held at a date, time and place designated by the village with
such village representatives in attendance as the village deems necessary. The
meeting shall be for the purpose of reviewing the work under the permit, and
reviewing special considerations necessary in the areas where work will occur,
including, without limitation, presence or absence of other utility facilities
in the area and their locations, procedures to avoid disruption of other
utilities, use of rights-of-way by the public during construction, and access
and egress by adjacent property owners.
   (D)   Compliance with all laws required. The issuance of a permit by the
village does not excuse the permittee from complying with other requirements of
the village and applicable statutes, laws, ordinances, rules, and regulations.
(Ord. 07-55, passed 12-17-2007)
§ 54.07 REVISED PERMIT DRAWINGS.
   In the event that the actual locations of any facilities deviate in any
material respect from the locations identified in the plans, drawings and
specifications submitted with the permit application, the permittee shall
submit a revised set of drawings or plans to the village within 90 days after
the completion of the permitted work. The revised drawings or plans shall
specifically identify where the locations of the actual facilities deviate from
the locations approved in the permit. If any deviation from the permit also
deviates from the requirements of this chapter, it shall be treated as a
request for variance in accordance with §
54.21. If the village denies the request for a variance, then the permittee
shall either remove the facility from the right-of-way or modify the facility
so that it conforms to the permit and submit revised drawings or plans
therefor.
(Ord. 07-55, passed 12-17-2007)
§ 54.08 INSURANCE.
   (A)   Required coverages and limits. Unless otherwise provided by franchise,
license, or similar agreement, each utility occupying right-of-way or
constructing any facility in the right-of-way shall secure and maintain the
following liability insurance policies insuring the utility as named insured
and naming the village, and its elected and appointed officers, officials,
agents, and employees as additional insureds on the policies listed in
divisions (A)(1) and (2) below:
      (1)   Commercial general liability insurance, including premises-
operations, explosion, collapse, and underground hazard (commonly referred to
as "X," "C," and "U" coverages) and products-completed operations coverage with
limits not less than:
         (a)   Five million dollars for bodily injury or death to each person;
         (b)   Five million dollars for property damage resulting from any one
accident; and
         (c)   Five million dollars for all other types of liability;
      (2)   Automobile liability for owned, non-owned and hired vehicles with a
combined single limit of $1,000,000 for personal injury and property damage for
each accident;
      (3)   Worker's compensation with statutory limits; and
      (4)   Employer's liability insurance with limits of not less than
$1,000,000 per employee and per accident.
      (5)   If the utility is not providing such insurance to protect the
contractors and subcontractors performing the work, then such contractors and
subcontractors shall comply with this section.
   (B)   Excess or umbrella policies. The coverages required by this section
may be in any combination of primary, excess, and umbrella policies. Any excess
or umbrella policy must provide excess coverage over underlying insurance on a
following-form basis such that when any loss covered by the primary policy
exceeds the limits under the primary policy, the excess or umbrella policy
becomes effective to cover such loss.
   (C)   Copies required. The utility shall provide copies of any of the
policies required by this section to the village within ten days following
receipt of a written request therefor from the village.
   (D)   Maintenance and renewal of required coverages.  
      (1)   The insurance policies required by this section shall contain the
following endorsement:
      "It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be canceled
nor the intention not to renew be stated until thirty (30) days after receipt
by the Village, by registered mail or certified mail, return receipt requested,
of a written notice addressed to the Village Administrator of such intent to
cancel or not to renew."
      (2)   Within ten days after receipt by the village of said notice, and in
no event later than ten days prior to said cancellation, the utility shall
obtain and furnish to the village evidence of replacement insurance policies
meeting the requirements of this section.
   (E)   Self-insurance. A utility may self-insure all or a portion of the
insurance coverage and limit requirements required by division (A) of this
section. A utility that self-insures is not required, to the extent of such
self-insurance, to comply with the requirement for the naming of additional
insureds under division (A), or the requirements of divisions (B), (C) and (D)
of this section. A utility that elects to self-insure shall provide to the
village evidence sufficient to demonstrate its financial ability to self-insure
the insurance coverage and limit requirements required under division (A) of
this section, such as evidence that the utility is a "private self-insurer"
under the Workers Compensation Act.
   (F)   Effect of insurance and self-insurance on utility's liability. The
legal liability of the utility to the village and any person for any of the
matters that are the subject of the insurance policies or self-insurance
required by this section shall not be limited by such insurance policies or
self-insurance or by the recovery of any amounts thereunder.
   (G)   Insurance companies. All insurance provided pursuant to this section
shall be effected under valid and enforceable policies, issued by insurers
legally able to conduct business with the licensee in the State of Illinois.
(Ord. 07-55, passed 12-17-2007) Penalty, see §
54.99
§ 54.09 INDEMNIFICATION.
   By occupying or constructing facilities in the right-of-way, a utility shall
be deemed to agree to defend, indemnify and hold the village and its elected
and appointed officials and officers, employees, agents and representatives
harmless from and against any and all injuries, claims, demands, judgments,
damages, losses and expenses, including reasonable attorney's fees and costs of
suit or defense, arising out of, resulting from or alleged to arise out of or
result from the negligent, careless or wrongful acts, omissions, failures to
act or misconduct of the utility or its affiliates, officers, employees,
agents, contractors or subcontractors in the construction of facilities or
occupancy of the rights-of-way, and in providing or offering service over the
facilities, whether such acts or omissions are authorized, allowed or
prohibited by this chapter or by a franchise, license, or similar agreement;
provided, however, that the utility's indemnity obligations hereunder shall not
apply to any injuries, claims, demands, judgments, damages, losses or expenses
arising out of or resulting from the negligence, misconduct or breach of this
chapter by the village, its officials, officers, employees, agents or
representatives.
(Ord. 07-55, passed 12-17-2007)
§ 54.10 SECURITY.
   (A)   Purpose. The permittee shall establish a Security Fund in a form and
in an amount as set forth in this section. The Security Fund shall be
continuously maintained in accordance with this section at the permittee's sole
cost and expense until the completion of the work authorized under the permit.
The Security Fund shall serve as security for:
      (1)   The faithful performance by the permittee of all the requirements
of this chapter;
      (2)   Any expenditure, damage, or loss incurred by the village occasioned
by the permittee's failure to comply with any codes, rules, regulations,
orders, permits and other directives of the village issued pursuant to this
chapter; and
      (3)   The payment by permittee of all liens and all damages, claims,
costs, or expenses that the village may pay or incur by reason of any action or
non-performance by permittee in violation of this chapter including, without
limitation, any damage to public property or restoration work the permittee is
required by this chapter to perform that the village must perform itself or
have completed as a consequence solely of the permittee's failure to perform or
complete, and all other payments due the village from the permittee pursuant to
this chapter or any other applicable law.
   (B)   Form. The permittee shall provide the Security Fund to the village in
the form, at the permittee's election, of cash, a surety bond in a form
acceptable to the village, or an unconditional letter of credit in a form
acceptable to the village. Any surety bond or letter of credit provided
pursuant to this division shall, at a minimum:
      (1)   Provide that it will not be canceled without prior notice to the
village and the permittee;
      (2)   Not require the consent of the permittee prior to the collection by
the village of any amounts covered by it; and
      (3)   Provide a location convenient to the village and within the State
of Illinois at which it can be drawn.
   (C)   Amount. The dollar amount of the Security Fund shall be sufficient to
provide for the reasonably estimated cost to restore the right-of-way to at
least as good a condition as that existing prior to the construction under the
permit, as determined by the Director of Public Works, and may also include
reasonable, directly related costs that the village estimates are likely to be
incurred if the permittee fails to perform such restoration. Where the
construction of facilities proposed under the permit will be performed in
phases in multiple locations in the village, with each phase consisting of
construction of facilities in one location or a related group of locations, and
where construction in another phase will not be undertaken prior to substantial
completion of restoration in the previous phase or phases, the Director of
Public Works may, in the exercise of sound discretion, allow the permittee to
post a single amount of security which shall be applicable to each phase of the
construction under the permit. The amount of the Security Fund for phased
construction shall be equal to the greatest amount that would have been
required under the provisions of this division (C) for any single phase.
   (D)   Withdrawals. The village, upon 14 days' advance written notice clearly
stating the reason for, and its intention to exercise withdrawal rights under
this division, may withdraw an amount from the Security Fund, provided that the
permittee has not reimbursed the village for such amount within the 14 day
notice period. Withdrawals may be made if the permittee:
      (1)   Fails to make any payment required to be made by the permittee
hereunder;
      (2)   Fails to pay any liens relating to the facilities that are due and
unpaid;
      (3)   Fails to reimburse the village for any damages, claims, costs or
expenses which the village has been compelled to pay or incur by reason of any
action or non-performance by the permittee; or
      (4)   Fails to comply with any provision of this chapter that the village
determines can be remedied by an expenditure of an amount in the Security Fund.
   (E)   Replenishment. Within 14 days after receipt of written notice from the
village that any amount has been withdrawn from the Security Fund, the
permittee shall restore the Security Fund to the amount specified in division
(C) of this section.
   (F)   Interest. The permittee may request that any and all interest accrued
on the amount in the Security Fund be returned to the permittee by the village,
upon written request for said withdrawal to the village, provided that any such
withdrawal does not reduce the Security Fund below the minimum balance required
in division (C) of this section.
   (G)   Closing and return of Security Fund. Upon completion of the work
authorized under the permit, the permittee shall be entitled to the return of
the Security Fund, or such portion thereof as remains on deposit, within a
reasonable time after account is taken for all offsets necessary to compensate
the village for failure by the permittee to comply with any provisions of this
chapter or other applicable law. In the event of any revocation of the permit,
the Security Fund, and any and all accrued interest therein, shall become the
property of the village to the extent necessary to cover any reasonable costs,
loss or damage incurred by the village as a result of said revocation, provided
that any amounts in excess of said costs, loss or damage shall be refunded to
the permittee.
   (H)   Rights not limited. The rights reserved to the village with respect to
the Security Fund are in addition to all other rights of the village, whether
reserved by this chapter or otherwise authorized by law, and no action,
proceeding or exercise of right with respect to said Security Fund shall affect
any other right the village may have. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the
village shall not be entitled to a double monetary recovery with respect to any
of its rights which may be infringed or otherwise violated.
(Ord. 07-55, passed 12-17-2007)
§ 54.11 PERMIT SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION.
   (A)   Village right to revoke permit. The village may revoke or suspend a
permit issued pursuant to this chapter for one or more of the following
reasons:
      (1)   Fraudulent, false, misrepresenting, or materially incomplete
statements in the permit application;
      (2)   Non-compliance with this chapter;
      (3)   Permittee's physical presence or presence of permittee's facilities
on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the rights-of-way
presents a direct or imminent threat to the public health, safety, or welfare;
or
      (4)   Permittee's failure to construct the facilities substantially in
accordance with the permit and approved plans.
   (B)   Notice of revocation or suspension. The village shall send written
notice of its intent to revoke or suspend a permit issued pursuant to this
chapter stating the reason or reasons for the revocation or suspension and the
alternatives available to permittee under this section.
   (C)   Permittee alternatives upon receipt of notice of revocation or
suspension. Upon receipt of a written notice of revocation or suspension from
the village, the permittee shall have the following options:
      (1)   Immediately provide the village with evidence that no cause exists
for the revocation or suspension;
      (2)   Immediately correct, to the satisfaction of the village, the
deficiencies stated in the written notice, providing written proof of such
correction to the village within five working days after receipt of the written
notice of revocation; or
      (3)   Immediately remove the facilities located on, over, above, along,
upon, under, across, or within the rights-of-way and restore the rights-of-way
to the satisfaction of the village providing written proof of such removal to
the village within ten days after receipt of the written notice of revocation.
The village may, in its discretion, for good cause shown, extend the time
periods provided in this division.
   (D)   Stop work order. In addition to the issuance of a notice of revocation
or suspension, the village may issue a stop work order immediately upon
discovery of any of the reasons for revocation set forth within division (A) of
this section.
   (E)   Failure or refusal of the permittee to comply.  
      (1)   If the permittee fails to comply with the provisions of division
(C) of this section, the village or its designee may, at the option of the
village:
         (a)   Correct the deficiencies;
         (b)   Upon not less than 20 days notice to the permittee, remove the
subject facilities or equipment; or
         (c)   After not less than 30 days notice to the permittee of failure
to cure the non-compliance, deem them abandoned and property of the village.
      (2)   The permittee shall be liable in all events to the village for all
costs of removal.
(Ord. 07-55, passed 12-17-2007)
§ 54.12 CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP OR OWNER'S IDENTITY OR LEGAL STATUS.
   (A)   Notification of change. A utility shall notify the village no less
than 30 days prior to the transfer of ownership of any facility in the right-
of-way or change in identity of the utility. The new owner of the utility or
the facility shall have all the obligations and privileges enjoyed by the
former owner under the permit, if any, and applicable laws, ordinances, rules
and regulations, including this chapter, with respect to the work and
facilities in the right-of-way.
   (B)   Amended permit. A new owner shall request that any current permit be
amended to show current ownership. If the new owner fails to have a new or
amended permit issued in its name, the new owner shall be presumed to have
accepted, and agreed to be bound by, the terms and conditions of the permit if
the new owner uses the facility or allows it to remain on the village's right-
of-way.
   (C)   Insurance and bonding. All required insurance coverage or bonding must
be changed to reflect the name of the new owner upon transfer.
(Ord. 07-55, passed 12-17-2007) Penalty, see §
54.99
§ 54.13 GENERAL CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS.
   (A)   Standards and principles. All construction in the right-of-way shall
be consistent with applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules and regulations,
and commonly recognized and accepted traffic control and construction
principles, sound engineering judgment and, where applicable, the principles
and standards set forth in the following IDOT publications, as amended from
time to time:
      (1)   Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction;
      (2)   Supplemental Specifications and Recurring Special Provisions;
      (3)   Highway Design Manual;
      (4)   Highway Standards Manual;
      (5)   Standard Specifications for Traffic Control Items;
      (6)   Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (92 Ill. Adm.
Code § 545);
      (7)   Flagger's Handbook; and
      (8)   Work Site Protection Manual for Daylight Maintenance Operations.
   (B)   Interpretation of municipal standards and principles. If a discrepancy
exists between or among differing principles and standards required by this
chapter, the Director of Public Works shall determine, in the exercise of sound
engineering judgment, which principles apply and such decision shall be final.
If requested, the Director of Public Works shall state which standard or
principle will apply to the construction, maintenance, or operation of a
facility in the future.
(Ord. 07-55, passed 12-17-2007) Penalty, see §
54.99
§ 54.14 TRAFFIC CONTROL.
   (A)   Minimum requirements. The village's minimum requirements for traffic
protection are contained in IDOT's Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control
Devices and this Code.
   (B)   Warning signs, protective devices, and flaggers. The utility is
responsible for providing and installing warning signs, protective devices and
flaggers, when necessary, meeting applicable federal, state, and local
requirements for protection of the public and the utility's workers when
performing any work on the rights-of-way.
   (C)   Interference with traffic. All work shall be phased so that there is
minimum interference with pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
   (D)   Notice when access is blocked. At least 48 hours prior to beginning
work that will partially or completely block access to any residence, business
or institution, the utility shall notify the resident, business or institution
of the approximate beginning time and duration of such work; provided, however,
that in cases involving emergency repairs pursuant to §
54.20, the utility shall provide such notice as is practicable under the
circumstances.
   (E)   Compliance. The utility shall take immediate action to correct any
deficiencies in traffic protection requirements that are brought to the
utility's attention by the village.
(Ord. 07-55, passed 12-17-2007) Penalty, see §
54.99
§ 54.15 LOCATION OF FACILITIES.
   (A)   General requirements. In addition to location requirements applicable
to specific types of utility facilities, all utility facilities, regardless of
type, shall be subject to the general location requirements of this division.
      (1)   No interference with village facilities. No utility facilities
shall be placed in any location if the Director of Public Works determines that
the proposed location will require the relocation or displacement of any of the
village's utility facilities or will otherwise interfere with the operation or
maintenance of any of the village's utility facilities.
      (2)   Minimum interference and impact. The proposed location shall cause
only the minimum possible interference with the use of the right-of-way and
shall cause only the minimum possible impact upon, and interference with the
rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin said right-of-
way.
      (3)   No interference with travel. No utility facility shall be placed in
any location that interferes with the usual travel on such right-of-way.
      (4)   No limitations on visibility. No utility facility shall be placed
in any location so as to limit visibility of or by users of the right-of-way.
      (5)   Size of utility facilities. The proposed installation shall use the
smallest suitable vaults, boxes, equipment enclosures, power pedestals, and/or
cabinets then in use by the facility owner, regardless of location, for the
particular application.
   (B)   Parallel facilities located within highways.
      (1)   Overhead parallel facilities. An overhead parallel facility may be
located within the right-of-way lines of a highway only if:
         (a)   Lines are located as near as practicable to the right-of-way
line and as nearly parallel to the right-of-way line as reasonable pole
alignment will permit;
         (b)   Where pavement is curbed, poles are as remote as practicable
from the curb with a minimum distance of two feet (0.6 m) behind the face of
the curb, where available;
         (c)   Where pavement is uncurbed, poles are as remote from pavement
edge as practicable with minimum distance of four feet (1.2 m) outside the
outer shoulder line of the roadway and are not within the clear zone;
         (d)   No pole is located in the ditch line of a highway; and
         (e)   Any ground-mounted appurtenance is located within one foot (0.3
m) of the right-of-way line or as near as possible to the right-of-way line.
      (2)   Underground parallel facilities. An underground parallel facility
may be located within the right-of-way lines of a highway only if:
         (a)   The facility is located as near the right-of-way line as
practicable and not more than eight feet (2.4 m) from and parallel to the
right-of-way line;
         (b)   A new facility may be located under the paved portion of a
highway only if other locations are impracticable or inconsistent with sound
engineering judgment (e.g., a new cable may be installed in existing conduit
without disrupting the pavement); and
         (c)   In the case of an underground power or communications line, the
facility shall be located as near the right-of-way line as practicable and not
more than five feet (1.5 m) from the right-of-way line and any above-grounded
appurtenance shall be located within one foot (0.3 m) of the right-of-way line
or as near as practicable.
   (C)   Facilities crossing highways.
      (1)   No future disruption. The construction and design of crossing
facilities installed between the ditch lines or curb lines of village highways
may require the incorporation of materials and protections (such as encasement
or additional cover) to avoid settlement or future repairs to the roadbed
resulting from the installation of such crossing facilities.
      (2)   Cattle passes, culverts, or drainage facilities. Crossing
facilities shall not be located in cattle passes, culverts, or drainage
facilities.
      (3)   90 degree crossing required. Crossing facilities shall cross at or
as near to a 90 degree angle to the centerline as practicable.
      (4)   Overhead power or communication facility. An overhead power or
communication facility may cross a highway only if:
         (a)   It has a minimum vertical line clearance as required by ICC's
rules entitled, Construction of Electric Power and Communication Lines (83 Ill.
Adm. Code § 305);
         (b)   Poles are located within one foot (0.3 m) of the right-of-way
line of the highway and outside of the clear zone; and
         (c)   Overhead crossings at major intersections are avoided.
      (5)   Underground power or communication facility. An underground power
or communication facility may cross a highway only if:
         (a)   The design materials and construction methods will provide
maximum maintenance-free service life; and
         (b)   Capacity for the utility's foreseeable future expansion needs is
provided in the initial installation.
      (6)   Markers. The village may require the utility to provide a marker at
each right-of-way line where an underground facility other than a power or
communication facility crosses a highway. Each marker shall identify the type
of facility, the utility, and an emergency phone number. Markers may also be
eliminated as provided in current federal regulations. (49 C.F.R. § 192.707
(1989)).
   (D)   Facilities to be located within particular rights-of-way. The village
may require that facilities be located within particular rights-of-way that are
not highways, rather than within particular highways.
   (E)   Freestanding facilities.
      (1)   The village may restrict the location and size of any freestanding
facility located within a right-of-way.
      (2)   The village may require any freestanding facility located within a
right-of-way to be screened from view.
   (F)   Facilities installed above ground. Above ground facilities may be
installed only if:
      (1)   No other existing facilities in the area are located underground;
      (2)   New underground installation is not technically feasible; and
      (3)   The proposed installation will be made at a location, and will
employ suitable design and materials, to provide the greatest protection of
aesthetic qualities of the area being traversed without adversely affecting
safety. Suitable designs include, but are not limited to, self-supporting
armless, single-pole construction with vertical configuration of conductors and
cable. Existing utility poles and light standards shall be used wherever
practicable; the installation of additional utility poles is strongly
discouraged.
   (G)   Facility attachments to bridges or roadway structures.
      (1)   Facilities may be installed as attachments to bridges or roadway
structures only where the utility has demonstrated that all other means of
accommodating the facility are not practicable. Other means shall include, but
are not limited to, underground, underwater, independent poles, cable supports
and tower supports, all of which are completely separated from the bridge or
roadway structure. Facilities transmitting commodities that are volatile,
flammable, corrosive, or energized, especially those under significant pressure
or potential, present high degrees of risk and such installations are not
permitted.
      (2)   A utility shall include in its request to accommodate a facility
installation on a bridge or roadway structure supporting data demonstrating the
impracticability of alternate routing. Approval or disapproval of an
application for facility attachment to a bridge or roadway structure will be
based upon the following considerations:
         (a)   The type, volume, pressure or voltage of the commodity to be
transmitted and an evaluation of the resulting risk to persons and property in
the event of damage to or failure of the facility;
         (b)   The type, length, value, and relative importance of the highway
structure in the transportation system;
         (c)   The alternative routings available to the utility and their
comparative practicability;
         (d)   The proposed method of attachment;
         (e)   The ability of the structure to bear the increased load of the
proposed facility;
         (f)   The degree of interference with bridge maintenance and painting;
         (g)   The effect on the visual quality of the structure; and
         (h)   The public benefit expected from the utility service as compared
to the risk involved.
   (H)   Appearance standards.
      (1)   The village may prohibit the installation of facilities in
particular locations in order to preserve visual quality.
      (2)   A facility may be constructed only if its construction does not
require extensive removal or alteration of trees or terrain features visible to
the right-of-way user or to adjacent residents and property owners, and if it
does not impair the aesthetic quality of the lands being traversed.
(Ord. 07-55, passed 12-17-2007) Penalty, see §
54.99
§ 54.16 CONSTRUCTION METHODS AND MATERIALS.
   (A)   Standards and requirements for particular types of construction
methods.
      (1)   Boring or jacking.
         (a)   Pits and shoring. Boring or jacking under rights-of-way shall be
accomplished from pits located at a minimum distance specified by the Director
of Public Works from the edge of the pavement. Pits for boring or jacking shall
be excavated no more than 48 hours in advance of boring or jacking operations
and backfilled within 48 hours after boring or jacking operations are
completed. While pits are open, they shall be clearly marked and protected by
barricades. Shoring shall be designed, erected, supported, braced, and
maintained so that it will safely support all vertical and lateral loads that
may be imposed upon it during the boring or jacking operation.
         (b)   Wet boring or jetting. Wet boring or jetting shall not be
permitted under the roadway.
         (c)   Borings with diameters greater than six inches. Borings over six
inches (0.15 m) in diameter shall be accomplished with an auger and following
pipe, and the diameter of the auger shall not exceed the outside diameter of
the following pipe by more than one inch (25 mm).
         (d)   Borings with diameters six inches or less. Borings of six inches
or less in diameter may be accomplished by either jacking, guided with auger,
or auger and following pipe method.
         (e)   Tree preservation. Any facility located within the drip line of
any tree designated by the village to be preserved or protected shall be bored
under or around the root system.
      (2)   Trenching. Trenching for facility installation, repair, or
maintenance on rights-of-way shall be done in accord with the applicable
portions of Section 603 of IDOT' s Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction.
         (a)   Length. The length of open trench shall be kept to the
practicable minimum consistent with requirements for pipe-line testing. Only
one-half of any intersection may have an open trench at any time unless special
permission is obtained from the Director of Public Works.
         (b)   Open trench and excavated material. Open trench and windrowed
excavated material shall be protected as required by Chapter 6 of the Illinois
Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
      Where practicable, the excavated material shall be deposited between the
roadway and the trench as added protection. Excavated material shall not be
allowed to remain on the paved portion of the roadway. Where right-of-way width
does not allow for windrowing excavated material off the paved portion of the
roadway, excavated material shall be hauled to an off-road location.
         (c)   Drip line of trees. The utility shall not trench within the drip
line of any tree designated by the village to be preserved.
      (3)   Backfilling.
         (a)   Any pit, trench, or excavation created during the installation
of facilities shall be backfilled for its full width, depth, and length using
methods and materials in accordance with IDOT's Standard Specifications for
Road and Bridge Construction. When excavated material is hauled away or is
unsuitable for backfill, suitable granular backfill shall be used.
         (b)   For a period of three years from the date construction of a
facility is completed, the utility shall be responsible to remove and restore
any backfilled area that has settled due to construction of the facility. If so
ordered by the Director of Public Works, the utility, at its expense, shall
remove any pavement and backfill material to the top of the installed facility,
place and properly compact new backfill material, and restore new pavement,
sidewalk, curbs, and driveways to the proper grades, as determined by the
Director of Public Works.
      (4)   Pavement cuts. Pavement cuts for facility installation or repair
shall be permitted on a highway only if that portion of the highway is closed
to traffic. If a variance to the limitation set forth in this division (4) is
permitted under §
54.21, the following requirements shall apply:
         (a)   Any excavation under pavements shall be backfilled and compacted
as soon as practicable with granular material of CA-6 or CA-10 gradation, as
designated by the Director of Public Works.
         (b)   Restoration of pavement, in kind, shall be accomplished as soon
as practicable, and temporary repair with bituminous mixture shall be provided
immediately. Any subsequent failure of either the temporary repair or the
restoration shall be rebuilt upon notification by the village.
         (c)   All saw cuts shall be full depth.
         (d)   For all rights-of-way which have been reconstructed with a
concrete surface/base in the last seven years, or resurfaced in the last three
years, permits shall not be issued unless such work is determined to be an
emergency repair or other work considered necessary and unforeseen before the
time of the reconstruction or unless a pavement cut is necessary for a
J.U.L.I.E. locate.
      (5)   Encasement.
         (a)   Casing pipe shall be designed to withstand the load of the
highway and any other superimposed loads. The casing shall be continuous either
by one-piece fabrication or by welding or jointed installation approved by the
village.
         (b)   The venting, if any, of any encasement shall extend within one
foot (0.3 m) of the right-of-way line. No above-ground vent pipes shall be
located in the area established as clear zone for that particular section of
the highway.
         (c)   In the case of water main or service crossing, encasement shall
be furnished between bore pits unless continuous pipe or village approved
jointed pipe is used under the roadway. Casing may be omitted only if pipe is
installed prior to highway construction and carrier pipe is continuous or
mechanical joints are of a type approved by the village. Bell and spigot type
pipe shall be encased regardless of installation method.
         (d)   In the case of gas pipelines of 60 psig or less, encasement may
be eliminated.
         (e)   In the case of gas pipelines or petroleum products pipelines
with installations of more than 60 psig, encasement may be eliminated only if:
extra heavy pipe is used that precludes future maintenance or repair and
cathodic protection of the pipe is provided;
         (f)   If encasement is eliminated for a gas or petroleum products
pipeline, the facility shall be located so as to provide that construction does
not disrupt the right-of-way.
      (6)   Minimum cover of underground facilities. Cover shall be provided
and maintained at least in the amount specified in the following table for
minimum cover for the type of facility:
 
TYPE OF FACILITY                      MINIMUM COVER
Electric lines                        30 inches (0.8 m)
Communication, cable or video service 18 to 24 inches (0.6 m, as determined by
lines                                 village)
Gas or petroleum products             30 inches (0.8 m)
Water line                            Sufficient cover to provide freeze
                                      protection
Sanitary sewer, storm sewer, or       Sufficient cover to provide freeze
drainage line                         protection
 
   (B)   Standards and requirements for particular types of facilities.
      (1)   Electric power or communication lines.
         (a)   Code compliance. Electric power or communications facilities
within village rights-of-way shall be constructed, operated, and maintained in
conformity with the provisions of 83 III. Adm. Code Part 305 (formerly General
Order 160 of the Illinois Commerce Commission) entitled "Rules for Construction
of Electric Power and Communications Lines," and the National Electrical Safety
Code.
         (b)   Overhead facilities. Overhead power or communication facilities
shall use single pole construction and, where practicable, joint use of poles
shall be used. Utilities shall make every reasonable effort to design the
installation so guys and braces will not be needed. Variances may be allowed if
there is no feasible alternative and if guy wires are equipped with guy guards
for maximum visibility.
         (c)   Underground facilities.
            1.   Cable may be installed by trenching or plowing, provided that
special consideration is given to boring in order to minimize damage when
crossing improved entrances and side roads.
            2.   If a crossing is installed by boring or jacking, encasement
shall be provided between jacking or bore pits. Encasement may be eliminated
only if: the crossing is installed by the use of "moles," "whip augers," or
other approved method which compress the earth to make the opening for cable
installation or the installation is by the open trench method which is only
permitted prior to roadway construction.
            3.   Cable shall be grounded in accordance with the National
Electrical Safety Code.
         (d)   Burial of drops. All temporary service drops placed between
November 1 of the prior year and March 15 of the current year, also known as
snowdrops, shall be buried by May 31 of the current year, weather permitting,
unless otherwise permitted by the village. Weather permitting, utilities shall
bury all temporary drops, excluding snowdrops, within ten business days after
placement.
      (2)   Underground facilities other than electric power or communication
lines. Underground facilities other than electric power or communication lines
may be installed by:
         (a)   The use of "moles," "whip augers," or other approved methods
which compress the earth to move the opening for the pipe;
         (b)   Jacking or boring with vented encasement provided between the
ditch lines or toes of slopes of the highway;
         (c)   Open trench with vented encasement between ultimate ditch lines
or toes of slopes, but only if prior to roadway construction; or
         (d)   Tunneling with vented encasement, but only if installation is
not possible by other means.
      (3)   Gas transmission, distribution and service. Gas pipelines within
rights-of-way shall be constructed, maintained, and operated in a village
approved manner and in conformance with the Federal Code of the Office of
Pipeline Safety Operations, Department of Transportation, Part 192 -
Transportation of Natural and Other Gas by Pipeline: Minimum Federal Safety
Standards (49 CFR §192), IDOT's Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction, and all other applicable laws, rules, and regulations.
      (4)   Petroleum products pipelines. Petroleum products pipelines within
rights-of-way shall conform to the applicable sections of ANSI Standard Code
for Pressure Piping. (Liquid Petroleum Transportation Piping Systems ANSI-
B 31.4).
      (5)   Water lines, sanitary sewer lines, storm water sewer lines or
drainage lines. Water lines, sanitary sewer lines, storm sewer lines, and
drainage lines within rights-of-way shall meet or exceed the recommendations of
the current Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in
Illinois.
      (6)   (a)   Landscaping. Ground mounted appurtenances to overhead or
underground facilities, when permitted within a right-of-way, shall be provided
with a vegetation-free area extending one foot (305 mm) in width beyond the
appurtenance in all directions. The vegetation-free area may be provided by an
extension of the mounting pad, or by heavy duty plastic or similar material
approved by the Director of Public Works. With the approval of the Director of
Public Works, shrubbery surrounding the appurtenance may be used in place of
vegetation-free area. The housing for ground-mounted appurtenances shall be
painted a neutral color to blend with the surroundings. Where a ground-mounted
facility is allowed, such equipment shall be screened around the perimeter in
accordance with a landscape plan sealed by a professional landscape engineer.
Plant materials shall include a mixture of deciduous and coniferous planting
materials. The owner or wireless provider shall be responsible for maintenance
of all landscaping as provided in the approved landscape plan.
         (b)   Location. Ground mounted facilities shall be located in
accordance with the small wireless facility design standards.
   (C)   Materials.
      (1)   General standards. The materials used in constructing facilities
within rights-of-way shall be those meeting the accepted standards of the
appropriate industry, the applicable portions of IDOT's Standards
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction, the requirements of the
Illinois Commerce Commission, or the standards established by other official
regulatory agencies for the appropriate industry.
      (2)   Material storage on right-of-way. No material shall be stored on
the right-of-way without the prior written approval of the Director of Public
Works. When such storage is permitted, all pipe, conduit, wire, poles, cross
arms, or other materials shall be distributed along the right-of-way prior to
and during installation in a manner to minimize hazards to the public or an
obstacle to right-of-way maintenance or damage to the right-of-way and other
property. If material is to be stored on right-of-way, prior approval must be
obtained from the village.
      (3)   Hazardous materials. The plans submitted by the utility to the
village shall identify any hazardous materials that may be involved in the
construction of the new facilities or removal of any existing facilities.
   (D)   Operational restrictions.
      (1)   Construction operations on rights-of-way may, at the discretion of
the village, be required to be discontinued when such operations would create
hazards to traffic or the public health, safety, and welfare. Such operations
may also be required to be discontinued or restricted when conditions are such
that construction would result in extensive damage to the right-of-way or other
property.
      (2)   These restrictions may be waived by the Director of Public Works
when emergency work is required to restore vital utility services.
      (3)   Unless otherwise permitted by the village, the hours of
construction are those set forth in this chapter.
   (E)   Location of existing facilities. Any utility proposing to construct
facilities in the village shall contact J.U.L.I.E. and ascertain the presence
and location of existing above-ground and underground facilities within the
rights-of-way to be occupied by its proposed facilities. The village will make
its permit records available to a utility for the purpose of identifying
possible facilities. When notified of an excavation or when requested by the
village or by J.U.L.I.E., a utility shall locate and physically mark its
underground facilities within 48 hours, excluding weekends and holidays, in
accordance with the Illinois Underground Facilities Damage Prevention Act (ILCS
Ch. 220, Act 50, §§ 1 et seq.).
(Ord. 07-55, passed 12-17-2007; Am. Ord. 18-18, passed 7-16-2018) Penalty, see
§
54.99
§ 54.17 VEGETATION CONTROL.
   (A)   Electric utilities - compliance with state laws and regulations. An
electric utility shall conduct all tree-trimming and vegetation control
activities in the right-of-way in accordance with applicable Illinois laws and
regulations, and additionally, with such local franchise or other agreement
with the village as permitted by law.
   (B)   Other utilities - tree trimming permit required. Tree trimming that is
done by any other utility with facilities in the right-of-way and that is not
performed pursuant to applicable Illinois laws and regulations specifically
governing same, shall not be considered a normal maintenance operation, but
shall require the application for, and the issuance of, a permit, in addition
to any other permit required under this chapter.
      (1)   Application for tree trimming permit. Applications for tree
trimming permits shall include assurance that the work will be accomplished by
competent workers with supervision who are experienced in accepted tree pruning
practices. Tree trimming permits shall designate an expiration date in the
interest of assuring that the work will be expeditiously accomplished.
      (2)   Damage to trees. Poor pruning practices resulting in damaged or
misshapen trees will not be tolerated and shall be grounds for cancellation of
the tree trimming permit and for assessment of damages. The village will
require compensation for trees extensively damaged and for trees removed
without authorization. The formula developed by the International Society of
Arboriculture will be used as a basis for determining the compensation for
damaged trees or unauthorized removal of trees. The village may require the
removal and replacement of trees if trimming or radical pruning would leave
them in an unacceptable condition.
   (C)   Specimen trees or trees of special significance. The village may
require that special measures be taken to preserve specimen trees or trees of
special significance. The required measures may consist of higher poles, side
arm extensions, covered wire or other means.
   (D)   Chemical use.
      (1)   Except as provided in the following paragraph, no utility shall
spray, inject or pour any chemicals on or near any trees, shrubs or vegetation
in the village for any purpose, including the control of growth, insects or
disease.
      (2)   Spraying of any type of brush-killing chemicals will not be
permitted on rights-of-way unless the utility demonstrates to the satisfaction
of the Director of Public Works that such spraying is the only practicable
method of vegetation control.
(Ord. 07-55, passed 12-17-2007) Penalty, see §
54.99
§ 54.18 REMOVAL, RELOCATION, OR MODIFICATIONS OF UTILITY FACILITIES.
   (A)   Notice. Within 90 days following written notice from the village, a
utility shall, at its own expense, protect, support, temporarily or permanently
disconnect, remove, relocate, change or alter the position of any utility
facilities within the rights-of-way whenever the corporate authorities have
determined that such removal, relocation, change or alteration, is reasonably
necessary for the construction, repair, maintenance, or installation of any
village improvement in or upon, or the operations of the village in or upon,
the rights-of-way.
   (B)   Removal of unauthorized facilities. Within 30 days following written
notice from the village, any utility that owns, controls, or maintains any
unauthorized facility or related appurtenances within the rights-of-way shall,
at its own expense, remove all or any part of such facilities or appurtenances
from the rights-of-way. A facility is unauthorized and subject to removal in
the following circumstances:
      (1)   Upon expiration or termination of the permittee's license or
franchise, unless otherwise permitted by applicable law;
      (2)   If the facility was constructed or installed without the prior
grant of a license or franchise, if required;
      (3)   If the facility was constructed or installed without prior issuance
of a required permit in violation of this chapter; or
      (4)   If the facility was constructed or installed at a location not
permitted by the permittee's license or franchise.
   (C)   Emergency removal or relocation of facilities. The village retains the
right and privilege to cut or move any facilities located within the rights-of-
way of the village, as the village may determine to be necessary, appropriate
or useful in response to any public health or safety emergency. If
circumstances permit, the municipality shall attempt to notify the utility, if
known, prior to cutting or removing a facility and shall notify the utility, if
known, after cutting or removing a facility.
   (D)   Abandonment of facilities. Upon abandonment of a facility within the
rights-of-way of the village, the utility shall notify the village within 90
days. Following receipt of such notice the village may direct the utility to
remove all or any portion of the facility if the Director of Public Works
determines that such removal will be in the best interest of the public health,
safety and welfare. In the event that the village does not direct the utility
that abandoned the facility to remove it, by giving notice of abandonment to
the village, the abandoning utility shall be deemed to consent to the
alteration or removal of all or any portion of the facility by another utility
or person.
(Ord. 07-55, passed 12-17-2007) Penalty, see §
54.99
§ 54.19 CLEAN-UP AND RESTORATION.
   The utility shall remove all excess material and restore all turf and
terrain and other property within ten days after any portion of the rights-of-
way are disturbed, damaged or destroyed due to construction or maintenance by
the utility, all to the satisfaction of the village. This includes restoration
of entrances and side roads. Restoration of roadway surfaces shall be made
using materials and methods approved by the Director of Public Works. Such
clean-up and repair may be required to consist of backfilling, re-grading, re-
seeding, re-sodding, or any other requirement to restore the right-of-way to a
condition substantially equivalent to that which existed prior to the
commencement of the project. The time period provided in this section may be
extended by the Director of Public Works for good cause shown.
(Ord. 07-55, passed 12-17-2007) Penalty, see §
54.99
§ 54.20 MAINTENANCE AND EMERGENCY MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   General. Facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or
within rights-of-way are to be maintained by or for the utility in a manner
satisfactory to the village and at the utility's expense.
   (B)   Emergency maintenance procedures. Emergencies may justify non-
compliance with normal procedures for securing a permit:
      (1)   If an emergency creates a hazard on the traveled portion of the
right-of-way, the utility shall take immediate steps to provide all necessary
protection for traffic on the highway or the public on the right-of-way
including the use of signs, lights, barricades or flaggers. If a hazard does
not exist on the traveled way, but the nature of the emergency is such as to
require the parking on the shoulder of equipment required in repair operations,
adequate signs and lights shall be provided. Parking on the shoulder in such an
emergency will only be permitted when no other means of access to the facility
is available.
      (2)   In an emergency, the utility shall, as soon as possible, notify the
Director of Public Works or his or her duly authorized agent of the emergency,
informing him or her as to what steps have been taken for protection of the
traveling public and what will be required to make the necessary repairs. If
the nature of the emergency is such as to interfere with the free movement of
traffic, the village police shall be notified immediately.
      (3)   In an emergency, the utility shall use all means at hand to
complete repairs as rapidly as practicable and with the least inconvenience to
the traveling public.
   (C)   Emergency repairs. The utility must file in writing with the village a
description of the repairs undertaken in the right-of-way within 48 hours after
an emergency repair.
(Ord. 07-55, passed 12-17-2007) Penalty, see §
54.99
§ 54.21 VARIANCES.
   (A)   Request for variance. A utility requesting a variance from one or more
of the provisions of this chapter must do so in writing to the Director of
Public Works as a part of the permit application. The request shall identify
each provision of this chapter from which a variance is requested and the
reasons why a variance should be granted.
   (B)   Authority to grant variances. The Director of Public Works shall
decide whether a variance is authorized for each provision of this chapter
identified in the variance request on an individual basis.
   (C)   Conditions for granting of variance. The Director of Public Works may
authorize a variance only if the utility requesting the variance has
demonstrated that:
      (1)   One or more conditions not under the control of the utility (such
as terrain features or an irregular right-of-way line) create a special
hardship that would make enforcement of the provision unreasonable, given the
public purposes to be achieved by the provision; and
      (2)   All other designs, methods, materials, locations or facilities that
would conform with the provision from which a variance is requested are
impracticable in relation to the requested approach.
   (D)   Additional conditions for granting of a variance. As a condition for
authorizing a variance, the Director of Public Works may require the utility
requesting the variance to meet reasonable standards and conditions that may or
may not be expressly contained within this chapter but which carry out the
purposes of this chapter.
   (E)   Right to appeal. Any utility aggrieved by any order, requirement,
decision or determination, including denial of a variance, made by the Director
of Public Works under the provisions of this chapter shall have the right to
appeal to the Village Board, or such other board or commission as it may
designate. The application for appeal shall be submitted in writing to the
Village Clerk within 30 days after the date of such order, requirement,
decision or determination. The Village Board shall commence its consideration
of the appeal at the Board's next regularly scheduled meeting occurring at
least seven days after the filing of the appeal. The Village Board shall timely
decide the appeal.
(Ord. 07-55, passed 12-17-2007)
§ 54.22 ENFORCEMENT.
   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as limiting any additional or
further remedies that the village may have for enforcement of this chapter.
(Ord. 07-55, passed 12-17-2007)
§ 54.99 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with
any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a fine in accordance
with the penalty provisions of this Village Code. There may be times when the
village will incur delay or other costs, including third party claims, because
the utility will not or cannot perform its duties under its permit and this
chapter. Unless the utility shows that another allocation of the cost of
undertaking the requested action is appropriate, the utility shall bear the
village's costs of damages and its costs of installing, maintaining, modifying,
relocating, or removing the facility that is the subject of the permit. No
other administrative agency or commission may review or overrule a permit
related cost apportionment of the village. Sanctions may be imposed upon a
utility that does not pay the costs apportioned to it.
(Ord. 07-55, passed 12-17-2007)
CHAPTER 55: CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEE AND PEG ACCESS SUPPORT FEE
Section
   
55.01   Definitions
   
55.02   Cable/video service provider fee imposed
   
55.03   PEG access support fee imposed
   
55.04   Applicable principles
   
55.05   No impact on other taxes due from holder
   
55.06   Audits of cable/video service provider
   
55.07   Late fees/payments
§ 55.01 DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
   CABLE SERVICE. That term as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 522(6).
   COMMISSION. The Illinois Commerce Commission.
   GROSS REVENUES. All consideration of any kind or nature, including, without
limitation, cash, credits, property, and in-kind contributions received by the
holder for the operation of a cable or video system to provide cable service or
video service within the holder's cable service or video service area within
the village.
      (1)   Gross revenues shall include the following:
         (a)   Recurring charges for cable or video service.
         (b)   Event-based charges for cable service or video service,
including, but not limited to, pay-per-view and video-on-demand charges.
         (c)   Rental of set-top boxes and other cable service or video service
equipment.
         (d)   Service charges related to the provision of cable service or
video service, including but not limited to activation, installation, and
repair charges.
         (e)   Administrative charges related to the provision of cable service
or video service, including but not limited to service order and service
termination charges.
         (f)   Late payment fees or charges, insufficient funds check charges,
and other charges assessed to recover the costs of collecting delinquent
payments.
         (g)   A pro rata portion of all revenue derived by the holder or its
affiliates pursuant to compensation arrangements for advertising or for
promotion or exhibition of any products or services derived from the operation
of the holder's network to provide cable service or video service within the
village. The allocation shall be based on the number of subscribers in the
village divided by the total number of subscribers in relation to the relevant
regional or national compensation arrangement.
         (h)   Compensation received by the holder that is derived from the
operation of the holder's network to provide cable service or video service
with respect to commissions that are received by the holder as compensation for
promotion or exhibition of any products or services on the holder's network,
such as a "home shopping" or similar channel, subject to ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, §
21-801(c)(1)(ix).
         (i)   In the case of a cable service or video service that is bundled
or integrated functionally with other services, capabilities, or applications,
the portion of the holder's revenue attributable to the other services,
capabilities, or applications shall be included in the gross revenue unless the
holder can reasonably identify the division or exclusion of the revenue from
its books and records that are kept in the regular course of business.
         (j)   The service provider fee permitted by ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-
801(b).
      (2)   Gross revenues do not include any of the following:
         (a)   Revenues not actually received, even if billed, such as bad
debt, subject to ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-801(c)(1)(vi).
         (b)   Refunds, discounts, or other price adjustments that reduce the
amount of gross revenues received by the holder of the state-issued
authorization to the extent the refund, rebate, credit, or discount is
attributable to cable service or video service.
         (c)   Regardless of whether the services are bundled, packaged, or
functionally integrated with cable service or video service, any revenues
received from services not classified as cable service or video service,
including, without limitation, revenue received from telecommunication
services, information services, or the provision of directory or Internet
advertising, including yellow pages, white pages, banner advertisement, and
electronic publishing or any other revenues attributed by the holder to
noncable service or nonvideo service in accordance with the holder's books and
records and records kept in the regular course of business and any applicable
laws, rules, regulations, standards, or orders.
         (d)   The sale of cable services or video services for resale in which
the purchaser is required to collect the service provider fee from the
purchaser's subscribers to the extent the purchaser certifies in writing that
it will resell the service within the village and pay the fee permitted by ILCS
Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-801(b) with respect to the service.
         (e)   Any tax or fee of general applicability imposed upon the
subscribers or the transaction by a city, state, federal, or any other
governmental entity and collected by the holder of the state-issued
authorization and required to be remitted to the taxing entity, including sales
and use taxes.
         (f)   Security deposits collected from subscribers.
         (g)   Amounts paid by subscribers to "home shopping" or similar
vendors for merchandise sold through any home shopping channel offered as part
of the cable service or video service.
      (3)   Revenue of an affiliate of a holder shall be included in the
calculation of gross revenues to the extent the treatment of the revenue as
revenue of the affiliate rather than the holder has the effect of evading the
payment of the fee permitted by ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-801(b) which would
otherwise be paid by the cable service or video service.
   HOLDER. A person or entity that has received authorization to offer or
provide cable or video service from the Commission pursuant to ILCS Ch. 220,
Act 5, § 21-401.
   PEG. Public, education and governmental.
   PEG ACCESS SUPPORT FEE. The amount paid under this chapter and ILCS Ch. 220,
Act 5, §21-801(d) by the holder to the village for the service areas within its
territorial jurisdiction.
   SERVICE. The provision of "cable service" or "video service" to subscribers
and the interaction of subscribers with the person or entity that has received
authorization to offer or provide cable or video service from the Commission
pursuant to ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-401.
   SERVICE PROVIDER FEE. The amount paid under this chapter and ILCS Ch. 220,
Act 5, §21-801 by the holder to a village for the service areas within its
territorial jurisdiction.
   VIDEO SERVICE. Video programming and subscriber interaction, if any, that is
required for the selection or use of such video programming services, and which
is provided through wireline facilities located at least in part in the public
right-of-way without regard to delivery technology, including Internet protocol
technology. This definition does not include any video programming provided by
a commercial mobile service provider defined in 47 U.S.C. § 332(d) or any video
programming provided solely as part of, and via, service that enables users to
access content, information, electronic mail, or other services offered over
the public Internet.
(Ord. 07-56, passed 12-17-2007)
§ 55.02 CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEE IMPOSED.
   (A)   Fee imposed. A fee is hereby imposed on any holder providing cable
service or video service in the village.
   (B)   Amount of fee. The amount of the fee imposed hereby shall be 5% of the
holder's gross revenues.
   (C)   Notice to the village. The holder shall notify the village at least
ten days prior to the date on which the holder begins to offer cable service or
video service in the village.
   (D)   Holder's liability. The holder shall be liable for and pay the service
provider fee to the village. The holder's liability for the fee shall commence
on the first day of the calendar month following 30 days after receipt of the
ordinance adopting this chapter by the holder. The ordinance adopting this
chapter shall be sent by mail, postage prepaid, to the address listed on the
holder's application notice sent pursuant to ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-401(b)
(6) to the village.
   (E)   Payment date. The payment of the service provider fee shall be due on
a quarterly basis, 45 days after the close of the calendar quarter. If mailed,
the fee is considered paid on the date it is postmarked. Each payment shall
include a statement explaining the basis for the calculation of the fee.
   (F)   Exemption. The fee hereby imposed does not apply to existing cable
service or video service providers that have an existing franchise agreement
with the village in which a fee is paid.
   (G)   Credit for other payments. An incumbent cable operator that elects to
terminate an existing agreement pursuant to ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-301(c)
with credit for prepaid franchise fees under that agreement may deduct the
amount of such credit from the fees that operator owes under division (B) of
this section.
(Ord. 07-56, passed 12-17-2007)
§ 55.03 PEG ACCESS SUPPORT FEE IMPOSED.
   (A)   PEG fee imposed. A PEG access support fee is hereby imposed on any
holder providing cable service or video service in the village in addition to
the fee imposed pursuant to §
55.02.
   (B)   Amount of fee. The amount of the PEG access support fee imposed hereby
shall be 1% of the holder's gross revenues or, if greater, the percentage of
gross revenues that incumbent cable operators pay to the village or its
designee for PEG access support in the village.
   (C)   Payment. The holder shall pay the PEG access support fee to the
village or to the entity designated by the village to manage PEG access. The
holder's liability for the PEG access support fee shall commence on the date
set forth in §
55.02(D).
   (D)   Payment due. The payment of the PEG access support fee shall be due on
a quarterly basis, 45 days after the close of the calendar quarter. If mailed,
the fee is considered paid on the date it is postmarked. Each payment shall
include a statement explaining the basis for the calculation of the fee.
   (E)   Credit for other payments. An incumbent cable operator that elects to
terminate an existing agreement pursuant to ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-301(c)
shall pay, at the time they would have been due, all monetary payments for PEG
access that would have been due during the remaining term of the agreement had
it not been terminated pursuant to that section. All payments made by an
incumbent cable operator pursuant to the previous sentence may be credited
against the fees that that operator owes under division (B) of this section.
(Ord. 07-56, passed 12-17-2007)
§ 55.04 APPLICABLE PRINCIPLES.
   All determinations and calculations under this chapter shall be made
pursuant to generally accepted accounting principles.
(Ord. 07-56, passed 12-17-2007)
§ 55.05 NO IMPACT ON OTHER TAXES DUE FROM HOLDER.
   Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to exempt a holder from
any tax that is or may later be imposed by the village, including any tax that
is or may later be required to be paid by or through the holder with respect to
cable service or video service. A state-issued authorization shall not affect
any requirement of the holder with respect to payment of the village's
simplified municipal telecommunications tax or any other tax as it applies to
any telephone service provided by the holder. A state-issued authorization
shall not affect any requirement of the holder with respect to payment of the
local unit of government's 911 or E911 fees, taxes or charges.
(Ord. 07-56, passed 12-17-2007)
§ 55.06 AUDITS OF CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER.
   (A)   Audit requirement. The village will notify the holder of the
requirements it imposes on other cable service or video service providers to
submit to an audit of its books and records. The holder shall comply with the
same requirements the village imposes on other cable service or video service
providers in its jurisdiction to audit the holder's books and records and to
recompute any amounts determined to be payable under the requirements of the
village. If all local franchises between the village and cable operator
terminate, the audit requirements shall be those adopted by the village
pursuant to the Local Government Taxpayers' Bill of Rights Act, ILCS Ch. 50,
Act 45, §§ 1 et seq. No acceptance of amounts remitted should be construed as
an accord that the amounts are correct.
   (B)   Additional payments. Any additional amount due after an audit shall be
paid within 30 days after the village's submission of an invoice for the sum.
(Ord. 07-56, passed 12-17-2007)
§ 55.07 LATE FEES/PAYMENTS.
   All fees due and payments which are past due shall be governed by ordinances
adopted by this village pursuant to the Local Government Taxpayers' Bill of
Rights Act, ILCS Ch. 50, Act 45, §§1 et seq.
(Ord. 07-56, passed 12-17-2007)
CHAPTER 56: CABLE AND VIDEO CUSTOMER PROTECTION LAW
Section
   
56.01   Customer Service and Privacy Protection Law
   
56.02   Enforcement
   
56.03   Customer credits
 
   
56.99   Penalty
§ 56.01 CUSTOMER SERVICE AND PRIVACY PROTECTION LAW.
   (A)   Adoption. The regulations of ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, § 22-501 are hereby
adopted by reference and made applicable to the cable or video providers
offering services within the village's boundaries.
   (B)   Amendments. Any amendment to the Cable and Video Customer Protection
Law that becomes effective after the effective date of this chapter shall be
incorporated into this chapter by reference and shall be applicable to cable or
video providers offering services within the village's boundaries. However, any
amendment that makes its provisions optional for adoption by municipalities
shall not be incorporated into this chapter by reference without formal action
by the corporate authorities of the village.
(Ord. 07-54, passed 12-17-2007)
§ 56.02 ENFORCEMENT.
   The village, pursuant to law, declares its intent to enforce all of the
customer service and privacy protection standards of the Cable and Video
Protection Law with respect to complaints received from residents within the
village.
(Ord. 07-54, passed 12-17-2007)
§ 56.03 CUSTOMER CREDITS.
   The village adopts the schedule of customer credits for violations. Those
credits shall be as provided for in the provisions of ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, §
22-501(s) and applied on the statement issued to the customer for the next
billing cycle following the violation or following the discovery of the
violation. The cable or video provider is responsible for providing the credits
and the customer is under no obligation to request the credit.
(Ord. 07-54, passed 12-17-2007)
§ 56.99 PENALTY.
   The village, pursuant to ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, § 22-501(r)(1), provides for a
schedule of penalties for any material breach of the Cable and Video Protection
Law by cable or video providers in addition to the penalties provided in the
law. The monetary penalties shall apply on a competitively neutral basis and
shall not exceed $750 for each day of the material breach, and shall not exceed
$25,000 for each occurrence of a material breach per customer.
   (A)   Material breach means any substantial failure of a cable or video
provider to comply with service quality and other standards specified in any
provision of the law.
   (B)   The village shall give the cable or video provider written notice of
any alleged material breaches of the law and allow such provider at least 30
days from the receipt of the notice to remedy the specified material breach.
   (C)   A material breach, for the purposes of assessing penalties, shall be
deemed to occur for each day that a material breach has not been remedied by
the cable or video service provider after the notice in division (B) of this
section.
(Ord. 07-54, passed 12-17-2007)
CHAPTER 57: STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
57.001   General requirements and covenants
Storm Sewer Construction Standards
   
57.020   General
   
57.021   Specifications
   
57.022   Materials
   
57.023   Construction requirements
Sanitary Sewer Construction Standards
   
57.030   General
   
57.031   Sanitary sewers
   
57.032   Protection of water mains
   
57.033   Survey lines and grades
   
57.034   Laying of pipe
   
57.035   Sanitary sewer manholes
   
57.036   Testing for acceptance of sanitary sewers
   
57.037   Certification
Street Pavements, Curb and Gutter Construction Standards
   
57.050   General
   
57.051   Materials and specifications for streets
Water Distribution System Construction Standards
   
57.060   General
   
57.061   Pipe
   
57.062   Protection of water mains
   
57.063   Pipe installation for water mains
   
57.064   Handling of pipe
   
57.065   Laying of pipe
   
57.066   Pressure testing and flushing of water mains
   
57.067   Flushing
   
57.068   Requirement of chlorine
   
57.069   Final flushing and testing
   
57.070   Valve vaults and boxes for water mains and water services
   
57.071   Fire hydrants
   
57.072   Gate valves
   
57.073   Service line connections
Sidewalks
   
57.080   General
   
57.081   Materials and construction methods
   
57.082   Sidewalk requirements
   
57.083   Curing
   
57.084   Backfill
Driveways
   
57.100   General
   
57.101   Parking lot improvements
Maintenance of Traffic and Restoration of Areas
   
57.110   General
Village Forestry Standards and Specifications
   
57.120   Authority
   
57.121   Policy
   
57.122   Species, cultivars or varieties
   
57.123   Planting stock requirements
   
57.124   Early maintenance
   
57.125   General maintenance
   
57.126   Tree protection
   
57.127   Container planting
   
57.128   Removal policy
   
57.129   Street closure and reopening procedure
   
57.130   Tree damage policy
   
57.131   Amendments
Street and Parking Lot Lighting Standards
   
57.140   General
   
57.141   Specifications
   
57.142   Street light locations
   
57.143   Light pole requirements
   
57.144   Light pole foundations
   
57.145   Luminaries and lamps
   
57.146   Wire/cable requirements
   
Appendix A: Flowering Crabs
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 57.001 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS AND COVENANTS.
   (A)   The specifications contained herein shall be for the construction of
the following public facilities within the village:
      (1)   Section
57.001 – General Requirements and Covenants;
      (2)   Sections
57.020 -
57.023 – Storm Sewer System;
      (3)   Sections
57.030 -
57.037 – Sanitary Sewer System;
      (4)   Sections
57.050 -
57.051 – Street Pavements, Curb and Gutters;
      (5)   Sections
57.060 -
57.073 – Water Distribution System;
      (6)   Sections
57.080 -
57.084 – Sidewalks;
      (7)   Sections
57.100 and
57.101 – Driveways;
      (8)   Section
57.110 – Maintenance of Traffic and Restoration of Areas;
      (9)   Sections
57.120 -
57.131 – Village Forestry Standards and Specifications; and
      (10)   Sections
57.140 -
57.146 – Street and Parking Lot Lighting Improvements.
   (B)   Unless specifically stated in these specifications, the following
documents shall provide general requirements and covenants applicable to
construction within the village.
      (1)   State of Illinois, Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction, as adopted January 1, 2002 and the Illinois Department of
Transportation's "Supplemental Specifications and Recurring Special
Provisions", adopted January 1, 2002 and subsequent editions thereto. All of
these specifications are hereinafter referred to in these village standard
specifications as State Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction.
      (2)   I.S.P.E., Consulting Engineers Council of Illinois, et al.,
Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in Illinois, as
adopted May, 1996, Fifth Edition. These specifications are hereinafter referred
to in these village standard specifications as State Standard Specifications
for Water and Sewer Main Construction.
   (C)   In the event of conflict between the contents of these documents and
the existing Village Codes, the former will supersede the latter and the
Village Engineer's decision will prevail.
(Ord. 07-57, passed 12-17-2007)
STORM SEWER CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS
§ 57.020 GENERAL.
   The standards and requirements found in this subchapter are for the
materials and constructing of storm sewer systems within the village.
(Ord. 07-57, passed 12-17-2007)
§ 57.021 SPECIFICATIONS.
   These specifications cover materials, construction and all appurtenances
normally used for the construction of a storm sewer system. Storm sewer systems
shall be installed in accordance with Sections 550, 551, 552, and 601 thru 605,
inclusive of State Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction
unless as modified herein or as shown in the village standards. All storm
manhole, catch basin, and inlet structures shall be provided with a continuous
layer of preformed bituminous mastic material at all joints. When adjustments
are necessary, they shall be constructed with a maximum of two precast concrete
rings set in a continuous bed of mortar to a maximum height of six inches. No
bricks shall be used. Joint material will be applied to the full circumference
of the pipe joint.
(Ord. 07-57, passed 12-17-2007)
§ 57.022 MATERIALS.
   (A)   All storm sewer pipe materials shall conform to the requirements set
forth in Section 1000 - Materials of the State Standard Specifications for Road
and Bridge Construction as follows:
      (1)   Reinforced Concrete Culvert, Storm Drain and Sewer Pipe (RCCP),
Class A Materials: Article 1040.03; and
      (2)   Reinforced Concrete Elliptical Culvert, Storm Drain and Sewer Pipe,
Class A Materials: Article 1040.05.
   (B)   Class IV RCCP pipe shall be provided for all storm sewers less than 15
feet in depth over the top of the pipe. For depths greater than 15 feet, but
less than 20 feet, Class V RCCP pipe shall be provided. For storm sewers
greater than 60 inches in diameter or for depths greater than 20 feet, the
storm sewer material class for the RCCP pipe shall be as provided in Section
550.03 of the State Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction.
   (C)   Alternate pipe materials may be utilized for installations not within
a public right-of-way or street for installations which will not be the
maintenance responsibility of the village. The alternate pipe material shall
meet the requirements for Class B materials set forth in Sections 550.02 and
550.03 of the State Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction.
   (D)   The village reserves the right to specify a particular kind of
material for any installation.
(Ord. 07-57, passed 12-17-2007)
§ 57.023 CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS.
   Construction shall be in strict conformance with the following articles
contained in the State Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction:
   (A)   Article 550.04 - Excavation and Foundation;
   (B)   Article 550.05 - Plugging Existing Sewers and Drains;
   (C)   Article 550.06 - Laying Sewer Pipe; and
   (D)   Article 550.07 - Backfilling.
(Ord. 07-57, passed 12-17-2007)
SANITARY SEWER CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS
§ 57.030 GENERAL.
   The standards and requirements found in this subchapter are for materials
and construction of sanitary sewers within the village.
   (A)   Specifications. These specifications cover pipe for sanitary sewers
and service connections, sewer fittings, manholes and all appurtenances
normally used for sanitary sewer collection systems. Special considerations
shall be covered in the detailed plans and special provisions covering the
proposed construction. Sanitary sewers shall be installed in accordance with
the State Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction, and
applicable standards of the village. In case of conflict, the village sanitary
sewer construction standards and other applicable ordinances of the village
shall take precedence and shall govern.
   (B)   Regulations. Additional rules and regulations governing the
construction of sanitary sewers in the village are:
      (1)   The East Dundee Municipal Code.
      (2)   The restriction, policies, and instructions that may be adopted
from time to time by the village.
      (3)   The Illinois Pollution Control Board Regulations.
      (4)   The Illinois Environmental Protection Act.
(Ord. 07-57, passed 12-17-2007)
§ 57.031 SANITARY SEWERS.
   (A)   General. All sanitary sewage consisting of domestic and other water-
borne wastes shall be collected and conveyed in a sanitary sewer pipe system to
a point of discharge into an existing sanitary sewer system, village
interceptor, or sewage treatment plant. No sanitary sewage shall be allowed to
enter any storm sewer system or be discharged onto the ground or into receiving
streams without first being treated.
   (B)   Pipe materials.
      (1)   All sanitary sewer pipe materials shall conform to the latest
applicable A.S.T.M., A.S.A., AWWA, A.A.S.H.T.O. or other nationally accepted
standards. Only the following sanitary sewer pipe and joint materials are
approved for use in the village.
Materials                                                                            Joints
                                                                                     A.S.T.M.
                                                                                     C425 and
   (a)   Extra Strength Vitrified Clay (A.S.T.M. C700) with factory-applied PVCA.S.T.M.
collar for 10" diameter or smaller. For installations less than 15 feet in depth.    D1784 Class
                                                                                     12454-B for
                                                                                     P.V.C. Bell
                                                                                     and Collar
   (b)   Reinforced Concrete Sewer Pipe (A.S.T.M. C76) for 12" diameter or greaA.S.T.M.
Class of pipe, coating and lining of the pipe as recommended by the pipe             C443
manufacturer and approved by the Village Engineer will be required.
                                                                                     A.S.T.M.
                                                                                     D3212 for
   (c)   Standard Polyvinyl Chloride (PVC) Sewer Pipe A.S.T.M. D3034, Type PSM gasket
SDR shall not exceed 26 (SDR, or standard dimension ratio, is the ratio of the pipe  joints with
outside diameter to the minimum wall thickness; SDR=D/t) for 12" diameter or less    elastomeric
and for depths less than 15 feet.                                                    seal
                                                                                     (A.S.T.M.
                                                                                     F477).
                                                                                     Push-on
                                                                                     rubber
   (d)   Ductile Iron Pipe ANSI A21.51 (AWWA C-151), Cement Lined per ANSI A21.gasket per
(AWWA C-104) class thickness designed per ANSI A21.50 (AWWA C-150).                  ANSI 21.11
                                                                                     (AWWA C111
                                                                                     and C600).
                                                                                     A.S.T.M.
                                                                                     D3139 for
                                                                                     rubber
   (e)   Heavy wall Polyvinyl Chloride (PVC) Pressure Pipe ANSI/AWWA C-900 or  gasket
A.S.T.M. D2241 and SDR as defined under (c) above shall not exceed 21.               joints
                                                                                     conforming
                                                                                     to A.S.T.M.
                                                                                     F477.
 
      (2)   Ductile iron pipe, PVC pressure pipe or reinforced concrete pipe
will be required by the village for all installations greater than 15 feet in
depth.
      (3)   Nothing herein shall constitute or imply an endorsement by the
village of any one material over another or an opinion by the village regarding
equality or superiority or the performance qualities of any of the materials.
(Ord. 07-57, passed 12-17-2007)
§ 57.032 PROTECTION OF WATER MAINS.
   Water mains shall be protected in accordance with the applicable Illinois
Pollution Control Board Regulations and the Illinois Environmental Protection
Agency, Division of Public Water Supplies, Technical Policy Statements.
Wherever the sanitary sewer main, building service sewer, or any storm drain
crosses a water main, a minimum 18 inches vertical separation shall be provided
between the top of the lower pipe and the bottom of the upper pipe, and the
water main shall be protected as specified on Standard Drawings No. 10 and 20
of the State Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction. If
an 18 inch vertical separation cannot be maintained, the water main shall be
protected as specified on Standard Drawings No. 21, 22, 23, and 24 of the State
Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction.
(Ord. 07-57, passed 12-17-2007)
§ 57.033 SURVEY LINES AND GRADES.
   Survey lines and grade hubs shall be provided by the owner's engineer at a
maximum spacing of 100 foot intervals and at all changes in line and grade
regardless of whether a laser beam is used.
   (A)   Depth of pipe cover. All pipe shall be laid to a minimum depth of six
feet measured from the existing or proposed ground surface to the top of the
pipe barrel unless specifically allowed otherwise in special circumstances by
the Village Engineer.
   (B)   Pipe cradle (bedding). Granular pipe cradle material shall be required
on all sanitary sewers installed in the village. Granular pipe cradle shall be
a minimum of four inches thick below the pipe in earth or gravel excavation and
a minimum of six inches in rock excavation for the trench. The cradle shall
extend up to the mid-point (springline) of the pipe. For clay or PVC pipe, the
trench must be backfilled with granular material to a minimum of 12 inches over
the top of the pipe per the applicable East Dundee Standard. The embedment
granular material shall conform to Class 1A meeting Gradation CA-7 set forth in
Article 1004.01 of the State Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction.
(Ord. 07-57, passed 12-17-2007)
§ 57.034 LAYING OF PIPE.
   Sanitary sewer pipe shall be laid true to line and grade as set forth in
Section 31, Paragraph 31-1.02 of the State Standard Specifications for Water
and Sewer Main Construction. Dirt or other foreign material shall be prevented
from entering the pipe or pipe joint during handling or laying operations and
any pipe or fitting that has been installed with dirt or foreign material in it
shall be removed, cleaned, and relaid. At times when pipe laying is not in
progress, the open end of the pipe shall be closed with a water-tight plug or
by other means approved by the Village Engineer to ensure absolute cleanliness
inside the pipe.
   (A)   Laying of pipe on curves. The curvature of sanitary sewers is not
allowed unless, in the opinion of the Village Engineer, special circumstances
would allow otherwise. Pipe required to be laid on curved alignment shall be
joined in straight alignment and then deflected, joint by joint. Special care
shall be taken in blocking the pipe and in no case shall the degree of
deflection exceed manufacturer's recommendations for the respective pipe size,
material, and barrel length.
   (B)   Sanitary sewer services. Sanitary sewer services shall be a minimum of
six inches in diameter and connected to the sewer main with a manufactured wye
or tee and a 45 degree bend as shown on the applicable East Dundee Standard.
Sanitary sewer services shall be extended to the property line or building at a
minimum gradient of 1%. Sanitary sewer service connections to sewer mains 12
feet or more in depth shall be constructed with a six inch tee and riser and
backfilled with select granular material. On a temporary basis, sanitary
services may be terminated with a manufactured plug, in which case the location
shall be staked and an accurate record kept of the distance from the nearest
downstream manhole along the sewer main. Sanitary sewer service connections to
existing sewer mains shall be made with a tapping machine and saddle tightly
secured to the existing sanitary sewer or by other methods approved by the
Village Engineer.
(Ord. 07-57, passed 12-17-2007)
§ 57.035 SANITARY SEWER MANHOLES.
   Manholes for sanitary sewers shall have a minimum inside diameter of 48
inches for 12 inch mains and a 60 inch diameter for greater than 12 inch but
equal to or less than 24 inch main sizes. Manholes shall be constructed of
precast reinforced concrete units or cast-in-place Portland Cement concrete in
accordance with Section 32 of the State Standard Specifications for Water and
Sewer Main Construction and shall comply with the East Dundee Sanitary Sewer
Standards.
   (A)   Manhole location. Manholes shall be located at the junction of two
sanitary sewer mains or at any change in grade, alignment, or size of pipe. The
maximum spacing of manholes shall be 300 feet for sanitary sewers 15 inches and
smaller and 400 feet for sanitary sewers larger than 15 inches in size.
   (B)   Precast concrete manholes shall be provided for this improvement
conforming to the applicable portions of Division III, Section 32 of the State
Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction and village
standards. The manhole bottom shall be precast with the first riser section. A
flexible type joint shall be furnished at points of entry into and exit from
manhole structures of design approved by the Village Engineer prior to
installation. This flexible joint may consist of a sleeve of high quality
synthetic rubber with a substantial serrated flange which is cast directly into
the wall of the manhole base to form a tight waterstop and protrudes outside of
the manhole wall to connect with the pipe entering/exiting the manhole. When
this type of flexible joint is used, the sleeve shall slip over the end of the
pipe adjacent to the manhole base and shall be secured by means of a stainless
steel strap clamp equipped with a draw bolt and nut. The contractor may elect
to utilize a modular mechanical type joint consisting of interlocking synthetic
rubber links shaped to continuously fill the annular space between the pipe and
wall opening. The links shall be loosely assembled with bolts to form a
continuous rubber belt around the pipe with a pressure plate under each bolt
head and nut. After the seal assembly is positioned in the sleeve, tightening
of the bolts shall cause the rubber sealing elements to expand and provide an
absolutely watertight seal between the pipe and manhole wall opening.
   (C)   Connections to existing manholes. A machine cored opening in the wall
of existing manholes shall be provided to accommodate a flexible connector
system. The system should consist of three component positive seal gasketing
system similar in design to Press-Seal Gasket Corporation of Fort Wayne,
Indiana (46852) PSX: SERIES SIX, POSITIVE SEAL. This connection system will
enable the contractor to provide a flexible, water-tight connection to existing
manholes. The three components should include a power sleeve, a gasket, and a
take-up clamp. The sleeve is to be mechanically expanded to compress the gasket
against the cored receptacle hole surface in the manhole wall. After adequate
compression of the gasket is achieved, the ends of the power sleeve should
interlock to insure against any loss of compression. The gasket system should
be secure in the manhole ready to accept pipe of the class and diameter
specified.
   (D)   Manhole appurtenances. The following items shall apply to all manhole
structures:
      (1)   Manholes shall be furnished with a water-tight frame and solid
cover (Neenah Foundry R-1077-B, East Jordon Works 1022 HD or approved equal)
with the word "SANITARY" imprinted on the cover in raised letters.
      (2)   Both the manhole frame and cover shall have machined horizontal and
vertical bearing surfaces.
      (3)   Pick holes shall not create openings in the manhole cover.
      (4)   Manholes located in areas subject to inundation shall be furnished
with waterproof, bolt-down frames and covers (Neenah Foundry R-1916-F, East
Jordan Iron Works 1045 ZPT or approved equal) with the word "SANITARY"
imprinted on the cover in raised letters.
      (5)   Manhole frames shall be adjusted to proper grade utilizing
reinforced, pre-cast concrete rings; brick or concrete blocks will not be
allowed.
      (6)   Adjusting rings shall be securely sealed to the cone section or top
barrel section of the manhole using an approved resilient, flexible, non-
hardening, pre-formed bituminous mastic material. This mastic shall be applied
in such a manner that no surface water or ground water inflow can enter the
manhole through gaps between the top barrel section or cone section and the
first adjusting ring, between adjusting ring, or between the last adjusting
ring and the manhole frame. Up to six inches of adjusting rings may be
installed on a given manhole.
      (7)   An exterior joint collar meeting A.S.T.M. C877-91 shall be used to
provide a water-tight seal between manhole barrel sections, cone barrel
section, and the cone section to frame and cover. The joint collar shall be
joint sealer system as manufactured by Mar-Mac Manufacturing Company of McBee,
South Carolina 29101 or an approved equal and shall be installed according to
the manufacturer's recommendations. The collar shall consist of a band seven
inches wide. The band shall have an outer layer of polyethylene with an under
layer of rubberized mastic that is reinforced with a woven polypropylene
fabric. There shall be a peelable protective paper against the mastic that is
removed when the collar is applied to the joint. Within the collar two steel
straps five-eighths inch wide shall be located three-quarter inches from each
edge of the band. The straps shall be in tubes that isolate them from the
mastic and allow them to slip freely when tightened around the pipe. The collar
shall be designed so that when it is applied around the joint, the ends shall
overlap at least six inches and when the straps are secured a layer shall
completely cover the straps protecting them from moisture and rust. A bell hole
shall be dug under the joint. After removing the protective paper, the band
shall be placed around the pipe, mastic side to the pipe and spanning the
joint, with the overlap at the top of the pipe. The steel straps shall be
secured with the proper tools. The closing flap shall cover all remaining
exposed strap.
      (8)   Hydraulic cement shall be used on all manhole interior joints
(dress up).
      (9)   Manhole steps on maximum 16 inch centers shall be furnished with
each manhole, securely anchored in place true to vertical alignment, in
accordance with the East Dundee Standard.
   (E)   Drop manhole assemblies. Drop manhole assemblies shall be provided at
the junction of sanitary sewers where the difference of grade of the inverts of
the pipes exceeds two feet. The entire drop assembly shall be cast in concrete
monolithically with the manhole barrel section for proposed manhole
construction or constructed of ductile iron pipe strapped to the outside of
existing manholes, if village permits, or of concrete encased drop assembly
tied to the exterior wall of existing manholes by a method approved by the
village.
(Ord. 07-57, passed 12-17-2007)
§ 57.036 TESTING FOR ACCEPTANCE OF SANITARY SEWERS.
   All sanitary sewers 21 inches and smaller including service lines shall pass
a low pressure air test before acceptance. The village may, at their
discretion, require in addition to or in lieu of the low pressure air test an
exfiltration test as described in division (B) of this section which follows
prior to final acceptance. Sanitary sewers 24 inches and larger shall pass an
exfiltration test described in division (B) of this section and be subject to a
physical inspection by the village. Additionally, manholes are subject to
physical inspection and vacuum testing described in division (D) of this
section.
   (A)   Low pressure air test procedures and requirements. The procedure for
low pressure air testing shall follow that set forth in Section 31, Paragraph
31-1.11B(3) of the State Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer
Construction. All plugs including those in the upstream end of sanitary
services must be carefully braced to prevent leakage and blowout. The line
being tested shall be deemed acceptable when the time taken for the one pound
pressure drop is not less than that shown in the Air Test Table which follows
at the end of §
57.037.
   (B)   Exfiltration test procedures and requirements.  
      (1)   The exfiltration test shall be performed in the absence of ground
water in accordance with the procedures set forth in Section 31, Paragraph 31-
1.11B(1) of the State Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Construction.
      (2)   The amount of exfiltration shall not exceed 200 gallons per inch of
pipe diameter per mile per day, including all manholes and service lines. The
Village Engineer shall be the sole judge of the results.
   (C)   Deflection testing of PVC pipe. All main sewers shall be tested for
excess deflection by pulling a "go-no go" mandrel through the pipe from manhole
to manhole. The outside diameter of the test mandrel shall be equal to 95% of
the original inside diameter of the pipe being used. The main sewers shall be
so tested no sooner than 30 days after they have been installed. Wherever
possible and practical, the testing shall initiate at the downstream lines and
proceed towards the upstream lines. Where deflection is found to be in excess
of 5% of the original pipe diameter, the contractor shall excavate to the point
of excess deflection and carefully compact around the point where excess
deflection was found. The line shall then be retested for deflection. However,
should, after the initial testing, the deflected pipe fail to return to the
original size (inside diameter), the line shall be replaced.
   (D)   Vacuum testing manholes. All new manholes shall be subject to a vacuum
test. The test is applicable for new manholes. The vacuum test shall be
performed after backfilling is completed. The testing agency is to comply with
the following guidelines:
      (1)   Use manufactured vacuum test equipment meeting the Engineer's
approval and should follow equipment manufacturer's recommended procedures
throughout the test, unless directed otherwise required by this specification.
      (2)   Use extreme care and follow safety precautions during testing
operations. Keep personnel clear of manholes during testing.
      (3)   Seal all openings except manhole top access using pneumatic plugs
rated for test pressures. Install plugs according to test equipment
manufacturer's recommendations.
      (4)   Brace pipe inverts if connecting pipes have not been backfilled.
      (5)   Install vacuum tester head assembly on manhole top access, and
Inflate seal.
      (6)   Evacuate manhole to ten inches Hg (mercury) or five psi, close
isolation valve and start test. The start time of the test should be recorded.
      (7)   Maintain vacuum in manhole for the time indicated in table for the
diameter and depth of manhole being tested.
      (8)   Allowable vacuum loss: one inch Hg.
      (9)   Test failure is indicated by vacuum loss greater than allowable
within the minimum test time indicated in table for the size of manhole being
tested.
Minimum Test Times for Various Manhole Diameters
Depth, Feet Diameter, inches
            48 54 60 66 72
            Time, Seconds
8           20 23 26 29 33
10          25 29 33 36 41
12          30 35 39 43 49
14          35 41 46 51 57
16          40 46 52 58 67
18          45 52 59 65 73
20          50 53 65 72 81
22          55 64 72 79 89
 
 
Minimum Test Times for Various Manhole Diameters
Depth, Feet Diameter, inches
            48 54 60 66  72
            Time, Seconds
24          59 64 78 87  97
26          64 75 85 94  105
28          69 81 91 101 113
 
   (E)   Test results. If the sanitary sewer installation fails to meet the
test requirements specified, the contractor shall determine the cause or causes
of the defect and shall, at his or her own expense, repair or replace all
materials and workmanship as may be necessary to comply with the test
requirements.
(Ord. 07-57, passed 12-17-2007)
§ 57.037 CERTIFICATION.
   It shall be the responsibility of the pipe manufacturers to certify that
pipe and joint materials furnished are capable of meeting the low pressure air
test, infiltration test, and exfiltration test and are manufactured in
conformance with the A.S.T.M., A.N.S.I., AWWA, or A.A.S.H.T.O. test(s)
specified.
   (A)   Air test table. Based on equations from A.S.T.M. C 828.
   (B)   Specification time (min:sec) required for pressure drop from three and
one-half to two and one- half psig when testing one pipe diameter only.
   (C)   Pipe diameter, inches:
LENGTH OF LINE, FEET 4    6    8    10   12   15   18   21   24
25                   0:04 0:10 0:18 0:28 0:40 1:02 1:29 2:01 2:38
50                   0:09 0:20 0:35 0:55 1:19 2:04 2:58 4:03 5:17
75                   0:13 0:30 0:53 1:23 1:59 3:06 4:27 6:04 7:55
100                  0:18 0:40 1:10 1:50 2:38 4:08 5:56 8:05 10:34
125                  0:22 0:50 1:28 2:18 3:18 5:09 7:26 9:55 11:20
150                  0:26 0:59 1:46 2:45 3:58 6:11 8:30
175                  0:31 1:09 2:03 3:13 4:37 7:05
 
LENGTH OF LINE, FEET 4    6    8    10   12   15    18    21    24
200                  0:35 1:19 2:21 3:40 5:17                   12:06
225                  0:40 1:29 2:38 4:08 5:40             10:25 13:36
250                  0:44 1:39 2:56 4:35            8:31  11:35 15:07
275                  0:48 1:49 3:14 4:43            9:21  12:44 16:38
300                  0:53 1:59 3:31                 10:12 13:53 18:09
350                  1:02 2:19 3:47           8:16  11:54 16:12 21:10
400                  1:10 2:38           6:03 9:27  13:36 18:31 24:12
450                  1:19 2:50           6:48 10:38 15:19 20:50 27:13
500                  1:28           5:14 7:34 11:49 17:01 23:09 30:14
 
(Ord. 07-57, passed 12-17-2007)
STREET PAVEMENTS, CURB AND GUTTER CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS
§ 57.050 GENERAL.
   The standards and requirements found in this subchapter are for the
materials and construction of street pavements within the village. Both rigid
and flexible pavement construction are permitted in the village.
(Ord. 07-57, passed 12-17-2007)
§ 57.051 MATERIALS AND SPECIFICATIONS FOR STREETS.
   (A)   General references. It is intended that all public streets shall be
constructed in accordance, as far as applicable, with the most recently adopted
edition of the State of Illinois, Department of Transportation, Standard
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction, including current Highway
Standards, Special Provisions, and Supplemental Specifications as issued by
said Department. These shall be referred to as the State Specifications for
Road and Bridge Construction.
   (B)   Subgrade. The subgrade of all public streets shall be prepared in
accordance with Section 300 of the State Standard Specifications for Road and
Bridge Construction. It is required that the soil composing the subgrade have a
minimum soil support value of 3.0 as determined by the IBR (Illinois Bearing
Ratio) Test procedures used by the Illinois Department of Transportation. When,
in the opinion of the Village Engineer, evaluation of the suitability of the
subgrade to support the proposed pavement is warranted, a competent Soils
Engineer approved by the Village Engineer and engaged by the developer at his
or her expense shall perform the necessary soil tests to insure that a stable
subgrade as specified is being provided.
   (C)   Design of pavement: procedure.
      (1)   The required thickness of the pavement shall be determined in
accordance with the current Illinois Department of Transportation Bureau of
Local Roads and Streets, "Administrative Policies: Flexible Pavement Design for
Local Agencies (Attachment 5-8L) or Rigid Pavement Design for Local Agencies
(Attachment 5-8M).
      (2)   The anticipated traffic volumes, the composition of the traffic,
and the subgrade support strength provided by the roadbed soils shall be
considered in the design of the pavement. This information is subject to the
review and approval of the Village Engineer.
      (3)   Village minimum design criteria. Not less than the minimum
requirements listed below shall be permitted in the design of streets.
STREET CLASSIFICATION         MINIMUM STRUCTURAL NO. (dt)
Primary or Major Street
   *ADT over 15,000        5.5
   *ADT over 7,000 - 15,0005.0
   *ADT under 7,000        4.0
Secondary or Collector Street 3.3
Minor or Local Street         2.7
Cul-de-Sac                    2.7
Industrial Park Streets       3.5
 
       *Average Daily Traffic anticipated ten years beyond completion of
subdivision.
   (D)   Minimum pavement thickness requirement. For flexible pavements, the
minimum requirements for surface course, base course, and subbase course shall
be in compliance with those given in Figure 5-4, Minimum Thickness and Material
Requirements in the Attachment 5-8L and in Figure 3-1, Minimum Structural
Design Requirements in the Attachment 5-8M defined previously in this section.
   (E)   Review of pavement design. The village shall be furnished with copies
of the soils report when a soil support IBR value of three or greater is used
in the pavement design, a list of proposed street classifications, the
anticipated traffic volumes which will be generated, and traffic factors based
on preceding data. The Village Engineer shall review this design information
and report the evaluation of same to the Plan Commission and/or Village Board
prior to their consideration of the Engineering Plans.
   (F)   Stage construction requirement for bituminous pavements. For
subdivision streets, the installation of the final one and one-half inch of
bituminous concrete surface of the proposed pavement shall be delayed for one
winter. After May 1st of the year following the initial construction of the
pavement or a later year mutually agreed upon between the owner and Village
Engineer, the contractor and the Village Engineer shall inspect and mark all
distressed or damaged areas. These areas shall be removed and repaired to the
satisfaction of the Village Engineer. The entire surface of the existing
pavement shall then be cleaned; primed at a minimum rate of 0.05 gallons per
square yard; sanded, if the street is open to traffic, at the minimum rate of
two pounds per square yard; and surfaced with the final layer of bituminous
concrete as required.
   (G)   Materials inspection.
      (1)   Subgrade compaction and all materials incorporated into the roadway
section shall be tested for compaction when being placed by a competent testing
laboratory engaged by the owner at his or her expense. Tests shall be made in
compliance with current state standard testing recommendations, except that
plant inspectors will not be required in concrete or asphalt plants
continuously during production provided plants have previously been approved
for furnishing materials by the Illinois Department of Transportation. However,
one random test shall be made daily on all material used. Results of all tests
conducted shall be forwarded to the Village Engineer for his review and
approval. Work will not be accepted without the test results being first
submitted to the village.
      (2)   The owner shall provide a pavement core for every 1,000 square
yards of pavement to determine the thickness, strength and/or density of the
pavement when requested by the Village Engineer, to determine their compliance
with the contract specifications.
   (H)   Protective coating application. All concrete pavement in the village
shall receive a protective coat regardless of the time of the year constructed
in accordance with applicable portions of Section 420.21 and 503.19 of the
State Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction.
(Ord. 07-57, passed 12-17-2007)
WATER DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS
§ 57.060 GENERAL.
   (A)   The standards and requirements found in this subchapter are for
materials and construction of water mains within the village. Specification
references made herein for manufactured materials such as pipe, hydrants,
valves and fittings refer to designations for the American Water Works
Association (AWWA) or the American National Standard Institute (ANSI). Nothing
herein shall constitute or imply an endorsement by the village of any one
material over another.
   (B)   Specifications. These specifications cover pipe fittings and accessory
items normally used for water distribution systems. Special considerations will
be covered in the plans and special provisions. Water distribution systems
shall be constructed in accordance with the most current edition of the
Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in Illinois.
(Ord. 07-57, passed 12-17-2007)
§ 57.061 PIPE.
   (A)   Ductile cast iron pipe. Ductile cast iron pipe shall conform to the
most current ANSI A21.51 and AWWA C151 specifications requirements. Class 52
thickness designation, casting, marking, testing, etc. shall be provided in
accordance with applicable ANSI or AWWA standards.
   (B)   Lining. Cement lining shall be included in accordance with the most
current ANSI A21.4 (AWWA - C104) specification requirements.
   (C)   Pipe fittings. All cast iron fittings shall conform to the latest ANSI
A21.10 and AWWA C110 specification requirements for cast iron fittings. Lining
or other special items shall be specified in the special provisions for a
project.
(Ord. 07-57, passed 12-17-2007)
§ 57.062 PROTECTION OF WATER MAINS.
   (A)   General. Wherever pipelines designated to carry potable water supplies
cross or are laid less than ten feet horizontally from existing or proposed
drains or sewer lines, or cross house service sewers, storm drains, or sanitary
sewers, special precautions shall be taken as follows.
   (B)   Parallel water mains and sewers.
      (1)   Should conditions prevail which prevent a lateral separation of ten
feet, the pipeline may be laid closer than ten feet to a storm or sanitary
sewer, provided the water main is laid in a separate trench and at such an
elevation that the bottom of the water main is at least 18 inches of clear
separation above the crown of the sewer.
      (2)   If it is impossible to obtain a horizontal separation of at least
ten feet, and a vertical separation of at least 18 inches as stipulated above,
the sewer shall be constructed or reconstructed of mechanical or slip-on joint
ductile iron pipe, of PVC pipe equivalent to water main standards of
construction, or of concrete pressure pipes specified herein, and be pressure
tested to assure water tightness.
   (C)   Water main crossing sewers.
      (1)   Whenever the water main crosses over house sewers, storm drains or
sanitary sewers, the water main shall be laid at such an elevation that the
bottom of the water main is at least 18 inches above the top of the drain or
sewer. This minimum vertical separation shall be maintained for that portion of
the water main located within ten feet to be measured from the centerline of
the drain or sewer normal to the water main centerline.
      (2)   Under conditions that the minimum vertical separation set forth in
division (C)(1) above cannot be maintained or it is necessary for the water
main to pass under a sewer or drain, the water main shall be protected as
specified on Standard Drawings No. 21, 22, 23, and 24 of the State Standard
Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction.
      (3)   Where a water main must cross under a sewer or drain, in addition
to the above, a vertical separation of 18 inches between the sewer and water
main shall be maintained. The sewer shall be supported to prevent its settling
as directed by the Village Engineer or Superintendent of Public Works.
   (D)   Polyethylene encasement. Where, in the opinion of the Village Engineer
the conditions warrant, a study shall be made at the expense of the owner to
determine if polyethylene encasement of the ductile iron water main is
advisable. The encasement shall meet the requirements of ANSI A21.5 and AWWA
C104 standards.
(Ord. 07-57, passed 12-17-2007)
§ 57.063 PIPE INSTALLATION FOR WATER MAINS.
   (A)   General. Ductile iron water main shall be installed in accordance with
the specifications and instructions for installing ductile iron pipe contained
in AWWA C600 standards.
   (B)   Excavation and backfill. Excavation and backfill for water mains shall
conform to the provisions of Section 20, 21, and 22 and other applicable
sections of the Standard Specifications for Water Main and Sanitary Sewer.
   (C)   Depth of pipe cover. Unless otherwise shown on the plans or indicated
in the special provisions, all pipe shall be laid to a minimum depth of five
feet six inches measured from the existing ground surface or established finish
grade to the top of the barrel of the pipe. In areas subject to subsequent
excavation or fill, the mains shall be laid to grades shown on the plans.
   (D)   Pipe foundations. To ensure that adequate and uniform support is
provided under the water main and to avoid differential settlement of the pipe,
all water main shall be laid on a bed of sand, gravel, or crushed stone to a
depth of four inches minimum thickness according to Laying Condition Type 4 set
forth in ANSI A21.50 and AWWA C150 standards. The initial backfilling of the
main to a minimum of six inches over the pipe shall be with approved fine
material free of rocks or clods larger than two inches in diameter. This
backfill material should be free of cinders, ashes, refuse, vegetable or
organic material, boulders or other material not suitable as determined by the
Village Engineer. The backfill shall be tamped into place to provide a firm
support all along the pipe.
   (E)   Dewatering of trench. Where water is encountered in the trench, it
shall be removed during pipe laying and jointing operations. Provisions shall
be made to prevent floating of the pipe. Trench water shall not be allowed to
enter the pipe at any time.
(Ord. 07-57, passed 12-17-2007)
§ 57.064 HANDLING OF PIPE.
   (A)   All types of pipe shall be handled in such a manner as will prevent
damage to the pipe or coating. Damaged pipe, specials and other accessories
shall be rejected and replaced to the satisfaction of the village. The methods
of handling shall be corrected to prevent further damage when called to the
attention of the contractor.
   (B)   Threaded pipe ends shall be protected by caps or other means until
laid.
   (C)   The pipe and fittings shall be inspected by the contractor for defects
while suspended above grade.
   (D)   Dirt or other foreign material shall be prevented from entering the
pipe or pipe joint during handling or laying operations, and any pipe or
fitting that has been installed with dirt or foreign material in it shall be
removed, cleaned and relaid. At times when pipe laying is not in progress, the
open ends of the pipe shall be closed by a water-tight plug or by other means
approved by the Village Engineer or Director of Public Works to ensure absolute
cleanliness inside the pipe.
(Ord. 07-57, passed 12-17-2007)
§ 57.065 LAYING OF PIPE.
   (A)   Laying of pipe on curves.
      (1)   Long-radius curves, either horizontal or vertical, may be laid with
standard pipe by deflections at the joints. If the pipe is shown curved on the
plans and no special fittings are shown, the contractor can assume that the
curves can be made by deflection of the joints with standard lengths of pipe.
If shorter lengths are required, the plan will indicate maximum lengths that
can be used.
      (2)   Where field conditions require deflection with curves not
anticipated by the plans, the Village Engineer will approve the methods to be
used.
      (3)   Maximum deflections at pipe joints and laying radius for various
pipe lengths are as found in the following standards:
         Ductile Cast Iron Pipe Mechanical Joints      AWWA C600
         Ductile Iron Pipe Push-On Joints         AWWA C600
      (4)   When rubber-gasketed pipe is laid on a curve, the pipe shall be
jointed in a straight alignment before the deflection is introduced.
   (B)   Joints for ductile cast iron pipe. Joints for cast iron pipe shall
consist of one of the two following types, unless otherwise provided in the
special provisions:
      (1)   Mechanical joints; or
      (2)   Push-on rubber gasket joints.
   (C)   Jointing mechanical joint pipe (AWWA C111).
      (1)   The outside of the spigot and inside of the bell of mechanical
joint pipe shall be thoroughly cleaned to remove all foreign matter from the
joint. The cast iron gland shall then be slipped onto the spigot end of the
pipe with the lip extension of the gland toward the socket or bell end. The
rubber gasket shall be placed on the spigot end with the thick edge toward the
gland. The pipe shall be pushed forward to completely seat the spigot end in
the bell. The gasket shall then be pressed into place within the bell, being
careful to have the gasket evenly located around the entire joint. The cast
iron gland shall then be moved along the pipe into position and bolted.
Mechanical joint restraint shall be Megalug Series 1100 produced by EBAA Iron
Inc. or approved equal.
      (2)   Nuts spaced 180 degrees shall be tightened alternately to AWWA C600
standards in order to produce an equal pressure on all parts of the gland.
   (D)   Jointing rubber gasket joint pipe (AWWA C111).
      (1)   The inside of the bell shall be thoroughly cleaned to remove all
foreign matter from the joint. The circular rubber gasket shall be inserted in
the gasket seat provided.
      (2)   A thin film of gasket lubricant shall be applied to the inside
surface of the gasket. Gasket lubricant shall be a solution of vegetable soap
or other solution supplied by the pipe manufacturer and approved by the Village
Engineer.
      (3)   The spigot end of the pipe shall be cleaned and entered into the
rubber gasket in the bell, using care to keep the joint from contacting the
ground. The joint shall then be completed by forcing the plain end to the seat
of the bell.
      (4)   All pipe shall be furnished with a depth mark to assure that the
spigot end is inserted to the full depth of the joint.
      (5)   Field-cut pipe lengths shall be beveled to avoid damage to the
gasket and facilitate making the joint.
   (E)   Bell and spigot pipe with lead joints. This type is allowed only when
required by special conditions. Details of such installations shall be
specifically approved by the Village Engineer.
   (F)   Thrusting blocking.
      (1)   Blocking to prevent movement of lines under pressure at bends,
tees, caps, valves and hydrants shall be with minimum 3000 psi Portland cement
concrete, a minimum of 12 inches thick, placed between solid ground and the
fittings and shall be anchored in such a manner that pipe and fitting joints
will be accessible for repairs. A mechanical joint restraint may be used as an
alternative to thrust blocking. Mechanical joint restraint shall be Megalug
Series 1100 produced by EBAA Iron, Inc. or approved equal.
      (2)   All bends of 11-1/4 degrees or greater, and all tees and plugs
shall be thrust protected to prevent movement of the lines under pressure as
per the East Dundee Standards.
   (G)   Connections to existing mains. Connections to existing water mains
shall be accomplished without interruption of service unless otherwise
authorized by the Village Engineer or Director of Public Works. Tap and gate
valves will be provided at the point of connection to the existing system.
(Ord. 07-57, passed 12-17-2007)
§ 57.066 PRESSURE TESTING AND FLUSHING OF WATER MAINS.
   (A)   Hydrostatic test.
      (1)   The newly laid water mains or any valve sections of it shall be
subject to a hydrostatic pressure test of no less than 150 pounds per square
inch (PSI).
      (2)   Duration of each pressure test shall be for a period of not less
than two hours for pipes with uncovered joints and not less than six hours for
pipes which have been backfilled before tests are made.
   (B)   Procedure for test. Each valved section of pipe shall be slowly filled
with water and the specified test pressure shall be applied by means of a pump
connected to the pipe in a satisfactory manner. The pump pipe connection and
all necessary apparatus, including gauges and meters, shall be furnished by the
contractor. Before applying the specified test pressure, all air shall be
expelled from the pipe. To accomplish this, taps shall be made, if necessary at
points of highest elevation, and afterwards tightly plugged. All exposed pipes,
fittings, valves, hydrants, and joints shall be carefully examined during the
open trench test. All joints showing visible leaks shall be repaired until
tight. Any cracked or defective pipes, fittings, valves, or hydrants discovered
as a consequence of this pressure test shall be removed and replaced by the
contractor with sound material, and the test shall be repeated until
satisfactory to the Village Engineer.
   (C)   Permissible leakage.
      (1)   Suitable means shall be provided by the contractor for determining
the quantity of water lost by leakage. The leakage test shall be conducted
after satisfactory completion of the pressure test before being acceptable.
      (2)   Allowable leakage shall not be greater than that computed by the
following table. (Allowable leakage is shown in Gal./hr/1,000 ft.)
 
Diameter of Pipe Allowable Leakage Diameter of Pipe Allowable Leakage
6"               0.55              18"              1.66
8"               0.74              20"              1.84
10"              0.94              24"              2.21
12"              1.10              30"              2.76
14"              1.29              36"              3.31
16"              1.47              42"              3.86
 
      (3)   Leakage is defined as the quantity of water to be supplied in the
newly laid pipe and any valved section of it necessary to maintain the
specified leakage test pressure after the pipe has been filled with water and
the air expelled. The test pressure shall be maintained on the hourly basis
minimally or at intervals directed by the Engineer.
      (4)   Flanged pipe shall be "bottle tight".
(Ord. 07-57, passed 12-17-2007)
§ 57.067 FLUSHING.
   (A)   Sections of pipe to be disinfected shall first be flushed to remove
any solids or contaminated material that may have become lodged in the pipe. A
hydrant shall be installed at the end of the main. One two-and-one-half inch
hydrant opening will, under normal pressure, provide this velocity in pipe
sizes up to and including 12 inches.
   (B)   All taps required by the contractor for chlorination or flushing
purposes, or for temporary or permanent release of air, shall be provided by
him or her as a part of the construction of water mains.
(Ord. 07-57, passed 12-17-2007)
§ 57.068 REQUIREMENT OF CHLORINE.
   Before being placed into service, all new mains and repaired portions of or
extensions to existing mains shall be chlorinated so that a chlorine residual
of not less than 25 parts per million remains in the water after standing 24
hours in the pipe.
   (A)   Form of applied chlorine. Chlorine shall be applied by one of the
methods which follow, subject to approval by the Village Engineer.
      (1)   Liquid chlorine. A chlorine gas-water mixture shall be applied by
means of a solution-feed chlorinating device or the dry gas may be fed directly
through proper devices for regulating the rate of flow and providing effective
diffusion of the gas into the water within the pipe being treated. Chlorinating
devices for feeding solutions of the chlorine gas or the gas itself must
provide means for preventing the backflow of water into the chlorine.
      (2)   Chlorine-bearing compounds in water. In certain instances, when the
usage of chlorine gas is not practical, such as in congested or confined areas,
upon approval of the Village Engineer, a chlorine-bearing compound of known
chlorine content, prepared in solution form, may be substituted for chlorine
gas.
   (B)   Point and rate of application.
      (1)   Point of application. The preferred point of application of the
chlorinating agent is at the beginning of the pipeline extension or any valved
section of it, and through a corporation stop inserted in the pipe. The water
injector for delivering the chlorine-bearing water into the pipe should be
supplied from a tap made on the pressure side of the gate valve controlling the
flow into the pipeline extension. Alternate points of application may be used
when approved or directed by the Village Engineer.
      (2)   Rate of application. Water from the existing distribution system or
other approved source of supply shall be controlled to flow very slowly into
the newly laid pipeline during application of the chlorine. The rate of
chlorine mixture flow shall be in such proportion to the rate of water entering
the newly laid pipe that the dosage applied to the water will be at least 50
parts per million unless otherwise directed by the Village Engineer.
      (3)   Retention period. Treated water shall be retained in the pipe at
least 24 hours. After this period, the chlorine residual at pipe extremities
and at other representative points shall be at least 25 parts per million.
      (4)   Chlorinating valves and hydrants. In the process of chlorinating
newly laid pipe, all valves or other appurtenances shall be operated while the
pipeline is filled with the chlorinating agent and under normal operating
pressure.
      (5)   Preventing reverse flow. Valves shall be manipulated so that the
strong chlorine solution in the line being treated will not flow back into the
line supplying the water. Check valves may be used if desired.
(Ord. 07-57, passed 12-17-2007)
§ 57.069 FINAL FLUSHING AND TESTING.
   (A)   Following chlorination, all treated water shall be thoroughly flushed
from the newly laid pipe at its extremity until the replacement water
throughout its length shows, upon test, the absence of chlorine. In the event
chlorine is normally used in the source of supply, then the tests shall show a
residual not in excess of that carried in the system.
   (B)   After flushing, water samples collected on two successive days from
the treated piping system, and directed by the Village Engineer, shall show
satisfactory bacteriological results. Bacteriological analysis must be
performed by a laboratory approved by the Director of the Illinois Department
of Public Health and the Village Engineer.
   (C)   Should the initial treatment result in an unsatisfactory bacterial
test, the original chlorination procedure shall be repeated by the contractor
until satisfactory results are obtained.
(Ord. 07-57, passed 12-17-2007)
§ 57.070 VALVE VAULTS AND BOXES FOR WATER MAINS AND WATER SERVICES.
   (A)   General.
      (1)   This section shall apply to the construction of standard or special
valve vaults, cast iron valve boxes and curb boxes, all in accordance with the
East Dundee Standard.
      (2)   Only four inch gate valves for service lines may be provided with
cast iron valve boxes. Such valves must be located in grassed areas not less
than six feet in diameter and with additional land available for repair
machinery to operate. All other valves larger than four inches in size and four
inch valves located in pavement shall be placed in vaults as described in these
specifications.
   (B)   Materials.
      (1)   Ring and cover and valve box castings. Castings for cast iron ring
and cover and/or cast iron parts of valve boxes shall conform to the
requirements of Standard Specifications for Gray Iron Castings, A.S.T.M.
Designation A-18.
      (2)   Materials for valve vaults. Portland Cement, masonry units, mortar
and other materials necessary for the construction of valve chambers and boxes
shall meet the requirements of Section 32 of the Standard Specifications for
Water and Sewer Main Construction in Illinois.
   (C)   Vault appurtenances. The following items shall apply to all vault
structures:
      (1)   Vaults shall be furnished with a water-tight frame and solid cover
(Neenah Foundry R-1077-B, East Jordan Iron Works 1022 HD or approved equal)
with the word "WATER" imprinted on the cover in raised letters.
      (2)   Both the vault frame and cover shall have machined horizontal and
vertical bearing surfaces.
      (3)   Pick holes shall not create openings in the vault cover.
      (4)   Vault frames shall be adjusted to proper grade utilizing
reinforced, precast concrete rings; brick or concrete blocks will not be
allowed.
      (5)   Adjusting rings shall be securely sealed to the cone section or top
barrel section of the vault using resilient, flexible, non-hardening,
preformed, bituminous mastic material (RamNek, or approved equal). This mastic
shall be applied in such a manner that no surface water or ground water inflow
can enter the vault through gaps between the top barrel section or cone section
and the first adjusting ring, between adjusting rings, or between the last
adjusting ring and the vault frame. Up to six inches of adjusting rings may be
installed on a given vault. However, no more than two rings in total shall be
used.
      (6)   RamNek or approved equal shall also be used to provide a water-
tight seal between vault barrel sections, cone to barrel section, and the cone
section to frame and cover.
      (7)   Hydraulic cement shall be used on all vault interior joints (dress
up).
      (8)   Seal-tight valve vaults may be either pre-cast or cast in place
with a minimum diameter of 48 inches.
   (D)   Cast iron valve boxes for gate valves.
      (1)   Cast iron valve boxes as per the East Dundee Standard are placed
for enclosing gate valves of small size in lieu of gate valve vaults at
locations acceptable to the village.
      (2)   Adjustable cast iron valve boxes shall be set to position during
backfilling operations so they will be in a vertical alignment to the gate
valve operating stem. The lower casting of the unit shall be installed first in
such a manner as to be cushioned and to not rest directly upon the body of the
gate valve or upon the water main. The upper casting of the unit shall then be
placed in proper alignment into such an elevation that its top will be a final
grade. Backfilling around both units shall be placed and compacted to the
satisfaction of the Village Engineer.
      (3)   The valve boxes shall be of a two-piece, screw-type, adjustable
design as manufactured by Tyler Pipe, 6850 Series, Item 664-S or approved equal
of a pattern of design acceptable to the Director of Public Works. The lids
shall be furnished with "Water" embossed or cast in the top surface.
   (E)   Curb boxes. Curb boxes shall be of the buffalo type, with a two and
one-quarter inch minimum shaft which sets over the curb stop, and of such
construction that it shall be capable of extension to finished grade to conform
to the depth of bury of the service line as provided in the East Dundee
Standards. The curb boxes shall be adjustable, screw-type cast iron as
manufactured by Tyler Pipe, 6500 Series, Item 95-E or approved equal of a
pattern of design acceptable to the Director of Public Works. Lids shall be of
a bolted down design with "Water" cast in the top surface. An enlarged base
shall be provided for services larger than one and one-half inches but less
than two inches. Valve boxes shall be provided for services larger than two
inches.
(Ord. 07-57, passed 12-17-2007)
§ 57.071 FIRE HYDRANTS.
   (A)   Description. These specifications are to be used in conjunction with
the latest AWWA Standard C502 for fire hydrants for ordinary water works
service.
   (B)   Materials.
      (1)   All materials used in the production of fire hydrants for ordinary
service shall conform to the specifications designated for each material listed
in AWWA Standard C502.
      (2)   For reasons of standardization, the hydrants shall be five and one-
quarter inch Waterous Pacer, Model WB-67-250 and of a pattern approved by the
Director of Public Works. The name or mark of the manufacturer and the size of
the valve opening shall be plainly cast in raised letters and so placed on the
hydrant barrel as to be visible after the hydrant has been installed.
      (3)   As a minimum requirement, all hydrants shall be designed for a
working pressure of 250 pounds per square inch and in workmanship, design, and
material shall conform to the AWWA Standard C502. The hydrant bodies shall be
ductile iron, fully mounted with approved non-corrodible metals. All wearing
surfaces shall be either bronze or some other approved non-corrodible material,
and there shall be no moving bearing or contact surfaces of iron in contact
with iron or steel. All contact surfaces shall be finished or machined in the
best workmanlike manner and all wearing surfaces shall be easily renewable.
      (4)   The design of the hydrant shall be such that all working parts may
be removed without excavating through the top of the hydrant and shall have the
required AWWA specified number of turns of the stem to open the gate an area
equal to the area of the valve opening. Any change in area of the water passage
through the valve must have an easy curve, and all outlets must have round
corners of good radius. The nozzle section shall be designed for easy 360
degree rotation by the loosening of no more than four bolts.
      (5)   The main valve closure shall be of the compression type, opening
against the pressure and closing with the pressure.
      (6)   Lugs, if required for harnessing the hydrant to the connecting pipe
from the main in the street, shall be provided on the bell of the elbow or on
the hydrant casting. A drawing of the lug construction shall be submitted for
approval on request of the Village Engineer or Director of Public Works.
      (7)   Hydrants shall be provided with a sidewalk flange. Breaking devices
shall be at the sidewalk flange which will allow the hydrant barrel to separate
at this point with a minimum breakage of hydrant parts in case of damage. There
shall also be provided at this point a safety stem coupling on the operating
stem that will shear at the time of impact. Unless otherwise specified, all
hydrants shall be equipped with O-Ring stem seals.
   (C)   Hydrant details.
      (1)   The dimensions and details of hydrant and nozzles, unless otherwise
noted, shall be as follows:
         Hydrant 6-inch Connection
         Hydrant connection pipe size inside diameter   6"
         Standpipe, minimum inside diameter   7"
         Length of hydrant from bottom of hydrant near
            connection to sidewalk ring   5' 8" minimum
         Valve opening, minimum seat diameter   5-1/4"
         Size of auxiliary gate valve   6"
         Hose nozzles, number and size   Two 2-1/2" and One 4-1/2"
The threading geometries of the hose nozzles shall match existing hydrants in
the village.
      (2)   All nozzles shall be fitted with ductile iron threaded caps with
the operating nut of the same design and proportions as the hydrant stem nut.
Caps shall be threaded to fit the corresponding nozzles and shall be fitted
with suitable gaskets for positive water tightness under test pressures.
      (3)   The operating nuts on hydrant stem and nozzle caps shall be the
same for all sizes of hydrants. Dimensions shall be as follows:
         Pattern of Nut         Tapered Pentagonal
         Height               1-1/16 inch
         Size of Pentagon         1-3/8 inch at bottom of nut; 1-1/4 inch at
top of nut (measured
                           from point to flat)
      (4)   The hydrants shall be furnished with flanged or mechanical joint
end connections.
      (5)   The hydrant valves shall open by turning to the left (counter-
clockwise).
   (D)   Factory hydrostatic test. Before the hydrant is painted at the
factory, it shall be subjected to an internal hydrostatic test of 500 pounds
per square inch with the hydrant valve in a closed position and again with the
hydrant valve in an open position.
   (E)   Painting.
      (1)   All iron parts of the hydrant both inside and outside shall be
thoroughly cleaned and painted. All inside surfaces and outside surfaces below
the ground line shall be covered with two coats of asphalt varnish. The first
coat shall have dried thoroughly before the second is applied.
      (2)   The outside of the hydrant above the finished ground line shall be
thoroughly cleaned and thereafter painted with one coat of paint of a durable
composition, and one additional coat of gloss red paint. This last coat shall
be field applied after installation and immediately before final acceptance of
the water system improvements.
   (F)   Construction details. Hydrants shall be plumb and shall be set so that
the lowest hose connections are at least 18 inches above the surrounding
finished grade. All hydrants shall be inspected in the field upon delivery to
the job to insure proper operation before installation. A minimum of one cubic
yard of coarse stone, gravel or like porous material shall be placed at and
around the base of the hydrant to ensure proper drainage of the hydrant after
use. The blocking of the hydrant shall consist of a wedge of 3000 psi minimum
P.C. concrete of not less than one-half cubic yard of volume extending from the
hydrant to undisturbed soil and shall be so placed to form a barrier adjacent
to the hydrant base to counteract the pressure of water exerted thereon. Care
shall be taken to insure that weep holes are not covered by concrete. The
hydrant shall be set on a concrete block to insure a firm bearing for the
hydrant base. The hydrant valve and tee shall be interconnected by steel rods
if required by special provision. The resetting of existing hydrants and moving
and reconnection of existing hydrants shall be handled in a manner similar to a
new installation. The hydrant setting shall follow the East Dundee Standards.
(Ord. 07-57, passed 12-17-2007)
§ 57.072 GATE VALVES.
   (A)   Description. These specifications are to be used in conjunction with
the latest AWWA Standard C509 for ordinary waterworks service.
   (B)   Materials.
      (1)   All materials used in the production of gate valves shall conform
to the latest AWWA Standards C509, C550, and C153 for valve stem construction,
protective interior coatings, and wall thickness respectively.
      (2)   The valves shall be of the resilient wedge design with a ductile
iron wedge fully encapsulated in nitrite rubber except for guide and nut areas
and with the body of the valve being ductile iron. The wedge rubber shall be
molded and bonded to the ductile iron gate.
      (3)   For reasons of standardization, valves shall be American Flow
Control, Series 2500 Ductile Iron Resilient Wedge valves. Non-rising type stems
are required.
      (4)   End connection configurations shall be either mechanical joints or
flanged joints.
      (5)   The valve body and bonnet shall be epoxy coated, inside and out.
(Ord. 07-57, passed 12-17-2007)
§ 57.073 SERVICE LINE CONNECTIONS.
   (A)   General. The minimum size of service lines shall be a pipe size of one
inch inside diameter.
   (B)   Copper service pipe.
      (1)   For connections to mains where service lines are less than three
inches in diameter, copper pipe, soft temper, Type K meeting the requirements
of A.S.T.M. B88 standards shall be required.
      (2)   The maximum size of a tap in the main shall not exceed one-fourth
the nominal inside diameter of the main. Where multiple taps are required due
to tap size limitations, the taps shall be made a minimum of 12 inches apart.
      (3)   A tapping saddle is required at each point of connection to the
main. The service saddle shall be a nylon-coated, double strap (stainless
steel) manufactured by Smith-Blair Clamp and Coupling Products, Product 317 or
approved equal.
      (4)   The corporation stop shall be a ball style valve manufactured by
A.Y. McDonald Manufacturing Company, series 4701B or approved equal.
      (5)   The curb stop shall be a ball style valve manufactured by A.Y.
McDonald Manufacturing Company, series 6100 or approved equal.
   (C)   Ductile iron service pipe. For connections to mains where service
lines are three inches or greater in diameter, ductile iron pipe, Class 52
meeting all of the requirements of § 57.061 shall be provided. The connection
to the main shall be by providing the appropriate manufactured and cutting-in
fittings for the service line in the main where at all possible. Where, in the
opinion of the Director of Public Works, disruption of the existing main is not
advisable, a tapping valve inserted under system pressure will be required.
(Ord. 07-57, passed 12-17-2007)
SIDEWALKS
§ 57.080 GENERAL.
   The standards and specifications stated in this subchapter for materials and
construction pertain to sidewalk construction within the village as part of a
village-wide sidewalk replacement program, public sidewalks funded by adjoining
property owners, and in areas of new subdivisions or other development. In all
the areas except park areas, Portland cement concrete sidewalk shall be the
standard requirement. Even though asphalt sidewalks are encouraged in park
areas for economics, concrete sidewalks are permitted.
(Ord. 07-57, passed 12-17-2007)
§ 57.081 MATERIALS AND CONSTRUCTION METHODS.
   The sidewalk shall be constructed of Portland cement concrete placed on a
prepared sub-grade in accordance with Section 424 of the State Standard
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction and as shown in the East Dundee
Standards.
(Ord. 07-57, passed 12-17-2007)
§ 57.082 SIDEWALK REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Sidewalks shall be required on both sides of the street in residential
subdivisions and for all commercial lots. Sidewalks may be required for
industrial lots and elsewhere if considered necessary by the Plan Commission
for public safety. All sidewalks shall be constructed of Portland cement
concrete unless another material is approved by the village. Depressed curbs at
all intersections shall be required. Any other provisions for the elderly or
the handicapped may be required if considered necessary by the Village
Engineer.
   (B)   Location. Unless otherwise directed by the Village Engineer, sidewalks
shall be located within the dedicated right-of-way and shall be laid offset one
foot from the property line of abutting lots and along such line as extended at
intersections.
   (C)   Class of concrete. Class SI Portland cement concrete per the State
Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction shall be furnished for
sidewalk construction, except where bituminous sidewalks have been authorized.
   (D)   Dimensions. Sidewalks in residential subdivisions and within
industrial developments where required by the Plan Commission shall be not less
than five feet in width and not less than five inches in thickness. Sidewalks
for commercial lots shall be not less than eight feet in width and not less
than five inches in thickness. Sidewalks shall not be less than six inches of
Portland cement concrete thick where they intersect a driveway.
(Ord. 07-57, passed 12-17-2007)
§ 57.083 CURING.
   (A)   The surface of the newly laid sidewalks shall be cured and protected
in a manner as set forth in Article 1020.13 of the State Standard
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction and satisfactory to the Village
Engineer or Director of Public Works. The material used for curing shall
conform with the concrete curing materials per Section 1022 of the
specifications noted previously.
   (B)   Special attention is required for the protection of fresh concrete
against cold weather which should follow the measures discussed in Article
1020.13 (c) of State Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction.
   (C)   A minimum of three days curing period is required for all newly
constructed concrete sidewalks. All freshly poured, exposed surfaces shall be
adequately protected against wash by rain. Traffic shall not be allowed on the
sidewalk until the curing period has elapsed.
(Ord. 07-57, passed 12-17-2007)
§ 57.084 BACKFILL.
   After the concrete has been cured, the spaces along the edges of the
sidewalk shall be backfilled to the finished level of the sidewalk with
approved topsoil material. The material shall then be compacted until firm and
the surface neatly graded to receive grass cover with either seeding or sod.
(Ord. 07-57, passed 12-17-2007)
DRIVEWAYS
§ 57.100 GENERAL.
   All new drive approaches within the village shall be constructed of Portland
cement concrete (Class SI) or bituminous concrete, Class I or B (Modified) over
an aggregate base course in accordance with the East Dundee Standards.
   (A)   Materials and construction methods.
      (1)   The concrete driveway approaches shall be constructed on a prepared
subgrade in accordance with Section 423 of the State Standard Specifications
for Road and Bridge Construction, hereinafter referred to as SSSRBC, and shall
be constructed of concrete having a minimum thickness of six inches for private
access driveways. For commercial and industrial driveways where heavy truck use
is anticipated, increasing the minimum thickness and/or including reinforcement
of the Portland cement concrete slab is required.
      (2)   The bituminous driveway approaches shall be constructed on a
prepared sub-grade in accordance with the applicable portions of Sections 351,
405, and 406 of the SSSRBC and shall be constructed of a minimum of eight
inches of compacted crushed gravel, having a gradation conforming to CA-6, as a
base course and with two inches minimum compacted thickness of bituminous
concrete, Class I or Class B (Modified) as a surface course. Increasing these
thicknesses for entrances in commercial and industrial areas where heavy truck
use is anticipated will be required as specified by the Village Engineer or
Director of Public Works.
   (B)   Curing of concrete.
      (1)   The surface of the newly laid concrete pavement shall be cured as
set forth in Article 1020.13(a) of the SSSRBC and by a method satisfactory to
the Village Engineer or Director of Public Works. The material used for curing
shall conform with the material specifications per Section 1022 of the SSSRBC.
      (2)   Special attention is required for the protection of fresh concrete
against cold weather, which should follow the measures discussed in Article
1020.13(c) of the SSSRBC.
      (3)   A minimum of three days curing period is required for all newly
constructed concrete pavements. All freshly poured, exposed surfaces shall be
adequately protected against wash by rain.
   (C)   Backfill. After the concrete has been cured, the spaces along the
edges of the driveway shall be backfilled to the finished level with approved
topsoil. The topsoil shall then be compacted until firm and the surface neatly
graded to receive grass cover with either seeding or sod.
   (D)   Protection and protective coating. Vehicles shall be kept off of new
concrete during the entire curing period.
(Ord. 07-57, passed 12-17-2007)
§ 57.101 PARKING LOT IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   General. All private parking lots to be constructed within the village
shall be designed according to the following requirements. All improvements
shall be governed by Sections 200, 400, 600, applicable portions of this
section, the State Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction,
and the ordinances of the village.
   (B)   Parking lot entrances. Entrances to parking lots primarily intended
for passenger cars across public street or alley right-of-ways shall not exceed
24 feet in width at the property line. Where entrances are proposed near the
intersection of public streets or alleys, the centerline of the entrance to the
parking lot shall be a minimum of 70 feet from the point of intersection of the
centerlines of the streets or alleys measured along the centerline of the
street providing access to the parking lot.
   (C)   Geometric space and area requirements.
      (1)   Off-street parking spaces shall be at least nine feet wide and 18
feet in length for a 90 degree parking angle. Aisles between 90 degree parking
spaces, whether single-loaded or double-loaded parking to the sides(s), shall
be a minimum of 24 feet in width.
      (2)   Where angle parking is desired, spacing dimensions of the parking
stalls and aisles shall be in accordance with the large car design standards as
set forth in "The Dimensions of Parking", Third Edition as adopted under the
joint effort of the Urban Land Institute (ULI) and the National Parking
Association or subsequent editions thereto. When covered or enclosed, such
parking spaces shall have a vertical clearance of at least seven feet six
inches.
      (3)   Parking lots shall meet all requirements of the village's zoning
ordinances. The impervious area ratio of the parking lot including access
driveways shall not exceed 0.85 or 85% coverage of the area contained within
the extreme limits of the curb lines which border the parking area. Pervious
island areas or gaps shall be provided at intervals of 90 feet (ten parking
stalls) or less to accommodate landscaping and lighting for the parking lot. No
credit shall be allowed due to parking restrictions in front and side yards
adjoining streets as established in the Zoning Ordinance,
Chapter 157 of the Village Code.
      (4)   Refer to §
157.149 of the Village Code for screening and landscaping of parking lots.
   (D)   Pavement design. Parking lot pavements shall be designed as set forth
in §§
57.050 and
57.051. The minimum structural number (Dt) of the pavement design for the stall
area and lightly traveled aisles of parking lots shall be 2.25 and for the main
circulation aisles and entrance shall be 2.75. In commercial and industrial
parking lots which will be subjected to single and multi-unit truck traffic, a
pavement having a minimum (Dt) of 3.25 shall be provided.
   (E)   Minimum pavement thickness requirements for parking lots.  
      (1)   For flexible-type pavements, a minimum of eight inches compacted of
crushed gravel (IDOT Gradation CA-6) and a minimum of three inches compacted of
bituminous concrete, placed in two equal lifts is required for stall areas and
lightly traveled aisles. Twelve inches minimum of compacted crushed gravel
(IDOT Gradation CA-6) and three inches compacted of bituminous concrete, placed
in two equal lifts is required for the main circulation aisles and entrances.
Other pavement designs which meet the structural number requirements will be
considered, subject to the Village Engineer's review and approval.
      (2)   For rigid pavements no less than six inches of Portland cement
concrete is acceptable. Jointing and reinforcement of concrete pavements shall
meet with the Village Engineer's approval.
      (3)   Prior to the installation of the parking lot base coarse materials,
the parking lot subgrade shall be compacted to a minimum of 95% Standard
Proctor Density. In addition, the subgrade shall be proof rolled and inspected
by the developer's engineer prior to the installation of the base course
materials. The village reserves the right to witness this test and approve the
placing of the base course materials.
   (F)   Curb and gutter. Portland cement concrete barrier curbs (Type B) or
combination concrete curb and gutter (Type B-6.12) shall be required around the
entire border of all paved areas and accessways within parking lots. The design
of the curb and gutter improvements must conform to the State Standard
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction and village standard details
for these items.
   (G)   Drainage.
      (1)   All parking lots having more than six parking spaces must be
provided with a drainage system to prevent surface water runoff from the
parking lot to discharge uncontrolled onto adjacent properties or onto public
right-of-ways. An on-site storm sewer system including storm water detention is
required. Prior to the connection of the on-site storm sewer system to the
receiving sewer, a catch basin shall be provided to catch residue, silt, or
foreign materials prior to entering the receiving system.
      (2)   The minimum gradient of a parking lot to insure positive drainage
shall be 1.0%. The maximum parking lot surface gradient shall not exceed 6.0%.
      (3)   The engineering plans for all parking lot designs shall include and
clearly define all pavement swales and shall be identified with drainage flow
arrows and the gradients along said swales. If concrete swales for drainage
within parking lots are provided, the minimum gradient can be reduced to 0.5%.
      (4)   Storm water detention is required for all developments including
parking facilities within the village. The maximum depth of ponding on parking
lots shall not exceed six inches. In addition, storm water detention can be
provided in underground conduits or grass detention areas within or immediately
adjacent to the parking lot. The design of detention facilities within parking
lots shall conform to the requirements as set forth in the Kane County
Stormwater Ordinance which has been adopted by the village.
(Ord. 07-57, passed 12-17-2007)
MAINTENANCE OF TRAFFIC AND RESTORATION OF AREAS
§ 57.110 GENERAL.
   The requirements included in the following subchapter pertain to the
maintenance of traffic along public streets and roadways during construction
activities and the restoration of the pavements and public parkways within the
village.
   (A)   Specification for traffic maintenance.
      (1)   All existing village streets and roadways shall remain open to two-
way traffic during construction activities unless a detour routing has been
previously approved by the Director of Public Works and proper notification has
been given to the Police and Fire Departments. For short-term disruptions of
less than six hours, one lane of traffic may be approved by the Director
provided proper traffic control, including signing and flagging, is implemented
for the duration of construction activities within the public right-of-way.
      (2)   It shall be the responsibility of the contractor performing work
within the village in or along public streets and roadways to provide the
proper repair of the pavements disturbed by construction activity and to keep
the pavement free of debris, including mud, stones, dust, etc. The Director of
Public Works shall have the sole authority in determining the adequacy and
extent of repairs and maintenance of traffic which are necessary.
      (3)   The contractor shall also be subject to Section 107, Legal
Regulations and Responsibility to Public as set forth in the State Standard
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction as it applies to work being
done.
   (B)   Specifications for restoration of the work area.
      (1)   Contractors doing work within the village, whether on public right-
of-ways or easements, shall be required to restore all areas disturbed by
construction activity to its original or better condition to the satisfaction
of the Director of Public Works.
      (2)   All grassed areas shall be restored with a minimum of four inches
of compacted topsoil and seeded with Class 1 Lawn Mixture with Mulch, Method 2
as set forth in Section 250 and Section 251 of the State Standard
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction.
      (3)   Refer to §§
57.050,
57.080, and
57.100 for requirements for the replacement of street pavements, curb and
gutters, sidewalks, and driveways disturbed by construction activity.
(Ord. 07-57, passed 12-17-2007)
VILLAGE FORESTRY STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS
§ 57.120 AUTHORITY.
   Pursuant to authority granted under "An Ordinance Regulating the Planting,
Maintenance, and Removal of Trees, Shrubs, and Other Plants; Creating a Tree
Committee; and Establishing the Position of Village Forester of the Village of
East Dundee, Illinois", adopted by the Board of Trustees in February, 1994, the
Village Forester, having had the advice and assistance of the Tree Committee,
established in the said ordinance, hereby promulgates the following as the
Village Forestry Standards and Specifications for the Village of East Dundee,
Illinois, hereinafter called the Village Forestry Standards and Specifications.
(Ord. 07-57, passed 12-17-2007)
§ 57.121 POLICY.
   (A)   All work on public trees shall comply with the "Tree Ordinance" of the
village and the Village Forestry Standards and Specifications.
   (B)   The Village Forestry Standards and Specifications shall be adhered to
at all times, but it may be amended at any time that experience, new research,
or laws indicate that improved methods or circumstances make it advisable, and
only then with the advice and assistance of the Tree Committee, all as provided
for in the above said ordinance.
   (C)   The policy of the Tree Committee and the Village Forester shall be to
cooperate at all times with the public, property owners, other municipal
departments, and with appropriate not-for-profit organizations.
(Ord. 07-57, passed 12-17-2007)
§ 57.122 SPECIES, CULTIVARS OR VARIETIES.
   (A)   The following Table I contains a list of tree species of the varieties
acceptable and approved for planting on village property.
   (B)   Unacceptable tree species or their varieties contained in the
following Table II shall not be planted on village-owned property, except in
special locations where because of characteristics of adaptability or landscape
effect they can be used to public advantage.
   TABLE 1
   LARGE TREES
   Spacing: 40' minimum
   Parkway Width: 8' minimum
SCIENTIFIC NAME        COMMON NAME            CULTIVARS
Acer saccharum         Sugar Maple            'Green Mountain'
                                              'Fairview'
                                              'Goldspire'
Alnus incana           Tag Alder
Celtis occidentalis    Hackberry
Celtis laevigata       Sugar Hackberry
Fagus grandifolia      American Beech
Fagus sylvatica        European Beech
Fraxinus americana     White Ash              'Autumn Applause'
                                              'Autumn Purple'
                                              'Champaign County'
Fraxinus pennsylvanica Green Ash              'Honeyshade'
                                              'Marshall Seedless'
                                              'Summit'
Fraxinus quadrangulata Blue Ash
Ginkgo biloba          Ginkgo (male)
Gymnocladus dioicus    Kentucky Coffee (male)
 
SCIENTIFIC NAME         COMMON NAME           CULTIVARS
Liquidamber styraciflua Sweetgum
Liriodendron tulipifera Tuliptree
Magnolia acuminata      Cucumber Tree
Platanus acerifolia     London Plane
Quercus alba            White Oak
Quercus bicolor         Swamp White Oak
Quercus imbricaria      Shingle Oak
Quercus macrocarpa      Bur Oak
Quercus coccinea        Scarlet Oak
Quercus robur           English Oak
Quercus rubra           Red Oak
Quercus shumardii       Shumard Oak
Quercus muehlenbergii   Chinquapin Oak
Sassafras albidum       Sassafras
Taxodium districhum     Bald Cypress
Tilia americana         Basswood
Tilia heterophylla      Beetree Linden
Tilia cordata           Littleleaf Linden     'Chancellor'
                                              'Greenspire'
Tilia euchlora          Crimean Linden
Tilia platyphyllos      Bigleaf Linden
Tilia tomentosa         Silver Linden
Tilia petioloaris       Pendant Silver Linden
 
   TABLE 1
   MEDIUM TREES
   Spacing: 35' minimum
   Parkway Width: 6' minimum
SCIENTIFIC NAME          COMMON NAME         CULTIVARS
Acer platenoides         Norway Maple
Acer rubrum              Red Maple           'Autumn Flame'
                                             'October Glory'
                                             'Red Sunset'
                                             'Schlesinger'
                                             'Scarlet Sentinel'
                                             'September Song'
                                             'Armstrong'
                                             'Bowhall'
Alnus glutinosa          Black Alder
Betula nigra             River Birch
Carpinus betulus         European Hornbeam
Cercidiphyllum japonicum Katsuratree
Cladrastic lutea         Yellowwood
Corylus colurna          Turkish Filbert
Eucommia ulmoides        Hardy Rubber Tree
Maclura pomifera         Osage Orange (male)
Magnolia kobus           Kobus Magnolia
Nyssa sylvatica          Black gum
Phellodendron amurense   Amur Cork Tree
Prunus sargentii         Sargent Cherry
Pyrus calleryana         Bradford Pear       'Aristocrat'
                                             'Chanticleer'
                                             'Redspire'
 
 
SCIENTIFIC NAME    COMMON NAME  CULTIVARS
Quercus acutissima Sawtooth Oak
Sophor japonica    Pagodatree
Zelkova serrata    Zelkova Tree
 
Medium-sized trees are better suited for planting on normal village parkways
than their larger counterparts. Large trees require more living space, and for
this reason it is recommended that they be planted on the private side of the
sidewalk whenever possible. The overall objective of proper tree selection is
to select the right tree for the right location in order that one may benefit
from the tree without being subject to future maintenance liabilities or
hazards.
   TABLE 1
   SMALL TREES
   Spacing: 25' minimum
   Parkway Width: 5' minimum
SCIENTIFIC NAME          COMMON NAME                              CULTIVARS
Acer ginnala             Amur Maple (tree form)
Acer Palmatum            Japanese Maple
Acer Pennsylvanicum      Striped Maple
Amalanchier canadensis   Shadblow Serviceberry (tree form)
Amlanchier grandiflora   Apple Serviceberry (tree form)
Amalanchier laevis       Allegany Serviceberry (tree form)
Carpinus caroliniana     American Hornbeam
Cercidiphyllum japonicum Katsura Tree
Cornus florida           Flowering Dogwood
Cornus kousa             Japanese Dogwood
Crataegus sp.            Hawthorn (Thornless) (Disease resistant)
Halesia carolina         Carolina Silverbell
Koelreuteria paniculata  Goldenrain Tree
 
 
SCIENTIFIC NAME   COMMON NAME         CULTIVARS
*Malus sp.        Flowering crab      See Appendix A
Ostrya virginiana Ironwood
Syringa Japonica  Japanese Tree Lilac
 
Small trees are appropriate in parkway locations where due to space limitations
larger trees cannot be properly utilized without creating spacing conflicts
with existing trees. Height limitations imposed by overhead utilities also
necessitate the use of appropriate small trees in order to avoid line conflicts
and the necessity of excessive utility trimming that results in disfigured
trees. On the whole, small trees which tend to be more ornamental than their
larger counterparts can create an added aesthetic dimension to the streetscape.
*Selected cultivars or varieties of suitable form and resistant to scab disease
(see Appendix A for listing of recommended crabs for local use).
Table II
The following is a listing of trees more or less common to our area that are
not suitable as street or parkway trees. Their lack of suitability is based
upon undesirable growth habits, fruiting habits, form, susceptibility to
serious diseases, propensity to storm damage, and a host of other limitations
too numerous to mention. The limitations listed for each tree or species group
are not all-inclusive and mention only the more serious problems encountered
locally. In essence, there are far too many superior street or parkway trees
listed in Table I to warrant the use of any of the trees listed in Table II
except under special circumstances.
Though many of the trees listed in Table II are presently growing on our
parkways as a result of previously unrestricted plantings, they do constitute a
maintenance liability to the village and as such should be replaced on removal
with species listed in Table I.
 
 
Scientific Name     Common Name       Problem or Limitation
Abies sp.           Fir               Form — visibility hazard
Acer negundo        Boxelder          Fast growing, weak wooded
Acer Platenoides    Norway maple      Local problem, verticillium w
Acer saccharinum    Silver/Soft Maple Subject to rot/storm damage
Aesculus sp.        Horsechestnut     Foliar diseases, leaf blotch
Ailanthus altissima Tree of Heaven    Weak wooded, aggressive
 
Scientific Name       Common Name      Problem or Limitation
Albizzia sp.          Mimosa           Not hardy, disease prone
Betula sp.            Birch            Environmental stress, borers
Catalpa sp.           Catalpa          Littering fruit
Diospiros             Persimmon        Littering fruit
Gleditsia sp.         Honeylocust      Serious disease/insect problem
Juglans sp.           Walnut           Littering fruit
Juniperus sp.         Juniper          Form — visibility hazard
Malus sp.             Common Apple     Littering fruit, disease prone
Morus sp.             Mulberry         Littering fruit
Picea sp.             Spruce           Form — visibility hazard
Pinus sp.             Pine             Form — visibility hazard
Platanus occidentalis Sycamore (Amer.) Disease — twig blight
Populus sp.           Poplar           Fast growing, weak wooded
Prunus sp.            Cherry and Plum  Littering fruit, disease prone
Pyrus sp.             Common Pear      Littering fruit
Quercus palustris     Pin Oak          Iron chlorosis
Robinia sp.           Black Locust     Shallow rooted, borers
Salix sp.             Willow           Weak wooded, storm damage
Thuja sp.             Arbor-vitae      Form — visibility hazard
Ulmus sp.             Elm              Serious disease, Dutch Elm
 
      (1)   Other tree species or their varieties not listed in the foregoing
Table I may be planted on village-owned property, but only desirable trees of
good appearance, beauty and adaptability that are generally free from injurious
inset, diseases or other limitations may be planted.
      (2)   Where certain planting sites have been assigned a particular
species or variety, only the designated species or variety shall be planted on
such sites, unless the plan is reviewed by the Village Forester with the advice
and assistance of the Tree Committee.
      (3)   The Tree Committee, in conjunction with the Village Forester, shall
review, al least once every two years, the species, cultivars and varieties
listed on Table I to determine whether any should be removed or whether certain
new species, cultivars or varieties of proven adaptability and value should be
added; and the Tree Committee shall similarly review the trees listed in Table
II to determine whether any should be removed or whether certain new species,
cultivars or varieties should be added thereto.
(Ord. 07-57, passed 12-17-2007)
§ 57.123 PLANTING STOCK REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Size.
      (1)   Unless otherwise specified by the Village Forester, all medium to
large deciduous trees and their cultivars or varieties shall conform to the
American Association of Nurserymen Standards, shall be free of branches to a
point not more nor less than 60% of their height, be at least 1-1/4 to 1-1/
2 inches in diameter at a point six inches above ground level, and be at least
eight to ten feet in height when planted.
      (2)   All small deciduous trees and their cultivars or varieties shall be
at least five feet in height and have at least six branches on the upper half
of the trunk.
   (B)   Grade. Unless otherwise allowed for specific reasons, all trees shall
have comparatively straight trunks, well-developed leaders and tops, and the
roots shall not only be characteristic of the species, cultivar or variety, but
also shall exhibit evidence of proper nursery pruning practices. They shall
have acceptable balance between top and root. At the time of planting, all
trees must be free of mechanical injuries and other objectionable features that
tend to affect the future form and beauty of the plant.
   (C)   Location and spacing.
      (1)   Based on a 40 year cycle, no tree which will attain a trunk
diameter greater than 15 inches shall be planted in a treelawn less than five
feet in width. In treelawns less than five feet in width, or where overhead
lines or building setback presents a special problem, the selection of planting
site and species shall be determined by the Village Forester.
      (2)   Trees shall be planted at least 15 feet from driveways and alleys,
and at street intersections the planting shall not interfere with the required
sight distance determined by the Village Engineer.
      (3)   No tree shall be planted closer than ten feet to a utility pole to
allow room for line maintenance.
      (4)   Spacing of trees shall be determined by the Village Forester in
accordance with local conditions; the species, cultivars and varieties used;
and their mature height, spread and form. Generally, all large trees, at
maturity, shall be spaced 40 to 60 feet, center-to-center; all medium-sized
trees shall be spaced a minimum of 35 feet, center-to-center; and all small
trees shall be spaced a minimum of 25 feet, center-to-center.
      (5)   All planting on unpaved streets without curbs or sidewalks must
have approval of the Village Forester, who shall determine the location of the
tree so that it will not be injured or destroyed when the street is curbed and
paved or when sidewalks are constructed.
   (D)   Methods of planting and support.
      (1)   Most small deciduous trees and shrubs may be moved bare-rooted
unless otherwise indicated. Roots of bare-rooted trees and shrubs must be
protected against drying out.
      (2)   All coniferous trees shall be moved balled and burlaped. Balled
roots should be prevented from drying out at the surface of the ball, and they
should be protected against freezing.
      (3)   Pits for the planting of bare-rooted plants shall be at least 12
inches larger in diameter than the diameter of the root system in order to
accommodate the roots without crowding. For balled trees, the pits should be a
minimum of 12 inches larger than the diameter of the ball of soil to allow
proper backfill.
      (4)   Plants shall be planted no deeper than previously grown with due
allowance for settling.
      (5)   In poorly drained soil, artificial drainage shall be provided to
the root system of any species intolerant of wet sites, or a species tolerant
of wet sites shall be used.
      (6)   Top soil, compost, peat moss, or an acceptable soil mixture shall
be placed about the roots of bare-root stock or in the backfill around balled
stock. When the planting is completed, the entire root area shall be thoroughly
saturated with water and burlap wrappings shall be cut.
      (7)   Although pruning should be done to develop a balance with the root
system, excessive pruning at the time of transplanting should be avoided.
      (8)   Tree trunks shall be suitably wrapped and guyed, or supported in an
upright position, according to accepted arboricultural practices. The guys or
supports shall be installed so that they will neither girdle or cause serious
injury to the tree nor endanger public safety.
(Ord. 07-57, passed 12-17-2007)
§ 57.124 EARLY MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   General. Newly planted trees, shrubs and other plants require special
maintenance for one or two growing seasons following planting. All maintenance
practices shall follow approved arboricultural standards.
   (B)   Watering. Ample soil moisture shall be maintained following planting.
A thorough watering once in five to ten days, depending on soil type and
drainage provisions, is usually adequate during the growing season. A soil
auger can be used to check the adequacy of moisture in the soil ball and/or
backfill.
   (C)   Fertilization. Adequate quantities of the essential nutrient elements
should be available after new root growth starts. However, provision of good
drainage and adequate moisture of the backfill, or the soil ball on balled
plants, is more important than fertilization immediately following planting.
   (D)   Insect and Disease Control. Frequent and thorough inspections shall be
made to determine when measures for the control of insects and diseases shall
be taken. Plants are in a weakened condition following transplanting, and they
are more susceptible to insects, especially borers, and disease than are
vigorously growing trees. Where it is necessary, proper insecticides or
fungicides shall be used that are labeled for the purpose intended.
   (E)   Pruning.
      (1)   Pruning newly planted trees shall consist of removing dead or
injured branches. The suppression of rank, uneven growth affects form. Water
sprouts shall be removed when they reach the diameter of a pencil.
      (2)   Pruning shall be practices as often thereafter as needed for sturdy
crotch development.
      (3)   Tree crowns should be elevated as growth characteristics dictate.
Newly planted trees need not have lower branches removed until they are well-
established.
(Ord. 07-57, passed 12-17-2007)
§ 57.125 GENERAL MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   Pruning and removal.
      (1)   No topping or dehorning of trees shall be permitted except by
written permission of the Village Forester. Proper cabling and bracing shall be
substituted for this practice wherever possible.
      (2)   All large established trees shall be pruned to allow free passage
of pedestrians and vehicular traffic at least seven feet over sidewalks and a
minimum clearance of 14 feet over all streets.
      (3)   It shall be the policy of the Village Forester to cooperate with
the Village Engineer and vice versa regarding placement and selection of
lighting standards and the selection of a system of tree pruning that will give
effective sight elimination.
      (4)   All cuts shall be made with a saw or pruner and only at collars or
crotches. No stubs shall be left. No spurs or claws shall be used in the trees.
      (5)   All dead branches shall be removed.
      (6)   All wounds over three inches in diameter shall be covered with a
suitable tree-wounding dressing.
      (7)   To prevent the spread of infectious diseases, all pruning tools
must be disinfected before being used on a new tree.
      (8)   Whenever streets are to be blocked off to public service, all
police and fire departments shall be notified of the location and length of
time the street will be blocked. Notifications shall be given these departments
upon the removal of such barriers or if such barriers are to remain longer than
originally expected.
      (9)   To protect the public from danger, suitable street and sidewalk
barriers, highway cones, or signs shall be used when pruning a tree. Signals,
flares or flasher lights shall be placed on all barriers or obstructions
remaining in the street after dark.
      (10)   The stumps of all removed trees shall be cut to at least six
inches below the ground level. The soil cavity shall be filled with soils and
the area leveled.
   (B)   Spraying.
      (1)   Suitable precautions shall be taken to protect and warn the public
that spraying is being done.
      (2)   Spraying shall be done only for the control of specific diseases or
insects with the proper materials in the necessary strength and applied at the
proper time to obtain the desired control. All spraying practices shall conform
to federal and state regulations.
      (3)   Dormant oil sprays shall not be applied to sugar maple, Japanese
maple, beech, flowering dogwood, hickory, walnut, and most crabapple trees.
Dormant oil sprays shall be applied only when the air temperature is at least
40 degrees for a period of 24 hours after spraying.
   (C)   Fertilization.
      (1)   Fertilization of public trees shall follow the recommendations of
the Natural History Survey or other accepted arboricultural standards.
      (2)   Methods of application of fertilizers shall be specified by the
Village Forester.
   (D)   Cavities. Extensive cavity work should be performed on trees only if
they are of sufficiently high value to justify the cost. All cavity work shall
conform to the National Arborist Association or other acceptable arboricultural
standards.
   (E)   Cabling and bracing.
      (1)   As a general rule, cables should be located above the crotch at a
point approximately two-thirds of the distance between the crotch and the tops
of the branch ends. Rust-resistant cables, thimbles, and lags should be used.
The ends of a cable should be attached to hooks or eyes or lags or bolts
inserted near the ends of the branches. Thimbles must be used in the eye splice
in each end of the cable. In no instance shall cable be wrapped around a
branch.
      (2)   All cabling and bracing practices with screw rods shall follow
National Arborist Association or other accepted arboricultural standards.
(Ord. 07-57, passed 12-17-2007)
§ 57.126 TREE PROTECTION.
   (A)   Construction zone.
      (1)   It is the responsibility of the permit holder, as a condition of
the permit, to protect all public trees located on the adjacent public right-
of-way that may reasonably be expected to be affected or damaged by
construction activities. Existing trees subject to construction damage shall be
boxed, fenced, or otherwise protected before any work is started. The trees to
be protected, the method of protection, and the dimensions involved shall be
determined by the Village Forester conjunctly with the permit holder or his/her
agent. Once assembled, no boxing, fencing or other protection device shall be
removed without prior approval of the Village Forester, and there will be no
construction activity or material within the enclosure.
      (2)   Dimensions. Small trees as determined by the Village Forester shall
be boxed or fenced in such a manner as to encompass the entire drip line area
of the tree (Figure 1). In no case shall the enclosure be less than two feet
from the centerline of the tree. Medium to large trees shall be boxed or fenced
in a manner determined by the Village Forester based on sound arboricultural
practices. In no case shall the protective device be closer than ten feet from
the centerline of the tree except in those portions bordered by the public
sidewalk or curb, in which case the protective device shall be offset one foot
wherever possible.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/16574ba874f17dfbd958615eed907c929c4100f2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6424.jpg]
 
   (B)   Utility installations (underground).
      (1)   All installations or underground utilities upon the public rights-
of-way are subject to approval by the village. Any and all installations that
impact on public trees due to underground conflicts (roots) are specifically
subject to the review and approval of the Village Forester before the project
starts.
      (2)   Trenching small trees. Open trenching in the root zone area of a
public tree is prohibited except in cases where the trenching falls outside the
dripline of the tree involved. In some instances, exceptions may be allowed if
in the opinion of the Village Forester the impact of trenching upon the tree
will be negligible.
Specifications for Trenching and Tunneling for the Installation of Public
Utilities
 
Tree                                                                Recommended
Diameter  Distance of Tunnel from Face of Tree Trunk – Each Side  Depth of
(a)       (b)                                                       Tunnel or
                                                                    Trench (c)
5 - 9"    6'                                                        2-1/2'
10 - 14"  10'                                                       3'
15 - 19"  12'                                                       3-1/2'
20" or    15'                                                       4'
more
 
      (3)   Trenching and tunneling – medium to large trees. When the dripline
of trees becomes extensive or overlapping, the only reasonable means of utility
installation on the public right-of-way is a combination of trenching and
tunneling. This applies particularly to trees in excess of five inches in
diameter. All trees in excess of five inches in diameter where there is
insufficient space to bypass the dripline by trenching must be tunneled. In no
case shall the tunnel be less than two feet in depth. The tunneling procedure
is determined by the diameter of the trees four and one-half feet from the
ground line. Unless specified otherwise by the Village Forester, all dimensions
apply as provided in the above table.
      (4)   Since cutting of larger roots is unavoidable in a trenching
operation, all roots over two inches in diameter must be cut cleanly and
painted with an appropriate tree-wound dressing. All trenches should not stay
open longer than necessary and must be properly barricaded.
(Ord. 07-57, passed 12-17-2007)
§ 57.127 CONTAINER PLANTING.
   (A)   Installation requirements.
      (1)   No container may be placed in a manner which violates the
visibility triangle, nor may any container be placed on public property where
such would constitute a visibility hazard.
      (2)   The planting medium shall be of sufficient volume to support and
sustain plant materials, and the design and construction details shall be
approved by the Village Forester.
   (B)   Maintenance of containers.
      (1)   Containers, plants and their maintenance become the responsibility
of the abutting property owner.
      (2)   All costs arising from the establishment, maintenance or removal of
plants or plant containers are to be borne by the abutting property owner.
      (3)   Containers, plants and their contents must be maintained in the
condition specified by original design at all times. Any planter not serving
its designed aesthetical function shall be replanted or removed.
   (C)   Notice to replant or remove. Any container and/or plant material not
maintained to quality and design standard, as required by the Village Forester,
is hereby declared a nuisance. Anyone failing to abate such a nuisance after
notice is given shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and the Village Forester may
remove such nuisance.
(Ord. 07-57, passed 12-17-2007)
§ 57.128 REMOVAL POLICY.
   (A)   It is the objective and the responsibility of the Village Forester to
promote and protect the health, safety and general welfare of the public by
providing for the regulation of the planting, maintenance and removal of trees,
shrubs and other plants within the village. As specified by ordinance, the only
person who may authorize the planting or removal of a village tree is the
Village Forester or his or her designated agent. Accordingly, a village tree
may be considered for removal if it is deemed by the Village Forester to
constitute a public nuisance (hazard) as defined in the following ways:
      (1)   Any dead or dying tree.
      (2)   Any otherwise healthy tree which harbors insects or diseases which
could reasonably be expected to seriously injure or harm any other tree.
      (3)   Any tree which, by reason of location or condition, constitutes an
eminent danger to the health, safety or welfare of the general public. In the
category of dangerous or hazardous trees are those with observable, critical
structural defects that could cause the tree to fail during periods of stress
(i.e. wind or ice storms). Included are extensive rot or cavity formations,
weak forks or crotches, and/or other characteristics that would impose an
immediate liability on the village.
   (B)   Not included in the definition of a tree as a public nuisance or
immediate hazard, as defined, are the following:
      (1)   Species of trees currently classified as undesirable and thereby
prohibited from being planted on village-owned property, as listed in Table II
of these standards and specifications, with the following exceptions:
         (a)   Any individual tree listed in Table II that is declared a public
nuisance by the Village Forester that meets the specification for removal as
previously identified.
         (b)   Any individual or species of tree listed in Table II that is
designated by the Village Forester as being part of a scheduled village-wide
replacement program designated to upgrade the village's tree population.
      (2)   Individual trees, regardless of species or kind, that pose either
an imminent or potential hazard for which corrective action can be taken.
      (3)   Trees that constitute an inconvenience to the public by virtue of
leaf, twig or fruit drop; that act as sources of allergies; that cause root
blockage in sanitary or storm tiles; that are subject to diseases or insect
problems which cause only minor harm to trees.
      (4)   Trees that constitute an inconvenience to the public by virtue of
their location, except those public trees that pose serious obstruction
problems in terms of egress or access to private property or new construction
projects or the alteration of established private facilities. The removal of a
public tree for purposes of accommodating private facilities will not be
sanctioned unless the following conditions have been satisfied:
         (a)   There are no other reasonable design alternatives.
         (b)   The value of the tree(s) in question has been determined by the
Village Forester in accordance with the latest revision of "A Guide to the
Professional Evaluation of Landscape Trees, Specimen Shrubs and Evergreens" as
published by the International Society of Arboriculture.
         (c)   The village must be compensated for the loss of the tree(s) by
the property owner before removal is undertaken by the village.
(Ord. 07-57, passed 12-17-2007)
§ 57.129 STREET CLOSURE AND REOPENING PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Notify all police and fire departments of street closure and duration
of closure.
   (B)   Close street and sidewalk with proper signs, barriers, barrier tape
and cones.
   (C)   Remove street-closure barriers in this order: barrier tape, cones,
barriers and signs.
   (D)   Notify all police and fire departments of street reopening.
   (E)   Remove all warning signs. When temporarily leaving work site, always
leave one lane clear of obstruction for emergency traffic.
(Ord. 07-57, passed 12-17-2007)
§ 57.130 TREE DAMAGE POLICY.
   (A)   Immediately upon receiving information indicating damage to a village
tree, the Village Forester, or a qualified agent of the Village Forester, is to
inspect the tree and complete a "Tree Evaluation" to determine the dollar value
of the damages incurred to the tree.
   (B)   The information is to be forwarded to the Collections Department with
a copy of the "Employee Report of Property Damage". Responsible parties will be
billed for damages incurred as determined by the procedures established by the
International Society of Arboriculture and published as a "Guide for
Establishing Values of Trees and Other Plants".
(Ord. 07-57, passed 12-17-2007)
§ 57.131 AMENDMENTS.
   The Village Forester shall have the authority to modify, amend, or extend,
with the advice and consent of the Tree Committee, the Village Forestry
Standards and Specifications at any time that experience indicates improved
methods or whenever circumstances make it advisable.
(Ord. 07-57, passed 12-17-2007)
STREET AND PARKING LOT LIGHTING STANDARDS
§ 57.140 GENERAL.
   All development shall include the design and construction of street lighting
facilities for the illumination of all roadways, public or private, which lie
in or border the development and all parking lots within the development.
Street lighting to be accepted by the village shall be constructed within the
public right-of-way or in easements dedicated to the village.
(Ord. 07-57, passed 12-17-2007)
§ 57.141 SPECIFICATIONS.
   (A)   Street lights and appurtenances shall be designed and installed
according to: The American Standard Practice for Roadway Lighting, latest
edition, the National Electric Code, latest edition, as amended by the Village
of East Dundee Electric Code, and these Engineering Standards.
   (B)   Manufacturer's information including catalog cuts for all materials
not specifically approved on the plans but required to install said street
light(s) into a working lighting system acceptable to the village shall be
submitted to the village for approval. All manufacturer's information and
catalog cuts must be approved by the Village Engineer prior to the commencement
of any portion of said work.
   (C)   The contractor shall confirm the location of the service drop and
connection with Commonwealth Edison and submit for approval to the Village
Engineer a plan or sketch of said electrical service to the proposed street
light(s) prior to the beginning of any street lighting construction. The plan
or sketch should also include the name and approval signature of the person at
Commonwealth Edison Company who has approved the plan.
   (D)   When requested by the village, a printout of illumination levels
point-by-point throughout the area to be lighted shall be submitted by the
developer's engineer or contractor to the Village Engineer for review and
approval of the proposed lighting system.
   (E)   Upon completion of the installation of the street light(s), the
contractor shall furnish "Record Drawings" of the work to the Village Engineer.
(Ord. 07-57, passed 12-17-2007)
§ 57.142 STREET LIGHT LOCATIONS.
   (A)   Residential, commercial and industrial districts.
      (1)   Poles shall be located at all intersections and spaced at a
distance not exceeding 300 feet from one another along the street. Poles shall
also be located at the ends of cul-de-sacs and curves in the roadway as
required by the Village Engineer. Poles shall be set in the parkway a minimum
of two feet clear distance from the back of curb. Where the distance between
the sidewalk and the curb is such that this location is impractical or where
the sidewalk is adjacent to the curb, the Village Engineer shall be consulted
for an acceptable alternate location for the pole.
      (2)   Unless otherwise directed by the Village Engineer, the direction of
the support arm shall be at right angles to the centerline of one of the
intersecting streets at a four-legged intersection with location preference to
the higher classification roadway, if applicable. At "T" intersections, a pole
shall be provided on the centerline extended from the terminating street at the
top of the "T" with the support arm extending toward the center of the
intersection. In cul-de-sacs, light poles shall be placed in the center median
or if no center median is to be constructed, at the end of the cul-de-sac along
the centerline extended.
   (B)   Arterials and collector streets.
      (1)   Poles shall be located at all intersections and spaced such that
the illumination meets the following criteria given in Tables 1 through 4
below:
   TABLE 1. RECOMMENDATIONS FOR ROADWAY AVERAGE MAINTAINED HORIZONTAL
ILLUMINATION
                                 URBAN
Vehicular Roadway Classification Commercial Intermediate Residential
                                 fc  lux    fc  lux      fc  lux
Freeway                          0.6 6      0.6 6        0.6 6
Expressway                       1.4 15     1.2 13       1.0 11
Major                            2.0 22     14  15       1.0 11
Collector                        1.2 13     0.9 10       0.6 6
Local                            0.9 10     0.6 6        0.4 4
Alley                            0.6 6      0.4 4        0.4 4
 
   TABLE 2. RECOMMENDED AVERAGE-TO-MINIMUM UNIFORMITY RATIOS
 
For Roadways in:   Recommended Ratios
                   ANSI FHWA/AASHTO
Commercial Areas   3:1  4:1
Intermediate Areas 3:1  4:1
Residential Areas  6:1  6:1
 
   TABLE 3. RECOMMENDED MOUNTING HEIGHT
MOUNTING HEIGHT
SIZE  RECOMMENDED ACCEPTABLE
                  MINIMUM MAXIMUM
70W
100W  25 FT.      22 FT.  30 FT.
150W
250W
400W  30 FT.      25 FT.  35 FT.
1000W
 
   TABLE 4. RECOMMENDATIONS FOR PARKING AREAS
 
TYPE                                 AVERAGE MAINTAINED FOOT CANDLES (F.C.)
OF AREA
Active entrances, security lighting, 5.0 F.C.
pedestrian or vehicular
High activity parking                3.6 F.C.
Low activity or inactive entrances,  1.0 F.C.
building surrounds
 
      (2)   The average maintained foot candles in the above table are
recommended by the IESNA. Light levels represent illumination levels that
attempt to provide safety, economy, security and also meet community
expectations. The illumination level should be maintained at a minimum of 2.0
foot candles in a surface parking lot.
(Ord. 07-57, passed 12-17-2007)
§ 57.143 LIGHT POLE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   All poles shall be round tapered seamless designed with satin ground
finish, fabricated from aluminum alloy 6063-T6. Poles shall be provided with
bolt-down anchor bases and handholes. Anchor bases and handhole frames shall be
manufactured from aluminum alloy 356-T6.
   (B)   Bracket arms shall be single member design manufactured from aluminum
alloy 6063-T6. Bracket arm shall taper to two and three-eighths inches at
luminaire end.
   (C)   Poles shall be designed and fabricated to withstand 90 mile per hour
winds and associated wind gusts and vibrations. The light poles shall be able
to support a luminaire panel up to 1.5 square feet. All poles shall be designed
in conformance with AASHTO's standard specifications for structural supports
for highway and traffic signals.
   (D)   In residential areas, the lighting standards shall have bolt-down
bases and shall be constructed of spun aluminum with a 25 foot mounting height.
The lighting standard shall be General Electric Type RRTA or approved equal. In
cases where bronze finish is desired, the finish shall be anodized duranotic
dark bronze finish on spun aluminum. Painted steel poles shall not be allowed.
Alternate poles and mounting height may be considered by the village upon
receipt of a formal request with adequate justification for departing from the
recommended standards other than strictly cost savings.
   (E)   Electrical materials shall be new and of the type and kinds listed by
the Underwriters Laboratory and meeting AASHTO criteria. Before any work is
started, the contractor shall obtain written approval from the village. At
least 30 days prior to starting construction, he shall submit three copies of
drawings showing each type of pole and bracket arm and including for both the
types of materials, dimensions, thickness of material, method of fabrication,
and description of details of items to be incorporated into the work meeting
with the village's approval.
   (F)   The contractor shall be fully responsible for the plumbness of the
poles. One of the following methods is recommended:
      (1)   The pole shall be considered plumb when a 48 inch or larger spirit
level, with offsets at the top equal to the pole taper, indicates when used at
eye level, that the center line of the pole is within one-half inch per ten
feet of true vertical in any direction.
      (2)   The pole shall be considered plumb when the center of the top is
directly over the center of the base as determined by viewing the pole through
a tripod mounted, accurate, quality transit from two angles at least 60 degrees
apart. Deviation shall not exceed one-half inch in ten feet.
   (G)   The foundation shall be installed with its axis plumb so that the
light pole may be installed plumb without the use of shims, grout or other
leveling devices.
(Ord. 07-57, passed 12-17-2007)
§ 57.144 LIGHT POLE FOUNDATIONS.
   The street light foundation shall be air entrained Class SI, Portland cement
concrete, with a three inch maximum slump and a minimum 14 day compressive
strength of 3500 psi, using an IDOT approved mix for this class of concrete,
when possible. The foundations shall be constructed in accordance with the
following requirements:
   (A)   The foundation shall be set so that the top six inches remain above
the finished grade line. A minimum of the top 24 inches shall be formed with
rigid forms firmly held to accurate level and grade. These forms shall include
a template for the anchor rods and wireway. Before pouring concrete, the bottom
of the foundation cavity shall be free from debris, loose earth, and water. The
portion of the foundation below the formed portion required shall be poured
against the undisturbed earth sides of the hole. The minimum depth of
foundation shall be 48 inches below grade and meet pole manufacturers' minimum
specifications.
   (B)   The exposed portion of the foundation shall be finished smooth. The
top shall be level within one-sixteenth inch from side to side and flat within
plus or minimum one-sixteenth inch. Shims and grout shall not be permitted to
plumb the pole.
   (C)   The Village Engineer shall be notified at least 24 hours prior to the
pouring of the foundations. No concrete will be placed until the Village
Engineer has inspected and has approved the depth of the excavation, the
character and condition of the foundation material and the reinforcement steel
in place.
   (D)   The foundation shall be allowed to set and cure for 14 days before the
pole is set, during which time the anchor bolt ends and exposed concrete shall
be protected from mechanical and weather damage.
(Ord. 07-57, passed 12-17-2007)
§ 57.145 LUMINARIES AND LAMPS.
   (A)   The luminaries shall consist of a housing, reflector, reflector
holder, lamp socket, slipfitter and three terminal photoelectric cells. The
luminaires shall have high-pressure sodium lamps in commercial or industrial
zones. In residential zones, lamps other than high-pressure sodium may be
considered, subject to Village Board and Commonwealth Edison's approval.
   (B)   All fixture components shall be designed to operate under all
environmental conditions. All luminaires shall be designed and wired to operate
on 60 hertz alternating current with a (90+% PF) auto regulator type CWA
ballast. All lens shall be heat resistant polycarbonate. All fixtures shall be
designed to operate at -20° F) minimum starting temperature. HPS fixtures
should be designed for satisfactory lamp starting at -40° F.
   (C)   The high-pressure sodium luminaire may be either the conventional
horizontal flat lens cobra head type or the decorative shoe box type, either of
which shall be the appropriate cutoff-type fixture for the particular
application.
      (1)   The cobra head type shall have die-cast aluminum housing, removable
ballast assembly, a photoelectrical cell receptacle and cell, an auto regulator
ballast and universal slipfitter receptacle. Acceptable units include General
Electric M-Powr/Door or approved equal.
      (2)   The high-pressure sodium decorative type fixture shall have a die-
cast aluminum housing, removable ballast assembly, a photoelectric cell
receptacle and cell, and an auto regulator ballast. Acceptable units are
General Electric Area Luminaires or approved equal and will be approved and
accepted by the Village Engineer.
(Ord. 07-57, passed 12-17-2007)
§ 57.146 WIRE/CABLE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   All wire and cable installed under this section from the power source
to the lighting standards shall be contained in either conduit manufactured as
U.L. listed plus 40 heavy wall EPC, rigid non-metallic conduit or heavy-walled
galvanized steel conduit. Direct burial of all wire and cable under this
section is prohibited.
      (1)   All cable, conductor and duct shall be new, having been
manufactured within 12 months of the date of installation. The size, type of
insulation, voltage and manufacturer's name shall be permanently marked on the
outer covering at regular intervals. It shall be delivered in complete coils or
reels with identifying U.L. tags and labels attached and shall be in first-
class condition when installed.
      (2)   Materials shall be packaged by the manufacturer and delivered with
identifying U.L. tags and labels attached. All U.L. labels and tags shall be
permanently removed from the reels and cartons by the village representative
for his records.
      (3)   Cables and conductors will be subject to inspection for acceptance
as to quality, conditions, and installation during final inspection. The
conduit material shall be subject to inspection for acceptance as to
installation during construction.
      (4)   All underground conductors shall be a minimum No. 6 or No. 8 A.W.G.
XLP-RHH copper, soft and annealed and shall conform to ASTM Specification for
stranded conductors. The conductor sizes used for the supply voltage runs are
determined by the maximum voltage drops allowed in the circuits. All pole
wiring shall be solid No. 10 A.W.G. XLP-RHH. Copper conductor insulation shall
be heat and moisture resistant plastic suitable for use at 90° Celsius in wet
locations at 600 volts. The wiring system shall be a parallel system with a
minimum of three insulated conductors: black, red and neutral colored white.
The maximum voltage drop between the controller or fuse box and the furthest
light pole of the system shall not exceed 2%. Calculations must be provided by
the contractor or the developer's engineer.
      (5)   Cable conduit shall be a minimum of two inches in diameter.
      (6)   All wire and cable installed under this section shall be heat and
moisture resistant, Type XLP-RHH, and be suitable for use at 90° Celsius and
shall have insulation rated at 600V.
      (7)   The bare ground wire shall be #8 AWG stranded copper wire.
   (B)   All wire shall be subject to an insulation test to ground after
installation. The minimum acceptable resistance to ground shall be 250,000
ohms. Any section of wiring failing to pass the minimum insulation test for any
reason or showing an obvious short circuit shall be rejected. All wire, cable
and unit duct to be furnished shall be buried not less than 24 inches below
finished grade.
   (C)   All runs shall be continuous without splice in cable from pole
handhole or to control cabinet.
   (D)   Adequate slack shall be provided such that the service connection can
be made without splices other than at the power source. In the case of aerial
service, an insulating bushing shall be provided for the steel conduit service
pole riser.
   (E)   When passing under concrete or asphalt surfaces, rigid galvanized
steel conduit not less than two inches in diameter with bushing shall be
provided for raceways.
   (F)   A splice connection in handholes only for copper conductors shall be
made with spiral spring wire, lug type, or approved equal connectors. Splices
in handholes below grade level shall be Scotchcast kits or equivalent equal.
   (G)   Rigid galvanized metal conduit shall be two inches in diameter minimum
and comply with Underwriter's Laboratories, Inc. Standard U.L. 6, WW-C-581a and
ASA Specification C80-1. Each length of conduit shall bear an Underwriter's
Laboratories label. Conduit may be either pushed or trenched depending on
location. Rigid galvanized metal conduit shall be required for:
      (1)   Street light foundation raceways.
      (2)   Control cabinet foundation raceways.
      (3)   All pavement crossings. Conduit shall also extend two feet beyond
the curb and shall be pushed or augured under pavement.
      (4)   The conduit between the street light control cabinet and the
Commonwealth Edison connection shall be three inch rigid steel.
   (H)   (1)   Concrete handholes shall be constructed at all street
intersections and wherever there is change in alignment of the cable greater
than 20 degrees. No handhole will be required where the cable is installed with
a radius of 20 feet or greater. Heavy duty handholes shall be required in areas
subject to motor vehicle traffic.
      (2)   Street lighting handholes shall be air entrained Class SI Portland
cement concrete with a maximum three inch slump and a minimum 14 day
compressive strength of 3500 psi using an IDOT approved mix for this class of
concrete, when possible. All conduit shall extend into the handhole a minimum
of four inches with a minimum of six feet of cable pulled into the handhole for
splices per conductor run. All handholes shall contain a frame and lid with the
designation "STREET LIGHTING" cast therein.
   (I)   All installation of the cable and conduit between poles shall be
placed in trenches a minimum of six inches wide and 24 inches below design
subgrade elevation.
      (1)   There shall be no sharp bends where the conduit enters the trench,
compacted approved fill shall be built up to half-fill the opening in the
conduit so that emerging cable conduit will have a smooth bed at this critical
point. If the trench depth is less than 12 inches because of obstructions, the
contractor shall cut a groove in such obstruction so the trench is a minimum of
12 inches deep. The cable conduit shall be laid in this groove, anchored to
prevent floating and covered to grade. Where trench depth exceeds 12 inches but
is less than 24 inches deep, any material excavated from the trench, which in
the opinion of the Village Engineer is satisfactory backfilling material, may
be used. Cinders, frozen earth, or other deleterious materials will not be
permitted in the backfill. Stone used in backfill shall be less than two inches
in any dimension.
      (2)   Backfilling shall be completed as soon as possible after
inspection. Backfill shall be deposited in uniform layers not to exceed six
inches thick loose measure. The material in each layer shall be mechanical
compacted in a manner approved by the Village Engineer.
      (3)   The village reserves the right to make inspections of the trench
construction and at any other stage it designates.
   (J)   Wiring test.
      (1)   The tests outlined in this section are field tests to be performed
in the presence of the Village Engineer's representative. They shall be
performed by the contractor's personnel and their equipment. Defects shall be
corrected and testing repeated until all sections of the installation are
sound. Splicing or repairing of insulation below grade is not permissible
except in a handhole.
      (2)   All construction shall be completed before tests are made. The
poles shall be erected, with ballasts and lamps in place. Trenches shall be
backfilled and all connections shall be made.
      (3)   Insulation resistance shall be measured with a megger generating
not less than 500 or more than 1,000 volts. A multimeter is not acceptable
because it applies only a few volts which will permit some insulation defects
to go undetected. Erratic behavior of the megger during the test indicates an
intermittent weakness which must be corrected. Only the lower value indicated
shall be considered or recorded.
      (4)   The Village Engineer's representative shall log the serial number
and voltage rating of the megger used by the contractor. He shall then confirm
the calibration of the megger by connecting the two leads of the megger
together so that the resistance to be measured by the megger when it is turned
at full speed is zero. Unless this is true, the megger will give false reading
under all other circumstances as well.
      (5)   Each circuit shall be permanently tagged for identification and
then tested at the control centers. The full voltage of the megger shall be
applied between ground and each insulated wire in each circuit. The ground
shall consist of a driven, copper-clad rod 8' x 5/8" or larger connected by #8
wire to the ground terminal in the control cabinet. Circuits shall be isolated
from each other by opening the circuit breakers.
      (6)   The minimum, acceptable resistance to ground shown by the megger
shall be 250,000 ohms. The tests shall be conducted as follows:
         (a)   Test at each pole location from handhole to the last light in a
string of lights. Locate any faults in underground cable before connecting
lamps.
         (b)   Test each lamp assembly at handhole using the #10 downwire in
each of the lamp poles. Correct any faults.
         (c)   Test the complete system with all connections made except the
fuses will not be installed in the switch box. Test the system from fuse output
lug to ground at the switch box.
         (d)   If a service center, check each circuit at the breaker output in
the control center.
         (e)   All tests shall be conducted in the presence of a representative
of the village or the Village Engineer.
      (7)   With all lamps "on" for a minimum of five minutes, measure the
voltage at the fuse output lug in the safety switch box. Then using the same
meter, measure the voltage to the last light in the string at the handhole
connection in the base of the pole for that lamp. The percent of voltage drop
from the supply fuse to the lamp shall not be more than 2%.
      (8)   A test log shall be used during the test noting all results and
identifying all meters used. Test logs will be signed by the contractor's
representative and the Village Engineer's witness.
   (K)   Service and control center.
      (1)   Service centers, if used, shall be established at such points as
are found feasible for the area to be serviced. The final selection of a
service and control center shall be approved by the Village Engineer and the
Commonwealth Edison Co. At each service center, the service switch and circuit
breaker shall be mounted in a weather-proof cabinet made of rust-resistant
metal or aluminum and shall be marked "Street Lighting". This cabinet shall be
equal to Crouse Hinds #27394 adapter.
      (2)   The cabinet shall be mounted on an 18 inch diameter concrete base
4'-0" deep cast in place consisting of four vertical rods and #3 rings 12
inches and on center for reinforcing. The top of the base shall be two and one-
half inches (+1/2") above finished grade. The base shall include a two inch
feeder conduit with standard radius and one and one-half inch service conduit
connected directly to the meter socket as required by Commonwealth Edison Co.
All feeder and supply conduit shall enter the cabinet from the bottom.
      (3)   The service center distribution cabinet shall be securely grounded
by driving into the ground a 3/4" x 10' copperweld ground rod inside concrete
base of a cabinet and connected to control panel ground terminal. On the back
of the control center shall be mounted the meter socket for the mounting of the
service meter. The control center cabinet shall be provided with a secure
locking facility and duplicate keys must be provided for same.
(Ord. 07-57, passed 12-17-2007)
APPENDIX A: FLOWERING CRABS
   The following selections or cultivars of flowering crabs are recommended for
local use based on adaptability and resistance to foliar disease. Not all are
suitable as parkway or street trees because of growth habits or characteristics
that pose visibility or other obstruction problems. However, most selections
listed may also be used to good landscape advantage on the home grounds,
provided that a local source is available.
Malus         Flower         Fruit         Form           Size   Comments
Cultivar
M. 'Adams'    carmine to     5/8" red      rounded, dense 20-25' persistent
              pink                                               fruit
M. baccata    slight pink to 1/2" purplish upright,       30-40' large size
Jackii        white          red           spreading
M.            reddish purple 1" reddish    spreading,     25'
'Baskatong'                  purple        arching
M. 'Beverly'  dark red to    1/2"-3/4"     upright,       15-25' good street
              white          bright red    spreading             tree
M. 'Bob       pink to white  5/8" yellow   rounded        15-20' persistent
White'                                                           fruit
M. 'Calloway' deep pink to   1" red        rounded        15-20'
              red
M. 'Candied   red to pink    5/8" bright   horizontal,    10-15'
Apple'                       red           weeping
M.            red to rose    5/8" glossy   narrow,        25'    good narrow
'Centurian'   red            red           upright               tree
M.            rose pink      1/2" bronze   rounded        8'     dwarf habit
'Coralburst'
M. 'David'    pink to white  1/2" scarlet  compact        15-20' good foliage
                             red
M. 'Dolgo'    pinkish to     1-1/4"-1-1/2" open           40'    fruit makes
              white          bright red                          jelly
M. 'Donald    pink to white  3/8" bright   compact,       15-20' good bird food
Whyman'                      red           rounded
M.            deep pink to   3/8" red and  rounded, dense 25'    Japanese Crab
'Floribunda'  white          yellow
M. 'Golden    white          1" yellow     compact        15-20' persistent
Hornet'                                                          fruit
M. 'Harvest   white          3/8" golden   upright        20'    good street
Gold'                                                            tree
M. 'Henry     white and      1-1/4" red    rounded        20'
Kohankie'     pinkish
M. hupehensis white          3/8" red      vase shape     25'    picturesque
M. 'Indian    red to rose    1/2" glossy   rounded        15-20' outstanding
Magic'        pink           red                                 fruit
M.            pink to white  2/5" yellow   loose open     20'    double flower
'Katherine'
M. 'Liset'    crimson to     5/8" glossy   rounded        15-20' excellent red
              rose red       crimson
M. 'Mary      pink to white  3/8" yellow   rounded        10'    shrub-like
Potter'
M. 'Milton    white          red           rounded        15-20'
Baron'
 
Malus         Flower        Fruit          Form           Size   Comments
Cultivar
M. 'Ormiston  apple-pink to 3/8" yellow    rounded, dense 25-30' persistent
Roy'          white                                              fruit
M. 'Pink      pink          1/2" maroon    upright, oval  15'
Spire'
M. 'Prince    rose pink     no fruit       upright, dense 15-20' double flower
George'
M.            purplish red  1/2" oxblood   upright,       25'
'Profusion'                 red            spreading
M. 'Red       dark red      dark red       columnar              compact flower
Baron'                                     upright
M. 'Red       white         1/2" cherry    horizontal     15'    good fruiting
Jewel'                      red            branching
M. 'Red       pink          1/2" red       upright,       20'    persistent
Splendor'                                  spreading             fruit
M. 'Robinson' deep pink     3/8" glossy    upright        20-25' vigorous
                            dark red                             grower
M. sargentii  white         1/4" dark red  horizontal     8'     shrub-like
M.            red to white  3/8" orange-   oval, dense    15-20' good street
'Snowdrift'                 red                                  tree
M. 'Sugar     pink to white 1/2" rich red  upright, oval         persistent
Tyme'                                                            fruit
M.            white         1" dull,       upright, oval  30'    good foliage
'Tschonoski'                yellow-brown
M. 'Veitchii' white         1/2" purple-   upright,       20'
                            brown          narrow
M. 'White     white         1/2" scarlet   rounded        20-25' good flower,
Angel'                      red                                  fruit
M. 'White     white         1/4" lime-     pendulous      12-15' weeping
Cascade'                    yellow
M. 'Winter    carmine to    1/2" yellow    broadly        20' +  outstanding
Gold'         white                        pyramidal             fruit
M. Zumi       white         1/8" brilliant rounded        25'    one of the
'Calocarpa'                 red                                  best
 
CHAPTER 58: GROUNDWATER PROTECTION
Section
General Provisions
   
58.001   Title
   
58.002   Findings
   
58.003   Purpose and intent
   
58.004   Definitions
   
58.005   Establishment of setback zones
   
58.006   Applicability
Operating Permits and Permit Conditions
   
58.020   General conditions
   
58.021   Permit applications
   
58.022   Conditions for GWPA permits issued to new facilities
   
58.023   Reporting
Groundwater Protection Overlay Zones; Regulations
   
58.035   Groundwater protection overlay zones
   
58.036   Regulations in the minimum setback zone (Zone 1)
   
58.037   Regulations in the maximum setback zone (Zone 2)
   
58.038   Regulations in the five-year capture zone (Zone 3)
Unauthorized Releases
   
58.050   General provisions
   
58.051   Unauthorized releases requiring recording
   
58.052   Unauthorized releases requiring reporting
   
58.053   Confirmed release; required action
   
58.054   Emergency; remediation by village
   
58.055   Reporting requirements not exclusive
Closure Permits and Permit Conditions
   
58.065   Facility closure; permit required
   
58.066   Closure proposal; requirements; acceptance
   
58.067   Facility abandonment
   
58.068   Permit application; fee
   
58.069   Multiple facilities
Administration; Enforcement
   
58.080   Enforcement
   
58.081   Notice of violation
   
58.082   Consultant and attorney review fees
   
58.083   Appeals
 
   
58.999   Penalty
   
Appendix A: Regulated Substances List
   
Appendix B: Groundwater Protection Program Operating Permit Request Form
Cross-reference:
   Stormwater Control and Detention Regulations, see
Chapter 154
   Water, see
Chapter 51
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 58.001 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be hereinafter known as the “Groundwater Protection
Ordinance,” may be cited as such, will be hereinafter referred to as “this
chapter,” and same shall be and constitute Ordinance No. 99-18.
(Ord. 99-18, passed 6-7-1999)
§ 58.002 FINDINGS.
   The village finds that:
   (A)   The continued availability of natural, uncontaminated supply of water
is an important and vital resource benefitting the residents of the village;
   (B)   It is in the best interest of the present and future residents of the
village both economically and in regard to health, that steps be taken to
reduce the risk of contamination to the water supply; and
   (C)   Restricting the number of future potential sources of contamination to
the water supply of the village pursuant to the guidelines established by this
chapter and the Illinois Groundwater Protection Act is a reasonable means by
which to attempt to provide for a continued unpolluted source of water for the
residents of the village and surrounding areas.
(Ord. 99-18, passed 6-7-1999)
§ 58.003 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   (A)   Purpose. In the interest of securing the public health, safety, and
welfare, to preserve the quality and quantity of groundwater resources in order
to assure a safe and adequate water supply for the present and future
generations, and to preserve groundwater resources currently in use and those
aquifers having a potential for future use as a public water supply, the
provisions of this chapter shall apply to all properties located within the
village. This chapter establishes regulations for land uses within the
groundwater protection areas for: inspection and monitoring standards for new
and existing regulated substance facilities; uniform standards for release
reporting; emergency response; substance management planning; permit
procedures; and enforcement.
   (B)   Intent. It is the intent of this chapter to provide a method:
      (1)   To protect the groundwater resources of the village and the
surrounding area.
      (2)   To provide a means of regulating land uses within the groundwater
protection areas.
      (3)   To protect the village’s drinking water supply and that of the
surrounding area from potential impacts by facilities that store, handle,
treat, use, or produce substances that pose a hazard to groundwater quality.
(Ord. 99-18, passed 6-7-1999)
§ 58.004 DEFINITIONS.
   Except as stated in this chapter, and unless a different meaning of a word
or term is clear from the context, the definition of words or terms in this
chapter shall be the same as those used in the Illinois Environmental
Protection Act and the Illinois Groundwater Protection Act (ILCS Chapter 415,
Act 5, §§ 14 et seq.), as amended from time to time.
   ACT. The Illinois Environmental Protection Act (ILCS Chapter 415, Act 5, §§
1 et seq.).
   AGENCY. The Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
   AQUIFER. Saturated (with groundwater) soils and geologic materials which are
sufficiently permeable to readily yield economically useful quantities of water
to wells, springs, or streams under ordinary hydraulic gradients.
   BOARD. The Illinois Pollution Control Board.
   CONTAINMENT DEVICE. A device that is designed to contain an unauthorized
release, retain it for cleanup, and prevent released materials from penetrating
into the ground.
   DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS. Duly appointed Director of Public Works for the
Village of East Dundee.
   FACILITY.
      (1)   Any building, structure, installation, equipment, pipe or pipeline
including but not limited to any pipe into a sewer or publicly owned treatment
works, well, pit, pond, lagoon, impoundment, ditch, landfill, storage
container, motor vehicle, rolling stock, or aircraft; or
      (2)   Any site or area where a hazardous substance has been deposited,
stored, disposed of, or placed, or otherwise come to be located.
   GROUNDWATER. Underground water which occurs within the saturated zone and
geologic materials where the fluid pressure in the pore space is equal to or
greater than atmospheric pressure.
   GROUNDWATER PROTECTION AREA (GWPA). The portion of an aquifer within the
minimum setback zone, maximum setback zone, or five-year capture zone of a well
or well field, as delineated in Exhibit 2 of Ord. 99-18.
   GROUNDWATER PROTECTION AREA PERMIT. An authorization by the Village of East
Dundee for a person to store, handle, use or produce a regulated substance
within a GWPA.
   GROUNDWATER PROTECTION OVERLAY ZONES. Zones of the GWPA designated to
provide differential levels of protection. Each GWPA is subdivided into three
GROUNDWATER PROTECTION OVERLAY ZONES as described below and as illustrated in
Exhibit 2 of Ord. 99-18.
      (1)   ZONE 1: MINIMUM SETBACK ZONE. The geographic area located between a
well or well field providing potable water to a community water supply and a
radial area of 400 feet (122 meters).
      (2)   ZONE 2: MAXIMUM SETBACK ZONE. The geographic area located between a
well or well field providing potable water to a community water supply and a
regular or irregularly shaped area not to exceed 1,000 feet (305 meters) from
the wellhead, but excluding the minimum setback zone.
      (3)   ZONE 3: FIVE-YEAR CAPTURE ZONE. The geographic area located between
a well or well field providing potable water to a community water supply and
the delineated five-year zone of capture but excluding Zones 1 and 2.
   NEW POTENTIAL PRIMARY SOURCE.
      (1)   A potential primary source which is not in existence or for which
construction has not commenced at its location as of effective date of passage
of this chapter;
      (2)   A potential primary source which expands laterally beyond the
currently permitted boundary, or if the primary source is not permitted, the
boundary in existence as of effective date of this chapter; or
      (3)   A potential primary source which is part of a facility that
undergoes major reconstruction. Such reconstruction shall be deemed to have
taken place where the fixed capital cost of the new components constructed
within a two-year period exceed 50% of the fixed capital cost of a comparable
entirely new facility.
      Construction shall be deemed commenced when all necessary federal, state
and local approvals have been obtained, and work at the site has been initiated
and proceeds in a reasonably continuous manner to completion.
   NEW POTENTIAL ROUTE.
      (1)   A potential route which is not in existence or for which
construction has not commenced at its location as of effective date of this
chapter; or
      (2)   A potential route which expands laterally beyond the currently,
permitted boundary or, if the potential route is not permitted, the boundary in
existence as of effective date of this chapter.
      Construction shall be deemed commenced when all necessary federal, state
and local approvals have been obtained, and work at the site has been initiated
and proceeds in a reasonably continuous manner to completion.
   NEW POTENTIAL SECONDARY SOURCE.
      (1)   A potential secondary source which is not in existence or for which
construction has not commenced at its location as of effective date of this
chapter;
      (2)   A potential secondary source which expands laterally beyond the
currently permitted boundary or, if the secondary source is not permitted, the
boundary in existence as of effective date of this chapter, other than an
expansion for handling of livestock waste or for treating domestic wastewaters;
or
      (3)   A potential secondary source which is a part of a facility that
undergoes major reconstruction. Such reconstruction shall be deemed to have
taken place where the fixed capital cost of the new components constructed
within a two-year period exceed 50% of the fixed capital cost of a comparable
entirely new facility.
      Construction shall be deemed commenced when all necessary federal, state
and local approvals have been obtained, and work at the site has been initiated
and proceeds in a reasonably continuous manner to completion.
   OPERATOR. Any person in control of, or having responsibility for daily
operation of a facility.
   OWNER. Any person who owns a site, facility or unit or part of a site,
facility or unit, or who owns the land on which the site, facility or unit is
located.
   PERSON. Any person, individual, public or private corporation, firm,
association, joint venture, trust, partnership, municipality, governmental
agency, political subdivision, public officer, owner, lessee, tenant, or any
other entity whatsoever or any combination of such, jointly or severally.
   POTABLE WATER. Water that is satisfactory for drinking, culinary, and
domestic purposes meeting currently accepted water supply practices and
principles.
   POTENTIAL PRIMARY SOURCE. Any unit at a facility or site not currently
subject to a removal or remedial action which:
      (1)   Is utilized for the treatment, storage, or disposal of any
hazardous or special waste not generated at the site;
      (2)   Is utilized for the landfilling, land treating, surface impounding
or piling of any hazardous or special waste that is generated on the site or at
other sites owned, controlled or operated by the same person; or
      (3)   Stores or accumulates at any time more than 75,000 pounds (34,020
kilograms) above ground, or more than 7,500 pounds (3,402 kilograms) below
ground, of any hazardous substances.
   POTENTIAL ROUTE. Abandoned and improperly plugged wells of all kinds,
drainage wells, all injection wells, including closed loop heat pump wells of
all kinds, drainage wells, all injection wells, including closed loop heat pump
wells, and any excavation for the discovery, development or production of
stone, sand or gravel.
   POTENTIAL SECONDARY SOURCE. Any unit at a facility of a site not currently
subject to a removal or remedial action, other than a potential primary source
which:
      (1)   Is utilized for the landfilling, land treating, or surface
impounding of waste that is generated on the site or at other sites owned,
controlled or operated by the same person, other than livestock and landscape
waste, and construction and demolition debris;
      (2)   Stores or accumulates at any time more than 25,000 pounds (11,340
kilograms) but not more than 75,000 pounds (34,020 kilograms) above ground, or
more than 2,500 pounds (1,134 kilograms) but not more than 7,500 pounds (3,402
kilograms) below ground, of any hazardous substances;
      (3)   Stores or accumulates at any time more than 25,000 gallons (94,633
liters) above ground, or more than 500 gallons (1,893 liters) below ground, of
petroleum, including crude oil or any fraction thereof which is not otherwise
specifically listed or designated as a hazardous substance;
      (4)   Stores or accumulates pesticides, fertilizers, or road oils for
purposes of commercial application or for distribution to retail sales outlets;
      (5)   Stores or accumulates at any one time more than 50,000 pounds
(22,680 kilograms) of any de-icing agent; or
      (6)   Is utilized for handling livestock waste or for treating domestic
wastewaters other than private sewage disposal systems as defined in the
Private Sewage Disposal Licensing Act (ILCS Chapter 225, Act 225, §§ 1 et
seq.).
   RECHARGE AREA. The area through which precipitation and surface water can
enter an aquifer.
   REGULATED SUBSTANCES. Those substances found in Exhibit 1, attached to this
chapter as Appendix A and incorporated herein.
   SATURATED ZONE. The zone in which the voids in the rock or soil are filled
with water at a pressure greater than atmospheric pressure.
   SETBACK ZONE. A geographic area designated pursuant to the Act and this
chapter, containing a potable water supply well or a potential source or
potential route, having a continuous boundary, and within which certain
prohibitions or regulations are applicable in order to protect groundwaters.
   SITE. Any location, place, tract of land, or facilities, including but not
limited to buildings, and improvements used for purposes subject to regulations
or control by the Act or regulations thereunder.
   UNAUTHORIZED RELEASE. Any spilling, leaking, emitting, discharging,
escaping, leaching, or disposing of a regulated substance in a quantity greater
than one gallon (eight pounds) from a facility into a containment system, into
the air, into groundwater, surface water, surface soils or subsurface soils.
UNAUTHORIZED RELEASE does not include: intentional withdrawals of regulated
substances  for the purpose of legitimate sale, use, or disposal; and
discharges permitted under federal, state, or local law.
   UNDERLYING PERMIT. Includes the building permits, sewer connection
agreements, stormwater detention permits, occupancy permits, preliminary plat
and final plat (required by the village subdivision and planned unit
development ordinances) and any other applicable approval or permit required by
the village in relation to the facility.
   UNIT. Any device, mechanism, equipment, or area (exclusive of land utilized
only for agricultural production).
   VILLAGE. The Village of East Dundee, Kane and Cook Counties, Illinois.
   VILLAGE FIRE INSPECTOR. The East Dundee and Countryside Fire Protection
District, which is contracted with by the village to provide fire inspection
services.
   WELL. Any excavation that is drilled, cored, bored, driven, dug, fitted or
otherwise constructed when the intended use of such excavation is for the
location, diversion, artificial recharge, or acquisition of groundwater.
   WELL FIELD. An area which contains one or more wells for obtaining a potable
water supply.
   WELL NUMBER. A well number owned and operated by the village, as depicted on
Exhibit 2 attached to Ord. 99-18.
(Ord. 99-18, passed 6-7-1999)
§ 58.005 ESTABLISHMENT OF SETBACK ZONES.
   (A)   Minimum setback zones are hereby established as set forth in Exhibit 2
of Ord. 99-18, as that area within a 400 feet (122 meters) radius of each
existing or permitted community water supply well within the village or within
400 feet (122 meters) of the corporate limits of the village.
   (B)   Maximum setback zones are hereby established as set forth in Exhibit
2, as that area within a regular or irregularly shaped 1,000 feet (305 meters)
radius of each existing or permitted community water supply well within the
village, or within 1,000 feet (305 meters) of the corporate limits of the
village.
   (C)   Five-year capture zones are hereby established as set forth in Exhibit
2.
(Ord. 99-18, passed 6-7-1999)
§ 58.006 APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   Persons who own and/or operate one or more facilities in a groundwater
protection area (GWPA) shall comply with this chapter. This obligation shall be
joint and several.
   (B)   All facilities within a GWPA must comply with this chapter prior to
issuance of any underlying permits. Existing facilities which are not applying
for an underlying permit shall have one year from the effective date of this
chapter to come into compliance.
   (C)   If the Director of Public Works determines that a facility, otherwise
exempt from the permit requirements of this chapter, has a potential to degrade
groundwater quality, then he or she may classify that facility as a new
potential primary source, a potential route, or potential secondary source, and
require that facility to comply with this chapter accordingly. Such
determination shall be based upon site-specific data and shall be eligible for
appeal pursuant to § 58.083 of this chapter.
   (D)   The following are exempt from the permit requirements of this chapter:
      (1)   The storage and handling of regulated substances for resale in
their original unopened containers of five gallons (19 liters) or 40 pounds (18
kilograms) or less shall be exempt from the permit requirements of this
chapter.
      (2)   De minimis usage of regulated substances: facilities that use,
store, or handle regulated substances in quantities of five gallons (19 liters)
or 40 pounds (18 kilograms) or less of any one regulated substance and in
aggregate quantities of 20 gallons (76 liters) or 100 pounds (45 kilograms) or
less of all regulated substances, shall be exempt from the permit requirement
of this chapter.
      (3)   Single family residences, provided that no home business is
operated on the premises.
      (4)   Public interest emergency use and storage of regulated substances.
      (5)   Regulated substances used by or for the village in wastewater
treatment processes.
      (6)   Fueling of equipment not licensed for street use, provided that
such fueling activities are conducted in a containment area that is designed
and maintained to prevent leakage or other violations of this chapter.
   (E)   The following are exempt from this chapter:
      (1)   Fuel tanks and fluid reservoirs attached to a private or commercial
motor vehicle and used directly in the operation of that vehicle.
      (2)   Existing heating systems using fuel oil.
      (3)   The activities of construction, repairing or maintaining any
facility or improvement on lands within Zones 1, 2, or 3 provided that all
contractors, subcontractors, laborers, material men and their employees when
using, handling, storing or producing regulated substances in Zones 1, 2, or 3
use those applicable “Best Management Practices” set forth in Exhibit 3,
attached to Ord. 99-18 and incorporated herein.
      (4)   Cleanups, monitoring and/or studies undertaken under supervision of
the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency or other state regulatory agency
or the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.
      (5)   Activities specifically regulated under 35 Ill. Adm. Code parts
601.615, 616, and 617 (regulations for existing and new activities within
setback zones and regulated recharge areas); 8 Ill. Adm. Code parts 255 and 256
(regulations for secondary containment for agricultural pesticide and
fertilizer facilities); and 8 Ill. Adm. Code part 257 (cooperative groundwater
protection program for agricultural chemical facilities within appropriate
setback zones).
      (6)   If the owner of a new potential primary source, new potential
secondary source, or new potential route is granted an exception by the Board
(other than land filling or land treating) pursuant to the Act, such owner
shall not be subject to this chapter to the same extent that such owner is not
subject to the Act.
      (7)   If the owner of a new potential primary source, new potential
secondary source, or new potential route is issued a certificate of minimal
hazard by the Agency pursuant to the Act, such owner shall not be subject to
this chapter to the same extent that such owner is not subject to the Act.
   (F)   Any action by the Agency or Board referred to in this section shall
not be final and binding on the village under this chapter until the village
has received notice of such proposed action and has had reasonable opportunity
to present evidence concerning its interest.
(Ord. 99-18, passed 6-7-1999)
OPERATING PERMITS AND PERMIT CONDITIONS
§ 58.020 GENERAL CONDITIONS.
   (A)   No person, persons, corporation, or other legal entities shall install
or operate a facility in a GWPA without first obtaining a groundwater
protection operating permit from the Director of Public Works.
   (B)   The focus of review for all permits shall be on the substances that
will be stored, handled, treated, used or produced and the potential for these
substances to degrade groundwater quality.
   (C)   All permits required pursuant to this chapter must be issued prior to
or concurrent with the issuance of permits for construction activities or
underlying permits.
   (D)   Existing facilities shall submit an application for a permit within
one year of the passage of this chapter or within one year of the facility’s
being included in a GWPA. The application must include a proposed schedule for
compliance.
   (E)   The Director of Public Works shall not issue an operating permit for a
facility unless adequate plans, specifications, test data, and/or other
appropriate information has been submitted by the owner and/or operator showing
that the proposed design and construction of the facility meets the intent and
provisions of this chapter and will not impact the short term or long term on
cumulative quantity or quality of groundwater.
   (F)   The application for operating permits pursuant to this chapter shall
be made on a form provided by the village and shall be accompanied by a fee as
set forth in the village Annual Fee Schedule. The annual renewal fee shall be
as set forth in said fee schedule, and this fee shall accompany the annual
certification statement.
   (G)   Any person who owns or operates more than one facility in a single
zone of the GWPA shall have the option of obtaining one permit for all
operations if the operations at each facility are similar and the permit
requirements under this chapter are applicable to each facility individually.
   (H)   An operating permit, issued by the Director of Public Works shall be
effective for one year. The Director of Public Works shall not issue a permit
to operate a facility until he or she determines that the facility complies
with the provisions of these regulations.
   (I)   The facility owner shall apply to the village for permit renewal at
least 60 days prior to the expiration of the permit. If an inspection of the
facility reveals noncompliance, then the Director of Public Works must verify
by a follow-up inspection that all required corrections have been implemented
before renewing the permit.
   (J)   Operating permits may be transferred to a new facility owner/operator
if the new facility owner/operator does not change any conditions of the
permit, the transfer is registered with the village within 30 days of the
change in ownership, and any necessary modifications are made to the
information in the initial permit application due to the change in ownership.
   (K)   Within 30 days of receiving an inspection report from the village, the
operating permit holder shall file with the village a plan and time schedule to
implement any required modifications to the facility or to the monitoring plan
needed to achieve compliance with the intent of this chapter or the permit
conditions. This plan and time schedule shall also implement all of the
recommendations of the Director of Public Works.
(Ord. 99-18, passed 6-7-1999) Penalty, see § 58.999
§ 58.021 PERMIT APPLICATIONS.
   The operating permit application shall include at a minimum:
   (A)   Name, address, and phone number of owner/operator.
   (B)   Property address, legal description and tax identification number of
the facility.
   (C)   The names and volumes of all regulated substances which are stored,
handled, treated, used, or produced at the facility being permitted in
quantities greater than the de minimis amounts specified in § 58.006 of this
chapter.
   (D)   Copies of all leases pertaining to the facility.
   (E)   A detailed description of the activities conducted at the facility
that involve the storage, handling, treatment, use or production of regulated
substances in quantities greater than the de minimis amounts specified in §
58.006 of this chapter.
   (F)   A description of the containment devices used to comply with the
requirements of this chapter.
   (G)   A regulated substances management plan for the facility.
   (H)   A description of the procedures for inspection and maintenance of
containment devices.
   (I)   A description of the method for disposal of regulated substance.
   (J)   Ten copies of a site plan showing the location of the facility and its
property boundaries and the locations where regulated substances in containers
larger than five gallons (19 liters) or 40 pounds (19 kilograms) in size are
stored, handled, treated, used, produced, and the location of each containment
device.
(Ord. 99-18, passed 6-7-1999)
§ 58.022 CONDITIONS FOR GWPA PERMITS ISSUED TO NEW FACILITIES.
   (A)   Containment devices. The owner/operator of a facility must provide
containment devices adequate in size to contain on-site any unauthorized
release of regulated substances from any area where these substances are either
stored, handled, treated, used, or produced. Containment devices shall prevent
such substances from penetrating into the ground. Design requirements for
containment devices include:
      (1)   The containment device shall be large enough to contain 110% of the
volume of the container in cases where a single container is used to store,
handle, treat, use, or produce a regulated substance. In cases where multiple
containers are used, the containment device shall be large enough to contain
150% of the volume of the largest container or 10% of the aggregate volume of
all containers, whichever is greater.
      (2)   All containment devices shall be constructed of materials of
sufficient thickness, density, and composition to prevent structural weakening
of the containment device as a result of contact with any regulated substance.
If coatings are used to provide chemical resistance for containment devices,
they shall also be resistant to the expected abrasion and impact conditions.
Containment devices shall be capable of containing any unauthorized release for
at least the maximum anticipated period sufficient to allow detection and
removal of the release.
      (3)   If the containment device is open to rainfall, then it shall be
able to accommodate the volume of precipitation that could enter the
containment device during a 24-hour, 100-year storm, in addition to the volume
of the regulated substance storage required in division (A)(1) above.
      (4)   Containment devices shall be constructed so that a collection
system can be installed to accumulate, temporarily store, permit detection of,
and permit removal of any storm runoff or regulated substance.
      (5)   Containment devices shall include monitoring procedures or
technology capable of detecting the presence of a regulated substance within 24
hours following a release.
   (B)   Regulated substances management plan.
      (1)   Plan required.
         (a)   A regulated substances management plan indicating procedures to
be followed to prevent, control, collect, and dispose of any unauthorized
release of a regulated substance shall be required as a condition of each
operating permit. If a spill prevention control plan or similar contingency
plan has been prepared in accordance with state or U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency requirements, a regulated substance management plan is not
required as long as all of the regulated substances are included in the spill
control plan.
         (b)   The regulated substances management plan shall include:
            1.   Provisions to address the regulated substances monitoring
requirements.
            2.   Provisions to train employees in the prevention,
identification, reporting, control, disposal, and documentation of any
unauthorized release of a regulated substance.
      (2)   Monitoring required. The owners or operators of all new facilities
shall implement regulated substances monitoring as part of the regulated
substances management plan required by § 58.080 of this chapter. Visual
monitoring must be implemented unless it is determined by the village to be
infeasible.
      (3)   Monitoring activities. All regulated substance monitoring
activities shall include the following:
         (a)   A written routine monitoring procedure which includes, when
applicable: the frequency of performing the monitoring method, the methods and
equipment to be used for performing the monitoring, the location(s) from which
the monitoring will be performed, the name(s) or title(s) of the person(s)
responsible for performing the monitoring and/or maintaining the equipment, and
the reporting format.
         (b)   Written records of all monitoring performed shall be maintained
on-site by the operator for a period of three years from the date the
monitoring was performed. The village may require the submittal of the
monitoring records or a summary at a frequency that the village may establish.
The written records of all monitoring performed in the past three years shall
be shown to the village upon demand during any site inspection. Monitoring
records shall include but not be limited to:
            1.   The date and time of all monitoring or sampling;
            2.   Monitoring equipment calibration and maintenance records;
            3.   The results of any visual observations;
            4.   The logs of all readings of gauges or other monitoring
equipment, or other test results; and
            5.   The results of inventory readings and reconciliations.
      (4)   Inspection and maintenance. Procedures for the in-house inspection
and maintenance of containment devices and areas where regulated substances are
stored, handled, treated, used, and produced shall be identified in the
operating permit for each facility. Such procedures shall be in writing, and a
log shall be kept of all inspection and maintenance activities. Such logs shall
be submitted to the Director of Public Works with the renewal applications
available for inspection at other times upon 48 hours notice. Inspection and
maintenance logs shall be maintained on-site by the owner or operator for a
period of at least three years from the date the monitoring was performed.
(Ord. 99-18, passed 6-7-1999)
§ 58.023 REPORTING.
   The permittee shall report to the Director of Public Works within 15 days
after any changes in a facility, including:
   (A)   The storage, handling, treatment, use, or processing of new regulated
substances;
   (B)   Changes in monitoring procedures; or
   (C)   The replacement or repair of any part of a facility that is related to
the regulated substance(s).
(Ord. 99-18, passed 6-7-1999) Penalty, see § 58.999
GROUNDWATER PROTECTION OVERLAY ZONES; REGULATIONS
§ 58.035 GROUNDWATER PROTECTION OVERLAY ZONES.
   (A)   The location of GWPAs in the village are defined in Exhibit 2 of Ord.
99-18. GWPA maps are also on file with the Director of Public Works for
reference purposes.
   (B)   In determining the location of facilities within the zones defined by
Exhibit 2, the following rules shall apply.
      (1)   Facilities located wholly within a GWPA zone shall be governed by
the restrictions applicable to that zone.
      (2)   Facilities having parts lying within more than one zone of a GWPA
shall be governed by the restrictions applicable to the more restrictive zone.
      (3)   Facilities having parts lying both in and out of a GWPA shall be
governed by the restrictions applicable to the more restrictive zone.
(Ord. 99-18, passed 6-7-1999)
§ 58.036 REGULATIONS IN THE MINIMUM SETBACK ZONE (ZONE 1).
   (A)   Prohibited uses and activities.
      (1)   Except as provided in §
58.006, no person shall place a new potential primary source, new potential
secondary source, or new potential route within the minimum setback zone(s) of
any existing or permitted community water supply well in the village or within
400 feet (122 meters) of the corporate limits of the village.
      (2)   Except as provided in §
58.006, no person shall alter or change an existing potential primary source,
potential secondary source, or potential route where the alteration or change
would result in a potential source or route that would be prohibited under this
chapter if it were a new potential source or route.
      (3)   No person shall conduct any activity or engage in a use of property
which shall constitute an interference with the health and safety or welfare of
a community water supply well. Such activities are declared to be a public
nuisance and are prohibited by this chapter.
   (B)   Review and approval of proposed activities.
      (1)   All proposals for new facilities which use, store, handle, treat,
or produce a regulated substance within the minimum setback zone (Zone 1) must
be reviewed by the Director of Public Works for compliance with this chapter,
including obtaining a groundwater protection permit pursuant to this chapter,
prior to issuance of any underlying permit.
      (2)   No groundwater operating permit shall be issued unless a finding is
made by the Director of Public Works that the proposal will not impact the long
term, short term or cumulative quality of the aquifer. The finding shall be
based on the present or past land use activities conducted at the facility;
regulated substances stored, handled, treated, used, or produced; and the
potential for the activities or regulated substances to degrade groundwater
quality.
      (3)   New sources of sanitary sewerage (residential and non-residential)
shall, as a condition of the building permit, be required to connect to an IEPA
permitted central sanitary sewer system prior to occupancy. This requirement
shall not be applicable for properties zoned E, estate residence district.
(Ord. 99-18, passed 6-7-1999) Penalty, see § 58.999
§ 58.037 REGULATIONS IN THE MAXIMUM SETBACK ZONE (ZONE 2).
   (A)   Prohibited uses and activities.
      (1)   Except as provided in § 58.006, no person shall place a new
potential primary source within the maximum setback zone(s) of any existing or
permitted community water supply well in the village or within 1,000 feet (305
meters) of the corporate limits of the village.
      (2)   Except as provided in § 58.006, no person shall alter or change an
existing potential primary source where the alteration or change would result
in a potential source or route that would be prohibited under this chapter if
it were a new potential source or route.
      (3)   No person shall conduct any activity or engage in a use of property
which shall constitute an interference with the health and safety or welfare of
a community water supply well or other water well by the accidental, negligent,
or intentional introduction of contaminants. Such activities are declared to be
a public nuisance and are prohibited by this chapter.
   (B)   Review and approval of proposed activities.
      (1)   All proposals for new facilities which use, store, handle, treat,
or produce a regulated substance within the maximum setback zone (Zone 2) must
be reviewed by the Director of Public Works for compliance with this chapter,
including obtaining a groundwater protection permit pursuant to this chapter,
prior to issuance of any underlying permit.
      (2)   No groundwater operating permit shall be issued unless a finding is
made by the Director of Public Works that the proposal will not impact the long
term, short term or cumulative quality of the aquifer. The finding shall be
based on the present or past land use activities conducted at the facility;
regulated substances stored, handled, treated, used, or produced; and the
potential for the activities or regulated substances to degrade groundwater
quality.
      (3)   New sources of sanitary sewerage (residential and non-residential)
shall, as a condition of the building permit, be required to connect to an IEPA
permitted central sanitary sewer system prior to occupancy. This requirement
shall not be applicable for properties zoned E, estate residence district.
(Ord. 99-18, passed 6-7-1999) Penalty, see § 58.999
§ 58.038 REGULATIONS IN THE FIVE-YEAR CAPTURE ZONE (ZONE 3).
   Review and approval of proposed activities:
   (A)   All proposals for new facilities which use, store, handle, treat, or
produce a regulated substance within the five-year capture zone (Zone 3) must
be reviewed by the Director of Public Works for compliance with this chapter,
including obtaining a groundwater protection permit pursuant to this chapter,
prior to issuance of any underlying permit.
   (B)   No groundwater operating permit shall be issued unless a finding is
made by the Director of Public Works that the proposal will not impact the long
term, short term or cumulative quality of the aquifer. The finding shall be
based on the present or past land use activities conducted at the facility;
regulated substances stored, handled, treated, used, or produced; and the
potential for the activities or regulated substances to degrade groundwater
quality.
   (C)   New sources of sanitary sewerage (residential and non-residential)
shall, as a condition of the building permit, be required to connect to an IEPA
permitted central sanitary sewer system prior to occupancy. This requirement
shall not be applicable for properties zoned E, estate residence district.
(Ord. 99-18, passed 6-7-1999) Penalty, see § 58.999
UNAUTHORIZED RELEASES
§ 58.050 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   All unauthorized releases shall be reported to the Director of Public Works
and Village Fire Inspector according to the provisions of this subchapter. All
unauthorized releases shall be recorded in the owner’s inspection and
maintenance log. An unauthorized release is an “unauthorized release requiring
recording” if the release is completely captured by the containment device. If
the containment device fails to contain the entire release, the release is an
“unauthorized release requiring reporting.”
(Ord. 99-18, passed 6-7-1999) Penalty, see § 58.999
§ 58.051 UNAUTHORIZED RELEASES REQUIRING RECORDING.
   (A)   Unauthorized releases requiring recording shall be reported to the
village and Village Fire Inspector within 24 hours after release has been
detected.
   (B)   The incident report shall be accompanied by a written record including
the following information:
      (1)   The type, quantities, and concentration of regulated substances
released.
      (2)   Method of cleanup which has or will be implemented.
      (3)   Method and location of disposal of the released regulated
substances together with contaminated soils, groundwater, or surface water,
including whether a hazardous waste manifest(s) has been or will be used.
      (4)   Method of future release prevention or repair. If this involves a
change in operation, monitoring, or management, the owner must apply for a new
operating permit.
      (5)   Facility operator’s name and telephone number.
   (C)   The Director of Public Works and Village Fire Inspector shall review
the information submitted pursuant to the report of an unauthorized release
requiring recording, shall review the operating permit, and may inspect the
facility. He or she shall either find that the containment standards of this
chapter can continue to be achieved or shall recommend the revocation of the
permit until appropriate modifications are made to allow compliance with the
standards.
(Ord. 99-18, passed 6-7-1999) Penalty, see § 58.999
§ 58.052 UNAUTHORIZED RELEASES REQUIRING REPORTING.
   (A)   Unauthorized releases requiring reporting shall be verbally reported
to the Director of Public Works and Village Fire Inspector immediately.
   (B)   A written report shall be submitted promptly thereafter containing the
following information that is known at the time of filing the report:
      (1)   List of type, quantity, and concentration of regulated substances
released.
      (2)   The results of all investigations completed at that time to
determine the extent of soil or groundwater or surface water contamination
because of the release.
      (3)   Method of cleanup implemented to date, proposed cleanup actions and
approximate cost of actions taken to date.
      (4)   Method and location of disposal of the released regulated substance
and any contaminated soils, groundwater, or surface water.
      (5)   Proposed method of repair or replacement of the containment device.
      (6)   Facility owner’s name and telephone number.
      (7)   The facility owner and operator jointly and severally shall be
responsible for any costs incurred by the village or its authorized agents in
the monitoring and conduct of such remedial actions, including but not limited
to all consultant, Village Fire Inspector, engineering, and attorney fees.
   (C)   Until cleanup is complete, the owner shall submit reports containing
the reports required by § 58.023 to the Director of Public Works every month or
at a more frequent interval specified by him or her.
   (D)   The Director of Public Works shall either find that the containment
standards of this chapter can continue to be achieved or shall recommend the
revocation of the permit until appropriate modifications are made to allow
compliance with the standards.
(Ord. 99-18, passed 6-7-1999) Penalty, see § 58.999
§ 58.053 CONFIRMED RELEASE; REQUIRED ACTION.
   (A)   Upon confirmation of an unauthorized release to groundwater, the owner
shall be responsible for immediately accomplishing the following:
      (1)   Locate and determine the source of the unauthorized release of the
regulated substance(s).
      (2)   Stop and prevent any further unauthorized release(s).
      (3)   Comply with the requirements for an unauthorized release(s)
requiring reporting.
   (B)   No new regulated substance(s) may be introduced at the site of the
regulated substance(s) that caused the violation.
(Ord. 99-18, passed 6-7-1999) Penalty, see § 58.999
§ 58.054 EMERGENCY; REMEDIATION BY VILLAGE.
   If an unauthorized release creates or is expected to create an emergency
situation with respect to the drinking water supply of the village and if the
facility owner fails to address the unauthorized release in a timely manner,
the village or its authorized agents shall have the authority to implement
removal or remedial actions. Such actions may include, but not be limited to,
the prevention of further groundwater contamination; installation of
groundwater monitoring wells; collection and laboratory testing of water, soil,
and waste sample; and cleanup and disposal of regulated substances. The
facility owner and operator jointly and severally shall be responsible for any
costs incurred by the village or its authorized agents in the conduct of such
remedial actions, including but not limited to all consultant, Village Fire
Inspector, engineering, and attorney fees.
(Ord. 99-18, passed 6-7-1999) Penalty, see § 58.999
§ 58.055 REPORTING REQUIREMENTS NOT EXCLUSIVE.
   Reporting a release to the Director of Public Works and Village Fire
Inspector does not exempt or preempt any other reporting requirements under
federal, state, or local laws.
(Ord. 99-18, passed 6-7-1999)
CLOSURE PERMITS AND PERMIT CONDITIONS
§ 58.065 FACILITY CLOSURE; PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person shall close or cause to be closed a facility regulated
pursuant to this chapter without first obtaining a closure permit from the
Director of Public Works. He or she shall not issue a permit to temporarily or
permanently close a facility unless adequate plans and specifications and other
appropriate information have been submitted by the applicant showing that the
proposed closure meets the intent and provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   Closure permits shall be required for all facilities that cease to
store, handle, treat, use, or produce regulated substances for a period of more
than 365 days or when the owner has no intent within the next year to store,
handle, treat, use, or produce regulated substances. During the period of time
between cessation of regulated substance storage, handling, treatment, use, or
production, and actual completion of facility closure, the applicable
containment and monitoring requirements of this chapter shall continue to
apply.
(Ord. 99-18, passed 6-7-1999) Penalty, see § 58.999
§ 58.066 CLOSURE PROPOSAL; REQUIREMENTS; ACCEPTANCE.
   (A)   Prior to closure, the facility owner shall submit to the Director of
Public Works a proposal describing how the owner intends to comply with closure
requirements. Owners proposing to close a facility shall comply with the
following requirements:
      (1)   Regulated substances shall be removed from the facility, including
residual liquids, solids, or sledges to levels specified by the Illinois
Environmental Protection Agency.
      (2)   When a containment device is to be disposed of, the owner must
document to the Director of Public Works that disposal has been completed in
compliance with the Act.
      (3)   An owner of a containment device or any part of a containment
device that is destined for reuse as scrap material shall identify this reuse
to the village.
   (B)   The owner of a facility being closed shall demonstrate to the
satisfaction of the Director of Public Works that no detectable unauthorized
release has occurred or that all unauthorized releases have been cleaned up.
This demonstration can be based on the ongoing leak detection monitoring or
soils sampling performed during or immediately after closure activities.
   (C)   If an unauthorized release is determined to have occurred, the
facility owner shall comply with §§ 58.050 et seq. of this chapter.
   (D)   Facility closure will be accepted as complete by the Director of
Public Works upon implementation of the closure permit conditions and
compliance with all other provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 99-18, passed 6-7-1999) Penalty, see § 58.999
§ 58.067 FACILITY ABANDONMENT.
   No person shall temporarily or permanently abandon a facility within the
GWPA without complying with the requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. 99-18, passed 6-7-1999) Penalty, see § 58.999
§ 58.068 PERMIT APPLICATION; FEE.
   The application for a closure permit pursuant to this chapter shall be made
on a form provided by the village and shall be accompanied by a fee as set
forth in the village Annual Fee Schedule.
(Ord. 99-18, passed 6-7-1999)
§ 58.069 MULTIPLE FACILITIES.
   Any person who owns or operates more than one facility in a single zone of
the GWPA shall have the option of obtaining one permit for all simultaneous
closures if the operations at each facility are similar and the permit
requirements under this chapter are applicable to each facility individually.
(Ord. 99-18, passed 6-7-1999) Penalty, see § 58.999
ADMINISTRATION; ENFORCEMENT
§ 58.080 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   The village shall be the administering agency and shall have the power
and authority to administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter. The
village shall have the right to conduct inspections of facilities at reasonable
times to determine compliance with this chapter.
   (B)   The Director of Public Works may revoke any permit issued pursuant to
this chapter after notice to the permittee and after affording the permittee an
opportunity to meet either in person or by telephone if he or she finds that
the permit holder:
      (1)   Has failed or refused to comply with any provision of this chapter;
      (2)   Has submitted false or inaccurate information in a permit
application;
      (3)   Has refused lawful inspection; or
      (4)   Has an unauthorized release and the Director of Public Works finds
that the containment standards of this chapter cannot continue to be achieved.
(Ord. 99-18, passed 6-7-1999) Penalty, see § 58.999
§ 58.081 NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
   Whenever it is determined that there is a violation of this chapter, the
notice of violation issued shall:
   (A)   Be in writing and delivered to the owner or operator by regular mail;
   (B)   Be dated and signed by the authorized village agent making the
inspection;
   (C)   Specify the violation or violations; and
   (D)   Specify the length of time (no less than 72 hours) to correct the
violation after receiving the notice of violation.
(Ord. 99-18, passed 6-7-1999)
§ 58.082 CONSULTANT AND ATTORNEY REVIEW FEES.
   During the course of the Director of Public Works review, he or she may
submit the permit application documents to the Village Engineer, Village Fire
Inspector, Village Attorney, and/or other technical consultants in order to
obtain assistance for the proper review of the permit application. The facility
owner/operator shall be notified that technical assistance has been sought in
accordance with these regulations. The Village Engineer, Village Fire
Inspector, Village Attorney, and/or other technical consultants shall submit
their itemized bill for services to the village, which shall transmit a bill to
the facility owner/operator. The bill for services shall be at a rate normally
charged for such professional services and shall include all travel and other
expenses normally charged to the village. The facility owner/operator shall pay
the village for the services rendered within ten days after the submission of
the bill from the village to him or her.
(Ord. 99-18, passed 6-7-1999) Penalty, see § 58.999
§ 58.083 APPEALS.
   (A)   The Village President shall appoint, subject to the village’s Board
approval, the Groundwater Appeals Committee.
   (B)   Any decision by the Director of Public Works under this chapter may be
appealed to the Groundwater Appeals Committee.
   (C)   The Groundwater Appeals Committee shall also hear petitions to exempt
a facility from the requirements of §§ 58.020 et seq. of this chapter as
follows:
      (1)   The applicant may demonstrate that the five-year capture zone area
(s) map incorrectly identifies the facility as being within the groundwater
protection overlay zone(s). The burden of proof shall rest upon the applicant
to demonstrate that the facility location is not within a delineated five-year
capture zone area. The applicant shall be required to present detailed
hydrogeologic and hydrologic information to the Groundwater Appeals Committee
that the facility location is, in fact, not within a five-year capture zone
area.
      (2)   The applicant may be required to present detailed technical
information that a material(s) on the regulated substances list does not
endanger the GWPA in the event of an unauthorized release. To continue the
permit appeal process, the applicant shall provide funds to the Groundwater
Appeals Committee to pay for the technical review by the Groundwater Appeals
Committee’s choice of consultant(s) of said hydrogeologic and hydrologic
information and/or regulated substance information and shall base its
recommendation, in part, on the report by said consultant(s).
   (D)   Procedures.
      (1)   Filing of appeals. Appeals to the Groundwater Appeals Committee
take place by filing an appeal in writing with the Village Clerk within 14 days
after receipt of a decision in writing from the Director of Public Works.
      (2)   Filing for exemption.
         (a)   Petitions to the Groundwater Appeals Committee to exempt a
facility should also be filed with the Village Clerk.
         (b)   A hearing with the Committee will be held within 30 days of
submission of the filing for an appeal or petition. A decision by the Committee
will be made in writing within 30 days of the hearing.
(Ord. 99-18, passed 6-7-1999)
§ 58.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   A violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute
a misdemeanor and a nuisance. It shall be a separate offense for each and every
day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of
this chapter is committed, continued, or permitted.
   (B)   Any owner or operator who violates any provisions of this chapter
shall be subject, upon conviction in court, to a fine not to exceed $1,000 per
day per facility.
   (C)   In addition to any fines and penalties set forth above, the owner or
operator shall reimburse the village for all costs incurred as a result of
responding to, containing, cleaning up, or monitoring the cleaning up and
disposal of any spilled or leaked regulated substance, including but not
limited to consultant, Village Fire Inspector, engineering, and legal fees.
(Ord. 99-18, passed 6-7-1999)
APPENDIX A: REGULATED SUBSTANCES LIST
   EXHIBIT 1
   REGULATED SUBSTANCES LIST
Acid and basic cleaning solutions
Antifreeze and coolants
Arsenic and arsenic compounds
Bleaches, peroxides
Brake and transmission fluids
Brine solution
Casting and foundry chemicals
Caulking agents and sealants
Cleaning solvents
Corrosion and rust prevention solutions
Cutting fluids
Degreasing solvents
Disinfectants
Electroplating solutions
Explosives
Fire extinguishing chemicals
Food processing wastes
Formaldehyde
Fuels and additives
Gasolines
Glues, adhesives and resins
Greases
Hydraulic fluid
Indicators
Industrial and commercial janitorial supplies
Industrial sludges and stillbottoms
Inks, printing and photocopying chemicals
Laboratory chemicals
Liquid storage batteries
Medical, pharmaceutical, dental, veterinary, and hospital solutions
Mercury and mercury compounds
Metals finishing solutions
Oils
Paints, primers, thinners, dyes, stains, wood preservatives, varnishing and
cleaning compounds
Painting solvents
PCB’s
Plastic resins, plasticizers and catalysts
Photo development chemicals
Poisons
Polishes
Pool chemicals in concentrated form
Processed dust and particulates
Radioactive sources
Reagents and standards
Refrigerants
Roofing chemicals and sealers
Sanitizers, disinfectants, bactericides and algaecides
Soaps, detergents and surfactants
Solders and fluxes
APPENDIX B: GROUNDWATER PROTECTION PROGRAM OPERATING PERMIT REQUEST FORM
VILLAGE OF EAST DUNDEE
GROUNDWATER PROTECTION PROGRAM
OPERATING PERMIT REQUEST
Company:           Facility Name:
                   
Street Address, City, State and Zip Code:
 
Telephone Number:  24 Hour Telephone Number:
 
Facility Contact:  Work Phone Number:
 
Emergency Contact: Work Phone Number: Home Phone Number:
 
Changes to Business Activities or Processes since Development Permit Issued:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Property Owner’s Name:              Telephone Number:
 
Property Owner’s Street Address, City, State and Zip Code:
 
Certification of Company Official:
I certify all information and data contained in this Operating Permit Request
Form are True and Correct to the best of my knowledge.
Signature:         Date:              Telephone Number:
 
Printed Name:      Title:
 
 
(Ord. 99-18, passed 6-7-1999)
CHAPTER 59: SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES
Section
   
59.01   Purpose
   
59.02   Interaction with other code provisions and laws
   
59.03   Definitions
   
59.04   Zoning
   
59.05   Permits; application process
   
59.06   Construction
   
59.07   Permit duration
   
59.08   Height limitations
   
59.09   General requirements
   
59.10   Stealth, concealment and design standards
   
59.11   Reservation of village utility pole space
   
59.12   Applicability of existing agreements
   
59.13   Collocation on village owned infrastructure
   
59.14   Notice of sale or transfer
   
59.15   Abandonment
   
59.16   Dispute resolution
   
59.17   Indemnification
   
59.18   Insurance
   
59.19   Maintenance of small wireless facilities
   
59.20   Revocation of permit
   
59.21   Exceptions to applicability
§ 59.01 PURPOSE.
   Consistent with the requirements of the Small Wireless Facilities Deployment
Act (Public Act § 100-585), and in anticipation of a continued increased demand
for placement of small wireless facilities of the type regulated by the act
both within the public rights-of-way and in other locations within the
jurisdiction of the village, the Village Board has found it to be in the best
interests of the public health, safety and general welfare of the village to
adopt the code amendments set forth in this chapter in order to establish
generally applicable standards for the design, permitting, location,
construction, deployment, regulation, operation, maintenance, repair and
removal of such small wireless facilities both within the public rights-of-way
and in other locations within the jurisdiction of the village so as to, among
other things:
   (A)   Prevent interference with the facilities and operations of the
village's utilities and of other utilities lawfully located both within public
rights-of-way and in other locations within the jurisdiction of the village;
   (B)   Preserve the character of the neighborhoods in which such small
wireless facilities are installed;
   (C)   Minimize any adverse visual impact of small wireless facilities and
prevent visual blight in the neighborhoods in which such facilities are
installed;
   (D)   Ensure the continued safe use and enjoyment of private properties
adjacent to small wireless facilities;
   (E)   Provide appropriate aesthetic protections to any designated historic
landmarks or districts within the village; and
   (F)   Ensure that the placement of small wireless facilities does not
negatively impact public safety and the village's public safety technology.
(Ord. 18-18, passed 7-16-2018)
§ 59.02 INTERACTION WITH OTHER CODE PROVISIONS AND LAWS.
   (A)   Other code provisions. The provisions of this chapter are intended to
supplement general requirements and standards relative to the siting of
telecommunication facilities and generally applicable requirements for
construction within public rights-of-way set forth elsewhere within this code,
including but not limited to the regulations set forth in
Chapter 54,
Chapter 115, and
Chapter 157 of this code. In the event of a conflict, however, the provisions
of this chapter shall control in all matters involving small wireless
facilities, as defined below.
   (B)   State and federal laws. In the event that applicable federal or state
laws or regulations conflict with the requirements of this chapter, a wireless
provider shall comply with the requirements of this chapter to the maximum
extent possible without violating such federal or state laws or regulations.
(Ord. 18-18, passed 7-16-2018)
§ 59.03 DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
   ACT. The Small Wireless Facilities Deployment Act (Public Act § 100-585).
   ANTENNA. Communications equipment that transmits or receives electromagnetic
radio frequency signals used in the provision of wireless services.
   APPLICABLE CODES. Means uniform building, fire, electrical, plumbing, or
mechanical codes adopted by a recognized national code organization or local
amendments to those codes, including the National Electric Safety Code.
   APPLICANT. Any person who submits an application and is a wireless provider.
   APPLICATION. A request submitted by an applicant to the village for a permit
to collocate small wireless facilities, and a request that includes the
installation of a new utility pole for such collocation, as well as any
applicable fee for the review of such application.
   AUTHORITY. The village or other unit of local government that has
jurisdiction and control for use of public rights-of-way as provided by the
Illinois Highway Code for placements within public rights-of-way or has zoning
or land use control for placements not within public rights-of-way.
   COLLOCATE or COLLOCATION. To install, mount, maintain, modify, operate, or
replace wireless facilities on or adjacent to a wireless support structure or
utility pole, whether existing or new.
   COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE. Cable service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 522(6), as
amended; information service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153(24), as amended;
telecommunications service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153(53), as amended; mobile
service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153(33), as amended; or wireless service other
than mobile service.
   COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE PROVIDER. A cable operator, as defined in 47 U.S.C.
522(5), as amended; a provider of information service, as defined in 47 U.S.C.
153(24), as amended; a telecommunications carrier, as defined in 47 U.S.C.153
(51), as amended; or a wireless provider.
   FCC. The Federal Communications Commission of the United States.
   FEE. A one-time charge.
   HISTORIC DISTRICT or HISTORIC LANDMARK. A building, property, or site, or
group of buildings, properties, or sites that are either: (i) listed in the
National Register of Historic Places or formally determined eligible for
listing by the Keeper of the National Register, the individual who has been
delegated the authority by the federal agency to list properties and determine
their eligibility for the National Register, in accordance with Section
VI.D.1.a.i through Section VI.D.1.a.v of the Nationwide Programmatic Agreement
codified at 47 CFR Part 1, Appendix C; or (ii) designated as a locally
landmarked building, property, site, or historic district by an ordinance
adopted by the village pursuant to a preservation program that meets the
requirements of the Certified Local Government Program of the Illinois State
Historic Preservation Office or where such certification of the preservation
program by the Illinois State Historic Preservation Office is pending.
   LAW. A federal or state statute, common law, code, rule, regulation, order,
or local ordinance or resolution.
   MICRO WIRELESS FACILITY. A small wireless facility that is not larger in
dimension than 24 inches in length, 15 inches in width, and 12 inches in height
and that has an exterior antenna, if any, no longer than 11 inches.
   PERMIT. A written authorization required by the village or other permitting
authority to perform an action or initiate, continue, or complete a project.
   PERSON. An individual, corporation, limited liability company, partnership,
association, trust, or other entity or organization, including an authority.
   PUBLIC SAFETY AGENCY. The functional division of the federal government, the
state, a unit of local government, or a special purpose district located in
whole or in part within this state, that provides or has authority to provide
firefighting, police, ambulance, medical, or other emergency services to
respond to and manage emergency incidents.
   PUBLIC UTILITY. Shall have the same meaning as set forth in § 3-105 of the
Public Utilities Act, ILCS Chapter 220, Act 5, § 3-105.
   RATE. A recurring charge.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. The area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway,
street, public sidewalk, alley, or utility easement dedicated for compatible
use. RIGHT-OF-WAY does not include authority-owned aerial lines.
   SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY. A wireless facility that meets both of the
following qualifications: (i) each antenna is located inside an enclosure of no
more than six cubic feet in volume or, in the case of an antenna that has
exposed elements, the antenna and all of its exposed elements could fit within
an imaginary enclosure of no more than six cubic feet; and (ii) all other
wireless equipment attached directly to a utility pole associated with the
facility is cumulatively no more than 25 cubic feet in volume. The following
types of associated ancillary equipment are not included in the calculation of
equipment volume: electric meter, concealment elements, telecommunications
demarcation box, ground-based enclosures, grounding equipment, power transfer
switch, cut-off switch, and vertical cable runs for the connection of power and
other services.
   STRUCTURAL ENGINEER. A person licensed under the laws of the State of
Illinois to practice structural engineering.
   UTILITY POLE. A pole or similar structure that is used in whole or in part
by a communications service provider or for electric distribution, lighting,
traffic control, or a similar function.
   VILLAGE. The Village of East Dundee.
   VILLAGE UTILITY POLE. A utility pole owned or operated by the village in
public rights-of-way.
   WIRELESS FACILITY. Equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless
communications between user equipment and a communications network, including:
(i) equipment associated with wireless communications; and (ii) radio
transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup power
supplies, and comparable equipment, regardless of technological configuration.
WIRELESS FACILITY includes small wireless facilities. WIRELESS FACILITY does
not include: (i) the structure or improvements on, under, or within which the
equipment is collocated; or (ii) wireline backhaul facilities, coaxial or fiber
optic cable that is between wireless support structures or utility poles or
coaxial, or fiber optic cable that is otherwise not immediately adjacent to or
directly associated with an antenna.
   WIRELESS INFRASTRUCTURE PROVIDER. Any person authorized to provide
telecommunications service in the state that builds or installs wireless
communication transmission equipment, wireless facilities, wireless support
structures, or utility poles and that is not a wireless services provider but
is acting as an agent or a contractor for a wireless services provider for the
application submitted to the village.
   WIRELESS PROVIDER. A wireless infrastructure provider and/or a wireless
services provider. This does not include, and expressly excludes, any person
who is providing service to or for a private niche market.
   WIRELESS SERVICES. Any services provided to the general public, including a
particular class of customers, and made available on a nondiscriminatory basis
using licensed or unlicensed spectrum, whether at a fixed location or mobile,
provided using wireless facilities.
   WIRELESS SERVICES PROVIDER. A person who provides wireless services.
   WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE. A freestanding structure, such as a monopole;
tower, either guyed or self-supporting; billboard; or other existing or
proposed structure designed to support or capable of supporting wireless
facilities. WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE does not include a utility pole.
(Ord. 18-18, passed 7-16-2018)
§ 59.04 ZONING.
   (A)   Small wireless facilities shall be classified as permitted uses and
shall not be subject to zoning review, if collocated in rights-of-way in any
zoning district, or outside rights-of-way in the following zoning districts:
      (1)   B-4, automotive service district;
      (2)   M-1, limited manufacturing; and
      (3)   M-2, limited manufacturing.
   (B)   In all other zoning districts, the village's normal zoning approvals,
processes and restrictions shall apply, if zoning approval, processes or
restrictions are required by the village's zoning ordinance.
(Ord. 18-18, passed 7-16-2018)
§ 59.05 PERMITS; APPLICATION PROCESS.
   Unless otherwise specifically exempted in this chapter, a permit to
collocate a small wireless facility within the village is required in all
cases. Permits are subject to the following:
   (A)   Permit applications. Permit applications for the collocation of small
wireless facilities shall be made on a form provided by the village for such
purpose. In addition to any generally applicable information required of other
communications service providers or for other installations in the public
right-of-way, applicants must, when requesting to collocate small wireless
facilities on a utility pole or wireless support structure, provide the
following information:
      (1)   Site specific structural integrity and, for a village utility pole,
make-ready analysis prepared by a structural engineer, as that term is defined
in § 4 of the Structural Engineering Practice Act of 1989;
      (2)   The location where each proposed small wireless facility or utility
pole would be installed and digital photographs of the location and its
immediate surroundings depicting the utility poles or structures on which each
proposed small wireless facility would be mounted or location where utility
poles or structures would be installed. The photographs shall include a digital
photo simulation of the proposed location providing "before and after" views
demonstrating the true visual impact of the proposed wireless facilities on the
surrounding environment;
      (3)   Specifications and drawings prepared by a structural engineer, as
that term is defined in § 4 of the Structural Engineering Practice Act of 1989,
for each proposed small wireless facility covered by the application as it is
proposed to be installed;
      (4)   The equipment type and model numbers for the antennas and all other
equipment associated with the small wireless facility;
      (5)   A proposed schedule for the installation and completion of each
small wireless facility covered by the application, if approved;
      (6)   Certification that, to the best of the applicant's knowledge, the
collocation complies with the written design standards established by the
village, and with the various other requirements set forth in this chapter and
code;
      (7)   Copies of all licenses, permits and approvals required by or from
the village (i.e. zoning approval, where required), other agencies and units of
government with jurisdiction over the design, construction, location and
operation of said small wireless facility. The applicant shall maintain such
licenses, permits and approvals in full force and effect and provide evidence
of renewal or extension thereof when granted; and
      (8)   In the event the small wireless facility is proposed to be attached
to an existing utility pole or wireless support structure owned by an entity
other than the village, legally competent evidence of the consent of the owner
of such pole or wireless support structure to the proposed collocation.
   (B)   Means of submission. Permit applications, along with all supporting
information, for the collocation of small wireless facilities shall be
submitted by personal delivery or by other means approved by the village.
   (C)   Multiple applications for same location. Multiple applications for
collocation on the same utility pole or wireless support structure shall be
processed based on a first fully complete application, first-served basis.
   (D)   Permit application fees. All applications for collocation of small
wireless facilities shall be accompanied by a non-refundable application fee in
the amounts set forth in §
37.01 of the code.
   (E)   Permit review timelines:
      (1)   (a)   Completeness of application. Requests for the collocation of
small wireless facilities shall be reviewed for conformance with the
requirements of the act, this chapter, and other applicable provisions of this
code. Within 30 days after receiving an application, the village must determine
whether the application is complete and notify the applicant. If an application
is incomplete, the village must specifically identify the missing information.
Processing deadlines are tolled from the time the village sends a notice of
incompleteness to the time the applicant provides the missing information.
         (b)   An application shall be deemed complete if the village fails to
provide notification to the applicant within 30 days of the date when all
documents, information, and fees specifically enumerated in the village's
permit application form are submitted by the applicant to the village.
      (2)   Existing pole or wireless support structure. Requests for the
collocation of small wireless facilities on an existing utility pole or
wireless support structure shall be processed on a nondiscriminatory basis and
either approved or denied within 90 days of submission of a completed
application. A permit application shall be deemed approved if the village fails
to approve or deny the application within 90 days, subject to the following: if
an applicant intends to proceed with the permitted activity on a deemed
approved basis, the applicant shall notify the village in writing of its
intention to invoke the deemed approved remedy no sooner than 75 days after the
submission of a completed application. The permit shall be deemed approved on
the later of the 90th day after submission of the completed application, or the
tenth day after receipt of the deemed approved notice by the village. Receipt
of a deemed approved notice by the village shall not preclude the village from
denying the permit within the allowed time limit.
      (3)   New utility pole. Requests for the collocation of small wireless
facilities that include the installation of a new utility pole shall be
processed on a nondiscriminatory basis and either approved or denied within 120
days of submission of a completed application. A permit application shall be
deemed approved if the village fails to approve or deny the application within
120 days, subject to the following: if an applicant intends to proceed with the
permitted activity on a deemed approved basis, the applicant shall notify the
village in writing of its intention to invoke the deemed approved remedy no
sooner than 105 days after the submission of a completed application. The
permit shall be deemed approved on the later of the 120th day after submission
of the completed application, or the tenth day after receipt of the deemed
approved notice by the village. Receipt of a deemed approved notice by the
village shall not preclude the village from denying the permit within the
allowed time limit.
   (F)   Tolling. The time limitations for approval or denial of applications
shall be tolled by notice to an applicant that its application is incomplete as
set forth above, upon mutual agreement of the parties, or by a local, state or
federal disaster declaration or similar emergency that causes a delay.
   (G)   Pole replacement. Permit approval shall be conditioned on the
replacement of a utility pole or wireless support structure at the applicant's
sole cost where such replacement is deemed necessary for compliance with the
requirements of this chapter or code relative to the siting of small wireless
facilities, or other applicable codes and regulations that concern public
safety.
   (H)   Denial. The village shall deny an application that does not meet the
requirements of this chapter. The reasons for any denial of a permit shall be
provided in a written notice of denial sent to the applicant, and shall include
the specific code provisions or application conditions on which the denial is
based.
   (I)   Resubmittal after denial. In the case of a permit denial, an applicant
may cure the deficiencies identified in the notice of denial and resubmit a
revised application once within 30 days after the notice of denial is sent
without payment of an additional application fee. The village shall have 30
days to approve or deny the resubmitted application or it is deemed approved,
if the applicant has notified the village of its intention to proceed with the
permitted activity on a deemed approved basis, which notification may be
submitted with the resubmitted application. Review of a resubmitted application
is limited to the deficiencies cited in the original notice of denial. This
division does not apply if a revised application is not resubmitted within 30
days, or curing any deficiencies in the original application requires review of
a new location, new or different structure for collocation, new antennas, or
other wireless equipment associated with the small wireless facility. In such
cases, a new application and application fee are required.
   (J)   Consolidated applications. Consolidated applications for small
wireless facilities for the collocation of up to 25 small wireless facilities
shall be allowed if the collocations each involve substantially the same type
of small wireless facility and substantially the same type of structure. Each
consolidated application shall provide all the information required by this
chapter for each small wireless facility at each location. If such an
application includes incomplete information for one or more small wireless
facility collocations, or includes requests for small wireless facilities that
do not qualify for consolidated treatment, or that are otherwise denied, the
village may remove such collocation requests from the application and treat
them as separate requests. Separate permits may be issued for each collocation
approved in a consolidated application.
   (K)   Alternate locations. If an applicant is seeking to install a new
utility pole as part of its application, the village may propose that the small
wireless facility be located on an existing utility pole or existing wireless
support structure within 100 feet of the proposed collocation. The applicant
shall accept the proposed alternate location so long as it has the right to use
the location on reasonable terms and conditions, unless the alternate location
imposes technical limits or additional material costs as determined by the
applicant. If the applicant refuses an alternate location based on the
foregoing, the applicant shall provide legally competent evidence in the form
of a written certification, under oath, describing the property rights,
technical limits or material cost reasons that prevent the alternate location
from being utilized.
   (L)   Exemptions. 
      (1)   No application, permit approval or fee shall be required from a
communications service provider authorized to occupy the right-of-way when the
work in question is for:
         (a)   Routine maintenance not requiring replacement of wireless
facilities if the wireless provider notifies the village in writing at least 48
hours prior to the planned maintenance;
         (b)   The replacement of wireless facilities with wireless facilities
that are substantially similar, the same size, or smaller if the wireless
provider notifies the village in writing at least ten days prior to the planned
replacement and includes equipment specifications, including: (i) equipment
type and model numbers, for the replacement of equipment consistent with the
equipment specifications information required on a permit application for
original installation; and (ii) information sufficient to establish that the
replacement is substantially similar. The wireless provider shall provide all
information necessary and requested by the village to establish that the
replacement is substantially similar. The village has the sole right and
responsibility to determine if a proposed small wireless facility is
substantially similar to the existing small wireless facility; or
         (c)   The installation, placement, maintenance, operation or
replacement of micro wireless facilities that are suspended on cables that are
strung between existing utility poles in compliance with applicable safety
codes.
      (2)   The foregoing shall not exempt communications service providers
from village permitting requirements where traffic patterns are affected or
lane closures are required.
(Ord. 18-18, passed 7-16-2018)
§ 59.06 CONSTRUCTION.
   Collocations for which permits are approved shall be completed within 180
days of issuance of the permit, unless the village agrees to extend the period
or a delay is caused by make-ready work for a village utility pole or by the
lack of commercial power or backhaul availability at the site, provided the
applicant has made a timely request within 60 days after the issuance of the
permit for commercial power or backhaul services, and the additional time to
complete installation does not exceed 360 days after issuance of the permit.
Permits that are not completed within applicable timelines shall be void absent
an extension granted in writing by the village.
(Ord. 18-18, passed 7-16-2018)
§ 59.07 PERMIT DURATION.
   Permits issued for small wireless facilities pursuant to this chapter shall
be for a period of five years. Permits are subject to renewal at the end of the
five year permit period for a successive five year term so long as the
installation complies with the applicable code provisions in force at the time
of renewal. A finding by the village at the time of a request for renewal that
an installation does not comply with the applicable code provisions in force at
the time of the renewal request shall be in writing. If the act is repealed or
found unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, all permits
granted by the village under this chapter shall terminate at the end of their
current term.
(Ord. 18-18, passed 7-16-2018)
§ 59.08 HEIGHT LIMITATIONS.
   (A)   Antenna installations. The maximum permitted height of a small
wireless facility is ten feet above the utility pole or wireless support
structure on which the small wireless facility is collocated.
   (B)   New poles. The maximum permitted height of new or replacement utility
pole or wireless support structure on which a small wireless facility is
collocated is the higher of:
      (1)   Ten feet in height above the tallest existing utility pole, other
than a utility pole supporting only wireless facilities, that is in place on
the date the application is submitted, and that is located within 300 feet of
the new or replacement utility pole or wireless support structure and that is
in the same right-of-way within the village. The village may designate which
intersecting right-of-way within 300 feet of the proposed utility pole or
wireless support structures shall control the height limitation for such
facility; or
      (2)   Forty-five feet above ground level.
   (C)   Waiver process. A wireless provider may receive a waiver from the
maximum permitted height of a new pole set forth in this section, if the
wireless provider receives a variation as set forth in §
157.207 of the code. In addition to meeting the variation standards of §
157.207 of the code, the wireless provider shall also establish that:
      (1)   Because of a particular unusual condition, a particular hardship or
practical difficulty to the wireless provider would result, as distinguished
from a mere inconvenience, and such hardship or difficulty has not been created
by the wireless provider;
      (2)   Existing utility poles or wireless support structures, or a new
utility pole at the maximum permitted height for a new pole allowed by this
section cannot accommodate the wireless facility at a height necessary to
function effectively, under reasonable terms and conditions; and
      (3)   The use of existing utility poles or other wireless support
structures, or a new utility pole at the maximum permitted height for a new
pole allowed by this section, is not technically feasible.
(Ord. 18-18, passed 7-16-2018)
§ 59.09 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Public safety technology. A wireless provider's operation of a small
wireless facility may not interfere with the frequencies used by a public
safety agency for public safety communications. A wireless provider must
install small wireless facilities of the type and frequency that will not cause
unacceptable interference with a public safety agency's communications
equipment. Unacceptable interference is determined by and measured in
accordance with industry standards and the FCC's regulations addressing
unacceptable interference to public safety spectrum or any other spectrum
licenses by a public safety agency. If a small wireless facility causes such
interference, and the wireless provider has been given written notice of the
interference by the public safety agency, the wireless provider, at its own
expense, shall take all reasonable steps necessary to correct and eliminate the
interference, including, but not limited to, powering down the small wireless
facility and later powering up the small wireless facility for intermittent
testing, if necessary. The village may terminate a permit for a small wireless
facility based on such interference if the wireless provider is not making a
good faith effort to remedy the problem in a manner consistent with the
abatement and resolution procedures for interference with public safety
spectrum established by the FCC, including 47 CFR 22.970 through 47 CFR 22.973
and 47 CFR 90.672 through 47 CFR 90.675. The burden to establish the good faith
effort shall be on the wireless provider, which shall timely deliver to the
village all information necessary to demonstrate its efforts to resolve the
interference consistent with the Code of Federal Regulations sections cited
above. Failure to remedy the interference as required herein shall constitute a
public nuisance and the small wireless facility may be abated through the
procedures for abatement of such nuisances set forth in this code.
   (B)   A wireless provider shall not construct or maintain any wireless
facility that:
      (1)   Obstructs, impedes or hinders the usual travel or public safety on
a right-of-way;
      (2)   Obstructs the legal use of right-of-way by utility users;
      (3)   Violates nondiscriminatory applicable codes;
      (4)   Violates or conflicts with
Chapter 54 (Construction of Utilities in the Right-of-Way),
Chapter 115 (Telecommunications), or
Chapter 157 (zoning) or other applicable regulations set forth in this code or
otherwise adopted by the village, except to the extent such chapters, sections
or regulations may be modified by the provisions of this chapter; or
      (5)   Violates the federal Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (42
U.S.C. § 12101 et seq.)
   (C)   Contractual requirements. Wireless providers shall comply with all
requirements imposed by a contract between the village and any private property
owner that concern design or construction standards applicable to utility poles
and ground-mounted equipment located in the right-of-way.
   (D)   Ground-mounted equipment. Wireless providers shall comply with the
ground mounted equipment spacing requirements within rights-of-way as set forth
in
Chapter 54  of this code and in the village's design standards.
   (E)   Undergrounding.
      (1)   The village has an established policy of undergrounding, and has
already initiated and established areas of the village for undergrounding. The
wireless provider shall comply with village code provisions, policies, or
regulations concerning undergrounding requirements, if any, that prohibit the
installation of new or the modification of existing utility poles or equipment
in the right-of-way.
      (2)   A wireless provider may receive a waiver to allow wireless
facilities to be located above ground in an area where village ordinances or
regulations prohibit or restrict above ground facilities, if the wireless
provider receives a variation as set forth in §
157.207 of the code. In addition to meeting the variation standards of §
157.207 of the code the wireless provider shall establish that:
         (a)   Underground equipment is not technically feasible and there is
no reasonable alternative or location that is more aesthetically favorable to
adjacent property owners and to effective use and management of the right-of-
way;
         (b)   An above ground wireless facility at the proposed location is
necessary at the proposed location to provide coverage in a specified area;
         (c)   An above ground wireless facility at the proposed location will
not disrupt traffic or pedestrian circulation or constitute a safety hazard;
         (d)   An above ground wireless facility at the proposed location will
not interfere with public safety uses or frequencies;
         (e)   Space exists within the public right-of-way to accommodate the
above ground wireless facility at the proposed location;
         (f)   An above ground wireless facility at the proposed location will
not create a safety hazard;
         (g)   The above ground wireless facility is located and designed in
such a way so as to minimize its visual impact on adjacent properties; and
         (h)   In any historical area, that the above ground wireless facility
will not detrimentally affect the historical nature of the area.
      (3)   Screening for ground mounted facilities. Where a ground-mounted
facility is allowed, such equipment shall be screened around the perimeter in
accordance with a landscape plan sealed by a professional landscape engineer.
Plant materials shall include a mixture of deciduous and coniferous planting
materials. The owner or wireless provider shall be responsible for maintenance
of all landscaping as provided in the approved landscape plan.
      (4)   Future undergrounding. The village may, from time to time, make a
decision to eliminate above-ground utility poles of a particular type
generally, such as electric utility poles, in all or a significant portion of
the village. In the event that such a utility pole has a collocated small
wireless facility in place at the time of such a decision, the village shall
either:
         (a)   Continue to maintain the utility pole, or install and maintain a
reasonable utility pole or wireless support structure for the collocation of
the small wireless facility; or
         (b)   Offer to sell the utility pole to the wireless provider at a
reasonable cost, or allow the wireless provider to install its own utility pole
so it can maintain service from that location.
   (F)   Collocation limits.
      (1)   Wireless providers shall not collocate small wireless facilities on
village utility poles that are part of an electric distribution or transmission
system within the communication worker safety zone of the pole or the electric
supply zone of the pole.
      (2)   However, the antenna and support equipment of the small wireless
facility may be located in the communications space on the village utility pole
and on the top of the pole, if not otherwise unavailable, if the wireless
provider complies with applicable codes for work involving the top of the pole.
      (3)   For purposes of this division, the terms "communications space,"
"communication worker safety zone," and "electric supply zone" have the
meanings given to those terms in the National Electric Safety Code as published
by the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers.
   (G)   Code compliance. Wireless providers shall comply with applicable codes
and local code provisions or regulations that concern public safety.
   (H)   In the event the village, in its reasonable discretion, deems it
necessary to remove, relocate or replace a utility pole or wireless support
structure, the village shall notify wireless provider at least 180 days prior
of the need to remove or relocate its small wireless facility. In such event,
the village shall provide options for alternative locations for the wireless
provider's relocation of equipment which shall be in a mutually agreeable
location ("Alternative Premises"). The wireless provider shall be solely
responsible for all costs related to the relocation of its small wireless
facility to the alternative premises. In the event that a suitable alternative
premises cannot be identified, the wireless provider may terminate the
applicable permit. In the event of an emergency, the village must provide as
much notice as reasonably practical under the circumstances.
(Ord. 18-18, passed 7-16-2018)
§ 59.10 STEALTH, CONCEALMENT AND DESIGN STANDARDS.
   Every wireless facility installation shall comply with the following
standards:
   (A)   General stealth, concealment and design standards. Installations shall
comply with any stealth, concealment, design and aesthetic standards applicable
to utility installations in the public right-of-way, as set forth in
Chapter 54 of this code, as well as any written design standards that are
generally applicable for decorative utility poles, or reasonable stealth,
concealment, design and aesthetic requirements that are otherwise identified by
the village in an ordinance, written policy adopted by the Village Board of
Trustees, in the village's comprehensive plan, or in a written design plan that
applies to other occupiers of the rights-of-way, including on a historic
landmark or in a historic district.
   (B)   Historic districts and landmarks. For areas designated as historic
districts, or on buildings or structures designated as historic landmarks
pursuant to
Chapter 153 of this code, in addition to the stealth, concealment and design
requirements referenced above, the following additional restrictions/conditions
apply to the installation of small wireless facilities:
      (1)   Small wireless facilities shall be comprised of materials that are
consistent with the surrounding elements so as to blend architecturally with
any buildings or structures designated as historic landmarks or located within
a designated historic district, and shall be designed to blend with the
surrounding historical landmarks and/or district in design and color.
      (2)   Small wireless facilities shall not be mounted upon signage,
including gateway signs, bike path signage, and electronic message board, any
publicly owned buildings, including but not limited to the depot and the
caboose, flagpoles, and decorative light poles.
      (3)   Small wireless facilities shall not be located in the right-of-way
adjacent to the bike path.
      (4)   Receive a certificate of appropriateness from the Historic
Commission, as set forth in
Chapter 153 of this code.
   (C)   Historic district or landmark limitations.
      (1)   Any stealth, concealment and design standards in a historic
district or on a historic landmark, including restrictions on a specific
category of utility poles, may not have the effect of prohibiting any
provider's technology. Such stealth, concealment and design measures shall not
be considered a part of the small wireless facility for purposes of the size
restrictions of a small wireless facility.
      (2)   This section shall not be construed to limit the village's
enforcement of historic preservation in conformance with the requirements
adopted pursuant to the Illinois State Agency Historic Resources Preservation
Act or the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966, 54 U.S.C. § 300101 et
seq., and the regulations adopted to implement those laws.
(Ord. 18-18, passed 7-16-2018)
§ 59.11 RESERVATION OF VILLAGE UTILITY POLE SPACE.
   The village may reserve space on village-owned utility poles for future
public safety uses or for village electric utility uses. Such reservation may
preclude collocation of small wireless facilities if the village reasonably
determines that the village's utility pole cannot accommodate both uses.
(Ord. 18-18, passed 7-16-2018)
§ 59.12 APPLICABILITY OF EXISTING AGREEMENTS.
   (A)   Existing installations. Subject to any applicable termination
provisions, where an existing agreement is in place between the village and a
wireless provider relating to the collocation of small wireless facilities on
village utility poles on June 1, 2018, such agreement shall remain in effect
for all small wireless facilities collocated on the village's utility poles
pursuant to applications submitted prior to June 1, 2018.
   (B)   Applications received between June 1, 2018 and June 1, 2020. Subject
to any applicable termination provisions, where an existing agreement is in
place between the village and a wireless provider relating to the collocation
of small wireless facilities on village utility poles on June 1, 2018, such
agreement shall remain in effect for all small wireless facilities collocated
on the village's utility poles pursuant to applications submitted after June 1,
2018, but prior to June 1, 2020, until June 1, 2020 or receipt by the village
from the wireless provider of a notice that it is opting to accept the rates,
fees and terms of this chapter and the act received after June 1, 2020,
whichever is later.
   (C)   Applications received after June 1, 2020. Subject to any applicable
termination provisions, where an existing agreement is in place between the
village and a wireless provider relating to the collocation of small wireless
facilities on village utility poles on June 1, 2018, such agreement shall
remain in effect for all small wireless facilities collocated on the village's
utility poles pursuant to applications submitted after June 1, 2020, until
receipt by the village of a notice from the wireless provider that it is
accepting the rates, fees, terms and conditions of this chapter.
(Ord. 18-18, passed 7-16-2018)
§ 59.13 COLLOCATION ON VILLAGE OWNED INFRASTRUCTURE.
   (A)   Fee. The annual fee to collocate a small wireless facility on a
village-owned utility pole located in a right-of-way shall be the higher of:
      (1)   $200/year per small wireless facility; or
      (2)   The actual, direct, and reasonable costs related to the wireless
providers use of space on the pole.
   (B)   Exception. Small wireless facilities collocated on village-owned
utility poles located outside of public right-of-way are not subject to the
rate limitations in this section.
   (C)   Attachment agreement. An attachment agreement in a form approved by
the village is required for any collocation upon any village owned utility pole
or wireless support structure.
(Ord. 18-18, passed 7-16-2018)
§ 59.14 NOTICE OF SALE OR TRANSFER.
   A wireless provider shall, prior to any sale or transfer of ownership or
control of a small wireless facility located within the jurisdiction of the
village, provide written notice to the village of such sale or transfer of
control. Such notice shall include the name and contact information of the new
wireless provider.
(Ord. 18-18, passed 7-16-2018)
§ 59.15 ABANDONMENT.
   (A)   A small wireless facility that is not operated for a continuous period
of 12 months shall be considered abandoned and the owner of the facility shall
remove the small wireless facility within 90 days after receipt of written
notice from the village notifying it of the abandonment. The notice shall be
sent by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, by the village
to the owner at its last known address. If the small wireless facility is not
removed within 90 days after receipt of such notice, such wireless facility
shall be deemed to be a nuisance and the village may remove or cause the
removal of such facility, and recover or place a lien for its costs, pursuant
to the terms of its pole attachment or other agreement for village utility
poles or through the procedures for abatement of nuisances set forth in this
code.
   (B)   In the event the village suspects that the wireless provider is no
longer using the small wireless facilities to provide wireless service, it may
send the wireless provider written notice that requires the wireless provider
to remove the small wireless facility or provide proof that the small wireless
facility is operational and still being used within 30 days, and informs the
wireless provider that failure to provide proof or to remove the small wireless
facility will result in the village removing the small wireless facility at the
wireless provider's cost.
(Ord. 18-18, passed 7-16-2018)
§ 59.16 DISPUTE RESOLUTION.
   The Circuit Court of Kane shall have exclusive jurisdiction to resolve all
disputes arising under the act. Pending resolution of a dispute concerning
rates for collocation of small wireless facilities on village utility poles
within the right-of-way, the village shall allow the collocating person to
collocate on its poles at annual rates of no more than $200 per year per pole,
with rates to be determined upon final resolution of the dispute.
(Ord. 18-18, passed 7-16-2018)
§ 59.17 INDEMNIFICATION.
   Other than for liabilities and losses due to or caused by the sole
negligence of the village or its employees or agents, a wireless provider shall
indemnify and hold the village harmless against any and all liability or loss
from personal injury or property damage resulting from or arising out of, in
whole or in part, the use or occupancy of the village infrastructure or
improvements, or right-of-way associated with such infrastructure or
improvements by the wireless provider or its employees, agents, or contractors
arising out of the rights and privileges granted under this chapter and the
act. A wireless provider proceeding under this chapter waives any claims it may
have against the village with respect to consequential, incidental, or special
damages, however caused, based on the theory of liability.
(Ord. 18-18, passed 7-16-2018)
§ 59.18 INSURANCE.
   At all times during the period in which a wireless provider's facilities are
located on village infrastructure, improvements or in right-of-way, the
wireless provider shall, at its own sole cost and expense, carry the following
insurance coverages:
   (A)   Property insurance for its property's replacement cost against all
risks;
   (B)   Workers' compensation insurance within statutory limits as required by
law; and
   (C)   (1)   Commercial general liability insurance with respect to its
activities on the village infrastructure, improvements or rights-of-way,
including coverage for bodily injury and property damage, with limits not less
than:
         (a)   Five million dollars for bodily injury or death to each person;
         (b)   Five million dollars for property damage resulting from any one
accident; and
         (c)   Five million dollars for all other types of liability.
      (2)   The wireless provider shall include the village as an additional
insured on the commercial general liability policy and shall provide
certificates of insurance and proof of inclusion of the village in a commercial
general liability policy to the village prior to the collocation of any
wireless facility, and shall keep updated certificates and proof of inclusion
on file with the village at all times that the provider maintains small
wireless facilities within the village.
   (D)   A wireless provider may self-insure all or a portion of the insurance
coverage and limits required by the village. A wireless provider that self-
insures is not required, to the extent of the self-insurance, to comply with
the requirement that the village be named an additional insured. A wireless
provider that self-insures shall provide to the village evidence sufficient to
demonstrate its financial ability to self-insure the insurance limits required
by the village.
(Ord. 18-18, passed 7-16-2018)
§ 59.19 MAINTENANCE OF SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES.
   (A)   A wireless provider shall maintain all small wireless facilities
installed within the village in a condition that maintains the safety,
integrity and aesthetics of such facilities. Small wireless facilities shall
not appear to be unkempt. In the event of a failure to properly maintain such
facilities, the village shall notify the wireless provider, in writing, who
shall have 30 days to correct the identified maintenance violation. If not
corrected within such period, the village reserves the right to take such
action as it deems necessary, including revocation of the permit. Maintenance
and replacement of small wireless facilities shall be performed by the wireless
provider at the wireless provider's sole cost and expense.
   (B)   In the event of an emergency involving an imminent threat to life or
property, the village may take corrective action to eliminate such emergency at
the wireless provider's expense.
(Ord. 18-18, passed 7-16-2018)
§ 59.20 REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   (A)   A permit to collocate a wireless facility may be revoked for one or
more of the following reasons:
      (1)   The wireless provider obtained approval by means of fraud or made a
misrepresentation of a material fact with respect to the permit application, or
any required documentation or submittal.
      (2)   The wireless provider failed to construct the small wireless
facility in accordance with the approved plans.
      (3)   The wireless provider failed to comply within any material
condition of a permit issued.
      (4)   The wireless provider substantially expanded or altered the use or
the structure of the small wireless facility beyond what was requested in the
permit application or approved, without the approval of the village.
      (5)   The wireless provider failed to notify the village of the
replacement of small wireless facilities as required by this chapter.
      (6)   A substantial change of law has occurred affecting the wireless
provider's authority to occupy or use the property upon which the small
wireless facility is located.
      (7)   The small wireless facility interferes with vehicular or pedestrian
use of the public right-of- way.
      (8)   The wireless provider has failed to make a safe and timely
restoration of the right-of-way or the property upon which the small wireless
facility is located.
      (9)   The wireless provider has failed to properly maintain the wireless
facility as required by this chapter.
      (10)   The wireless provider has failed to abate interference with public
safety communications in a manner consistent with the abatement and resolution
procedures for interference with public safety spectrum established by the FCC
including 47 CFR 22.970 through 47 CFR 22.973 and 47 CFR 90.672 through 47 CFR
90.675.
      (11)   The small wireless facility has been abandoned and the wireless
provider has failed to remove the wireless facilities as provided in this
chapter.
   (B)   Written notification of the permit revocation shall be sent by
certified mail or shall be personally delivered to the wireless provider
setting forth the basis for the revocation. The wireless provider shall, within
14 days of the notice of revocation, file a written response with the Building
Inspector or his or her designee setting forth the reasons why the permit
should not be revoked along with such evidence in opposition to the revocation
as the wireless provider determines necessary. Failure to file a response with
the Building Inspector or his or her designee shall be deemed an admission of
the facts set forth in the notification of written notification and shall
result in automatic revocation of the permit. The Building Inspector or his or
her designee shall render findings and a decision within 21 days of the date of
receipt of the wireless provider's response, if any.
   (C)   If the Building Inspector or his or her designee revokes the permit,
the wireless provider may file a written notice of appeal with the Village
Clerk within 21 days of notification of the permit revocation. Such notice
shall contain a response to the decision of the Building Inspector or his or
her designee. The Village Board shall hear the revocation appeal and render a
decision on such appeal.
(Ord. 18-18, passed 7-16-2018)
§ 59.21 EXCEPTIONS TO APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   Nothing in this chapter authorizes the collocation of small wireless
facilities on:
      (1)   Property owned by a private party without the written consent of
the property owner;
      (2)   Property owned or controlled by a unit of local government that is
not located within rights-of-way without the written consent of the unit of
local government (local governments are, however, required to authorize the
collocation of small wireless facilities on utility poles owned or controlled
by the local government or located within rights-of-way to the same extent the
local government permits access to utility poles for other commercial projects
or uses);
      (3)   A privately-owned utility pole or wireless support structure,
without the consent of the property owner;
      (4)   Property owned, leased or controlled by a park district, forest
preserve district, or conservation district for public park, recreation or
conservation purposes, without the consent of the affected district, excluding
the placement of facilities on rights-of-way located in an affected district
that is under the jurisdiction and control of a different unit of local
government as provided by the Illinois Highway Code (ILCS Chapter 605, Act 5,
§§ 1-101 et seq.); or
      (5)   Property owned by a rail carrier registered under § 18c-7201 of the
Illinois Vehicle Code (ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 18c-7201), Metra Commuter
Rail or any other public commuter rail service, or an electric utility as
defined in § 16-102 of the Public Utilities Act (ILCS Chapter 220, Act 5, § 16-
102), without the consent of the rail carrier, public commuter rail service, or
electric utility;
   (B)   The provisions of this chapter do not apply to:
      (1)   Facilities of an electric or gas public utility or such utility's
wireless facilities if the facilities are being used, developed and maintained
consistent with the provisions of ILCS Chapter 220, Act 5, § 16-108.5(i) of the
Public Utilities Act; or
      (2)   Small wireless facilities owned by the village.
(Ord. 18-18, passed 7-16-2018)
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
Chapter
   
70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
   
71.   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
   
72.   PARKING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 70: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
70.01   State traffic laws adopted
   
70.02   Traffic-control device file created
   
70.03   Additions
   
70.04   Amendments
   
70.05   Parking violation fees
   
70.06   Motor driven cycles
   
70.07   Solicitation on roadways
   
70.08   Fourth Street residential parking
   
70.09   Motor trucks prohibited on North Street
   
70.10   Excessive idling
   
70.11   Motor truck restrictions
   
70.12   Vehicle weight restrictions on certain streets
   
70.13   Designated truck route
   
70.14   Vehicle length restrictions on certain streets
 
   
70.99   Penalty
§ 70.01 STATE TRAFFIC LAWS ADOPTED.
   (A)   The Illinois Vehicle Code, ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, with amendments
made thereto from time to time by the State Legislature is hereby adopted in
its entirety, and made a part of this chapter by reference, with amendments and
additions as made thereto by the Village Board, and shall be applicable in the
village.
   (B)   Any person who violates any provision of the Illinois Vehicle Code
within the village shall be subject to the penalty provided for violation of
this code.
(1981 Code, § 41.01) (Ord. 80-20, passed - -1980)
Statutory reference:
   Authority to adopt vehicle code by reference, ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, § 20-
204
§ 70.02 TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICE FILE CREATED.
   (A)   There is hereby created within the village a “Traffic-Control Device
File,” which shall be maintained and kept as a separate part from this code for
accessibility and simplicity.
   (B)   The file shall be kept in duplicate, the original to be kept in the
Police Department and a certified copy in the office of the Village Clerk.
   (C)   The file shall be a complete listing of all schedules of designated
streets in accordance with the provisions of ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, §§ 11-208
et seq. and in conjunction with Traffic Engineering Investigations and Studies,
where mandated.
(1981 Code, § 41.02) (Ord. 80-20, passed - -1980)
§ 70.03 ADDITIONS.
   The following additions are hereby made to the State Code.
   (A)   Chapter 1 - Definitions.
      70-1-290 LOADING ZONE. The space adjacent to a curb reserved for the
exclusive use of the loading or unloading of passengers or materials.
      70-1-291 PUBLIC BUILDING. A building used by the municipality the county,
any school district, the State of Illinois or the United Sates Government.
   (B)   Chapter 11, Article V - Driving While Intoxicated, Transporting
Alcoholic Liquor and Reckless Driving.
      70-11-590 NEGLIGENT DRIVING. It shall be unlawful for any reason to
operate any vehicle negligently, heedlessly or without due caution in a manner
as to endanger or be likely to endanger any person or property.
   (C)   Chapter 11, Article XIII - Stopping, Standing and Parking.
      70-11-1390 RESPONSIBILITY OF OWNER. The fact that a vehicle is registered
in a persons name shall be prima facie proof that the person was responsible
for any violation of any parking regulation of this chapter involving the
vehicle.
      70-11-1391 PARKING PENALTIES. Parking penalties to be determined annually
pursuant to the fee schedule as established by the Village Board.
   (D)   Chapter 11, Article XIV - Miscellaneous Laws.
      70-11-1490 CLINGING TO MOVING VEHICLES. Any person riding upon any
bicycle, motorcycle, coaster, sled, roller skates or any moving vehicle, shall
not attach the same or himself or herself to any moving vehicle upon any
roadway. No person shall ride on the running board, fender, hood, roof, trunk
or outside step of any vehicle.
      70-11-1491 USE OF COASTERS, ROLLER SKATES AND SIMILAR DEVICES. No person
upon roller skates or riding in or by means of any coaster, toy vehicle or
similar devices shall go upon any roadway except while crossing a street in a
crosswalk and except on streets set aside as play streets when and as
authorized by ordinance.
      70-11-1492 DAMAGE TO PROPERTY. It shall be unlawful for any person for
any reason to operate any vehicle in a manner so as to willfully, maliciously,
wantonly, negligently or otherwise injure, deface, destroy or damage property,
whether real property, personal property or mixed property.
      70-11-1493 UNNECESSARY NOISE. It shall be unlawful to operate a vehicle
which makes unusually loud or unnecessary noise or cause a vehicle to do the
same.
(1981 Code, § 41.03) (Ord. 80-20, passed - -1980; Am. Ord. 95-06, passed 2-6-
1995; Am. Ord. 11-15, passed 3-21-2011; Am. Ord. 11-16, passed 3-21-2011)
§ 70.04 AMENDMENTS.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/16574ba874f17dfbd958615eed907c929c4100f2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7683.jpg]Publisher's Note: This Section has been AMENDED by new
legislation (Ord. 25-48, adopted 10-20-2025). The text of the amendment will be
incorporated below when the ordinance is codified.
   The following amendments are hereby made to the State Code.
   (A)   Chapter 11, Article II - Obedience to and Effect of Traffic Laws.
      70-11-206 TRAFFIC LAWS APPLY .... ANIMAL DRAWN VEHICLES.
      (a)   It shall be unlawful to leave any horse or other draft animal
unattended or allow other animals to roam in any street without having the
animal securely fastened or accompanied by a driver.
   (B)   Chapter 11, Article XIII - Stopping, Standing and Parking.
      70-11-1302 OFFICERS AUTHORIZED TO REMOVE VEHICLES.
      4.   The Police Department is hereby authorized to have removed and towed
away any car or other vehicle illegally parked in any place where such parked
vehicle creates or constitutes a traffic hazard, blocks the use of a fire
hydrant or obstructs or may obstruct the movement of any emergency vehicle; or
in any public place where signs have been legally posted either limiting or
prohibiting parking; or any vehicle which has been parked in any public place
for a period of 24 consecutive hours. Vehicles towed away shall be stored and
shall be released to the owner or operator thereof after payment of the expense
incurred in removing and storing the vehicles.
      70-11-1303 STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING PROHIBITED IN SPECIFIC PLACES.
      4.   It shall be unlawful to park any motor vehicle on any private
property without the consent of the owner of the property.
      5.   When signs are erected at the entrances of highways and streets into
the village giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle between the
hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on any day, on any street within the village
except such regulation shall not apply to Jackson Street between Van Buren
Street and Water Street, Hill Street between Van Buren Street and River Street,
Railroad Street between Van Buren Street and River Street, and Parking Lots 1
and 2 between Railroad Street and Hill Street where parking is permitted.
      6.   It shall be unlawful to stop, stand or park a motor vehicle for a
period of time longer than necessary for the unloading and delivery or pickup
of materials, not to exceed 30 minutes, in any place posted as a loading zone.
      7.   It shall be unlawful to park a vehicle for longer than the time
designated within any district or upon any street or section thereof, when
signs are erected giving notice thereof.
      8.   Snow removed - Interference by parking.
      (a)   It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle on any public street in
the village at any time after the snow on the street exceeds two (2) inches in
depth and for a twelve (12) hour period following the cessation of the
snowfall.
      (b)   It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle on any public street or
portion thereof in the village at any time when the street is being cleaned.
Signs indicating that a street or portion thereof is being cleaned shall be
posted immediately before the cleaning of the street and shall be removed after
the cleaning of the street is finished.
      (c)   Any vehicles parked in violation of this section are hereby
declared a public nuisance and a hazard to public safety and police officers in
the village are hereby authorized to cause removal of the vehicle to a public
garage or other place of safety during snow removal operations of the village
on the streets and the expense of the removal and storage in the public garage
shall be paid by the owner or operator of the vehicle.
      (d)   Any person violating any provisions of this subsection (8) shall be
fined not less than $25, nor more than $750, for each and every separate
offense.
(1981 Code, § 41.04) (Ord. 80-20, passed - -1980; Am. Ord. 15-05, passed 2-16-
2015; Am. Ord. 23-05, passed 2-6-2023)
§ 70.05 PARKING VIOLATION FEES.
   (A)   Any person accused of a violation of an ordinance prohibiting parking
a vehicle in a designated or restricting the length of time a vehicle may be
there parked, may settle and compromise the claim against him or her for the
illegal parking by paying to the village a sum according to the schedule of
fines set forth in the village annual fee schedule.
   (B)   (Reserved).
   (C)   The payment may be made at the Village Hall located at 120 Barrington
Avenue, East Dundee, Illinois, 60118. Payments received shall be promptly
turned over and credited to the appropriate fund.
   (D)   This section shall not apply to persons parking a vehicle so as to
obstruct the entrance or exit of any place where police or fire apparatus or
other emergency equipment is kept or housed, or so as to block an emergency
entrance in a hospital; nor shall this section apply to any person charged with
parking a vehicle so as to entirely obstruct traffic in any street or alley or
parking in a way as to reduce traffic on an arterial street to one-way traffic
only, nor to any person who refuses to move a vehicle illegally parked at the
request of any member of the Police Department.
(1981 Code, § 41.05) (Ord. 80-20, passed - -1980; Am. Ord. 92-11, passed 10-19-
1992; Am. Ord. 17-09, passed 2-6-2016)
§ 70.06 MOTOR DRIVEN CYCLES.
   (A)   Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this
section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where
the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
      AREA. The geographical boundaries within which an operating motorcycle or
operating motor-driven cycle can be heard.
      ELECTRIC VEHICLE. A battery-powered electric vehicle operated solely by
electricity or a plug-in hybrid electric vehicle that operates on electricity
and gasoline and has a battery that can be recharged from an external source.
      ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING STATION. Any facility or equipment that is used
to charge a battery or other energy storage device of an electric vehicle.
      MOTOR VEHICLE and VEHICLE. A motorcycle or motor-driven cycle.
      MOTORCYCLE. Every motor vehicle having a seat or saddle for the use of
the rider and designated to travel on not more than three wheels in contact
with the ground, but excluding a tractor.
      MOTORIZED SCOOTER. Every board or other device or object having wheels,
utilizing a platform, with or without a seat and which is propelled by some
type of motor and steered in some manner by an individual.
      MOTOR-DRIVEN CYCLE. Every motorcycle including every device propelled by
a motor, which produces not to exceed five horsepower which has a seat for the
operator to sit, and every bicycle with motor attached.
      NON-RESIDENT. Every person who is not a resident of the state.
      NON-RESIDENT'S OPERATING PRIVILEGE. The privilege conferred upon a
nonresident by the laws of the state pertaining to the operation by such person
of a motor vehicle, or the use of a vehicle owned by such person in the state.
      OPERATOR. Every person who drives or is in actual physical control of a
motor vehicle upon a street or who is exercising control of or steering a
vehicle being towed by a motor vehicle.
      PERSONAL ASSISTIVE MOBILITY DEVICE. A motorized self-balancing unit,
designed to transport individuals, including but limited to those who have
limited mobility.
      RACING OF MOTOR. Sudden acceleration or deceleration of the motor of a
motorcycle or motor-driven cycle.
      STREET. The entire width between the boundary lines of every way,
including alleys publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use
of the public for purposes of vehicular traffic.
      STUNTING. Operating a vehicle in a manner causing it to weave or suddenly
change course, or the loss of body contact with the seat by a driver or
passenger, and not for the purpose of safe operation of such vehicle.
      TOURING. Any repetitious driving in the same area which causes a
disturbance or is done with the intent of calling attention to an operator of a
motorcycle or motor-driven cycle.
   (B)   Operation generally. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or
cause to be operated a motorcycle or motor-driven cycle upon any street within
the village except in compliance with the following:
      (1)   Driver's license. The operator of such vehicle shall have in the
operator's possession a valid driver's license issued by the state (or, if such
operator is a nonresident, such operator shall have in the operator's
possession evidence of a nonresident's operating privilege) and which has not
been suspended, limited or cancelled.
      (2)   Compliance with vehicle standards. Such vehicle shall at such time
of operation be capable of performing in accordance with the standards then
fixed by the motor vehicle laws of the state and by the ordinances of the
village.
      (3)   Compliance with traffic regulations. The operator shall operate the
vehicle in accordance with the motor vehicle laws of the state and ordinances
of the village.
      (4)   Exhaust system and muffler. Such vehicle shall be equipped with an
exhaust system in good working order, sufficient to prevent excessive or
unusual noises. No such vehicle shall be equipped with any muffler cutout, or
removable exhaust pipe cover, or any bypass in a muffler, or any muffler from
which the baffle plates, screens, or other original internal parts have been
removed or altered. No such vehicle shall be equipped with an exhaust system
which has been modified in a manner which will amplify or increase the noise
emitted by the motor of such vehicle above that emitted by the exhaust system
originally installed on the vehicle. No such vehicle shall be equipped with an
exhaust system which has been modified or altered in any way from that
furnished by the vehicle manufacturer; provided, however, that equipment
equivalent to that originally installed may be substituted when parts are
replaced.
      (5)   Proficiency in operation. Before operating a motorcycle or motor-
driven cycle upon a public street, the operator thereof shall have first become
sufficiently proficient in the operation thereof to control the vehicle without
unreasonable danger to others. If the vehicle is rented, leased or borrowed
from another, the operator shall first have demonstrated to the lessor, renter
or lender of such equipment that the operator is sufficiently proficient to
operate such vehicle upon a public street without unreasonable danger to
others.
      (6)   Carrying passengers. A person operating a motorcycle or motor-
driven cycle shall ride only upon the permanent and regular seat attached
thereto, and such operator shall not carry any other person nor shall any other
person ride on a motorcycle or motor-driven cycle unless such vehicle is
designed to carry more than one person, in which event a passenger may ride
upon the permanent and regular seat if designed for two persons, or upon
another seat firmly attached to the rear or side of the operator. Where a seat
designed to carry a person in addition to the operator is attached to the rear
of the operator, two footrests must be firmly attached to each side of the
vehicle for the use of such person.
      (7)   Riding in tandem. Not more than two motorcycles or motor-driven
cycles shall be operated side by side in any one lane of traffic upon any
street.
      (8)   Causing disturbance; touring, stunting or racing of motor. No
motorcycle or motor-driven cycle shall be operated in any manner so as to cause
a disturbance in any area of the village. Touring, stunting, or racing of
motors is prohibited.
      (9)   Dangerous operation. No operator of a motorcycle or motor-driven
cycle shall engage in maneuvers, stunting or other operations dangerous to the
operator or the operator's passenger or to the persons or property of others,
and an operator must at all times keep body contact with the saddle or seat of
such vehicle. The operation of a motorcycle or motor-driven cycle on one wheel
is prohibited.
      (10)   Maximum height of handlebars. No person shall operate a motorcycle
or motor-driven cycle having handlebars exceeding 15 inches in height measured
from the lowest point of the saddle to the highest point of the handlebars.
      (11)   Required equipment. The operator of a motorcycle or motor-driven
cycle and every passenger thereon shall be protected by glasses, goggles or a
transparent shield in accordance with ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1404. Every
motorcycle or motor-driven cycle shall be equipped with a rearview mirror,
electrical horn, fenders, headlights and rear lights, and front and rear
brakes.
   (C)   Operation by persons under 18 years of age. No person under 18 years
of age shall purchase, rent, lease or borrow a motorcycle or motor-driven cycle
unless such person has first obtained written consent from either of the
person's parents, or the person's legal guardian. No such person under 18 years
of age shall take possession of and operate any motorcycle or motor-driven
cycle unless, on the occasion of such purchasing or on the occasion of such
renting, leasing or borrowing of such motorcycle or motor-driven cycle, such
person under 18 years of age obtains and files with such seller, renter, lessor
or lender a consent in writing on a form furnished by the village, signed by
either parent of such minor, or such minor's legal guardian, in the presence of
and witnessed by such lessor, renter or lender, or the duly authorized agent of
the lessor, renter or lender, to the effect that permission is granted for such
child to purchase a vehicle, or to rent, lease or borrow a motorcycle or motor-
driven cycle from such renter, lessor of lender, and that such parent or
guardian consents to such sale and/or consents to the renting, leasing or
lending of a motorcycle or motor-driven cycle to such child, and assumes full
legal responsibility for acts or actions of such child in the operation of any
such motorcycle or motor-driven cycle then or thereafter sold, rented, leased
or lent to such child, and such responsibility and commitment of such parent or
guardian shall continue for a period of 60 days. The written consent must be
renewed every 60 days thereafter.
   (D)   Suspension or revocation of business license for violation of section.
In addition to any fines or penalties imposed by this Code, the Village Manager
may suspend or revoke the license of any person engaged in the business of
selling motorcycles or motor-driven cycles violating the provisions of this
section.
   (E)   Operation of a motorized scooter. No person shall use, operate or be
in control of a motorized scooter on a public or private street, parking lot,
sidewalk, bike path or other area open to the public. Operation of a motorized
scooter may be permitted on private property with the permission of the
property owner.
   (F)   Parental responsibility for violations by minors. It shall be unlawful
for any parent or guardian of a person under the age of 17 years to permit such
person under the age of 17 years to violate any provisions of this section. The
commission of any such act by a minor who is living with the minor's parents or
guardian shall raise the presumption that the parent or guardian has neglected
to restrain such minor from committing such act. It shall be an affirmative
defense for the parent or guardian to prove that such parent or guardian
exercised the parent's or guardian's duty to restrain the minor from committing
such act complained of in the pending action, but that such action on the part
of the parent or guardian to attempt to restrain the minor, although exercised
with due care, was unsuccessful.
   (G)   Operation of personal assistive mobility devices.
      (1)   Personal assistive motorized devices shall be prohibited on any
public right-of-way, including but not limited to, parking lots, sidewalks,
bike paths or other areas open to the public, except when utilized by an
individual or individuals described as follows:
         (a)   Those who have limited mobility, including but not limited to
the elderly and disabled individuals;
         (b)   The United States Postal Service for purpose of the delivery of
the United States Mail; or
         (c)   Governmental entities for public safety purposes.
      (2)   Personal assistive motorized devices when utilized by individuals,
pursuant to division (G)(1)(a) through (c) of this section may be operated on
public sidewalks when utilized in a generally safe manner and in such a way
that their use does not impede pedestrian traffic. The speed of any such device
may not exceed ten m.p.h.
      (3)   Division (G)(1) and (2) of this section do not apply to motorized
wheelchairs, as defined in the Illinois Motor Vehicle Code, ILCS Ch. 625, Act
5, § 1 et seq.
(Ord. 04-30, passed 8-16-2004; Am. Ord. 22-37, passed 8-8-2022)
§ 70.07 SOLICITATION ON ROADWAYS.
   No person shall stand on a highway, road or street within the corporate
limits of the village for the purpose of soliciting employment, business or
contributions from the occupant of any vehicle.
(Ord. 07-07, passed 2-19-2007)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 70.08 FOURTH STREET RESIDENTIAL PARKING.
   (A)   There are hereby established and made available to the persons set
forth herein a maximum of ten "4th Street Residential Parking Permits". Where
an authorized "4th Street Residential Parking Permit" is available, upon
payment, at the rate set forth in the Annual Fee Schedule, by a resident of any
residential dwelling unit or business located in the 300 block of River Street
in the village, the person making such payment shall receive a "4th Street
Residential Parking Permit" permit which shall allow, without any further
payment, such person to park the motor vehicle for which the permit has been
issued on 4th Street overnight.
   (B)   No more than two such "4th Street Residential Parking Permits" shall
be issued per residential dwelling unit.
   (C)   Purchase of a "4th Street Residential Parking Permit" is an exception
to the parking requirement for residential housing units outlined in §
157.051(B)(2)(e) and (K)(3) of this Code of Ordinances.
(Ord. 07-20, passed 4-16-2007; Am. Ord. 07-37, passed 8-6-2007; Am. Ord. 10-38,
passed 8-16-2010)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 70.09 MOTOR TRUCKS PROHIBITED ON NORTH STREET.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purposes of this section the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      MOTOR TRUCK. Every motor vehicle used or maintained primarily for the
transportation of property and having a maximum registered gross weight on
registration in excess of 10,000 pounds, excluding recreational vehicles,
emergency governmental vehicles, up to one-ton pickups, tow trucks, buses and
city franchised vehicles.
      TRUCK TRACTOR. Any motor vehicle used or designed for use with a semi-
trailer for carrying, conveying, or moving over the highways any freight,
property, article or thing, and having a combined weight of vehicle and maximum
load to be carried thereon of more than 10,000 pounds.
      TRUCK TRAILER. Every vehicle without motive power which:
         (a)   Has a combined weight of vehicle and maximum load to be carried
thereon of more than 10,000 pounds;
         (b)   Is designated for carrying property and for being drawn by a
motor vehicle.
   (B)   Motor truck traffic prohibited.
      (1)   Except as provided in division (B)(2) below, no person shall
operate any motor truck upon North Street within the village.
      (2)   It shall be an affirmative defense to a violation of division (B)
(1) above that the motor truck is being operated on North Street for the
primary purpose of engaging in one or more of the following activities:
         (a)   Receiving or discharging goods or performing any contracted work
at any business or residence on North Street including landscaping, plumbing,
and electrical work;
         (b)   Servicing utility facilities or construction sites in the city.
   (C)   Signage. The Public Works Director is hereby authorized and directed
to erect and maintain specialized traffic directional control signs on North
Street in a conspicuous manner and place at each end of the roadway or section
thereof in order to give notice of this regulation.
   (D)   Civil infraction assessment.  A violation of any provision of this
section constitutes a traffic infraction and shall be dealt with according to
the procedures established by §
10.99 of this Code of Ordinances.
(Ord. 10-51, passed 12-20-2010)
§ 70.10 EXCESSIVE IDLING.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for a person that operates a motor vehicle
operating on diesel fuel in the village to cause or allow the motor vehicle,
when it is not in motion, to idle for more than a total of ten minutes within
any 60 minute period, except under the following circumstances:
      (1)   The motor vehicle has a Gross Vehicle Weight Rating of less than
8,000 pounds;
      (2)   The motor vehicle idles while forced to remain motionless because
of on-highway traffic, an official traffic control device or signal, or at the
direction of a law enforcement official;
      (3)   The motor vehicle idles when operating defrosters, heaters, air
conditioners, or other equipment solely to prevent a safety or health
emergency;
      (4)   A police, fire, ambulance, public safety, other emergency or law
enforcement motor vehicle, or any motor vehicle used in an emergency capacity,
idles while in an emergency or training mode and not for the convenience of the
vehicle operator;
      (5)   The primary propulsion engine idles for maintenance, servicing,
repairing, or diagnostic purposes if idling is necessary for such activity;
      (6)   A motor vehicle idles as part of a government inspection to verify
that all equipment is in good working order, provided idling is required as
part of the inspection;
      (7)   When idling of the motor vehicle is required to operate auxiliary
equipment to accomplish the intended use of the vehicle (such as loading,
unloading, mixing, or processing cargo; controlling cargo temperature;
construction operations; lumbering operations; oil or gas well servicing; or
farming operations), provided that this exemption does not apply when the
vehicle is idling solely for cabin comfort or to operate non-essential
equipment such as air conditioning, heating, microwave ovens, or televisions;
      (8)   An armored motor vehicle idles when a person remains inside the
vehicle to guard the contents, or while the vehicle is being loaded or
unloaded;
      (9)   A bus idles a maximum of 15 minutes in any 60 minute period to
maintain passenger comfort while non-driver passengers are on board;
      (10)   If the motor vehicle has a sleeping berth, when the operator is
occupying the vehicle during a rest or sleep period and idling of the vehicle
is required to operate air conditioning or heating;
      (11)   When the motor vehicle idles due to mechanical difficulties over
which the operator has no control;
      (12)   The motor vehicle is used as airport ground support equipment,
including, but not limited to, motor vehicles operated on the air side of the
airport terminal to service or supply aircraft;
      (13)   The motor vehicle is:
         (a)   A bus owned by a public transit authority; and
         (b)   Being operated on a designated bus route or on a street or
highway between designated bus routes for the provision of public
transportation;
      (14)   The motor vehicle is an implement of husbandry exempt from
registration;
      (15)   The motor vehicle is owned by an electric utility and is operated
for electricity generation or hydraulic pressure to power equipment necessary
in the restoration, repair, modification or installation of electric utility
service; or
      (16)   The outdoor temperature is less than 32 degrees Fahrenheit or
greater than 80 degrees Fahrenheit.
   (B)   When the outdoor temperature is 32 degrees Fahrenheit or higher and 80
degrees Fahrenheit or lower, a person who operates a motor vehicle operating on
diesel fuel in an affected area may not cause or allow the motor vehicle to
idle for a period greater than 30 minutes in any 60 minute period while waiting
to weigh, load, or unload cargo or freight, unless the vehicle is in a line of
vehicles that regularly and periodically moves forward.
   (C)   This section does not prohibit the operation of an auxiliary power
unit or generator set as an alternative to idling the main engine of a motor
vehicle operating on diesel fuel.
   (D)   This section does not apply to the owner of a motor vehicle rented or
leased to another entity or person operating the vehicle.
(Ord. 13-31, passed 8-19-2013)
§ 70.11 MOTOR TRUCK RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      MOTOR TRUCK. Every vehicle designed, used, or maintained primarily for
the transportation of property or for pulling or carrying freight.
   (B)   Truck route restrictions. The required truck route for motor trucks
traveling to and from the facility located at 306 East Third Street, East
Dundee, Illinois, shall be: Third Street to Barrington Avenue to Route 68 to
Route 72/Main Street.
   (C)   Signage. The Public Works Director is hereby authorized and directed
to erect and maintain specialized traffic signs in order to give notice of this
regulation.
   (D)   Liability for violation. Whenever any motor truck is operated in
violation of the provisions of this chapter, the owner or driver or both of
such vehicle shall be deemed guilty of such violation, and either or both the
owner and the driver may be prosecuted for such violation.
   (E)   Penalty for violation. Any person, firm or corporation found guilty of
a violation of this section shall be fined an amount equal to $500.
   (F)   Enforcement. Enforcement of this chapter by a hearing officer shall be
conducted pursuant to Chapter 36, Administrative Adjudication, of this code.
(Ord. 15-51, passed 12-14-2015; Am. Ord. 24-41, passed 12-2-2024) Penalty, see
§
70.99
§ 70.12 VEHICLE WEIGHT RESTRICTIONS ON CERTAIN STREETS.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      MOTOR TRUCK. Every vehicle designed, used, or maintained primarily for
the transportation of property or for pulling or carrying freight.
   (B)   Weight restrictions on streets. Except as provided in division (C)
below, no person shall operate any motor vehicles with a gross weight,
including load, exceeding eight tons or 16,000 pounds, on any street in the
village, except on the following streets:
      (1)   Water Street, from Lincoln Avenue to Barrington Avenue;
      (2)   Barrington Avenue, from Water Street to Penny Avenue;
      (3)   Third Street, from Barrington Avenue to the truck parking facility
located at 306 East Third Street.
   (C)   The following vehicles, are exempt from the provisions of division (B)
of this section:
      (1)   Emergency vehicles.
      (2)   Vehicles owned and operated by governmental agencies.
      (3)   Vehicles owned and operated by private utilities for the purpose of
engaging in services within the roadway sections listed in division (B) of this
section.
      (4)   Buses.
      (5)   Vehicles engaged in the collection and removal of garbage or refuse
within the roadway sections listed in division (B) of this section.
      (6)   Snow removal vehicles engaged in snow removal functions on private
property or under contract with the village.
      (7)   Tow trucks for the purpose of engaging in services within the
roadway sections listed in division (B) of this section.
      (8)   Vehicles engaged in receiving or discharging goods or performing
any contracted work at any business or residence within the roadway sections
listed in division (B) of this section.
   (D)   Signage. The Public Works Director is hereby authorized and directed
to erect and maintain specialized traffic directional control signs in a
conspicuous manner and place at each end of the roadway or section thereof in
order to give notice of this regulation.
   (E)   Liability for violation. Whenever any motor truck or vehicle is
operated in violation of the provisions of this chapter, the owner or driver or
both of such vehicle shall be deemed guilty of such violation, and either or
both the owner and the driver may be prosecuted for such violation.
   (F)   Penalty for violation. Any person, firm or corporation found guilty of
a violation of this section shall be fined an amount equal to $500.
   (G)   Enforcement. Enforcement of this chapter by a hearing officer shall be
conducted pursuant to
Chapter 36, Administrative Adjudication, of this code.
(Ord. 24-11, passed 3-18-2024; Am. Ord. 24-41, passed 12-2-2024)
§ 70.13 DESIGNATED TRUCK ROUTE.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      MOTOR TRUCK. Every vehicle designed, used, or maintained primarily for
the transportation of property or for pulling or carrying freight.
   (B)   Designated truck route. The truck route for motor trucks shall be:
Barrington Avenue, to and from Water Street to Penny Avenue (IL Route 68).
   (C)   An operator of any motor truck stopped for driving on a street that is
not designated as a "Truck Route" or designated as a "No Truck" route or
otherwise contains a sign indicating a restriction shall furnish documentation
showing the point of origin and destination for such motor truck.
   (D)   Signage. The Public Works Director is hereby authorized and directed
to erect and maintain specialized traffic signs in a conspicuous manner and
place at each end of the roadway or section thereof in order to give notice of
this regulation.
   (E)   Liability for violation. Whenever any motor truck or vehicle is
operated in violation of the provisions of this chapter, the owner or driver or
both of such vehicle shall be deemed guilty of such violation, and either or
both the owner and the driver may be prosecuted for such violation.
   (F)   Penalty for violation. Any person, firm or corporation found guilty of
a violation of this section shall be fined an amount equal to $500.
   (G)   Enforcement. Enforcement of this chapter by a hearing officer shall be
conducted pursuant to Chapter 36, Administrative Adjudication, of this code.
(Ord. 24-11, passed 3-18-2024; Am. Ord. 24-41, passed 12-2-2024)
§ 70.14 VEHICLE LENGTH RESTRICTIONS ON CERTAIN STREETS.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      MOTOR TRUCK. Every vehicle designed, used, or maintained primarily for
the transportation of property or pulling or carrying freight.
   (B)   Length restrictions on streets. Except as provided in division (C)
below, no person shall operate any motor vehicles with a vehicle length,
including load. exceeding 30 feet, on any street in the village, except on the
following streets:
      (1)   Water Street, from Lincoln Avenue to Barrington Avenue:
      (2)   Barrington Avenue, from Water Street to Penny Avenue;
      (3)   Third Street, from Barrington Avenue to the truck parking facility
located at 306 East Third Street.
   (C)   The following vehicles are exempt from the provisions of division (B)
of this section:
      (1)   Emergency vehicles.
      (2)   Vehicles owned and operated by governmental agencies.
      (3)   Vehicles owned and operated by private utilities for the purpose of
engaging in services within the roadway sections listed in division (B) of this
section.
      (4)   Buses.
      (5)   Vehicles engaged in the collection and removal of garbage or refuse
within the roadway sections listed in division (B) of this section.
      (6)   Snow removal vehicles engaged in snow removal functions on private
property or under contract with the village.
      (7)   Tow trucks for the purpose of engaging in services within the
roadway sections listed in division (B) of this section.
      (8)   Vehicles engaged in receiving or discharging goods or performing
any contracted work at any business or residence within the roadway sections
listed in division (B) of this section.
   (D)   Signage. The Public Works Director is hereby authorized and directed
to erect and maintain specialized traffic signs in a conspicuous manner and
place at each end of the roadway or section thereof in order to give notice of
this regulation.
   (E)   Liability for violation. Whenever any motor truck or vehicle is
operated in violation of the provisions of this chapter, the owner or driver or
both of such vehicle shall be deemed guilty of such violation, and either or
both the owner and the driver may be prosecuted for such violation.
   (F)   Penalty for violation. Any person, firm, or corporation found guilty
of a violation of this section shall be fined an amount equal to $500.
   (G)   Enforcement. Enforcement of this chapter by a hearing officer shall be
conducted pursuant to Chapter 36, Administrative Adjudication, of this code.
(Ord. 24-41, passed 12-2-2024)
§ 70.99 PENALTY.
   Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
chapter shall be fined not less than $10, nor more than $750, for each offense.
A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a
violation occurs or continues.
(1981 Code, § 41.06) (Ord. 80-20, passed - -1980)
CHAPTER 71: TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
Schedule
   
I.   Speed limits
   
II.   One-way streets
   
III.   Yield intersections
   
IV.   Stop intersections
   
V.   Bicycle riding
   
VI.   Restricted turns
   
VII.   Motor trucks prohibited
SCHEDULE I. SPEED LIMITS.
   (A)   The general speed limit in the village shall be set at 25 mph, except
for the following list.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any operator to drive a motor vehicle at
speeds greater than those listed.
 
Street       Location                        Speed Limit Ord. No. Date Passed
             From the southern corporate
Elgin Avenue limits north to 1400 feet south 30 mph      13-54    12-16-2013
             of Williams Place
Roslyn Road  Entire length                   20 mph      88-16    11-7-1988
Water Street From Illinois Route 72 to north 30 mph      97-26    10-6-1997
             village limits
 
   (C)   The speed limit in school zones on school days when children are
present shall be 20 miles per hour as follows:
 
Street    Location                      Speed Limit Ord. No. Date Passed
Van Buren Between Illinois Route 72 and 20 mph      13-02    1-22-2013
          Johnson
 
Penalty, see § 10.99
SCHEDULE II. ONE-WAY STREETS.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/16574ba874f17dfbd958615eed907c929c4100f2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7683.jpg]Publisher's Note: This Section has been AMENDED by new
legislation (Ord. 25-56, adopted 12-8-2025). The text of the amendment will be
incorporated below when the ordinance is codified.
   The following streets shall be deemed one-way streets. It shall be unlawful
for an operator to drive a motor vehicle in the direction indicated.
 
Street             Location                      Direction Ord. No. Date Passed
Fourth Street      Between Barrington Avenue and South     04-20    6-7-2004
                   Railroad Street
Meier Street       Between Barrington Avenue and South     77-13    11-21-1977
                   Railroad Street
South River Street From Main to South Williams   South
                   Place
Williams Place     From Elgin Avenue to River    East
                   Street
 
Penalty, see § 10.99
SCHEDULE III. YIELD INTERSECTIONS.
   The following intersection shall be deemed yield intersections. An operator
of a motor vehicle shall yield the right-of-way as follows.
Street Location Direction Ord. No. Date Passed
Street          Location                         Direction Ord. No. Date Passed
Crestwood Drive Intersection with Park Street    North     96-06    2-19-1996
Dunbar Lane     Intersection with Balmoral       North     88-06    5-16-1988
                Avenue
Kimberly Road   Intersection with Deerpath Road  South     96-06    2-19-1996
Lincoln Avenue  Intersection with Wenholz Avenue East      86-27    10-6-1986
Michigan Street Intersection with First Street   East      86-27    10-6-1986
Oak Street      Intersection with Linden Avenue  West      90-16    8-6-1990
Park Street     Intersection with Aberdeen Drive West      96-06    2-19-1996
Roslyn Road     Intersections with Springcrest,  North     88-16    11-7-1988
                Summit and Guth Streets
Wenholz Avenue  Intersection with First Street   East      86-27    10-6-1986
 
Penalty, see § 10.99
SCHEDULE IV. STOP INTERSECTIONS.
   The following streets are deemed stop intersections. An operator of a motor
vehicle shall stop as indicated below.
Street Location Direction Ord. No. Date Passed
Street            Location               Direction       Ord. No. Date Passed
                 Intersection of Dunbar North           87-19    7-6-1987
                  Lane and Bannock Road
Barrington Avenue Intersection with      East and west   09-31    10-19-2009
                  Second Street
Barrington Avenue Intersection with      East and west   85-18    11-18-1985
                  Third Street
E. 3rd Street     Hill                   South           16-16    5-16-2016
Elgin Avenue      Williams Place         North           13-40    11-4-2013
Guth Street       Greenwood Avenue       North           16-16    5-16-2016
Hill Street       Intersection with      East            09-40    12-21-2009
                  VanBuren Street
Hill Street       Intersection with      West            09-40    12-21-2009
                  VanBuren Street
Hill Street       N. River Street        East and west   16-16    5-16-2016
Howard Street     Intersection with      North and south 88-12    9-19-1988
                  Wendt Street
Jackson Street    Intersection with      West            96-08    3-4-1996
                  VanBuren Street
Jackson Street    Intersection with      East            09-40    12-21-2009
                  VanBuren Street
Jackson Street    Intersection with      West            87-23    11-2-1987
                  Water Street
Jackson Street    Intersection with      East            87-23    11-2-1987
                  North River Street
Johnson Street    Intersection with      East and West   96-08    3-4-1996
                  South River Street
Maiden Lane       Intersection with      East and West   96-08    3-4-1996
                  VanBuren Street
Meier Street      Railroad               South           16-16    5-16-2016
Racing Rapids     For traffic leaving by
Frontage Road     the east ingress/                      83-18    9-6-1983
                  egress drive
Railroad Street   Intersection with      East            09-40    12-21-2009
                  VanBuren Street
Railroad Street   Intersection with      West            09-40    12-21-2009
                  VanBuren Street
River Haven Drive Illinois Route 25      East            13-42    11-18-2013
Roslyn Road       Intersection with      West            88-16    11-7-1988
                  VanBuren Street
Second Street     Intersection with      North and south 09-31    10-19-2009
                  Barrington Avenue
Springcrest Road  Roslyn Road            North           16-16    5-16-2016
Summit Avenue     Roslyn Road            North           16-16    5-16-2016
Wendt Street      Intersection with      West and east   88-12    9-19-1988
                  Howard Street
 
Penalty, see § 10.99
SCHEDULE V. BICYCLE RIDING.
   Riding any bicycle, coaster or similar device upon pedestrian walkways as
listed below is prohibited.
 
Location                                             Ord. No. Date Passed
Fox River Bridge adjacent to Illinois State Route 72 95-16    8-7-1995
 
Penalty, see § 10.99
SCHEDULE VI: RESTRICTED TURNS.
 
Street       Location         Restriction      Direction Ord. No. Date Passed
Van Buren    Illinois Route   No right turn on North     13-43    11-18-2013
Street       72               red
Van Buren    Intersection     No right turn on
Street       with State Route red              South     08-28    6-16-2008
             72
             Intersection
Water Street with State Route No left turn     South     04-19    6-7-2004
             72
 
Penalty, see § 10.99
SCHEDULE VII: MOTOR TRUCKS PROHIBITED
Street Location Restriction Direction Ord. No. Date Passed
Street         Location       Restriction   Direction  Ord. No. Date Passed
                              No vehicle
                              traffic
               East of Water  exceeding     Both
Lincoln Avenue Street         eight tons/   directions 24-41    12-2-2024
                              16,000 pounds
                              or 30 feet in
                              length
                              No vehicle
                              traffic
               East of Water  exceeding     Both
Wenholz Avenue Street         eight tons/   directions 24-41    12-2-2024
                              16,000 pounds
                              or 30 feet in
                              length
                              No vehicle
                              traffic
Michigan       East of Water  exceeding     Both
Avenue         Street         eight tons/   directions 24-41    12-2-2024
                              16,000 pounds
                              or 30 feet in
                              length
                              No vehicle
               Between East   traffic
               Third Street   exceeding     Both       24-11;   3-18- 2024;
North Street   and Water      eight tons/   directions 24-41    12-2-2024
               Street         16,000 pounds
                              or 30 feet in
                              length
                              No vehicle
               Between        traffic
               Barrington     exceeding     Both       24-11;   3-18- 2024;
Water Street   Avenue and     eight tons/   directions 24-41    12-2-2024
               Main Street    16,000 pounds
               (IL Route 72)  or 30 feet in
                              length
                              No vehicle
                              traffic
               North of       exceeding     Both
1st Street     Barrington     eight tons/   directions 24-41    12-2-2024
               Avenue         16,000 pounds
                              or 30 feet in
                              length
                              No vehicle
                              traffic
               North of       exceeding     Both
2nd Street     Barrington     eight tons/   directions 24-41    12-2-2024
               Avenue         16,000 pounds
                              or 30 feet in
                              length
                              No vehicle
               Between        traffic
               Barrington     exceeding     Both
2nd Street     Avenue and     eight tons/   directions 24-41    12-2-2024
               Main Street    16,000 pounds
               (IL Route 72)  or 30 feet in
                              length
                              No vehicle
               North of the   traffic
               facility       exceeding     Both
3rd Street     located at 306 eight tons/   directions 24-41    12-2-2024
               East 3rd       16,000 pounds
               Street         or 30 feet in
                              length
                              No vehicle
                              traffic
               South of       exceeding     Both
3rd Street     Barrington     eight tons/   directions 24-41    12-2-2024
               Avenue         16,000 pounds
                              or 30 feet in
                              length
                              No vehicle
               Between        traffic
               Barrington     exceeding     Both       24-11;   3-18- 2024;
River Street   Avenue and     eight tons/   directions 24-41    12-2-2024
               Main Street    16,000 pounds
               (IL Route 72)  or 30 feet in
                              length
                              No vehicle
                              traffic
               North of       exceeding     Both
4th Street     Barrington     eight tons/   directions 24-41    12-2-2024
               Avenue         16,000 pounds
                              or 30 feet in
                              length
                              No vehicle
                              traffic
               South of       exceeding     Both
4th Street     Barrington     eight tons/   directions 24-41    12-2-2024
               Avenue         16,000 pounds
                              or 30 feet in
                              length
                              No vehicle
                              traffic
Van Buren      North of       exceeding     Both
Street         Barrington     eight tons/   directions 24-41    12-2-2024
               Avenue         16,000 pounds
                              or 30 feet in
                              length
                              No vehicle
               Between        traffic
Van Buren      Barrington     exceeding     Both       24-11;   3-18- 2024;
Street         Avenue and     eight tons/   directions 24-41    12-2-2024
               Main Street    16,000 pounds
               (IL Route 72)  or 30 feet in
                              length
                              No vehicle
               South of       traffic
Van Buren      Barrington     exceeding     Both
Street         Avenue and     eight tons/   directions 24-41    12-2-2024
               Main Street    16,000 pounds
               (IL Route 72)  or 30 feet in
                              length
                              No vehicle
                              traffic
Springcrest    North of       exceeding     Both
Road           Barrington     eight tons/   directions 24-41    12-2-2024
               Avenue         16,000 pounds
                              or 30 feet in
                              length
                              No vehicle
                              traffic
               North of       exceeding     Both
Summit Avenue  Barrington     eight tons/   directions 24-41    12-2-2024
               Avenue         16,000 pounds
                              or 30 feet in
                              length
                              No vehicle
                              traffic
               North of       exceeding     Both
Guth Street    Barrington     eight tons/   directions 24-41    12-2-2024
               Avenue         16,000 pounds
                              or 30 feet in
                              length
                              No vehicle
                              traffic
               North of       exceeding     Both
Onie Court     Barrington     eight tons/   directions 24-41    12-2-2024
               Avenue         16,000 pounds
                              or 30 feet in
                              length
 
Penalty, see § 10.99
CHAPTER 72: PARKING REGULATIONS
Schedule
   
72.01   Parking regulations
   
72.02   Parking of recreational vehicles, trailers or truck tractors restricted
 
   
72.99   Penalty
§ 72.01 PARKING REGULATIONS.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/16574ba874f17dfbd958615eed907c929c4100f2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7683.jpg]Publisher's Note: This Section has been AMENDED by new
legislation (Ord. 25-48, adopted 10-20-2025). The text of the amendment will be
incorporated below when the ordinance is codified.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/16574ba874f17dfbd958615eed907c929c4100f2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7683.jpg]Publisher's Note: This Section has been AMENDED by new
legislation (Ord. 25-50, adopted 11-3-2025). The text of the amendment will be
incorporated below when the ordinance is codified.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/16574ba874f17dfbd958615eed907c929c4100f2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7683.jpg]Publisher's Note: This Section has been AMENDED by new
legislation (Ord. 25-57, adopted 12-8-2025). The text of the amendment will be
incorporated below when the ordinance is codified.
   Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or in compliance
with the law or the directions of a police officer or official traffic-control
device, no person shall park a vehicle in any of the following places.
Street Location Side of Street Special Provisions Ord. No. Date Passed
Street       Location     Side of       Special       Ord. No.     Date Passed
                          Street        Provisions
             River Valley               Fire lane;
             Square                     900 feet in
            Shopping                  length and    91-14        11-18-1991
             Center                     seven feet
                                        wide
                                        2 hour
            Village Hall              maximum, from 89-16; 23-34 9-5-1989; 8-
                                        8:00 a.m. to               7-2023
                                        5:00 p.m.
             (a)   First three parking stalls on the south side of Barrington
             Avenue, commencing 58 feet west of the intersection with Third
            Avenue
             (b)   Two northern most parking stalls located adjacent to the
             Village Hall at the southwest corner of Third Street and
             Barrington Avenue
             Between
             Second
Adams Street Street and   North                      86-27        10-6-1986
             King
             Williams
             Street
             Between
Albert Drive Route 25 and North and                  15-18        4-6-2015
             Castle       south
             Avenue
                                        No parking or
                                        standing
                                        except for a
                                        period of
                                        time
             Between                    necessary for
Barrington   Third Street South         the loading   14-16        7-21-2014
Avenue       and Meier                  or unloading
             Street                     of a vehicle,
                                        Monday
                                        through
                                        Friday from
                                        10:00 a.m. to
                                        2:00 p.m.
             From its
             intersection
             with
             Illinois
Barrington   State Route  North                      82-11        4-19-1982
Avenue       68 westerly
             to its
             intersection
             with Van
             Buren Street
                                        Except for
             Between                    the
Barrington   Second       North         allowances    67-14; 23-34 9-5-1967; 8-
Avenue       Street and                 for parking                7-2023
             Third Street               at Village
                                        Hall
Castle       North of     West                       15-18        4-6-2015
Avenue       Albert Drive
             From
             Illinois
Dundee Road  State Route                            86-08        4-21-1986
             25 to
             Illinois
             Route 72
Frontage                 North                      91-11        9-16-1991
Road
             Between
             Greenwood
Guth Street  Avenue and   West                       86-27        10-6-1986
             Barrington
             Avenue
             From north
             boundary of
             the private
             driveway
             servicing
             the property
Guth Street  commonly     West                       84-11        6-18-1984
             known as 21
             Guth Street
             to a point
             on the west
             side 100
             feet north
             From the
             north
             boundary of
             the private
             driveway
             servicing
Guth Street  the property East                       84-11        6-18-1984
             commonly
             known as 20
             Guth Street
             to a point
             on the east
             side 97 feet
             north
             From 900
Higgins      feet west to
Road,        500 feet
Illinois     east of the                            86-15        4-21-1986
State Route  intersection
72           with Rock
             Road Drive
                                        No parking
                                        for more than
                                        24 hours. No
             Between                    parking
Hill Street  River Street East and west within 12     15-05        2-16-2015
             and Van                    hours after a
             Buren Street               snowfall of
                                        three inches
                                        or more has
                                        occurred
             From Van
             Buren Street
Hill Street  east to east Either                     63-8         7-1-1963
             end of Hill
             Street
             Between
             Walter       North and
Hill Street  Street and   south                      16-16        5-16-2016
             N. River
             Street
             One parking
             stall 120
             feet west of
             N. River
Hill Street  between      South                      16-16        5-16-2016
             signs
             adjacent to
             sanitary
             sewer
             structure
             Between Hill               24 hours
Hill Street  Street and   South of      limit,
Parking Lot  Railroad     Meier Street  overnight     16-23        7-5-2016
             Street                     parking
                                        allowed
             Between the
             north
Illinois     village
State Route  limits and                             67-10        8-21-1967
25           the south
             village
             limits
             535 feet
Illinois     long within
State Route  the right-   North                      91-11        9-16-1991
68; Frontage of-way
Road         immediately
             west
             From
             centerline
             of Fox River
Illinois     Bridge to a
State Route  point 239    Either                     95-22        10-2-1995
72           feet east of
             the
             centerline
             of Van Buren
             Street
             From Healy
Illinois     Road to
State Route  Illinois     Either                     92-12        11-16-1992
72           State Route
             25
             Adjacent to
             the property
             commonly
Illinois     known as
State Route  Santa's      North                      83-18        9-6-1983
72           Village from
             its west
             ingress/
             egress
             From
             intersection
Illinois     with
State Route  Illinois                               81-15        11-2-1981
72           State Route
             68 westerly
             to Fox River
             Bridge
Illinois     From Rock
State Route  Road to                                12-27        6-18-2012
72           Beverly Road
                                        No parking
                                        for more than
                                        24 hours. No
             Between                    parking
Jackson      Water Street East and west within 12     15-05        2-16-2015
Street       and Van                    hours after a
             Buren Street               snowfall of
                                        three inches
                                        or more has
                                        occurred
             Between Van
Johnson      Buren Street North                      96-08        3-4-1996
Street       and River
             Street
             From South
Johnson      River Street
Street       east for a   South                      96-08        3-4-1996
             distance of
             125 feet
             From
             intersection
             with Van
Johnson      Buren Street
Street       east to the  North                      83-11        6-20-1983
             eastern
             termination
             of Johnson
             Street
                                        No parking on
             Between                    Sundays on
             South River                the south
Johnson      Street and   South         side of       11-10        2-22-2011
Street       South Van                  Johnson
             Buren Street               between 7:00
                                        a.m. and 12:
                                        00 (noon)
             From a point
             located at
             the
             northwest
             corner of
King Street  intersection West                       84-11        6-18-1984
             with
             Illinois
             State Route
             72 to a
             point 158
             feet north
King         Between
Williams     North Street East                       86-27        10-6-1986
Street       and Adams
             Street
             Between
Lincoln      Water Street South                      86-27        10-6-1986
Avenue       and Wenholz
             Avenue
             Between Van
Maiden Lane  Buren Street Both                       96-08        3-4-1996
             and River
             Street
             Between the
             west side of
             North River                60-minute
Main Street  Street and   North         limit         59-2         3-16-1959
             the east
             side of
             Water Street
             Between east
             end of the
             Fox River
Main Street  Bridge and   South         60-minute     59-2         3-16-1959
             the west                   limit
             side of
             South River
             Street
             Three spaces
             located at                 Ingress/
Main Street  northeast                 egress        16-21        6-20-2016
             corner of 12               terminated
             East Main
             Street
                                        24-hour
Main Street  West of                    limit,
Parking Lot  River Street East          overnight     16-23        7-5-2016
                                        parking
                                        allowed
             Beginning at
             a point 68
             feet north
             of the
             intersection
             with
             Railroad
Meier Street Street       West                       99-02        3-21-1988
             northerly
             for a
             distance of
             20 feet to a
             point 88
             feet north
             of the
             intersection
             Between
             Railroad
             Street and
             Barrington
             Avenue
             except
             beginning at
             a point 68
             feet north
             of the                     No parking
Meier Street intersection East and west for more than 13-46        12-2-2013
             with                       24 hours
             Railroad
             Street
             northerly
             for a
             distance of
             20 feet to a
             point 88
             feet north
             of the
             intersection
                                        No parking
                                        for more than
                                        24 hours. No
             Between                    parking
Railroad     River Street East and west within 12     15-05        2-16-2015
Street       and Van                    hours after a
             Buren Street               snowfall of
                                        three inches
                                        or more has
                                        occurred
             From Water
             Street east
             to River
Railroad     Street and
Street       Van Buren    East and west              15-05        2-16-2015
             Street to
             the dead end
             of Railroad
             Street
             From the
             intersection
             of Center
Ravine Road  Drive                                  94-20        9-19-1994
             eastward to
             the village
             corporate
             limits
             From
             intersection
             of Illinois
Richardson   State Route  Either                     02-10        7-1-2002
Road         25 westward
             for a
             distance of
             185 feet
             Between                    3-hour
River Street Jackson      East          parking from  16-23        7-5-2016
             Street and                 7:00 a.m. to
             Hill Street                5:00 p.m.
                                        3-hour
             From Hill                  parking from
River Street Street to    East          7:00 a.m. to  16-23        7-5-2016
             Railroad                   5:00 p.m. for
             Street                     first 12
                                        spaces
                                        30-minute
                                        parking 7:00
             From                       a.m. to 5:00
             Railroad                   p.m. first
River Street Street to    East          two spaces    16-23        7-5-2016
             Barrington                 and 3-hour
             Avenue                     parking 7:00
                                        a.m. to 5:00
                                        p.m. for next
                                        15 spaces
                                        Thursday
                                        through
                                        Sunday only
             Between Main               from 11:00
             Street and                 p.m. to 3:00
River Street Jackson      East          a.m. excludes 19-24        7-8-2019
             Street                     ride share
                                        services
                                        (e.g. taxis,
                                        Uber, Lift,
                                        etc.
                                        3-hour
                                        parking from
             From                       7:00 a.m. to
             Railroad                   5:00 p.m. for
River Street Street to    West          first 16      16-23        7-5-2016
             Barrington                 spaces and no
             Avenue                     overnight
                                        parking first
                                        five spaces
             Between
             Johnson
             Street and
             the northern
South River  most
Street       entrance to  Both                       96-08        3-4-1996
             the parking
             lot commonly
             known as 10
             East Main
             Street
             Between the
             northern
             most
             entrance to
             the parking
South River  lot commonly                           96-08        3-4-1996
Street       known as 10
             East Main
             Street and
             Illinois
             State Route
             72
             From
             intersection
             with Jackson
Water Street Street       East                       85-4         3-18-1985
             northward to
             village
             limits
             From
             intersection
             with Main
Water Street Street       West                       85-4         3-18-1985
             northward to
             village
             limits
             From
             intersection
             with
             Illinois
             State Route
             72 northerly
             110 feet to
Water Street the north    East                       82-18        9-7-1982
             edge of the
             driveway
             servicing
             properties
             at 5 East
             Main Street
             and 7 East
             main Street
             Between
Wenholz      Water Street North                      86-27        10-6-1986
Avenue       and First
             Street
             It shall be
             prohibited
             to park a
             non-electric
             vehicle in
             an electric
             vehicle
             charging
             station
             designated
             for use by
             electric
             vehicles,
             vehicle
             including an
             electric
             vehicle                    Two-hour
             charging                   maximum
N/A          station on   N/A           parking per   22-37        8-8-2022
             any private                electric
             or public                  vehicle
             off-street
             parking
             facility. A
             person may
             park only an
             electric
             vehicle in
             an electric
             vehicle
             charging
             station
             space
             designated
             for use by
             electric
             vehicles.
             Upon any
N/A          grass, lawn, N/A           None          22-24        6-20-20
             or dirt on
             properties.
 
§ 72.02 PARKING OF RECREATIONAL VEHICLES, TRAILERS OR TRUCK TRACTORS
RESTRICTED.
   (A)   No person shall park, stop, or leave standing any recreational vehicle
without motive power, nor any trailer of any kind without motive power, on any
street, right of way, designated publicly used parking lot or alley.
   (B)   No person shall park any recreational vehicle with motive power or
trailer with motive power on any public street for more than two hours.
(Ord. 23-41, passed 9-18-2023)
§ 72.03 REMOVAL AUTHORITY.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/16574ba874f17dfbd958615eed907c929c4100f2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7683.jpg]Publisher's Note: This Section has been ADDED by new
legislation (Ord. 25-48, adopted 10-20-2025). The text of the amendment will be
incorporated below when the ordinance is codified.
 
§ 72.99 PENALTY.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/16574ba874f17dfbd958615eed907c929c4100f2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7683.jpg]Publisher's Note: This Section has been AMENDED by new
legislation (Ord. 25-48, adopted 10-20-2025). The text of the amendment will be
incorporated below when the ordinance is codified.
   (A)   Any owner or operator, who is accused of a violation of this chapter,
may settle and compromise that claim by paying the amount within the timeframe
as provided in the annual fee schedule, as amended.
   (B)   If the person accused of the violation does not settle the claim, the
complaint shall be subject to administrative adjudication pursuant to
Chapter 36 and the person shall be subject to the penalties set forth in §
10.99.
   (C)   Payments received by mail shall be credited as paid on the date
received by the village.
   (D)   Whenever any vehicle shall have been parked in violation of any
regulation of this chapter, the person in whose name such vehicle is registered
shall be prima facie responsible for such violation.
(Ord. 13-56, passed 12-16-2013)
CHAPTER 73
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/16574ba874f17dfbd958615eed907c929c4100f2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7683.jpg]Publisher's Note: This Chapter has been ADDED by new
legislation (Ord. 25-35, adopted 6-16-2025). The text of the amendment will be
incorporated below when the ordinance is codified.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/16574ba874f17dfbd958615eed907c929c4100f2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7683.jpg]Publisher's Note: This Chapter has been AMENDED by new
legislation (Ord. 25-36, adopted 7-21-2025). The text of the amendment will be
incorporated below when the ordinance is codified.
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
Chapter
   
90.   ALARM SYSTEMS
   
91.   STREETS, ALLEYS AND SIDEWALKS
   
92.   ANIMALS
   
93.   NUISANCES
   
94.   FIRE SAFETY
   
95.   TREES
CHAPTER 90: ALARM SYSTEMS
Section
   
90.01   Definitions
   
90.02   Purpose
   
90.03   Servicing of alarm systems
   
90.04   Central stations
   
90.05   Automatic voice dialing alarms
   
90.06   Alarm user permit required
   
90.07   Alarm user permit
   
90.08   Revocation/suspension of alarm user permit
   
90.09   On-premises alarm; outside ringers
   
90.10   Alarm activation when alarm user permit not issued
   
90.11   Updating alarm user permit application
   
90.12   Transfer of alarm user permit prohibited
   
90.13   Enforcement
   
90.14   False alarms
   
90.15   Noncompliance
   
90.16   Liability of village and P.S.A.P.
§ 90.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALARM ADMINISTRATOR. A person or persons, designated by the chief of police,
to administer, control and review applications, permits and alarm dispatch
requests.
   ALARM BUSINESS. Any business operated by a person who engages in the
activity of altering, installing, leasing, maintaining, moving, repairing,
replacing, selling, servicing or responding to an alarm system or which causes
any of these activities to take place.
   ALARM SITE. Premises protected by an alarm system.
   ALARM SYSTEM. An assembly of equipment, mechanical or electrical, arranged
to signal the presence of a hazard requiring urgent attention and to which the
Police Department or Fire Department are expected to respond, other than alarm
systems on motor vehicles. The definition of ALARM SYSTEM shall be interpreted
broadly to include any type of alarm system that is based on any type of
technology and includes each of the alarm systems defined in this chapter:
“automatic digital dialing alarm system,” “automatic voice dialing alarm
system,” “central station system,” “emergency answering service,” and “wireless
alarm system.”
   ALARM USER. Any person or business in control of premises where an alarm
system is maintained.
   ALARM USER PERMIT. A permit issued by the village that allows an alarm user
to use, own or lease an alarm system or to be in control of an alarm site where
an alarm system is operated or maintained.
   AUTOMATIC DIGITAL DIALING ALARM SYSTEM. An alarm system that has the
capability of transmitting digital code signals to an alarm receiving board at
the (P.S.A.P.) Public Safety Answering Point Center, using regular or dedicated
telephone lines.
   AUTOMATIC VOICE DIALING ALARM SYSTEM. An alarm system, which automatically
sends over regular telephone lines or by wireless technology, a prerecorded
voice message indicating the existence of an emergency situation that the alarm
system is designed to detect.
   CENTRAL STATION SYSTEM. A system in which the operation of electrical
protection circuits and devices are signaled automatically to, recorded in,
maintained and supervised from a place of business having trained operators in
attendance at all times.
   CHIEF OF POLICE. The duly appointed chief of police of the Village of East
Dundee.
   COMMUNICATION SWINGER SUPPRESSION. A programming feature of an alarm
system’s alarm panel that prevents continuous alarm signals from being received
at the alarm business, which monitors the alarm system.
   EMERGENCY ANSWERING SERVICE. A telephone answering service providing, among
its services, the function of receiving on a continuous basis through trained
employees, emergency signals from alarm systems and thereafter immediately
relaying the message by live voice to the Public Safety Answering Point.
   FALSE ALARM. The activation of an alarm system through mechanical or
electronic failure, malfunction, improper installation or the negligence of the
alarm business or user or their employees or agents, except that the following
shall not be considered false alarms:
      (1)   Alarms caused by the failure or malfunction of the equipment
located at the P.S.A.P.;
      (2)   Alarms occurring on a repeated basis without apparent cause within
the first 60 days after installation of the alarm system, and where continuous
effort, in the sole opinion of the Alarm Administrator, is being made jointly
by the alarm user, Village Inspection Department and any other concerned person
to correct the malfunction expeditiously;
      (3)   Alarms caused by an attempted or actual illegal entry of which
there is visible evidence;
      (4)   Alarms caused by an on-premises fire;
      (5)   Alarms intentionally caused by a person acting under a reasonable
belief that a need exists to call the Police Department or Fire Department; and
      (6)   Alarms caused by hurricanes, tornados, earthquakes, major floods or
other natural disasters.
   ON-PREMISES ALARM. An alarm system that audibly announces an emergency
condition at a residence or business establishment, and may or may not be
connected to any central alarm system, emergency answering service or the
Public Safety Answering Point.
   P.S.A.P.; PUBLIC SAFETY ANSWERING POINT. A call center operated by, or for,
the village to answer telephone calls and alarms for police, firefighting and
ambulance services and to dispatch these emergency services.
   PUBLIC SAFETY PERSONNEL. Police, firefighting and ambulance personnel.
   REVOKE ALARM USER PERMIT; REVOCATION. As the result of revocation of an
alarm user permit, police, firefighting and ambulance services may no longer
respond to an alarm. This condition may remain permanently in effect unless the
requirements for reinstatement are met.
   SUSPEND ALARM USER PERMIT; SUSPENSION. As the result of suspension of an
alarm user permit, police, firefighting and ambulance services may no longer
respond to an alarm during the period of suspension,
   VILLAGE. The Village of East Dundee.
   WIRELESS ALARM SYSTEM. Any assembly of equipment, mechanical and/or
electrical, that utilizes wireless technology to signal and/or receive the
presence of a hazard requiring urgent attention and to which the Police
Department or Fire Department are expected to respond.
(1981 Code, § 15.01) (Ord. 96-18, passed 9-3-1996; Am. Ord. 20-20, passed 5-18-
2020)
§ 90.02 PURPOSE.
   (A)    The primary purpose of this chapter is to reduce the number of
unnecessary responses by public safety personnel to mechanically or
electronically activated burglar, hold-up, fire and medical emergency alarms
and to charge the cost of such responses to that portion of the village’s
resident and business population wishing to use or required to use such alarms.
   (B)   False or unnecessary alarms severely impact and endanger the safety
and general welfare of the residents of the village. In addition to the
significant cost involved in responding to such alarms and the concurrent loss
of manpower and ineffective utilization of equipment, such alarms require
emergency responses which may contribute to a high accident rate.
   (C)   False alarms will be reduced by imposing certain regulations on alarm
systems and charging the cost of alarm responses to that portion of the village
resident and business population that use such alarms. Therefore, the village
adopts these regulations and imposes, among other things, a gradually
increasing service charge on the occurrence of more than four alarms for an
alarm system in one calendar year. In addition, the failure to pay service
charges or permit fees, the occurrence of 11 or more alarm occurrences in one
calendar year, and the failure to otherwise comply with this chapter, may
constitute grounds for suspension or revocation of an alarm user permit, which
may result in public safety personnel not responding to additional alarm
occurrences.
   (D)   Nothing in this chapter, however, shall be deemed to require or
obligate public safety personnel to respond to an alarm. Nothing herein shall
preclude public safety personnel from responding to any call or request for
assistance that is other than an alarm occurrence (i.e., notification of the
public safety personnel by means other than activation of an alarm system).
(Ord. 20-20, passed 5-18-2020)
§ 90.03 SERVICING OF ALARM SYSTEMS.
   An alarm business or user shall not perform any service on any alarm system
in the village without first notifying the Public Safety Answering Point and
disconnecting the alarm at the alarm user’s end and again notifying the Public
Safety Answering Point upon completion of the work.
(1981 Code, § 15.03) (Ord. 96-18, passed 9-3-1996; Am. Ord. 20-20, passed 5-18-
2020)
§ 90.04 CENTRAL STATIONS.
   No one shall operate a central station or emergency answering service in the
village unless licensed as an alarm business.
(1981 Code, § 15.04) (Ord. 96-18, passed 9-3-1996; Am. Ord. 20-20, passed 5-18-
2020)    
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 90.05 AUTOMATIC VOICE DIALING ALARMS.
    No person shall use, cause, permit to be used, or engage in the business of
providing any telephone device and/or telephone attachment that automatically
dials any village telephone line, or 911 lines connected to the Public Safety
Answering Point and then reproduces any voice message to report any robbery,
burglary, fire or other emergency.
(1981 Code, § 15.05) (Ord. 96-18, passed 9-3-1996; Am. Ord. 20-20, passed 5-18-
2020)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 90.06 ALARM USER PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)    It shall be unlawful for any alarm user to use, own or lease an alarm
system or to be in control of an alarm site wherein an alarm system is operated
or maintained without having first obtained a permit for that system.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any alarm user to use, own or lease an alarm
system or to be in control of an alarm site wherein an alarm system is operated
or maintained when a permit therefor has been suspended, revoked or expired.
   (C)   The following bi-annual fees shall be charged to obtain an alarm user
permit:
      (1)   An initial alarm user permit shall be $15.
      (2)   Renewal of an alarm user permit shall be $10.
   (D)   All permits issued are valid for two calendar years unless the permit
is revoked or suspended.
(1981 Code, § 15.06) (Ord. 96-18, passed 9-3-1996; Am. Ord. 20-20, passed 5-18-
2020)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 90.07 ALARM USER PERMIT.
   (A)    Any person who desires to install, maintain or use an alarm system,
including on-premises alarm systems, shall first make application to the Alarm
Administrator on a form to be provided and secure an alarm user permit for the
alarm system. Each application shall be signed by the applicant and shall
include, among other things, the following:
      (1)   Date of application;
      (2)   The full legal name, address and telephone number of the applicant;
      (3)   The full legal name, address and telephone number of the alarm user
who is in control of the alarm site where the alarm systems are located;
      (4)   The full legal name, address and telephone number of the owner or
manager of the alarm site;
      (5)   The name, address and telephone number of the alarm site where the
alarm systems are located;
      (6)   The type location: business or residence;
      (7)   The type of alarm: fire, burglary, medical, other;
      (8)   Business hours, if applicable;
      (9)   List of persons authorized access to the establishment during non-
business hours, including mobile/work phone numbers;
      (10)   Procedure to be followed in the event of an alarm;
      (11)   Emergency call list of personnel to notify in the event of an
alarm;
      (12)   Description and location of the alarm on the premises;
      (13)   The name and address of the alarm business that installed the
alarm.
      (14)   The name and address of the alarm business responsible for
monitoring or maintaining the alarm.
      (15)   The following statement:
         By signing this application, the alarm user agrees that he/she has
read and understood the following release, indemnification and hold harmless
provisions: The alarm user agrees to release and not hold liable the Village of
East Dundee, its Public Safety Answering Point (P.S.A.P.), and their appointed
and elected officials, officers, employees, contract employees, volunteers and
agents (the “Affiliates”) for any claims, causes of actions, losses, damages or
liabilities of any kind brought by any person, including, but not limited to,
any property damage and any death, injury or illness that arises from or
relates to any actual or claimed failure of service or any consequential
damages claimed to result from such failure, or the installation, inspection,
surveillance or operation of the user’s alarm system or the Village’s or
P.S.A.P.’s alarm system, or their receiving panels or of any other component
part of such alarm systems, whether or not due to the negligent, willful or
reckless acts or omission of the Village, the P.S.A.P., or any of the
Affiliates. The alarm user further agrees to defend, indemnify and hold
harmless the Village of East Dundee, the P.S.A.P. and the Affiliates, from any
claims, causes of actions, losses, damages or liabilities of any kind brought
by any person, including but not limited to any property damage and any death,
injury or illness, arising out of or relating to this application or any permit
or license issued by the Village, any act or omission by the Village or the
Village’s Affiliates in regard to this application, the alarm user’s connection
to the Village or P.S.A.P.’s alarm system, the alarm user’s decision not to
connect to the Village or P.S.A.P.’s alarm system (where not mandated by
another code provision), the operation of the alarm user’s alarm system, the
operation of the Village or P.S.A.P. alarm system, or the response or non-
response of any Village or P.S.A.P. Affiliates to the alarm user’s property.
      (16)   Signature of applicant.
   (B)   Incomplete applications shall be returned to the applicant. A permit
will not be issued until the completed application is received and the Alarm
Administrator has granted approval of the permit.
   (C)   An application for an alarm user permit shall be denied if:
      (1)   The applicant has failed to pay required false alarm fees for the
alarm site or for a different alarm site under the applicant’s ownership or
control.
      (2)   The applicant has failed to comply with any provisions of this
chapter or other sections of this code.
   (D)   The Alarm Administrator shall be responsible for processing and
issuing alarm user permits.
(1981 Code, § 15.06) (Ord. 96-18, passed 9-3-1996; Am. Ord. 20-20, passed 5-18-
2020)
§ 90.08 REVOCATION/SUSPENSION OF ALARM USER PERMIT.
   (A)   An alarm user permit may be revoked by the Alarm Administrator under
the following circumstances:
      (1)   More than ten false alarms are recorded in a calendar year from any
alarm system for which a permit has been issued;
      (2)   Failure to pay false alarm or user permit fees; or
      (3)    Failure to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter
within ten days after receiving notification of a violation, in writing, from
the Alarm Administrator.
   (B)   The Alarm Administrator shall notify the alarm user by certified mail,
return receipt requested, or personal delivery that the village intends to
revoke its alarm user permit within 15 days from the date of receipt of the
notice. Said notice shall further advise that the alarm user may submit, within
ten days of the date of receipt, a written request for review to the Village
Administrator, setting forth the reasons that the alarm user permit should not
be revoked or other action taken. The submission of the request shall suspend
revocation of the alarm user permit.
   (C)   If the alarm user fails to submit a request for review within the
stated time period, the Village Administrator shall review the record of the
permit and the grounds for revocation and make a determination regarding
revocation based upon those records. If revocation is ordered, the Village
Administrator shall then issue a written order of revocation, which shall
include an explanation of the consequences of revocation. The written order
shall be sent to the alarm user by certified mail, return receipt requested, or
personal delivery. Revocation shall be effective on the date following review
or the original revocation date, whichever is later. If revocation is not
ordered, notice to that effect shall be sent in the same manner.
   (D)   If a request for review is submitted within the stated time period, a
written notice of the time and place of the review shall be served on the alarm
user by the Village Administrator by first class mail or personal delivery at
least ten days prior to the date set for the review.
   (E)   At the requested review before the Village Administrator, the Alarm
Administrator and the alarm user, or his or her authorized representative,
shall have the right to present evidence. Upon completion of the review, the
Village Administrator may either enter an order of revocation, withdraw the
notice of revocation, suspend the permit until such time that he or she is
satisfied that the cause or causes of the false alarms have been eliminated, or
take such other action as may be appropriate. The alarm user, who was present
or represented at the review, will receive no further notice of revocation. An
alarm user having no representation at the review shall be notified by
certified mail, return receipt requested, or personal delivery, of the action
of the Village Administrator. Revocation shall be effective on the first
business day following completion of the review.
   (F)   Any alarm user, whose alarm user permit has been revoked pursuant to
this section, shall have the right, within ten days of the determination of
revocation, to file a written appeal with the Village Board. No alarm user
shall be required to discontinue use of its alarm system prior to the
expiration of the ten-day period. The appeal shall set forth the specific
grounds on which it is based. The Village Board shall hold a hearing on the
appeal within 30 days after its receipt. At the hearing, the appellant or a
designated representative shall have the right to present written or oral
argument in support of the appeal. The Village Board shall issue its decision
within ten days after the hearing, which decision shall be effective upon alarm
user’s receipt of notice by certified mail, receipt requested, or personal
delivery.
   (G)   Reinstatement of revoked user permit: The alarm user must submit to
the Alarm Administrator a new alarm user permit application, payment of past
due fees, fines and a reinstatement fee in the amount set forth in
Chapter 37, Fees and Fines, along with a written explanation of the action that
the alarm user has taken to substantially reduce the likelihood of false
alarms. Upon the Alarm Administrator’s determination that the aforementioned
conditions have been met, the alarm user permit may be reinstated; provided,
however, that no revoked alarm user permit may be reinstated within the six-
month period following the effective date of the revocation, unless the Alarm
Administrator, in his or her sole and absolute discretion, approves a shorter
period. Upon reinstatement, the alarm user shall be in the same position, for
purposes of calculating alarm occurrences and services charges, as an alarm
user that has received an alarm user permit for the first time.
(1981 Code, § 15.06) (Ord. 96-18, passed 9-3-1996; Am. Ord. 20-20, passed 5-18-
2020)
§ 90.09 ON-PREMISES ALARM; OUTSIDE RINGERS.
   (A)   No person shall use, allow or cause to exist an outside ringer which
emits an audible sound in any manner similar to the village’s emergency
vehicles. In addition, the sound shall be distinguishable from any and all
village alert systems broadcast in an audible manner.
   (B)   (1)   All outside ringers shall be equipped with an automatic shut-off
which will deactivate within five minutes of the initial alarm.
      (2)   Failure to provide the shut-off shall result in the immediate
suspension of the alarm user permit and shall be in violation of this chapter.
   (C)   In addition to any other remedies provided by this chapter, the Alarm
Administrator may order the immediate suspension of an alarm user permit and
removal or deactivation of an alarm system based upon knowledge of the misuse
or improper maintenance of an outside ringer.
   (D)   This section shall not apply to water flow alarms required by the Fire
Prevention Code for automatic fire suppression equipment installed in any
structure, which are programmed either to:
      (1)   Activate the communication swinger suppression after three
activations; or
      (2)   Allow only single alarming per alarm zone per armed period.
(1981 Code, § 15.07) (Ord. 96-18, passed 9-3-1996; Am. Ord. 20-20, passed 5-18-
2020)
§ 90.10 ALARM ACTIVATION WHEN ALARM USER PERMIT NOT ISSUED.
   Any alarm user, who does not have a valid alarm user permit, shall be
assessed a user fee in the amount of $300 for each notice to the Public Safety
Answering Point of an activation of the alarm system at the alarm site.
(Ord. 20-20, passed 5-18-2020)
§ 90.11 UPDATING ALARM USER PERMIT APPLICATION.
   It is unlawful for any alarm user to fail or refuse to amend its alarm user
permit application within 14 days after any of the information required and
contained therein becomes outdated or inaccurate.
(Ord. 20-20, passed 5-18-2020) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.12 TRANSFER OF ALARM USER PERMIT PROHIBITED.
   An alarm user permit cannot be transferred to another alarm site or another
alarm user or person.
(Ord. 20-20, passed 5-18-2020)
§ 90.13 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter, a Fire
Inspector or Village Building Official on official business shall have the
authority, at reasonable times and upon reasonable oral notice, to enter any
premises in the village in, or upon which, alarm systems are located to inspect
the installation or operation of alarm systems.
   (B)   If the inspection reveals any violations of the provisions of this
chapter, a written report detailing the violation shall be promptly sent to the
alarm user or business by certified mail, receipt requested, or personal
delivery. The report shall require correction within 30 days after receipt of
the notice and shall state that a failure to comply may result in the
revocation of the alarm business license or the alarm user’s permit, in
accordance with provisions of this chapter. The alarm user or business shall be
granted a reasonable extension of time to correct the violation upon good cause
shown.
(1981 Code, § 15.08) (Ord. 96-18, passed 9-3-1996; Am. Ord. 20-20, passed 5-18-
2020)
§ 90.14 FALSE ALARMS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally generate,
transmit or issue a false alarm.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any alarm user to control, operate or possess
an alarm system which generates, transmits or issues a false alarm.
   (C)   Each alarm user shall be responsible for any false alarms transmitted
by its alarm system.
   (D)   The Alarm Administrator shall maintain a record of all false alarms
and may revoke or suspend an alarm user permit upon occurrence of more than ten
false alarms in any one calendar year.
   (E)   The Alarm Administrator shall charge the alarm user a fee as provided
in
Chapter 37: Fees and Fines, for each false alarm in excess of four in any one
calendar year. Payment of the charges shall be remitted to the Police
Department by the alarm user within 15 days of the date of mailing of the
statement of the charges.
   (F)   Alarm users may, within 15 days of the date of mailing of a statement
for false alarm fees, submit a written report to the Alarm Administrator or
request to meet with the Alarm Administrator to show cause for voiding a
recorded false alarm. The Alarm Administrator shall review the alarm user’s
report and/or meet with the alarm user and issue a written finding as to
whether or not the false alarm record will be voided. The finding of the Alarm
Administrator shall be final and a copy of the findings shall be provided to
the alarm user by first class mail.
   (G)   If an alarm user has submitted a report or requested a meeting
pursuant to division (F), any fees due shall be payable to the village within
seven days from the date of the Alarm Administrator’s written findings on the
false alarms.
(1981 Code, § 15.09) (Ord. 96-18, passed 9-3-1996; Am. Ord. 20-20, passed 5-18-
2020) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.15 NONCOMPLIANCE.
   Any person or business that violates any of the provisions of this chapter
or refuses to remedy a violation of this chapter shall be subject to the fees
and fines set forth in
Chapter 37: Fees and Fines, and §
10.99 of the Village Code.
(1981 Code, § 15.10) (Ord. 96-18, passed 9-3-1996; Am. Ord. 20-20, passed 5-18-
2020)
§ 90.16 LIABILITY OF VILLAGE AND P.S.A.P.
   The village and P.S.A.P. assume no liability for any defects or failure in
the operation of any alarm system because of the actions or inaction of any
person associated with the installation, operation, monitoring or maintenance
thereof, or for the transmission of alarm signals or messages or the relaying
of such signals and messages. In the event that the village finds it necessary
to suspend or revoke an alarm business license or user permit, or to otherwise
require the disconnection of any alarm system, the village shall have no
liability for such action. No special duty or any other duty, other than that
owed to the general public, shall be created by virtue of this chapter or by
virtue of the issuance of any alarm user permit or as a result of the
transmission to, or receipt of, an alarm signal by the village’s Police or Fire
Departments, or its P.S.A.P.
(1981 Code, § 15.11) (Ord. 96-18, passed 9-3-1996; Am. Ord. 20-20, passed 5-18-
2020)
CHAPTER 91: STREETS, ALLEYS AND SIDEWALKS
Section
   
91.01   Names of streets
   
91.02   Numbering buildings
   
91.03   Damage to streets
   
91.04   Encroachments on streets
   
91.05   Obstructing streets
   
91.06   Builders occupying streets
   
91.07   Materials in streets
   
91.08   Excavations
   
91.09   Laying of pipe in streets
   
91.10   Moving structures on streets
   
91.11   Debris in streets
   
91.12   Protection of work in streets
   
91.13   Barbed wire fences
   
91.14   Advertising on streets
   
91.15   Snow on sidewalks
   
91.16   Driveways
   
91.17   Trees
   
91.18   Encroachments prohibited
§ 91.01 NAMES OF STREETS.
   (A)   In general. All streets of the village shall be known and designated
by the names applied hereto, respectively, on the map of the village kept on
file in the office of the Village Clerk and the street names designated on the
map shall continue to be the names of streets unless and until changed by
ordinance of the Board of Trustees.
   (B)   Honorary street name designations. The honorary street name
designations for streets policy, attached to Ord. 09-29, passed 9-21-2009, as
amended from time to time, is hereby adopted by reference as fully as if set
forth in full in this chapter.
(1981 Code, § 5.01) (Am. Ord. 09-29, passed 9-21-2009)
§ 91.02 NUMBERING BUILDINGS.
   Buildings located along the streets of the village shall be numbered in
accordance with a chart kept by the Village Clerk showing the proper street
number of each lot. The owner of any such building shall place the number on
his or her building so as to be visible from the street.
(1981 Code, § 5.02)
§ 91.03 DAMAGE TO STREETS.
   No person shall damage or deface any street, alley, sidewalk, public way,
park or other public property, or any post, wire lamp, street sign, traffic
sign, tree, grass, vegetation, gutter, drain, manhole or any other appurtenance
thereon, except as may be authorized by the village.
(1981 Code, § 5.03)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 91.04 ENCROACHMENTS ON STREETS.
   (A)   No person shall erect or maintain any temporary structure or thing on,
over or under any street, alley, sidewalk or public way, except by permit or
license from the Chief of Police, as follows:
      (1)   Application for the permit or license shall describe the nature of
the temporary encroachment with as much detail as the Village Police Department
shall require.
      (2)   The Chief of Police, may issue or deny the permit or license and
may impose any condition to the permit or license the Chief deems necessary to
protect the abutting properties and the safety of the residents.
      (3)   For purposes of this division (A), temporary shall be deemed to be
a period of time of three days, (24 hours each day) or less.
   (B)   No person shall erect or maintain any structure, equipment, vehicle or
encroachment of any kind (other than a temporary obstruction for which a permit
or license has been issued in accordance with division (A) above), on, over or
under any street, alley, sidewalk or public way unless a permit, therefore, has
been issued by the Village Building Department.
      (1)   Application for a permit shall be made to the Village Building
Department and include a specific description of the obstruction proposed on
any street, alley, sidewalk or public way end and the necessity for such
obstruction.
      (2)   The application shall be reviewed and approved by the Village Board
upon demonstration that the proposed obstruction is of necessity and does not
interfere with the appearance, or use of surrounding properties or the
aesthetics of the area.
   (C)   Awnings made of a pliable substance attached to a building and
extending not less than eight feet above the surface of the sidewalk may be
erected and maintained without a permit.
   (D)   Any encroachment on any street, alley, sidewalk or public way once
permitted shall be maintained so that it does not endanger or obstruct the
public.
   (E)   No improvements other than village approved landscaping, sidewalks and
mailboxes shall be placed within the street right-of-way. Low voltage lighting
may be placed in the street right-of-way with permission of the Village Public
Works Department. All landscaping, decorative landscape, fencing and the like
placed in the street right-of-way shall be at the owner’s risk and may be
removed by the village and replaced with grass or sod in conjunction with
village repair and maintenance of the public street and utilities.
   (F)   Any encroachment maintained in violation of this section is declared a
nuisance and may be abated by the village in the event it is determined that
the safety of village residents is in question.
(1981 Code, § 5.04) (Ord. 04-34, passed 9-20-2004; Am. Ord. 13-28, passed 8-19-
2013) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 91.05 OBSTRUCTING STREETS.
   (A)   No person shall obstruct or endanger the free passage or proper use of
the public of any street, sidewalk, alley or public place, except as may be
permitted by this chapter.
   (B)   Goods, wares and merchandise may be placed on sidewalks for a
reasonable time, as may be necessary while loading and unloading, provided
pedestrian traffic is not obstructed.
(1981 Code, § 5.05)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 91.06 BUILDERS OCCUPYING STREETS.
   (A)   Builders may occupy the portion of the public street and sidewalk
abutting upon and adjacent to such buildings for private use in connection with
the actual building operations under the permit as is required subject to the
supervision and direction of the Director of Public Works.
   (B)   No materials, except those required for immediate use in connection
with a building or structure or the alteration or repair thereof, shall be
placed upon the street or sidewalk abutting upon or adjacent to the building.
As soon as the building or structure is under roof, all materials shall be
placed within the lot line and the street and sidewalk cleaned and placed in
the same condition as before the beginning of building operations under the
permit.
   (C)   No more than one-half the space between the center line of the street
and the lot line of the premises upon which the building alterations or repairs
are being conducted under the permit and no more than one-third the width of
any public sidewalk, shall be occupied under the permit; provided the full
width of the sidewalk may be occupied by the consent of the Director of Public
Works and the providing of a temporary walk leading around the obstructed
portion of the sidewalk connecting with the permanent walk at either end
thereof. The temporary walk shall be constructed to the satisfaction of the
Director of Public Works, to be made safe and secure for public travel upon the
same.
   (D)   No building material, temporary walk or obstruction shall be placed so
as to render inaccessible access to, or obstruct any fire hydrant, manhole,
catch basin inaccessible access to, or obstruct any fire hydrant, manhole,
catch basin or vault, or render impassable to vehicles any street, alley or
public way.
   (E)   The holder of the permit shall, at all times during the work, maintain
the portion of the permanent sidewalk reserved or the temporary walk above
provided for, in a safe condition and clear of all material, rubbish, dirt or
snow.
   (F)   He or she shall erect and maintain a sufficient and suitable fence
railing or barricade to guard all excavations, embankments or obstructions
along the street, obstructed during the time he or she shall occupy the same
under the permit.
   (G)   He or she shall place and maintain proper and sufficient red lights or
tallow pots on each end of every obstruction or excavation and at intervals of
50 feet along the same at night. No person shall remove, extinguish or disturb
the lights or pots.
   (H)   He or she shall, at no time, obstruct the gutter or waterway of any
street so as to prevent free passage of water along the street and, if any
gutter be shaded or covered so that ice accumulated therein, he or she shall
clear the gutter of the ice so as to allow the water to pass freely at all
times.
(1981 Code, § 5.06)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 91.07 MATERIALS IN STREETS.
   (A)   Any person not holding a building permit shall not store any materials
on any street, sidewalk or public place without a permit therefor from the
village.
   (B)   The fee for the permit shall be as provided in the village annual fee
schedule.
(1981 Code, § 5.07)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 91.08 EXCAVATIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to make any excavation in any
street, alley or public place or tunnel under any street, alley or public place
in the village without a permit or without complying with the regulations
herein contained. The permits shall not be required for excavations made by
public utility companies operating under an agreement with the village.
   (B)   Applications for permits shall be made to the Village Clerk and shall
state thereon the locations of the intended excavation or tunnel, the size
thereof, the purpose therefor and the person for whom the work is being done.
   (C)   (1)   No permit shall be issued without the payment of a fee as
provided in the village annual fee schedule for each excavation or tunnel not
exceeding 100 feet in length, and an additional fee as per the annual fee
schedule for each additional 100 feet or fraction thereof.
      (2)   Any person obtaining a permit shall also give bond, with sureties
to be approved by the Board of Trustees, conditioned that he or she will
suitably guard or protect any excavation or obstruction, and defend, save, keep
harmless and indemnify the village of and from all actions, suits, costs,
damages and expenses whatsoever, including attorney’s fees, which shall or may,
at any time, happen to come to it for or on account of any injuries or damages
received or sustained by any party by or from acts or omissions of the
applicant, or his or her employees, in doing the work; and that he or she will
restore the streets, sidewalks, public square or alley to its former condition
and complete the work as speedily as possible, and when completed, notify the
Village Clerk of the fact.
   (D)   In addition to the liability of the person holding a permit and the
sureties upon the bond, the person for whom the work may have been done shall
also be liable to the village for any and all expense at costs to which the
village may be put, or become liable for, by reason of the failure to
reconstruct, restore or refill properly.
   (E)   No permit to enter upon any street, public square or alley for any of
the purposes herein mentioned shall be issued or granted to any person who
shall in any respect be delinquent in the payment of moneys herein provided
for, or who shall in the judgement of the Board of Trustees be unqualified in
engage in the class of work herein provided for.
   (F)   Any person making any excavation or tunnel shall do so according to
the terms and conditions of the application and permit authorizing the work to
be done. Sufficient and proper barricades and lights shall be maintained to
protect persons, vehicles and animals from injury by or because of the
excavation being made.
   (G)   The Director of Public Works is authorized, if he or she deems it
advisable in connection with the issuance of the work permit, to provide that
no actual connections shall be made or back filling done until the work has
been inspected by the village, in which case the person to whom the permit has
been granted shall pay to the village the actual cost of any inspection.
   (H)   Any person making any excavation or tunnel in or under any street,
alley or public place to its original condition promptly upon the completion of
the work for which the excavation or tunnel was made and have the
responsibility for repair for a one-year period after restoration. In case of
any unreasonable delay in so doing, the Board of Trustees shall give notice to
the person that unless the excavation or tunnel is refilled properly and the
surface relaid so as to be in the same condition as it was prior to the
excavation within ten days, the village will do the work and charge the expense
of doing the same to the person. If, at the end of the time mentioned, the
conditions of the notice have not been complied with, the work shall be done by
the village, an accurate account of the expense involved shall be kept and the
total cost shall be charged to the person who made the excavation or tunnel.
   (I)   Any person making any excavation or tunnel on private property, in
conjunction with the construction of any building or improvement, shall, as
soon as practicable, complete the building or improvement over or on the same.
In no event shall an excavation remain open and the building thereon remain
incomplete for a period of more than 30 days. In the event any excavation is
not built on or over within 30 days after opening, the excavation shall
immediately be filled and closed.
(1981 Code, § 5.08)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 91.09 LAYING OF PIPE IN STREETS.
   (A)   No sewer, water pipe, conduit pipe, gas pipe, wire or cable for
conveying electric current for any street or alley pavement, sidewalk or other
like improvement shall be placed, laid or maintained in, under or upon any
street, alley, sidewalk, easement of passage or public peace, except
improvements constructed under special assessment proceedings, unless a permit
authorizing the same has been issued by the village.
   (B)   Any utility pipes when placed in any public street or alley shall be
laid so that there will be no interference with sewers or water pipes and
before any pipes are laid, permission must be secured from the village and same
must be placed in a portion of the street or alley as may be directed by the
village.
   (C)   A utility company that lays down pipes in any public street or alley
shall make and file with the Village Clerk an accurate map showing the exact
location of every line of pipe laid by it, which map shall be accessible for
public inspection and shall be kept constantly revised to show any changes or
additions.
(1981 Code, § 5.09)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 91.10 MOVING STRUCTURES ON STREETS.
   (A)   No person shall move any building or structure on any street without a
permit from the Director of Public Works. The Director of Public Works may
issue the permit under the conditions as he or she may reasonably prescribe to
protect the streets and village and private property and to minimize public
inconvenience.
   (B)   He or she may require the permitted to execute a bond or insurance
contract on behalf of the village in the amount as he or she deems appropriate
conditioned that the permittee will comply with the conditions of the permit
and indemnify the village against any damage caused to village or private
property or any person by removal of the building or structure.
(1981 Code, § 5.10)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 91.11 DEBRIS IN STREETS.
   (A)   No person shall litter or deposit any foreign matter on any street,
alley, sidewalk, park or public place, except building materials and
merchandise as permitted under this chapter or as may be permitted by the Board
of Trustees. The foreign matter shall expressly include leaves, grass
clippings, landscape waste in any form whatsoever, snow or ice.
   (B)   Any person violating this section shall be liable for the cost of
removal of the foreign matter in addition to the penalty provided for violation
of this code.
(1981 Code, § 5.11) (Am. Ord. 93-9, passed 9-20-1993; Am. Ord. 11-04, passed 2-
7-2011)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 91.12 PROTECTION OF WORK IN STREETS.
   Any person laying or making an excavation in or doing any work in any
street, sidewalk or other public place shall maintain suitable barricades to
prevent injury to any person or vehicle by reason of the work. Barricades shall
be protected by suitable lights at night. Any defect in any pavement shall be
barricaded to prevent injury. Any person maintaining any opening or excavation
in any such place shall guard the opening or excavation while the same remains
open, by proper barricades and lights. No person shall interfere with or
disturb any barricades or lights lawfully placed to protect or make new
pavement or excavation or opening in any street, alley or sidewalk.
(1981 Code, § 5.12)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 91.13 BARBED WIRE FENCES.
   No person shall maintain or construct any fence composed in whole or part of
barbed wire, with any similar materials designed to injure any person or with
any wire charged with electrical current, except to protect industrial
property, in which case the barbed wire must be at least six feet above the
sidewalk and extend inward from the property line.
(1981 Code, § 5.13)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 91.14 ADVERTISING ON STREETS.
   No person shall paint or post any signs or bills on any trees, poles or
other structures in any street, parkway or right-of-way or on the surface of
any street or sidewalk.
(1981 Code, § 5.14)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 91.15 SNOW ON SIDEWALKS.
   The person occupying the ground floor of any building, the user of any lot
without a structure thereon and the owner of any vacant building or other
premises shall remove the snow and ice accumulating on the abutting sidewalks
within 24 hours after any snowfall has ceased. If snow or ice cannot be
removed, the surface shall be sanded or otherwise treated to lessen the hazard
for pedestrians until the climate permits removal.
(1981 Code, § 5.15)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 91.16 DRIVEWAYS.
   (A)   No person shall construct a driveway across any sidewalk without first
having obtained a permit therefor from the Director of Public Works.
   (B)   The fee for a driveway construction permit is as provided in the
village annual fee schedule.
   (C)   Driveways across sidewalks shall be constructed in compliance with
specifications which have been adopted by the Board of Trustees and which are
on file in the office of the Clerk.
   (D)   The person maintaining a driveway shall keep it in good repair at the
place where it crosses the sidewalk and free from any obstruction or other
openings.
(1981 Code, § 5.16)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 91.17 TREES.
   (A)   No person shall plant any tree or shrub in any street, parkway or
other public place without first having secured a permit therefor. Application
for the permit shall be made to the Director of Public Works for approval.
   (B)   No person shall injure any tree or shrub planted in any street,
parkway or public place.
   (C)   No person shall attach any sign, advertisement or notice to any tree
or shrub in any street, parkway or public place.
   (D)   Any tree or shrub which overhangs any sidewalk, street or other public
place in the village in a way as to impede or interfere with traffic or travel
on the public place shall be trimmed by the owner of the abutting premises on
which the trees or shrubs grown so that the obstruction shall cease. Any limb
of a tree which has become likely to fall on or across any public way or place
shall be removed by the owner of the premises on which the tree grows or
stands.
   (E)   (1)   No person shall attach any wire or rope to any tree without the
permission of the Director of Public Works.
      (2)   Any person granted the right to maintain poles and wires in the
streets, alleys or other public places in the village shall, in the absence of
provision in the franchise concerning the subject, keep the wires and poles
from and away from any trees or shrubs in the places so far as may be possible
and shall keep all trees and shrubs properly trimmed, subject to the
supervision of the Director of Public Works, to insure that injury shall not be
done to the poles, wires, shrubs and trees by contact with wires.
(1981 Code, § 5.17)
Penalty, see § 10.99
Cross-reference:
   Trees, see
Chapter 95
§ 91.18 ENCROACHMENTS PROHIBITED.
   No person, firm, corporation or other entity shall install, place, maintain
or construct any structure which encroaches upon the State of Illinois right of
way on Route 72 within the village limits.
(Ord. 12-29, passed 6-18-2012)
CHAPTER 92: ANIMALS
Section
   
92.01   Short title; application
   
92.02   Definitions
   
92.03   Adoption of Kane County animal control ordinance
   
92.04   Limitation on number of dogs and cats
   
92.05   Farm animals
   
92.06   Chickens and ducks
   
92.07   Enforcement
§ 92.01 SHORT TITLE/APPLICATION.
   (A)   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Animal Control
Ordinance”.
   (B)   To establish animal control regulations and procedures, the Animal
Control Ordinance adopts Kane County’s Animal Control Ordinance, authorizing
the village to enforce its provisions as modified by this chapter, and adopts
certain additional provisions set forth herein. Kane County also has authority
to enforce (within the village) Kane County’s Animal Control Ordinance, without
such modifications, pursuant to the intergovernmental agreement.
(Ord. 20-14, passed 5-4-2020)
§ 92.02 DEFINITIONS.
   The definitions set forth in Kane County’s Animal Control Ordinance, as
amended from time to time and as modified by §
92.03, are incorporated herein as if fully set forth. In addition, as used in
this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires, the terms specified in
this section have the following meanings:
   ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION. Enforcement of this chapter by a hearing
officer, pursuant to
Chapter 36, Administrative Adjudication, of this code.
   ANIMAL CONTROL WARDEN. The village’s police officers shall be animal control
wardens to perform duties pursuant to this chapter.
   CHIEF OF POLICE. The duly appointed Chief of Police of the Village of East
Dundee.
   DANGEROUS DOG OR OTHER ANIMAL; DANGEROUS DOG; DANGEROUS ANIMAL. Any
individual dog or other animal, when unmuzzled, unleashed, or unattended by its
owner or custodian that behaves in a manner that a reasonable person would
believe poses a serious and unjustified imminent threat of serious physical
injury or death to a person or a companion animal in a public place, including
menacing behavior.
   ENCLOSURE. A fence or structure with a design approved by the village of at
least six feet in height, which is covered, forming or causing an enclosure
suitable to prevent the entry of young children, and suitable to confine a
vicious or dangerous animal in conjunction with other measures that may be
taken by the owner or keeper, such as tethering of the vicious or dangerous
animal within the enclosure. The enclosure shall be securely enclosed and
locked and designed to prevent the animal from escaping from the enclosure. If
the enclosure is a room within a residence, the door must be locked. A vicious
or dangerous animal may be allowed to move about freely within the entire
residence if it is muzzled at all times.
   HEARING OFFICER. The person appointed by the village to hear and decide
cases brought pursuant to
Chapter 36, Administrative Adjudication, of this code.
   INTERGOVERNMENTAL AGREEMENT. The intergovernmental agreement between Kane
County and the village for animal control services to be provided by Kane
County, which is in effect from and after September 12, 2016, until terminated.
   KANE COUNTY/ COUNTY. County of Kane, Illinois.
   KANE COUNTY ANIMAL CONTROL ORDINANCE/COUNTY ORDINANCE. Chapter 5, Animal
Control Ordinance, of the Kane County Code, as it may be amended from time to
time.
   POLICE DEPARTMENT. The Village’s police department.
   VICIOUS ANIMAL; VICIOUS DOG OR ANIMAL.
      (1)   Any individual dog or other animal that when unprovoked bites or
attacks a human being or other animal either on public or private property; and
      (2)   Any individual dog or other animal that has a trait or
characteristic and a generally known reputation for viciousness, dangerousness,
or unprovoked attacks upon human beings or other animals, unless handled in a
particular manner with special equipment.
   VILLAGE. The Village of East Dundee, Illinois.
   VILLAGE POLICE OFFICER; POLICE OFFICER. A sworn law enforcement officer
employed by the village’s Police Department, who shall be an animal control
warden, may be appointed as a humane investigator, and shall have the authority
of a sheriff’s deputy under the county ordinance.
(Ord. 20-14, passed 5-4-2020)
§ 92.03 ADOPTION OF KANE COUNTY ANIMAL CONTROL ORDINANCE.
   The village adopts and incorporates by reference Kane County’s Animal
Control Ordinance, Chapter 5 of the Kane County Code, with the following
exceptions thereto, consisting of certain deletions and changes, which shall
control wherever such exceptions are applicable or are in conflict with certain
other provisions of that code. In addition, to the extent that any provision of
the Kane County Animal Control Ordinance limits its application to the
corporate area of the county, outside of a municipality, that provision shall
apply within the village.
   (A)   Section 5-2: Definitions:
      (1)   The definitions in §
92.02 of this chapter are incorporated into the county ordinance, subject to
the following:
         (a)   “Dangerous dog”, as defined in the county ordinance shall be
deleted and replaced with “dangerous dog; dangerous dog or other animal;
dangerous animal”, as defined in §
92.02:
      DANGEROUS DOG OR OTHER ANIMAL; DANGEROUS DOG; DANGEROUS ANIMAL: Any
individual dog or other animal, when unmuzzled, unleashed, or unattended by its
owner or custodian that behaves in a manner that a reasonable person would
believe poses a serious and unjustified imminent threat of serious physical
injury or death to a person or a companion animal in a public place, including
menacing behavior.
         (b)   The definition of “department” in the county ordinance shall be
amended to include the following:
   The Police Department shall have the same authority as the Department for
village enforcement purposes.
         (c)   The definition of “enclosure” in the county ordinance shall be
deleted and replaced with the following definition from §
92.02:
      ENCLOSURE: A fence or structure with a design approved by the village of
at least six feet in height, which is covered, forming or causing an enclosure
suitable to prevent the entry of young children, and suitable to confine a
vicious or dangerous animal in conjunction with other measures that may be
taken by the owner or keeper, such as tethering of the vicious or dangerous
animal  within the enclosure. The enclosure shall be securely enclosed and
locked and designed to prevent the animal from escaping from the enclosure. If
the enclosure is a room within a residence, the door must be locked. A vicious
or dangerous animal may be allowed to move about freely within the entire
residence if it is muzzled at all times.
         (d)   The term and definition of “vicious dog” in the county ordinance
shall be deleted and replaced with “vicious animal; vicious dog or animal”, as
defined in §
92.02:
      VICIOUS ANIMAL; VICIOUS DOG OR ANIMAL:
      1.   Any individual dog or other animal that when unprovoked bites or
attacks a human being or other animal either on public or private property; and
      2.   Any individual dog or other animal that has a trait or
characteristic and a generally known reputation for viciousness, dangerousness,
or unprovoked attacks upon human beings or other animals, unless handled in a
particular manner with special equipment.
         (e)   These new terms and definitions shall be substituted whenever
the original term is referenced.
   (B)   Section 5-9: Dog Running At Large; Public Nuisance; Impoundment: shall
be amended as follows:
      (1)   The title shall be revised to read: Dogs/Cats Running At Large;
Public Nuisance; Impoundment; and
      (2)   The following shall be inserted at the end of the paragraph:
         This paragraph applies to cats, which are not permitted to run at
large.
      (3)   The following paragraph shall be added:
         The following restrictions apply specifically to dogs:
            1.   It shall be unlawful to permit any dog, except when on a leash
controlled by the owner or his or her agent, to use or be upon any public
street, sidewalk, parkway, public area or unenclosed premises within the
village.
            2.   It shall be unlawful to permit any dog, even though on a
leash, to be in or enter upon any public hall, restaurant, confectionery shop,
office, store, grocery, tavern or any other store for the sale of food, except
any store for the sale of animal pets anywhere within the village during the
time that any of the places are open for use by the public.
            3.   It shall be unlawful for any dog, even though on a leash, to
go or be upon any school premises or public playground within the village or
upon a path or sidewalk extending through or within any school premises or
public playground within the village, unless permitted by their respective
authorities.
            4.   No leash shall be longer than eight feet in length.
            5.   The provisions of this section shall not apply to dogs leading
blind persons or other duly approved service animals in the course of their
service.
            6.   Any waste deposited by a dog on public property or right-of-
way, public walks, recreation areas or the private property of others must be
immediately removed by the person who has custody or control of the dog unless
otherwise authorized by the property owner. Any person violating this section
shall be liable for the cost of removal of the waste in addition to the penalty
provided for violation of this code.
   (C)   Subsection E of Section 5-10: Notice Of Impoundment: Service Of
Notice; Redemption Of Impounded Dog; Conditions, is amended to include the
following:
      Payment of an additional impoundment fee into the county’s animal control
fund, as a penalty for the first offense and for each subsequent offense, does
not apply if apprehension and impoundment is by the Police Department.
   (D)   Section 5-12: Animals Exhibiting Signs Of Rabies; Notice To
Administrator; Confinement Of Animal; Animals Exposed; Confinement; is amended
to be and read as follows:
      The owner of any animal which exhibits clinical signs of rabies, whether
or not such animal has been inoculated against rabies, shall immediately notify
the County administrator or Chief of Police, and shall promptly confine such
animal under the direct supervision of a licensed veterinarian for a period of
at least ten days. Any animal in direct contact with such animal, whether or
not the exposed animal has been inoculated against rabies, shall be confined as
ordered by the administrator or Chief of Police.
   (E)   Section 5-13, Report Of Bite By Animal; Confinement; Report; At End Of
Confinement; Confinement In Owner’s House; Reduction Of Period; Violations;
Expense; shall be amended by inserting the following final paragraph:
      The Chief of Police shall have the same authority as the County
administrator under this section, and shall work cooperatively with the
administrator.
   (F)   Section 5-14: Prevention Of Spread Of Rabies; Powers; shall be amended
by inserting the following final paragraph:
      The Chief of Police also may order such preventive action.
   (G)   Section 5-15: Enclosure For Vicious Dog Or Other Animal; Leash For
Dangerous Dog Or Other Animal; Exemptions; Injunction; Nuisance, is amended as
follows:
      (1)   A new first paragraph is inserted, to be and read as follows:
         A vicious or dangerous animal is declared to be a nuisance and it is
unlawful to keep or harbor a nuisance animal, except as specifically provided
in this section.
      (2)   The following additional requirements are added:
         (a)   Vicious and dangerous dogs shall not be classified in a manner
that is specific to breed.
         (b)   If an animal is found to be vicious or dangerous, it shall be
subject to enclosure if deemed appropriate by the Chief of Police. The owner of
a vicious animal or dangerous dog shall allow reasonable access of a police
officer to inspect the enclosure for compliance with an enclosure order and the
animal shall not be released to the owner until so approved.
         The only times that a vicious or dangerous animal is allowed out of
the enclosure are:
            (1)   if it is necessary for the owner or keeper to obtain
veterinary care;
            (2)   in case of an emergency or natural disaster where the
animal’s life is threatened; or
            (3)   to comply with the order of the court or Hearing Officer,
provided that it is securely muzzled and restrained with a leash not exceeding
six feet in length, and shall be under the direct control and supervision of
the owner or keeper or muzzled in its owner’s residence.
         (c)   No owner or keeper of a vicious or dangerous animal shall sell
or give it away without court or Hearing Officer approval.
         (d)   Whenever an owner of a vicious or dangerous animal relocates, he
or she shall notify the administrator and the Police Department within seven
days of relocation.
         (e)   A Hearing Officer may find an animal to be vicious and order it
to be removed from the village.
         (f)   Any animal that has been found to be a dangerous animal and is
not confined to an enclosure shall be impounded by the Police Department, an
animal control warden or any law enforcement authority have jurisdiction in
that area.
         (g)   The Chief of Police may find an animal to be dangerous, pursuant
to the same requirements as the County administrator. The owner of a dog or
other animal so found to be a dangerous animal may request a hearing to contest
the matter in Administrative Adjudication within 30 days of receipt of
notification of the determination, for a de novo hearing on the determination.
         (h)   No dog or cat or other domesticated animal, which kills a
chicken or duck on a permitted tract of land, shall for that reason alone be
considered a vicious or dangerous animal.
         (i)   The village may file any complaint in Administrative
Adjudication, in accordance with its procedures.
         (j)   References to “court” shall be replaced with “court or Hearing
Officer;”
         (k)   For enforcement purposes, the Chief of Police shall have
authority to make determinations otherwise granted to the County administrator.
   (H)   Division 2. Prohibited Animals, Sections 5-16 to 5-16-2, is deleted in
its entirety and replaced with the following:
      5-16: Dangerous Animals.
      It shall be unlawful to keep or harbor in the village any bear, lion,
wildcat, catamount, orangutan, chimpanzee, tiger, poisonous or other dangerous
reptile or any other animal which is free by nature or wild by nature in the
eyes of the law and dangerous to humankind. It shall also be unlawful for any
person to keep or harbor any vicious animal in the village or any animal which
is dangerous because of a propensity to injure persons, except in accordance
with Section 5-15 of this chapter.
   (I)   A new Section 5-16-1, Potentially Dangerous Dog; Vicious Animal, shall
be inserted to be and read as follows:
      5-16-1: Potentially Dangerous Dog; Vicious Animal.
      A.   A dog found running at large and unsupervised with 3 or more other
dogs may be deemed a potentially dangerous dog by an animal control warden or
Police Officer. Potentially dangerous dogs shall be spayed or neutered and
micro-chipped within 14 days of reclaim. The designation of “potentially
dangerous dog” shall expire 12 months after the most recent violation of this
Section. Failure to comply with this Section will result in impoundment of the
dog and/or a fine.
      B.   A potentially dangerous dog may be deemed a vicious animal if it, or
one or more of those other dogs, committed an unprovoked bite or attack on a
human being or other animal on public or private property.
   (J)   A new Section 5-16-2, Biting Dogs, shall be inserted to be and read as
follows:
      5-16-2: Biting Dogs.
      A.   Biting Dog. A dog which has bitten, scratched or otherwise injured
any person so as to cause abrasion to the skin of the person.
      B.   Whenever a dog has bitten, scratched or otherwise injured a person
within the village so as to cause an abrasion of the skin and the person so
injured was not, at the time, unlawfully trespassing upon the person or
property of the owner of the dog, process shall issue and be served upon the
owner of the dog.
      C.   If the defendant is found guilty, he or she shall be fined for the
offense, or the court or Hearing Officer may stay execution and continue the
cause subject to an order that defendant have the dog disposed of within the
time for which the case is continued. Upon satisfactory showing to the court or
Hearing Officer that the dog has been disposed of, the court or Hearing
Officer, in its discretion, may dismiss the action.
   (K)   A new Section 5-16-3, Damage to Property, shall be inserted to be and
read as follows:
      5-16-3: Damage To Property.
      No person shall, without the consent of the owner of the property
concerned, permit any dog or cat in his or her custody or control to enter upon
the premises of another within the village, or permit any dog or cat in his or
her custody to injure or carry away any vegetable, plant, fruit, shrub, tree,
flower or other thing which may be on the premises or which may be planted or
seeded there.
   (L)   Sections 5-19 through 22 shall not be interpreted to infer or imply
that the animals protected thereunder are permitted in the village, because
farm animals, other than chickens and ducks, are not permitted pursuant to §
92.05 of this chapter.
   (M)   Sections 5-26: Prohibited Acts: shall be amended to permit the
purchase of baby chicks and baby ducklings to the extent that it complies with
§
92.06 of this chapter.
(Ord. 20-14, passed 5-4-2020; Am. Ord. 21-03, passed 1-18-2021)
§ 92.04 LIMITATION ON NUMBER OF DOGS AND CATS.
   (A)   A total of not more than three dogs or three cats or any combination
thereof, such that the cumulative total shall not exceed four, is permitted to
be or remain in or about any single-family detached residence, building or lot.
   (B)   Not more than one dog or cat is permitted in any single dwelling unit
in any multiple housing dwelling unit within the village at any one time.
   (C)   This section applies only to dogs and cats over the age of three
months.
(1981 Code, § 14.20) (Ord. 02-16, passed 10-21-2002; Am. Ord. 09-09, passed 4-
20-2009; Am. Ord. 20-14, passed 5-4-2020)
§ 92.05 FARM ANIMALS.
   No person shall keep or allow to be kept upon or about the premises or upon
any vacant property or public streets within the village any cattle, horses,
swine, sheep, goats, geese, or poultry (other than chickens and ducks as
permitted in §
92.06).
(1981 Code, § 14.04) (Ord. 20-14, passed 5-4-2020; Am. Ord. 21-03, passed 1-18-
2021)
§ 92.06 CHICKENS AND DUCKS.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      CHICKEN. A member of the subspecies Gallus gallus domesticus, also known
as a domesticated fowl.
      COOP INCLUDES POULTRY TRACTOR AND POULTRY RUN. A structure that is
designed to house chickens and/or ducks. A mobile coop is a POULTRY TRACTOR. A
POULTRY RUN is an outdoor area that is enclosed on all vertical sides by
fencing. The run must be attached to or must surround a coop with a doorway or
hatch that allows access into the space by chickens and/or ducks.
      DUCK. A member of the subspecies Anas platyrhynchos domesticus, also
known as a domesticated duck.
      PERMITTED TRACT OF LAND. The tract of land as identified by the
application upon which a permit is granted by the village for the keeping
chickens and/or ducks.
      PERMITTEE. An applicant who has been granted a permit by the village to
raise, harbor or keep chickens and/or ducks.
      PERMITTING OFFICER. A person appointed by the Village Administrator.
      SINGLE FAMILY DWELLING. Any building that contains only one dwelling
unit.
      TRACT OF LAND. A property that has one single family dwelling located on
that property.
   (B)   Permit required.
      (1)   No person shall raise, harbor or keep chickens and/or ducks within
the village without obtaining a valid coop permit from the village.
      (2)   In order to obtain a permit, an applicant must submit a completed
application with a fee as established by the annual fee schedule. If for any
reason, the permit is not issued, the fee will be refunded. Once granted, a
permit shall remain in effect until the earliest of (a) its suspension or
revocation, (b) the repeal of this section or (c) abandonment of the permit,
which shall occur without further action of the village if no chickens and/or
ducks are kept on a tract of land for six or more consecutive months.
      (3)   Requirements to obtain a permit shall include:
         (a)   That all requirements of this section are met;
         (b)   That all fees for the permit are paid in full;
         (c)   That all judgments in the village’s favor and against the
applicant have been paid in full;
         (d)   That the tract of land to be permitted shall contain only one
single family dwelling occupied and be used as such by the applicant;
         (e)   That the applicant has provided notice to the residents of all
immediately adjacent dwellings of the applicant’s intent to obtain a permit;
         (f)   That the applicant has successfully completed an approved class
in raising chickens and/or ducks in an urban setting;
         (g)   That a permit shall only be issued after the coop has been
inspected and determined to meet all requirements of this section;
         (h)   That the issuance of a permit will not be detrimental to or
endanger the public health, safety, comfort or general welfare of the community
or neighboring residents;
         (i)   That the issuance of a permit will not be injurious to the
enjoyment of property by property owners in the immediate vicinity.
      (4)   If the permitting officer concludes as a result of the information
contained in the application that the requirements for a permit have been met,
then the officer shall issue the permit.
      (5)   If the applicant is found to be in violation of this section, he/
she will be given a reasonable time to come into compliance and, upon
compliance, the permit shall be issued; or, if not in compliance, the
application and fee shall be returned and a new application must be filed.
   (C)   Coop permits. Coop permits are non-transferrable.
   (D)   Suspension or revocation of a coop permit.
      (1)   The permitting officer may seek suspension or revocation of a coop
permit pursuant to the applicable regulations and procedures of § 110.12,
Revocation and Suspension, for the following violations:
         (a)   False statements on any application or report required by this
section;
         (b)   Failure to pay any fee;
         (c)   Failure to correct deficiencies noted in notices of violation
within the time specified in the notice;
         (d)   Failure to maintain the coop in compliance with this section;
         (e)   Failure to comply with the provisions of an approved mitigation
or remediation plan ordered by the Village President as a penalty at a
violation hearing; or
         (f)   Failure to comply with any provision of this section.
      (2)   Notification. A decision to revoke, suspend, or deny a permit, or
impose a mitigation or remediation plan shall be in writing, delivered by mail
or in person to the address indicated on the application. The notification
shall specify reasons for that action.
   (E)   Number and type of chickens and/or ducks allowed. The maximum number
of chickens and/or ducks allowed per tract of land is four in total, meaning
that no more than four of any combination of chickens and/or ducks are allowed
per tract of land. Roosters are prohibited.
   (F)   Zoning districts allowed. A coop can only be permitted in those
residential areas zoned E-Estate Residence District; or R-1, R-2 or R-3 Single-
Family Residence Districts.
   (G)   Enclosures.
      (1)   Coops shall be located in the rear yard, must be located at least
ten feet from the property line and at least 25 feet from any adjacent
residential dwelling, church, school, or place of business, and must be closer
to the permittee’s residence than any adjoining residential dwelling, church,
school, or place of business.
      (2)   Coops will be kept clean, dry, secure, odor free, neat and sanitary
at all times. Manure, uneaten and discarded feed, feathers and other waste must
be removed from the coop regularly and at a minimum of once per week.
      (3)   Coops shall be designed to provide safe and healthy living
conditions.
      (4)   The poultry tractor shall provide a minimum of four square feet per
chicken and/or duck while minimizing adverse impacts to other residents in the
neighborhood.
      (5)   The poultry run shall provide a minimum of ten square feet of floor
area per chicken and/or duck while minimizing adverse impacts to other
residents in the neighborhood.
      (6)   Coops must provide adequate ventilation, sun and shade, protection
from precipitation, protection from cold weather, fresh water and must be
impermeable to rodents, wild birds and predators including cats and dogs.
      (7)   Chickens and/or ducks must be kept in an enclosure and fenced area
at all times and not allowed to run free. Chickens and/or ducks must be secured
in a coop or poultry tractor during non-daylight hours.
      (8)   A coop or poultry tractor shall be enclosed on all sides and shall
have a roof and doors. Access doors must be able to be shut and locked each
night. Open windows and vents must be covered with predator and bird proof
wire.
      (9)   The materials used in making the coop or poultry tractor shall be
uniform for each element of the structure, such that the walls are made of the
same material, the roof has the same shingles or other covering and any windows
or openings be constructed of the same materials. The use of scrap, washboard,
sheet metal or similar materials is prohibited. Coops and poultry tractors
shall be well maintained.
      (10)   Any enclosed poultry run shall consist of sturdy wire fencing, a
minimum of six feet in height, and covered with wire, aviary netting or solid
roofing.
   (H)   Odor and noise.
      (1)   Odors from chickens and/or ducks, chicken and/or duck manure or
other chicken and/or duck related substances shall not be perceptible beyond
the boundaries of the permitted tract of land.
      (2)   Noise from chickens and/or ducks shall not be loud enough to
disturb persons of reasonable sensitivity beyond the boundaries of the
permitted tract of land at the property boundaries.
   (I)   Predators, rodents, insects and parasites. The permittee shall take
necessary action to reduce the attraction of predators and rodents and the
potential infestation of insects and parasites. Chickens and/or ducks found to
be infested with insects or parasites that may result in unhealthy conditions
to humans or chickens and/or ducks shall be removed immediately from the
permitted tract of land.
   (J)   Feed and water. Chickens and/or ducks shall be provided with access to
feed and clean water at all times. The feed and water shall be unavailable to
rodents, wild birds and predators. Feed must be stored in a fully enclosed,
rodent proof container.
   (K)   Waste storage and removal.
      (1)   Manure must be stored and disposed of in compliance with this
section and the Village Code. All stored manure shall be covered by a fully
enclosed structure with a lid over the entire structure. No more than three
cubic feet of manure shall be stored on the permitted tract of land.
      (2)   The coop and surrounding area must be kept free from trash and
accumulated droppings. Uneaten feed shall be removed in a timely manner.
   (L)   Chickens and/or ducks at large. The permittee shall not allow the
permittee’s chickens and/or ducks to run at large upon any street, alley or
unenclosed lot within the village. No dog or cat or other domesticated animal,
which kills a chicken and/or duck off the permitted tract of land, shall for
that reason alone be considered a dangerous or aggressive animal or the
village’s responsibility to enforce its animal control provisions.
   (M)   Unlawful acts.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep chickens and/or ducks
in violation of any provision of this section.
      (2)   It shall be unlawful for any owner, renter or leaseholder of
property to allow chickens and/or ducks to be kept on the property in violation
of the provisions of this section.
      (3)   No person shall keep chickens and/or ducks inside a single family
dwelling unit, multifamily dwelling unit or rental unit.
      (4)   No person shall slaughter any chickens and/or ducks within the
village.
      (5)   No person shall keep a rooster.
      (6)   No person shall keep chickens and/or ducks on a vacant or
uninhabited tract of land.
      (7)   No permittee shall engage in chicken and/or duck breeding or
fertilizer production for commercial purposes.
(Ord. 15-41, passed 9-21-2015; Am. Ord. 20-14, passed 5-4-2020; Am. Ord. 21-03,
passed 1-18-2021)
§ 92.07 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Citations and complaints regarding violations of the adopted Kane
County Animal Control Ordinance shall describe the violation by first
indicating this §
92.07, followed by the Kane County ordinance number, e.g.,
92.07 (5-9-4) for nuisance feeding.
   (B)   In addition to enforcing violations of this chapter in the Circuit
Court, the village may enforce such violations before a hearing officer in
administrative adjudication, subject to the requirements of this chapter. The
hearing officer shall have the powers granted to the Circuit Court under this
chapter, as well as those provided in
Chapter 36 of the Village Code.
   (C)   The village’s enforcement of this chapter shall be subject to the fees
and fines set forth in
Chapter 37: Fees and Fines, and §
10.99 of the Village Code.
(Ord. 20-14, passed 5-4-2020)
CHAPTER 93: NUISANCES
Section
   
93.01   Public nuisances prohibited
   
93.02   Public nuisances defined
   
93.03   Abatement of public nuisances
   
93.04   Cost of abatement
   
93.05   Abandoned motor vehicles
   
93.06   Parking mobile homes and the like
   
93.07   Noxious plants and the like
   
93.08   Burning of materials
   
93.09   Control and extermination of rats
   
93.10   Inoperable motor vehicles
   
93.11   Noise
   
93.12   Temporary dumpsters and storage units
 
   
93.99   Penalty
§ 93.01 PUBLIC NUISANCES PROHIBITED.
   No person shall possess, erect, contrive, cause, continue, maintain or
permit to exist any public nuisance within the village or within the police
jurisdiction of the village.
(1981 Code, § 12.01) (Am. Ord. 07-31, passed 5-7-2007)
Penalty, see § 93.99
§ 93.02 PUBLIC NUISANCES DEFINED.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PUBLIC NUISANCE. A thing, act, occupation, condition or use of property
which shall continue for such length of time as to:
      (1)   Substantially annoy, injure or endanger the comfort, health, repose
or safety of the public;
      (2)   In any way render the public insecure in life or in the use of
property;
      (3)   Greatly offend the public morals or decency; or
      (4)   Unlawfully and substantially interfere with, obstruct or tend to
obstruct or render dangerous for passage any street, alley, highway, navigable
body of water or other public way.
   PUBLIC NUISANCES AFFECTING HEALTH. The following acts, omissions, places,
conditions and things are hereby specifically declared to be public health
nuisances, but shall not be construed to exclude other health nuisances coming
within the definition of “public nuisance” above:
      (1)   All decayed, harmfully adulterated or unwholesome food or drink
sold or offered for sale to the public;
      (2)   Carcasses of animals, birds or fowl not buried or otherwise
disposed of in a sanitary manner within 24 hours after death;
      (3)   Accumulations of decayed animal or vegetable matter, trash,
rubbish, rotting lumber, bedding, packing material, abandoned vehicles or
machinery, scrap metal or any material in which flies, mosquitoes, disease-
carrying insects, rats or other vermin may breed or which create a fire hazard;
      (4)   All stagnant water in which mosquitoes, flies or other insects can
multiply;
      (5)   Garbage cans which are not fly-tight;
      (6)   The escape of smoke, soot, cinders, noxious acids, fumes, gases,
fly ash or industrial dust within the village limits in quantities as to
endanger the health of persons of ordinary sensibilities or any act in
violation of the Illinois Environmental Protection Act;
      (7)   The pollution of any public well or cistern, stream, lake, canal or
body of water by sewage, creamery or industrial wastes or other substances or
any act in violation of the Environmental Protection Act;
      (8)   Any use of property, substances or things within the village
emitting or causing any foul, offensive, noisome, nauseous, noxious or
disagreeable odors, effluvia or stenches extremely repulsive to the physical
senses of ordinary persons which annoy, discomfort, injure or inconvenience the
health of any appreciable number of persons within the village;
      (9)   All abandoned wells not securely covered or secured from public
use;
      (10)   Any barn, stable or shed used for keeping animals;
      (11)   Any obstruction in or across any watercourse, drainage ditch or
ravine;
      (12)   The deposit of garbage, rubbish or any offensive substance on any
street, sidewalk or public place or on any private property, except as may be
permitted by ordinance; and/or
      (13)   Any noxious weeds on private property, as defined by ILCS Chapter
505, Act 100, § 2.
      (14)   Any and all unattended clothing donation containers on private or
public property anywhere in the village.
      (15)   Any and all garbage cans or containers placed or remaining on
parkway walks, driveways, parkways or front yards on any day before 12:00 p.m.
(noon) on the day preceding garbage pickup, or after 12:00 p.m. (noon) on the
day after the scheduled collection. This division (15) does not include
commercial properties with private refuse pickup.
   PUBLIC NUISANCES AFFECTING MORALS AND DECENCY. The following acts,
omissions, places, conditions and things are hereby specifically declared to be
public nuisances offending public morals and decency, but the enumeration shall
not be construed to exclude other nuisances offending public morals and decency
coming within the definition of “public nuisance” above:
      (1)   All disorderly houses, bawdy houses, house of ill fame, gambling
houses and buildings or structures kept or resorted to for the purpose of
prostitution, promiscuous sexual intercourse or gambling, except the state
authorized lottery;
      (2)   All gambling devices and slot machines;
      (3)   All places where intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverages
are sold, possessed, stored, brewed, bottled, manufactured or rectified without
a permit or license as provided for by this code; and/or
      (4)   Any place or premises within the village where ordinances or state
laws relating to public health, safety, peace, morals or welfare are openly,
continuously, repeatedly and intentionally violated.
   PUBLIC NUISANCES AFFECTING PEACE AND SAFETY. The following acts, omissions,
places, conditions and things are hereby declared to be public nuisances
affecting peace and safety, but the enumerations shall not be construed to
exclude other nuisances affecting public peace or safety coming within the
provisions of the definition of “public nuisance” above:
      (1)   All buildings erected, repaired or altered in violation of the
provisions of the ordinances of the village relating to materials and manner of
construction of buildings and structures;
      (2)   All unauthorized signs, signals, markings or devices which purport
to be or may be mistaken as official traffic-control devices placed or
maintained upon or in view of any public highway or railway crossing;
      (3)   All trees, hedges, billboards or other obstructions which prevent
persons driving vehicles on public streets, alleys or highways from obtaining a
clear view of traffic when approaching an intersection or pedestrian crosswalk;
      (4)   All limbs of trees which project over a public sidewalk less than
eight feet above the surface thereof or less than ten feet above the surface of
a public street;
      (5)   All use or display of fireworks, except as provided by the laws of
the state, except the Board of Trustees may grant a permit for public display
of fireworks under the conditions as it may impose;
      (6)   All buildings or structures so old, dilapidated or out of repair as
to be dangerous, unsafe, insanitary or otherwise unfit for human use;
      (7)   All wires over streets, alleys or public grounds which are strung
less than 15 feet above the surface of the street or ground;
      (8)   All obstructions of streets, alleys, sidewalks or crosswalks and
all excavations in or under the same, except as permitted by the ordinances of
the village or which, although made in accordance with the ordinances, are kept
or maintained for an unreasonable length of time after the purpose thereof has
been accomplished;
      (9)   All open and unguarded pits, wells, excavations or unused basements
freely accessible from any public street, alley or sidewalk;
      (10)   All abandoned refrigerators or iceboxes from which the doors and
other covers have not been removed or which are not equipped with a device for
opening from the inside by pushing only with the strength of a small child;
      (11)   Any unauthorized or unlawful use of property abutting on a public
street, alley or sidewalk or of a public street, alley or sidewalk which causes
large crowds of people to gather, obstructing traffic and free use of the
streets or sidewalks;
      (12)   Any advertisements or signs affixed to any building, wall, fence,
sidewalk, street or other private or public property without permission of the
owner thereof;
      (13)   Any sign, marquee or awning which is in an unsafe condition or
which overhangs any roadway or which overhangs any sidewalk less than eight
feet above the sidewalk surface;
      (14)   Any structure, material or condition which constitutes a fire
hazard or will impair the extinguishing of any fire; and
      (15)   Any nuisance so defined by the Illinois Compiled Statutes.
(1981 Code, § 12.02) (Am. Ord. 00-29, passed 12-18-2000; Am. Ord. 06-35, passed
8-21-2006; Am. Ord. 07-48, passed 11-19-2007)
§ 93.03 ABATEMENT OF PUBLIC NUISANCES.
   (A)   (1)   Whenever complaint is made to the Village President that a
public nuisance exists or has existed within the village, he or she shall
promptly notify the Chief of Police or some other village official whom the
President shall designate, who shall forthwith inspect or cause to be inspected
the premises and shall make a written report of his or her findings to the
President.
      (2)   Whenever practicable, the inspecting officer shall cause
photographs to be made of the premises and shall file the same in the office of
the Village Clerk.
   (B)   (1)   Notice to owner. If the inspecting officer shall determine that
a public nuisance exists on private property and that there is a great and
immediate danger to the public health, safety, peace, morals or decency, the
Village President may direct the Chief of Police or a Deputy Sheriff to serve a
notice on the owner, or, if the owner cannot be found, on the occupant or
person causing, permitting or maintaining the nuisance and to post a copy of
the notice on the premises. The notice shall direct the owner, occupant or
person causing, permitting or maintaining such nuisance to abate or remove the
nuisance within 24 hours, but not longer than ten days, depending upon the
extremity of the danger or nuisance, and shall state that unless the nuisance
is so abated, the village will cause same to be abated and will charge the cost
thereof to the owner, occupant or person causing, permitting or maintaining the
same, as the case may be.
      (2)   Abatement by village. If the nuisance is not abated within the time
provided, or if the owner, occupant or person causing the nuisance cannot be
found, the Director of Public Works or some other village official whom the
President shall designate shall cause the abatement or removal of the public
nuisance.
   (C)   If the inspecting officer shall determine that a public nuisance
exists on private premises, but that the nature of the nuisance is not such as
to threaten great and immediate danger to the public health, safety, peace,
morals or decency, he or she shall file a written report of his or her findings
with the President, who shall cause an action to abate the nuisance to be
commenced in the name of the village.
(1981 Code, § 12.03)
§ 93.04 COST OF ABATEMENT.
   In addition to any other penalty imposed by this chapter for the erection,
contrivance, creation, continuance or maintenance of a public nuisance, the
cost of abating a public nuisance by the village shall be collected as a debt
from the owner, occupant or person causing, permitting or maintaining the
nuisance and if notice to abate the nuisance has been given to the owner, the
cost shall be assessed against the real estate as other special taxes.
(1981 Code, § 12.04)
§ 93.05 ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLES.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      ABANDONED VEHICLE. Any vehicle in a state of disrepair rendering the
vehicle incapable of being driven in its condition or any vehicle that has not
been moved or used for seven consecutive days or more and is apparently
deserted.
      ANTIQUE VEHICLE. Any motor vehicle or other vehicle 25 years of age or
older.
      HIGHWAY. Any street, alley or public way within the village.
   (B)   The abandonment of a motor vehicle or other vehicle or any part
thereof on private or public property, other than a highway, in view of the
general public, anywhere in the village is unlawful, except on property of the
owner or bailee of the abandoned vehicle. A motor vehicle or other vehicle or
any part thereof so abandoned on private property may be authorized for removal
by or upon the order of the Chief of Police after a waiting period of seven
days or more has expired.
   (C)   When an abandoned, lost, stolen or unclaimed motor vehicle or other
vehicle comes into the temporary possession or custody of a person in the
state, not the owner of the vehicle, the person shall immediately notify the
Police Department when the vehicle is within the corporate limits of the
village. Upon receipt of the notification, the Chief of Police shall authorize
a towing service to remove and take possession of the abandoned, lost, stolen
or unclaimed motor vehicle or other vehicle. The towing service will safely
keep the towed vehicle and its contents, maintain a record of the tow until the
vehicle is claimed by the owner or any other person legally entitled to
possession thereof, or until it is disposed of as provided in this section.
   (D)   (1)   When a motor vehicle or other vehicle is abandoned on a highway
in the village ten hours or more, its removal by a towing service may be
authorized by order of the Chief of Police.
      (2)   When an abandoned, unattended, wrecked, burned or partially
dismantled motor vehicle or other vehicle is creating a traffic hazard because
of its position in relation to the highway or its physical appearance is
causing the impeding of traffic, its immediate removal from the highway by a
towing service may be authorized by order of the Chief of Police.
      (3)   When a vehicle removed from either public or private property is
authorized by order of the Chief of Police, the owner of the vehicle will be
responsible for all towing costs.
   (E)   When a motor vehicle or other vehicle is authorized to be towed away,
the Police Department shall keep and maintain a record of the vehicle towed,
listing the color, year of manufacture, manufacturer’s trade name,
manufacturer’s series name, body style, vehicle identification number and
license plate year and number displayed on the vehicle. The record shall also
include the date and hour of tow, location towed from, location towed to,
reason for towing and the name of the officer authorizing the tow.
   (F)   (1)   When the Police Department does not know the identity of the
registered owner or other legally entitled person, they will cause the motor
vehicle registration records of the state to be searched by a directed
communication to the Secretary of the State for the purpose of obtaining the
required ownership information.
      (2)   The Police Department shall cause the stolen vehicle files of the
Illinois State Police to be searched by a directed communication to the
Illinois State Police for stolen or wanted information on the vehicle. When the
Illinois State Police files are searched with negative results, the information
contained in the National Crime Information Center (N.C.I.C.) files will be
searched by the Illinois State Police. The information determined from these
record searches will be used by the Police Department in sending a notification
by certified mail to the owner or legally entitled person advising where the
vehicle is held, requesting a disposition be made and setting forth public sale
information.
   (G)   When the registered owner or other person legally entitled to the
possession of a motor vehicle or other vehicle cannot be identified from the
registration files of the state or from the registration files of a foreign
state, if applicable, the Police Department shall notify the State Police for
the purpose of identifying the vehicle’s owner or other person legally entitled
to the possession of the vehicle. The information obtained by the State Police
will be immediately forwarded to the law enforcement agency having custody of
the vehicle for notification of owner.
   (H)   Any time before a motor vehicle or other vehicle is sold at public
sale or disposed of as provided herein, the owner or other person legally
entitled to its possession may reclaim the vehicle by presenting to the Police
Department proof of ownership or proof of the right to possession of the
vehicle. No vehicle shall be released to the owner or other person under this
division (H) until all towing and storage charges have been paid.
   (I)   (1)   Whenever an abandoned, lost, stolen or unclaimed motor vehicle
or other vehicle, seven years of age or newer, remains unclaimed by the
registered owner or other person legally entitled to its possession for a
period of 30 days after notice has been given, as provided herein, the Police
Department, having possession of the vehicle, shall cause it to be sold at
public sale to the highest bidder. Notice of the time and place of the sale
shall be posted in a conspicuous place for at least ten days prior to the sale
on the premises where the vehicle has been impounded. At least ten days prior
to the sale, the Police Department shall cause a notice of the time and place
of the sale to be sent by certified mail to the registered owner or other
person known by the Police Department or towing service to be legally entitled
to the possession of the vehicle. The notice shall contain a complete
description of the vehicle to be sold and what steps must be taken by any
legally entitled person to reclaim the vehicle.
      (2)   In those instances where the certified notification specified
herein has been returned by the postal authorities to the Police Department due
to the addressee having moved, or being unknown at the address obtained from
the registration records of the state, the sending of a second certified notice
will not be required.
   (J)   (1)   When the identity of the registered owner or other person
legally entitled to the possession of an abandoned, lost or unclaimed vehicle
of seven years of age, or newer cannot be determined by any means provided for
in this section, the vehicle may be sold as provided herein or disposed of in
the manner authorized by this section without notice to the registered owner or
other persons legally entitled to the possession of the vehicle.
      (2)   When an abandoned vehicle of more than seven years of age is
impounded as specified by this section, it will be kept in custody for a
minimum of ten days for the purpose of determining ownership, the contacting of
the registered owner by the U.S. mail, public service or in person for
determination of disposition and an examination of the State Police stolen
motor vehicle files for theft and wanted information. At the expiration of the
ten-day period, without the benefit of disposition information being received
from the registered owner, the Chief of Police will authorize the disposal of
the vehicle as junk only.
      (3)   A motor vehicle or other vehicle classified as an antique vehicle
is excluded herefrom.
   (K)   When a motor vehicle or other vehicle in the custody of the Police
Department is reclaimed by the registered owner or other legally entitled
person, or when the vehicle is sold at public sale or otherwise disposed of as
provided in this section, a record of the transaction shall be maintained by
the Police Department for a period of one year from the date of the sale or
disposal.
   (L)   When a vehicle located within the corporate limits of the village is
authorized to be towed away by the Chief of Police and disposed of as set forth
in this section, the proceeds of the public sale or disposition after the
deduction of towing, storage and processing charges shall be deposited in the
Municipal Treasury.
   (M)   Any police officer, towing service owner, operator or employee shall
not be held to answer or be liable for damages in any action brought by the
registered owner, former registered owner or his or her legal representative or
any other person legally entitled to the possession of a motor vehicle or other
vehicle when the vehicle was processed and sold or disposed of as provided by
this section.
(1981 Code, § 12.05)
Penalty, see § 93.99
§ 93.06 PARKING MOBILE HOMES AND THE LIKE.
   The parking of mobile homes, trailers, boats and any other motor vehicle
licensed by the state shall be as provided in the village’s zoning regulations.
No licensed vehicle shall be used for sleeping purposes, except that, upon
registration with the Police Department, a mobile home may be used for sleeping
purposes while parked as otherwise permitted for a contiguous period not to
exceed five days per year.
(1981 Code, § 12.06) (Am. Ord. 93-17, passed 11-15-1993)
Penalty, see § 93.99
§ 93.07 NOXIOUS PLANTS AND THE LIKE.
   (A)   Any weeds such as or known as jimson, burdock, ragweed, thistle,
cockleburr or other weeds of like kind, tall grasses and plants or bushes of
the species of tall, common or European Barberry, otherwise known as Barberis
Vulgaris, or its horticultural varieties found growing in any place or location
within the corporate limits of the village, are declared to be a nuisance. It
shall be unlawful for any person to cause or permit any such weeds, tall
grasses, plants or bushes to grow or remain in any place or location within the
corporate limits of the village to a height in excess of six inches.
   (B)   (1)   It shall be duty of every owner or occupant of every lot or
tract of land within the corporate limits of the village to cut, destroy or
remove or cause to be cut, destroyed or removed every weed, tall grass, plant
or bush, as herein above described, upon every lot or tract of land in a manner
and on or before the time as the weeds, tall grasses, bushes or plants or tall
grasses reach or exceed the height of six inches. Upon failure of any owner or
occupant so to do, it shall be the duty of the Chief of Police or the Village
Health Officer to serve or cause to be served a notice upon any owner or
occupant of any premises upon which any weeds, tall grasses, plants or bushes
are caused or permitted to grow in violation of the provisions of this section,
demanding the abatement of the growth as a nuisance, within a period of ten
days from the date of the service.
      (2)   Failure of any owner or occupant to comply with the provisions and
demands of the notice shall constitute a violation of the provisions of this
section.
   (C)   If, upon the expiration of the ten-day period provided in the notice,
any owner or occupant of any premises in the village upon which any such weeds,
tall grasses, plants or bushes are caused or permitted to grow in violation of
the provisions of this section, it shall be the duty of the Chief of Police or
the Village Health Officer to proceed to the nuisance by cutting, destroying or
otherwise removing the weeds or tall grasses, plants or bushes and to keep an
account of the expense thereof and the expense shall be charged to the owner,
or the owner and occupant jointly, of the premises, and it shall be the duty of
the owner or the owner and occupant jointly to pay the expense.
   (D)   (1)   The village shall have a continuing lien upon the premises and
real estate upon which any noxious weeds or tall grasses or bushes shall be
caused or permitted to grow in violation of the provisions of this section, for
or on account of which it is necessary for any expense to be suffered or
incurred by the village for the cutting, destroying or otherwise removing of
any weed or tall grasses, plants or bushes. Every lien shall, upon compliance
with the conditions hereinafter set forth, become and be prior and superior to
the rights and interests of creditors, encumbrances, purchasers and other
parties in interest in the premises and real estate.
      (2)   The lien may be preserved and enforced in the following manner. The
Village Clerk shall, within six months after the accrual of the expense or cost
or charge, file or cause to be filed with the appropriate county official a
claim for lien, verified by the affidavit of himself, herself or any other
officer of the village having knowledge of the facts, which shall consist of a
brief statement of the facts of the claim, the balance due after allowing all
credits and a sufficiently correct description of the lot, lots or tract or
tracts of land or real estate to properly identify the land or real estate.
      (3)   No lien shall be defeated in the proper amount thereof because of
error or overcharging on the part of the village, nor shall any lien be
defeated upon proof that the expense or cost or charge resulted from or was
incurred by reason or fault of any tenant or occupant or other person in
possession other than the owner.
   (E)   (1)   If payment shall not be made as provided in this section of any
amount due by virtue of its provisions when the same shall become due, the
village may file or cause to be filed a petition or bill in the appropriate
court for a foreclosure of the lien and the village may proceed, in its
corporate name, to foreclose the lien in like manner and with like effect as
provided by the Illinois Compiled Statutes in foreclosure of mortgages. The
suit shall be commenced within two years after the accrual of the expense or
cost or charge. Any decree rendered in court may be enforced and collected as
other decrees or judgements in the court.
      (2)   The remedy provided in this section shall not be construed to
abridge or in any manner interfere with the right and power of the village to
enforce the collection thereof by an action at law or as otherwise provided in
this section, but the remedy herein provided shall be taken and held as an
additional means to enforce payment of the delinquent expense or cost or
charge.
(1981 Code, § 12.07) (Am. Ord. 13-52, passed 12-16-2013) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.08 BURNING OF MATERIALS.
   (A)   Definitions.
      (1)   BONFIRE. Open fires at public or private gatherings.
      (2)   GARBAGE. Refuse resulting from the handling, processing,
preparation, packaging, cooling and consumption of food and food products.
      (3)   LANDSCAPE WASTE. Dry leaves, the dry trimmings of fall, and pieces
of trees or bushes not more than two inches in diameter, and any other dried
vegetative matter as is ordinarily produced by any yard, garden or lot. Dry
material includes only material which is not damp or wet as a result of
rainfall, frost, dew or other external sources of moisture and is also seasoned
by the evaporation of internal moisture commonly found in material recently cut
from living plants.
      (4)   OPEN BURNING. The combustion of any matter in such a way that the
products of the combustion are admitted into the open air.
      (5)   RECREATIONAL FIRES. Small open fires at public or private
gatherings.
      (6)   RESPONSIBLE ADULT. An individual 18 years or older who is not under
the influence of drugs or alcohol or suffering from any other disability which
would impair his or her ability to properly supervise a fire.
      (7)   WOOD. Dry wood that has not been chemically treated, stained or
painted.
   (B)   Outdoor fires and open burning.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, no person shall set
fire to or cause or permit to be burned in any yard, lot, street or alley, any
rubbish, garbage, paper or other combustible material unless such material is
confined during combustion to an approved incinerator. For purposes of this
division, an APPROVED INCINERATOR is one which prevents the escape of soot,
cinders, fumes, gases and smoke. No fire may be set or cause or allow to burn
in or on any public right-of-way, including streets, sidewalks, alleys and
parkways.
      (2)   The burning of leaves and other landscape waste materials is only
allowed on the second and fourth Saturdays during the months of October,
November and April and the second and fourth Sundays during the months of
October, November and April.
      (3)   Open burning under this section shall be allowed between the hours
of 10:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. Burning of landscape waste at any other time shall
be a violation of this section.
      (4)   The location for any open burning of landscape waste materials
shall not be less than 30 feet from any structure and provisions shall be made
to prevent the fire from spreading to within 30 feet of any structure.
      (5)   In any event, no person shall burn leaves or other landscape waste
material if, in the judgment of the Village Administrator, the Police Chief or
the Code Enforcement Officer, the burning of such material creates a general
health hazard, poses a special or significant hazard to the health and safety
of any nearby person who encounters or may encounter the products of combustion
because of its known impact upon chronic lung disorders, cardiovascular disease
and obstructive airway disease, or endangers any adjoining building, structure
or other property by the communication of smoke or fire.
      (6)   If the Village President in his or her discretion determines that
due to unusual seasonal conditions it would be appropriate to allow the burning
of leaves and other landscape waste material at times other than those
specified in this section, the Village President may extend the above specified
time periods for the burning of leaves and other landscape waste material for a
period of time not to exceed 30 days prior or subsequent to the time specified
in this section effective upon posting notice on the village’s website and at
the Village Hall building. The Village Clerk shall include the notice on the
agenda for the next regularly scheduled Board meeting.
      (7)   Burning materials authorized under this division may occur only
under the following conditions:
         (a)   Burning may be conducted only on days when the wind will not
carry smoke or other products of combustion in the direction of structures or
persons on nearby parcels.
         (b)   The fire shall be small and capable of being readily controlled
or extinguished in the event that a change in wind direction or other factors
result in a violation of the regulations established in this division.
         (c)   A responsible person of not less than 18 years of age shall be
present at the site of the fire at all times to observe and control the fire.
         (d)   Water shall be available by way of a hose connected to an
operational water source, which hose shall have a sufficient length and
capacity to properly extinguish a fire, or the responsible person shall have an
operational fire extinguisher or other device which is sufficient to promptly
extinguish the fire.
         (e)   The fire shall be completely extinguished and not allowed to
smolder after substantial completion of the combustion.
         (f)   Any other provision of this section of the contract
notwithstanding, it shall be lawful for any person as a means of cooking food
to burn combustible material ordinarily used for the purpose of cooking food
outdoors in any permanent or temporary outdoor fireplace, grill or barbecue
pit. Such fire must be kept under competent and continuous supervision and must
be kept a sufficient distance from any building, structure or other material so
as not to constitute a fire hazard.
         (g)   If the Village Administrator, Police Chief or Code Enforcement
Officer or any officer of a fire department or police department concludes that
the material is being burned in violation of any provision of this section or
any other provision of the Village Code, then the aforementioned individual
may, in his or her sole discretion, order corrective measures including,
without limitation, that the fire be immediately extinguished. It shall be
unlawful for any person to fail to comply with the orders of the Village
Administrator, Police Chief or any officer of a fire department regarding any
fire including, without limitation, fires burning leaves and other landscape
waste materials, pursuant to this section.
   (C)   Bonfires.
      (1)   A bonfire shall only be allowed when the conditions of state law
are met.
      (2)   A bonfire shall be no more than five feet by five feet in dimension
and shall burn not longer than three hours. The site and duration of a bonfire
shall only be increased by the code official when it is determined that the
fire safety requirements of the situation and the desirable duration of the
burn warrant an increase.
      (3)   Fuel for a bonfire shall consist only of wood and shall be ignited
with a small quantity of paper. The fire shall not be used for waste disposal
purposes, and the fuel shall be chosen to minimize the generation of air
contaminants.
      (4)   All permits shall be requested by and issued to the owner or
occupant of the land upon which the bonfire is to be kindled.
   (D)   Recreational fires.
      (1)   A recreational fire shall be no more than three feet by three feet
in dimension and shall burn not longer than three hours. Recreational fires
shall be supervised at all times.
      (2)   Fuel for a recreational fire shall consist only of wood and shall
be ignited with a small quantity of paper. The fire shall not be used for waste
disposal purposes, and the fuel shall be chosen to minimize the generation of
air contaminants.
      (3)   No permits are necessary for recreational fires.
(Ord. 08-01, passed 1-7-2008; Am. Ord. 14-04, passed 2-24-2014; Am. Ord. 14-35,
passed 11-3-2014) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.09 CONTROL AND EXTERMINATION OF RATS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      RAT. Animals of the rodent family which are known to be dangerous to the
health and safety of the community.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or permit the
existence of rats anywhere within the village and it shall be unlawful for the
owner, occupant or person in custody of any real property and any buildings
therein to permit the same to become occupied by rats.
   (C)   (1)   Whenever the Building Inspector and Health Committee of the
Board of Trustees shall be of the opinion that any real property or any
building or structure therein is infested and occupied by rats, he or she shall
file a written statement to this effect with the Village Clerk. The Clerk
thereupon shall cause written notice to be served upon the owner, occupant or
person in custody of the real property or structure by registered mail or by
personal service.
      (2)   The notice shall state that the real property or building has been
declared to be a hazard to the health and safety of the residents of the
village because of the occupancy of the premises by rats and that the rats must
be exterminated and that the extermination must be done at once.
   (D)   (1)   If the person receiving notice has not complied therewith or
taken appeal from the determination of the officer or employee finding the
existence of rats therein within ten days from service of notice by personal
service or registered mail, the Building Inspector may, upon notice of Health
Committee of the Board of Trustees, proceed to arrange for the extermination of
rats.
      (2)   The costs and expenses of rat extermination shall be billed to the
owner, occupant or person in custody of the premises and, if not paid within 60
days, a lien shall be filed against property.
   (E)   (1)   Any person violating any provisions of this section or
permitting rats to remain on its premises, after receiving due notice thereof
mentioned aforesaid, shall be subject to the penalty provided for violation of
this code.
      (2)   The penalty may be in addition to paying the cost of rat
extermination.
(1981 Code, § 12.09)
Penalty, see § 93.99
§ 93.10 INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLES.
   (A)   All inoperable motor vehicles located anywhere in the village whether
public or private property are hereby declared to constitute and be a public
nuisance.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      INOPERABLE VEHICLE. Any motor vehicle on which the engine, wheels,
steering apparatus or other essential parts have been removed or altered or do
not function properly so that the motor vehicle is incapable of operating
properly and safely or on which no current license has been issued for its
operation on the public highways by the Secretary of State; providing that:
         (a)   Vehicles which have been duly licensed and rendered temporarily
incapable of being driven under their own motor power because of wreck or
damage and are awaiting repair;
         (b)   Vehicles temporarily stored in duly licensed commercial garages
and storage yards; and
         (c)   Vehicles kept inside a fully enclosed garage or storage building
shall not be deemed INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLES within the meaning of this
section.
(1981 Code, § 12.10)
§ 93.11 NOISE.
   (A)   Findings. It is hereby declared that it is in the interest of the
public health and welfare of the people of the village that the hours and days
of operation of strip mines, stone quarries, gravel mines, saw mills and all
other uses, operations and endeavors which do or are likely to produce loud and
disturbing noises need regulation.
   (B)   Prohibited noises.
      (1)   Prohibitions generally.
         (a)   It is unlawful to make or cause to have made any noise or sounds
of such volume or of such nature as to cause annoyance to the residents of the
village.
         (b)   It is unlawful to disturb the peace or quiet by the creating of
excessive and unnecessary noise.
      (2)   Horns and whistles. It is unlawful to blow or cause to be sounded
any horn, whistle, or other signaling device of any unreasonably loud or harsh
sound in the village except as a signal for starting or stopping work or in
emergencies as to avoid or to prevent injury to persons or property.
      (3)   Audio, musical, and similar equipment.
         (a)   It is unlawful to play, use, operate, or permit to be played or
operated, in any building or on any public or private premises any radio,
phonograph, microphone, musical instrument, television, loudspeaker, sound
amplifier, or similar equipment in such a manner as to disturb the peace,
quiet, or comfort of neighboring residents, except as described in conjunction
with a village-permitted special event, permit, or block party.
         (b)   1.   In all zoning districts, the operation of any radio,
phonograph, microphone, musical instrument, television, loudspeaker, sound
amplifier, commercial music amplification or reproduction equipment or similar
equipment between the hours of 10:30 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. Sunday through
Thursday, and between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. Friday and
Saturday, in such a manner as to be plainly audible more than 50 feet beyond
the property line of the premises from which the noise is emanating, shall be
prima facie evidence of a violation of this section.
            2.   For the purposes of this section, PLAINLY AUDIBLE means any
sound which clearly can be heard, by unimpaired auditory senses based upon a
direct line of sight of 50 feet or more. However, words or phrases need not be
discernable. The detection of the rhythmic bass component of the music is
sufficient to constitute a plainly audible sound.
         (c)   No person shall cause or permit to be emanated or emitted from
any such device any lewd, obscene, profane, or indecent language or sounds, or
any false representation of any matter, product, or project advertised thereby,
the sale of which is prohibited by law, ordinance, or statute.
         (d)   It is prohibited to play, use, operate, or permit to be played,
used, or operated any radio, television, musical instrument, phonograph,
loudspeaker, sound amplifier, or similar equipment for producing sound which is
audible upon the public streets of the village for the purpose of commercial
advertising or of attracting the attention of the public to any building or
structure except when a permit has been first procured from the Village
Administrator as required by this code.
      (4)   Engine exhaust. It is unlawful to discharge into the open air the
exhaust of any steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine, motorboat,
or motor vehicle except through a muffler or other device which will
effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom.
      (5)   Defect in vehicle or load. It is unlawful to use any automobile,
motorcycle, vehicle, wagon, or cart so defective or loaded in such a manner as
to create loud or unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling, or other noises.
      (6)   Refuse collection. It is unlawful for any refuse collector or firm
to collect, gather, load, remove, empty, haul, or otherwise transport any
refuse, recycling, or other waste materials from any container, dumpster, or
other storage unit within the village, except between the hours of 6:00 a.m.
and 7:00 p.m. on any day.
      (7)   Construction activities. Any activity in the construction of any
building or structure (including excavation, demolition, alteration, or
repair), or the laying of pavement, including but not limited to the making of
an excavation, clearing of surface land, and loading or unloading materials,
equipment, or supplies, anywhere in the village shall be permitted only between
the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday; 8:00 a.m. and 8:
00 p.m., on Sunday.
      (8)   Lawn, garden, and landscape maintenance activities. Any lawn,
garden, or landscape maintenance activities involving the operations of any
gasoline or electric powered equipment, including without limitation mowers,
tractors, trimmers, vacuums, blowers, tillers, hedge clippers, grinders,
shredders, chainsaws, sod cutters, or other equipment the use of which is
attended with a noise that is plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet from the
boundaries of the premises upon which such equipment is operated or used, shall
be permitted only between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m., Monday through
Saturday; 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m., on Sunday.
   (C)   Exemptions. The following exemptions shall be provided from the terms
and restrictions provided in this section:
      (1)   Street sweeping operations on public right-of-ways, public parking
lots, or private parking lots in non-residential zoning districts.
      (2)   Construction and lawn maintenance operations performed by or on
behalf of the village or Dundee Township Park District on publicly owned
property.
      (3)   Construction and/or lawn maintenance activities required as a
result of a storm or emergency situation to provide for the protection, safety,
and welfare of the village.
      (4)   Work related to sewer, water, power, or utility interruptions.
      (5)   Snow removal operations on any public or private property, parking
lot, or right-of-way.
   (D)   Application for special permit.
      (1)   Applications for a special permit for relief from the noise
restrictions designated in this section on the basis of undue hardship may be
made to the Village Administrator or by a special use permit ordinance by the
Village Board of Trustees. Any permit granted hereunder shall contain all
conditions upon which the permit has been granted and shall specify a
reasonable time that the permit shall be effective.
      (2)   Permit issuance shall be provided if the following conditions are
found:
         (a)   The additional time is necessary for the applicant to alter or
modify his or her activity or operation to comply with this section; or
         (b)   The activity, operation, or noise source will be of temporary
duration and cannot be done in a manner that would comply with other divisions
of this section; or
         (c)   The Village Board of Trustees has issued a special use permit
with the conditions granted to the property owner; or
         (d)   No other reasonable alternative is available to the applicant.
      (3)   The Village Administrator or Village Board of Trustees may
prescribe any conditions or requirements they deem necessary to minimize the
adverse effects upon the community or the surrounding community or the
surrounding neighborhood.
(1981 Code, § 12.11) (Am. Ord. 00-29, passed 12-18-2000; Am. Ord. 12-53, passed
7-16-2012; Am. Ord. 14-39, passed 11-17-2014; Am. Ord. 23-36, passed 8-7-2023)
Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.12 TEMPORARY DUMPSTERS AND STORAGE UNITS.
   (A)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this section the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      TEMPORARY DUMPSTER.  A large container designed for the receiving,
transporting and dumping of waste materials on a temporary basis during
demolition or construction projects and is not intended to include karts or
dumpsters used for refuse or recycling collection as regulated in Chapter 50 of
this Code.
      TEMPORARY STORAGE UNIT.  Any container, portable structure or temporary
accessory structure that can be or is used for the storage of personal property
or equipment of any kind and which is located for such purposes outside an
enclosed building.
   (B)   Regulations.  It shall be unlawful for an owner of property:
      (1)   To have more than one temporary storage unit or one temporary
dumpsters on the property;
      (2)   To place the temporary storage unit or temporary dumpster less than
five feet from all property lines;
      (3)   Allow the temporary storage unit or temporary dumpster to remain on
the property for more than 30 days per calendar year unless a valid and active
building permit has been issued for the property, unless work associated with
that building permit has ceased for a period of 30 days;
      (4)   Allow rubbish, material or garbage to become windblown from a
temporary dumpster; or
      (5)   Allow the temporary dumpster or temporary storage unit on
residential properly to be placed on other than a driveway or other hard
surface approved by the Village Engineer.
(Ord. 13-36, passed 9-16-2013)
§ 93.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   Any person violating §
93.08 shall be fined not less than $25, nor more than $750, for each offense.
The violation of §
93.08 is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and shall be abated in the
manner provided by law.
   (C)   (1)   Except as provided below in division (C)(2), any person, firm,
or corporation violating any provision of §
93.11 shall be fined not less than $25 nor more than $5,000 for each offense,
and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which
a violation occurs or continues.
      (2)   The first violation of §
93.11(B)(3)(a) and/or (B)(3)(b) in a 12-month period shall be punishable by a
fine of not less than $250 or more than $5,000. A subsequent violation by the
same person which occurs within 12 months of a previous conviction shall be
punishable by a fine of not less than $100 more than the prior minimum fine but
not more than $5,000.
(1981 Code, § 12.08) (Ord. 93-13, passed 10-18-1993; Am. Ord. 96-03, passed 1-
16-1996; Am. Ord. 99-33, passed 10-4-1999; Am. Ord. 00-29, passed 12-18-2000;
Am. Ord. 14-39, passed 11-17-2014; Am. Ord. 19-04, passed 2-4-2019; Am. Ord.
24-17, passed 5-6-2024)
CHAPTER 94: FIRE SAFETY
Section
   
94.01   Fire prevention and safety regulations and enforcement
§ 94.01 FIRE PREVENTION AND SAFETY REGULATIONS AND ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   All building code regulations related to fire prevention and safety
for proposed, existing, and temporary buildings and structures in the village
are established and enforced by the East Dundee and Countryside Fire Protection
District, including but not limited to as follows:
      (1)   Receiving and reviewing building permit applications for all
construction, alteration, additions, repair, removal, demolition, use,
location, occupancy, and maintenance of all proposed, existing, temporary, or
modified buildings and structures in the village to determine compliance with
fire prevention and safety regulations as set forth by the Fire District.
      (2)   Conducting plan reviews, inspections, and consultations of all
proposed, existing, temporary, or modified buildings and structures in the
village to determine compliance with fire prevention and safety regulations set
forth by the Fire District.
      (3)   Imposing and collecting fees related to fire prevention and safety
regulations, as provided by the Fire District fee schedule.
      (4)   Issuing citations, fines, and other penalties for noncompliance
with fire prevention and safety regulations.
      (5)   Otherwise enforcing fire safety regulations.
   (B)   The village requires that all building, zoning, and other development
permits for proposed, existing, temporary, and modified buildings and
structures within the village comply with the Fire District building
regulations as a condition for granting permits, licenses, or an occupancy
certificate. The village may require verification from the Fire District prior
to issuing any permits, licenses, or certificates of occupancy.
(Ord. 24-29, passed 8-19-2024; Am. Ord. 25-10, passed 2-17-2025)
CHAPTER 95: TREES
Section
   
95.01   Title
   
95.02   Purpose and intent
   
95.03   Definitions
   
95.04   Committee; establishment and duties
   
95.05   Village Forester; establishment and duties
   
95.06   Permits
   
95.07   Public nuisances
   
95.08   Interference with Forester
 
   
95.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Trees, see §
91.17
§ 95.01 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “East Dundee Tree
Chapter” and may be cited herein as “this chapter.”
(1981 Code, § 20.01)
§ 95.02 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   (A)   It is the purpose of this chapter to promote and protect the public
health, safety and general welfare by providing for the regulation of the
planting, maintenance and removal of trees, shrubs and other plants within the
village.
   (B)   It is the intent of the Board of Trustees that the terms of this
chapter shall be construed so as to promote:
      (1)   The planting, maintenance, restoration and survival of desirable
trees, shrubs and other plants within the village; and
      (2)   The protection of community residents from personal injury and
property damage and the protection of the village from property damage, caused
or threatened by the improper planting, maintenance or removal of trees, shrubs
or other plants located within the community.
(1981 Code, § 20.02)
§ 95.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ARBORICULTURAL SPECIFICATIONS AND STANDARDS OF PRACTICE FOR EAST DUNDEE or
VILLAGE FORESTRY STANDARDS OF SPECIFICATIONS. A manual prepared by the Forester
pursuant to the ordinance containing regulations and standards for planting,
maintenance and removal of trees, shrubs and other plants upon village owned
property.
   FORESTER. The Superintendent of Public Works of East Dundee shall also be
the Village Forester.
   PROPERTY OWNER. The record owner or contract purchaser of any parcel of
land.
   TREE, SHRUBS and OTHER PLANTS. All vegetation, woody or otherwise, except
lawn grass and flowers less than 24 inches in height.
   VILLAGE-OWNED PROPERTY. Property within the village limits and:
      (1)   Owned by the village in fee simple absolute; and
      (2)   Implied or expressly dedicated to the public for present or future
use for purposes of vehicular or pedestrian traffic or for public easements.
(1981 Code, § 20.03)
§ 95.04 COMMITTEE; ESTABLISHMENT AND DUTIES.
   (A)   The General Village Committee of the Board of Trustees shall also be
known as the Tree Committee. Its functions and duties are limited to those set
forth in this chapter.
   (B)   The Tree Committee shall perform the following duties:
      (1)   Within a reasonable time after the establishment of the Tree
Committee, upon call of the Chairperson of the Tree Committee, the Tree
Committee shall meet and adopt rules of procedure for regular and special
meetings to fulfill the duties imposed upon it by this chapter.
      (2)   The Tree Committee shall advise and consult the Forester on any
matter pertaining to this chapter and its enforcement. The topics under which
this advice and consultation may be given may include, but are not limited to
any of the following:
         (a)   Amendments to this chapter and alterations or revisions to the
“Village Forestry Standards and Specifications” and alterations or revisions to
the Village Forestry Plan;
         (b)   Policy concerning selection, planting, maintenance and removal
of trees, shrubs and other plants within the village;
         (c)   Allocation of funds for the Village Forestry Plan and
expenditures of funds by the Public Works Department on Forestry;
         (d)   Establishment of education and informational programs;
         (e)   Development of policies and procedures regarding the Forester’s
duties; and
         (f)   Issuance of permits required by this chapter.
      (3)   The Tree Committee, upon the request of any person who disagrees
with the decision of the Forester shall hear all issues of the disputes which
arise between the Village Forester and any person whenever those issues involve
matters or the interpretation or enforcement of the Village Forester Standards
and Specifications, the Village Forest Plan or of the interpretation or
enforcement of this chapter, including disputes regarding the issuance of
permits, or the concurrence or nonconcurrence of the Forester in permits
required under other ordinance or laws, or the abatement of nuisances. The
decision of a majority of the members of the Tree Committee with regard to the
dispute shall be binding upon the Forester. Nothing in this section shall be
construed to limit the jurisdiction of any court of law with respect to the
disputes.
(1981 Code, § 20.04)
§ 95.05 VILLAGE FORESTER; ESTABLISHMENT AND DUTIES.
   (A)   The position of the Forester is hereby established.
   (B)   The Forester shall perform the following duties:
      (1)   The Forester, with the assistance of the Tree Committee shall
develop and each subsequent year, update the Village Forestry Plan. The plan
shall outline village forestry program activities for a minimum of the next
five years. This plan shall describe the village forestry activities to be
undertaken by the village, the reasons for those activities, the possible
funding sources, the means of accomplishing the activities, the alternatives
available to the village to fund or accomplish the activity, the projected date
of completion and the consequences if the activity if not completed. Activities
may include, but are not limited to street tree inventory, planting, tree
removal, beautification projects, educational projects and funding through
available grants.
      (2)   The Forester, with the assistance of the Tree Committee shall
develop and periodically review and revise, as necessary, the Village Forestry
Standards and specifications. This manual shall contain regulations and
standards for the planting, maintenance and removal of trees, shrubs and other
plants upon village-owned property.
      (3)   The Forester shall cause the Village Forestry Plan and the Village
Forestry Standards and Specifications and all revisions and amendments to it,
to be published and promulgated and shall cause three copies of the Manual and
all revisions and amendments to it, to be available for public inspection at
the office of the Village Clerk. Notice that the information is available for
public inspection shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation with
Kane County at least one week day of each four consecutive weeks immediately
following the initial availability of the Village Forestry Standards and
Specifications or revisions or amendments thereto. The Village Forestry
Standards and Specifications and any revisions and additions thereto shall
become effective on the tenth day following the final publication in a
newspaper of general circulation required under this division.
      (4)   The Forester shall make available to any interested person copies
of this chapter, information about the activities of the Tree Committee, copies
of the Village Forestry Standards and Specifications and copies of the Village
Forestry Plan.
      (5)   The Forester shall administer the Village Forestry Plan, this
chapter and the provisions of the Village Forestry Standards and
Specifications.
      (6)   The Forester shall perform whatever acts are necessary, including
the planting and maintenance of trees, the removal of undesirable trees, shrubs
and other plants located on the village-owned property, to insure that all
trees, shrubs and other plants located on village-owned property conform with
the Village Forestry Plan, the Village Forestry Standards and Specifications
and this chapter. Pursuant to this duty, the Forester in accordance with normal
village procedures regarding contracts may arrange contractual agreements.
      (7)   The Forester shall issue permits as are required by this chapter
and shall obtain, as a condition precedent to the issuance of the permits, the
written agreement of each person who applies for the permits that he or she
will comply with the requirements of this chapter, the Village Forestry Plan
and with the regulation and standards of the Village Forestry Standards and
Specifications. The Forester shall have the right to inspect all work performed
pursuant to the permits. If the Forester finds that the work performed is not
in compliance with the requirements of this chapter, the Village Forestry Plan
or with the regulations or standards of the Village Forestry Standards and
Specifications, the Forester shall provide written notice of his or her finding
to the permit applicant and:
         (a)    The permit shall be nullified and shall be nullified and shall
be void;
         (b)   The Forester may issue a written order that the permit applicant
cease and desist all work for which the permit was required; and
         (c)   The permit applicant shall be subject to penalty under the terms
of this chapter; and
         (d)   The Forester may take steps to correct the results of the
noncomplying work and the reasonable costs of the steps shall be charged to the
permit applicant.
      (8)   The Forester shall establish a program of public information and
education that will encourage the planting, maintenance or removal of trees,
shrubs and other plants on private property in furtherance of the goals of the
Village Forestry Plan.
(1981 Code, § 20.05)
§ 95.06 PERMITS.
   (A)   No person, except the Forester, an agent of the Forester or a
contractor hired by the Forester, may perform any of the following acts without
first obtaining from the Forester a permit for which no fee shall be charged
and nothing in this section shall be construed to exempt any person from the
requirements of obtaining any additional permits as are required by law:
      (1)   Plant on village-owned property, or treat, prune, remove or
otherwise disturb any tree, shrub or other plant located on village-owned
property, except that this provision shall not be construed to prohibit owners
of property adjacent to village-owned property from watering or fertilizing
without a permit any tree, shrub or other plant located on the village-owned
property;
      (2)   Trim, prune or remove any tree portions thereof if the tree or
portions thereof reasonably may be expected to fall on village-owned property
and thereby to cause damage to persons or property;
      (3)   Place on village owned property, either above or below ground
level, a container for trees, shrubs or other plants;
      (4)   Damage, cut, tap, carve or transplant any tree, shrub or other
plant located on village- owned property;
      (5)   Attach any rope, wire, nail, sign, poster or any other man-made
object to any tree, shrub or other plant located on village owned property; and
      (6)   Dig a tunnel or trench on village-owned property.
   (B)   Within seven days of receipt of the application, the Forester shall
issue a permit to perform within 30 days of the day of issuance any of the acts
specified in division (A) above, immediately above, for which a permit is
requested whenever.
      (1)   The acts would result in the abatement of a public nuisance;
      (2)   Acts are not inconsistent with the development and implementation
of the Village Forestry Plan or with any regulations or standards of the
Village Forestry Standards and Specifications;
      (3)   An application has been signed by the applicant and submitted to
the Forester detailing the location, number, size and species of trees, shrubs
or other plants that will be affected by such acts, setting forth the purpose
of such acts and the methods to be used and presenting any additional
information that the Forester may find reasonably necessary;
      (4)   The applicant agrees to perform the work for which the permit is
sought in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, the Village Forestry
Plan and with the regulations and standards set forth in the Village Forestry
Standards and Specifications;
      (5)   The applicant certifies that he or she has read and understands
those provisions of the Village Forestry Plan, this chapter and of the Village
Forestry Standards and Specifications which are pertinent to the work for which
the permit is sought; and
      (6)   If the work for which a permit is issued entails the felling of any
tree or part thereof, located on private property, which as a result of the
falling reasonably may be expected to fall upon village owned property and if
the felling is done by one other than the owner of the property on which the
felling is done, then the applicant shall agree to indemnify and hold the
village harmless for all damages resulting from work conducted pursuant to the
permit and shall deposit with the Village Clerk a liability insurance policy in
the amount of $100,000 per person and $300,000 per accident for bodily injury
liability and $50,000 aggregate for property damage liability, which policy
shall name the village as an additional insured.
   (C)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to exempt public utility
companies or their agents from any of the requirements of this chapter.
(1981 Code, § 20.06)
§ 95.07 PUBLIC NUISANCES.
   (A)   The following are public nuisances:
      (1)   Any dead or dying tree, shrub or other plant, whether located on
village-owned property or on private property;
      (2)   Any otherwise healthy tree, shrub or other plant, whether located
on village-owned property or on private property which harbors insects or
diseases which reasonably may be expected to injure or harm any tree, shrub or
other plant;
      (3)   Any tree, shrub, other plant or portion thereof, whether located on
village-owned property or on private property which by reason of location or
condition constitutes an imminent danger to the health, safety or welfare of
the general public;
      (4)   Any tree, shrub or other plant or portion thereof whether located
on village-owned property or on private property which obstructs the free
passage of pedestrian or vehicular traffic or which obstructs a street light;
      (5)   Any tree, shrub or other plant or portion thereof whether located
on village-owned property or on private property which dangerously obstructs
the view in the “visibility triangle” as such may be determined by the Village
Engineer pursuant to ordinance;
   (B)   The officers, agents, servants and employees of the village have the
authority to enter onto private property whereon there is located a tree,
shrub, plant part that is suspected to be a public nuisance.
   (C)   The following are the prescribed means of abating public nuisances
under this chapter:
      (1)   Any public nuisance, under this chapter, which is located on
village-owned property shall be pruned, removed or otherwise treated by the
Forester in whatever fashion is required to cause the abatement of the nuisance
within a reasonable time after its discovery.
      (2)   (a)   Any public nuisance under this chapter which is located on
private-owned property shall be pruned, removed or otherwise treated by the
property owner or his or her agent in whatever fashion is required to case the
abatement of the nuisance. No property owner may be found guilty of violating
this provision unless and until the following requirements of notice have been
satisfied:
            1.   The Forester shall cause a written nonce to be personally
served or sent by registered mail to the person to whom was sent the tax bill
for the general taxes for the last preceding year.
            2.   The notice shall describe the kind of tree, shrub or other
plant part which has been declared to be a public nuisance; its location on the
property; the reason for declaring it a nuisance.
            3.   The notice shall describe the premises by legal description or
by street address.
            4.   The notice shall state the actions that the property owner may
undertake to abate the nuisance.
            5.   The notice will require the elimination of the nuisance no
less than 30 days after the notice is delivered or sent to the person to whom
was sent the tax bill for the general taxes for the last preceding year.
            6.   The notice shall include a copy of this chapter and a copy of
ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, §§ 11-20-11 and 11-20-12.
         (b)   In the event flat the nuisance is not abated by the date
specified in the notice, the Forester is authorized to cause the abatement of
the nuisance. The reasonable cost of the abatement shall be filed as a lien
against the property on which the nuisance was located. In addition, the
property owner upon which the nuisance is located shall be subject to
prosecution under §
95.99. Nothing in this provision shall be construed to exempt any person from
the requirements of obtaining permits under §
95.06.
      (3)   The Forester is empowered to cause the immediate abatement of any
public nuisance provided that the nuisance is determined by the Forester to be
an immediate threat to any person or property.
   (D)   The Forester is hereby empowered to seek from any court of competent
jurisdiction an order directing immediate abatement of any public nuisance.
(1981 Code, § 20.07)
§ 95.08 INTERFERENCE WITH FORESTER.
   No person shall unreasonably hinder, prevent, delay or interfere with the
Forester or his or her agents while engaged in the execution or enforcement of
this chapter.
(1981 Code, § 20.08)
Penalty, see § 95.99
§ 95.99 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter or who fails to comply
with any notice issued pursuant to the provisions of chapter, upon being found
guilty of violation, shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $750 for each
separate offense, each day during which any violation of the provisions of this
chapter shall occur or continue shall be a separate offense. If, as the result
of the violation of any provision of this chapter, the injury, mutilation or
death of a tree, shrub or other plant located on village owned property is
caused, the cost of repair or replacement of the tree, shrub or other plant
shall be borne by the party in violation. The replacement value of trees and
shrubs shall be determined in accordance with the latest revision of A Guide to
the Professional Evaluation of Landscape Trees, Specimen Shrubs and Evergreens,
as published by the International Society of Aboriculture.
(1981 Code, § 20.09)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
Chapter
   
110.   GENERAL LICENSING PROVISIONS
   
111.   MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS AND SERVICES
   
112.   AMUSEMENTS
   
113.   FOOD TRUCKS
   
114.   SOLICITORS, PEDDLERS AND TRANSIENT AND ITINERANT MERCHANTS
   
115.   TELECOMMUNICATIONS
   
116.   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
   
117.   ADULT USE BUSINESS LICENSE
   
118.   INDOOR COMMERCIAL SPORTS AND ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENT
   
119.   RENTAL LICENSE
   
120.   REQUESTS FOR THE USE OF THE DEPOT AND DEPOT PARK
   
121.   RAFFLE LICENSE
   
122.   CANNABIS BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENTS
   
123.   VIDEO GAMING
CHAPTER 110: GENERAL LICENSING PROVISIONS
Section
   
110.01   Purpose
   
110.02   Definitions
   
110.03   License required
   
110.04   Applications
   
110.05   Inspection or investigation
   
110.06   Issuance of license
   
110.07   Fees
   
110.08   Expiration and renewal
   
110.09   Building and premises
   
110.10   Nuisances prohibited
   
110.11   Inspections and analysis
   
110.12   Revocation and suspension
   
110.13   License to be posted; destruction or removal prohibited unless
authorized
   
110.14   License not assignable; unlawful use
   
110.15   Separate licenses required for each location
   
110.16   Separate licenses required for each business
   
110.17   Enforcement
   
110.18   Conflicts with certain home rule county ordinances regarding payment
of minimum hourly wages and paid sick leave
§ 110.01 PURPOSE.
   Because each commercial establishment located in the village is a basic part
of and affects the physical and economic well-being of the village
necessitating services from the village in the form of building, health, fire,
and police inspections and other services, such commercial establishments shall
in all respects be in full compliance with the provisions contained in this
chapter. This chapter is designed to provide for the means whereby the village
may render the necessary inspections and services to commercial establishments
and commercial activities in order to promote, protect, and safeguard the
public health, safety, and welfare of the residents and consumers of the
village and to enable the effecting of an accurate record of commercial
establishments located and carrying on commercial activities or commerce within
the village.
(Ord. 13-29, passed 8-19-2013)
§ 110.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions, whether
capitalized or not, shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.
   ENGAGING IN BUSINESS. Persons operating, conducting, doing, carrying on,
causing to be carried on or pursuing any business activity, profession,
occupation, trade, pursuit or activity for the purpose of profit. BUSINESS
ACTIVITY includes but is not limited to the following activities of commerce or
commercial activity located in the village:
      (1)   FOOD ESTABLISHMENT. A building or premises or a portion thereof,
the principal use of which is for the sale, dispensing, distribution, serving
or storage of food, foodstuff or drink for consumption on or off the premises.
      (2)   INDUSTRIAL ESTABLISHMENT. A building or premises or a portion
thereof, the principal use of which is for manufacturing, including assembly,
processing, fabrication, storage or warehousing, including scientific or
manufacturing research, engineering and development.
      (3)   RETAIL AND WHOLESALE SALES ESTABLISHMENT. A building or premises or
portion thereof, the principal use of which is for the sale or distribution of
merchandise, goods or chattel for a price or fee by a seller to a consumer or
by one business to another business.
      (4)   SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT. A building or premises or a portion thereof,
the principal use of which is for the rendering of personal or material
services for a price or fee whether or not a commodity or material good is
worked upon or exchanged.
   PERSON. Any individual, male or female, estate, trust, receiver, cooperative
association, club, corporation, company, firm, partnership, joint venture,
syndicate, or other entity engaging in a business, profession, occupation,
trade, pursuit, or activity.
   PLACE OF BUSINESS. The building or premises or portion thereof the principal
use of which is, temporary or otherwise, for the retail sale or distribution of
merchandise, goods or food rendering of personal or material services to
consumers for profit. In the event there is no such location, but the business
is transacted at the location of the buyer, then the general sales area shall
be considered a place of business. Place of business shall not include a
business conducted at a personal residence.
(Ord. 13-29, passed 8-19-2013)
§ 110.03 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall engage in, conduct, maintain, operate or carry on any
business, occupation, activity or establishment, either by himself, herself or
itself, or through an agent, employee or partner, without first having obtained
a license for such business, occupation, activity or establishment.
(Ord. 13-29, passed 8-19-2013)
§ 110.04 APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   Applications for licenses shall be filed with the Village Clerk in
writing on a form provided for that purpose, except as otherwise provided.
   (B)   If the applicant is an individual or sole proprietorship, the
application shall contain his or her name, date of birth, business name, if
any, business and residence addresses and business and residence telephone
numbers. If the applicant is a partnership or other non-corporate business
entity, the application shall contain the business names, if any, address and
telephone number of the partnership or other entity, and the names, dates of
birth and residence addresses and residence telephone numbers of each partner
or member thereof. If the applicant is a corporation, the application shall
contain the name of the corporation and its address and telephone number and
the names, residence addresses and residence telephone numbers of each officer
and director thereof, and if a majority in interest of the stock of such
corporation is owned by one person or his or her nominee or nominees, the
application shall also contain the name, date of birth, residence address and
residence telephone number of such person.
   (C)   Each application shall also contain:
      (1)   A designation of the type or kind of license desired;
      (2)   The location or proposed location of the place of business,
occupation, activity or establishment;
      (3)   The applicable fee to be paid as provided by any village ordinance;
      (4)   The number of the certificate of registration required under the
Illinois Statutes relating to retailer's occupation tax, service occupation
tax, and/or use tax, if applicable; and
      (5)   Such additional information as may be needed by village officials
in evaluating the application, including evidence of any insurance policy or
bond required by any village ordinance.
(Ord. 13-29, passed 8-19-2013)
§ 110.05 INSPECTION OR INVESTIGATION.
   Upon receipt of an application for a license, if an inspection or
investigation is required before the issuance of such license, the Village
Clerk shall promptly refer such application to the village official who is
responsible for making such inspection or investigation. Such village official
shall make such inspection or investigation and deliver a written report to the
Village Clerk within ten days after receiving the application or a copy thereof
with a recommendation for the approval or disapproval thereof.
(Ord. 13-29, passed 8-19-2013)
§ 110.06 ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.
   All applications and inspection and/or investigation reports, if applicable,
shall be promptly delivered to the Village Clerk for review and approval or
disapproval. If approved, the license shall be signed by the Village President,
attested by the Village Clerk and issued. If disapproved, the Village Clerk
shall indicate the reasons therefore in writing on the application and the
applicant shall be notified by the Village Clerk.
(Ord. 13-29, passed 8-19-2013)
§ 110.07 FEES.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/16574ba874f17dfbd958615eed907c929c4100f2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7683.jpg]Publisher's Note: This Section has been AMENDED by new
legislation (Ord. 25-45, adopted 10-6-2025). The text of the amendment will be
incorporated below when the ordinance is codified.
   (A)   All fees and/or charges for licenses shall be deposited with the
Village Clerk at the time the application is filed. Fees shall not be prorated
for business conducted for a portion of a year.
   (B)   The annual fee shall be $50.
(Ord. 13-29, passed 8-19-2013)
§ 110.08 EXPIRATION AND RENEWAL.
   Unless otherwise provided, all licenses shall expire on the last day of
December each year. Such licenses shall be reissued upon the filing and
approval of a new application and the deposit of the fee with the Village
Clerk. Prior to approving such new application, the Village Clerk may request a
reinspection and/or reinvestigation in cases in which the Clerk deems it
appropriate. No license shall be renewed or reissued if the licensee,
applicant, business, activity or establishment has any overdue accounts with
village for fees, penalties, fines, or charges in connection with the business,
activity, occupation or establishment.
(Ord. 13-29, passed 8-19-2013)
§ 110.09 BUILDING AND PREMISES.
   No license shall be issued for any business, occupation, activity or
establishment unless the building and premises to be used fully comply with all
ordinances, codes, rules and regulations of the village and the statutes of the
State of Illinois.
(Ord. 13-29, passed 8-19-2013)
§ 110.10 NUISANCES PROHIBITED.
   No business, occupation, activity or establishment, whether or not a license
has been issued therefore, shall be conducted, operated, maintained or carried
on so as to constitute a nuisance.
(Ord. 13-29, passed 8-19-2013)
§ 110.11 INSPECTIONS AND ANALYSIS.
   (A)   Inspections at reasonable times may be made by authorized village
officials or employees of any building or premises used for or in connection
with the operation of a business, occupation, activity or establishment for
which a license has been applied, or when issued, and the licensee or the
person in charge of the building or premises shall allow such an inspection.
   (B)   Whenever an analysis of any commodity or material is reasonably
necessary to assure compliance with the provisions of any village ordinance,
code, rules or regulations, or to detect violations thereof, the licensee or
the person in charge of the building or premises shall furnish any authorized
village official or employee sufficient samples of such material or commodity
for such analysis upon request.
(Ord. 13-29, passed 8-19-2013)
§ 110.12 REVOCATION AND SUSPENSION.
   (A)   Suspension of business operations.
      (1)   When the conduct or operation of any commercial establishment or
activity, whether licensed or unlicensed, shall constitute a nuisance in fact
and a clear and present danger to the public health, safety, or general
welfare, the Village Administrator shall be authorized to summarily order the
cessation of business and the closing of the premises for a period not to
exceed ten days.
      (2)   Unless (i) waived by the affected business; or (ii) the nuisance is
substantially abated in the opinion of the Village Administrator and the
business is allowed to resume and reopen, within eight days after a license is
suspended, the Village President shall call a hearing as provided in division
(D) of this section for the purpose of determining whether or not the license
should be revoked or further suspended.
   (B)   Revocation of license. Licenses issued by the village may be suspended
for up to 30 days or revoked in addition to any fine imposed by the Village
President after notice and hearing as provided in division (D) of this section
for any of the following causes:
      (1)   Any fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement contained in the
application for the license;
      (2)   Failure by the applicant to comply with any provision of this code
or any statutes of the state relating to the business, occupation, or activity
of the license;
      (3)   Conviction of the applicant of any felony or of a misdemeanor where
such conviction indicates their inability to operate a safe, honest, and
legitimate business operation within the village;
      (4)   Failure of the licensee to pay any fine, penalty, or charge owed to
the village;
      (5)   Any deceptive trade practices as defined by state or federal law or
regulation or failure of the licensee to comply with all applicable laws and
regulations regarding consumer protection and deceptive trade practices;
      (6)   Failure of the licensee to comply with all village zoning,
building, fire and health codes, and ordinances, as well as all other
applicable village codes, ordinances, rules, and regulations; failure to
maintain the premises in good repair, free of litter and debris; or failure to
keep the premises in a safe condition for employees, customers, and other
persons present therein or thereon;
      (7)   Any other violation of any village ordinance, resolution, or
regulation; or
      (8)   Refusal to permit an inspection or sampling or any interference
with a duly authorized village officer or employee while in the reasonable
performance of his or her duties in making such inspections.
   (C)   Such revocation, if ordered, shall not preclude prosecution and
imposition of any other penalties provided for the violation of other
applicable provisions of this chapter or other ordinances of the village. No
person whose license has been revoked shall be eligible for a new license
during the period for which the original license was originally issued.
   (D)   Hearing procedures.
      (1)   Notice.
         (a)   Notice of a hearing shall set forth specifically the grounds of
the complaint and the time and place of the hearing.
         (b)   Such notice shall be served by certified mail (return receipt
requested) to the licensee at his or her last known residence or business
address, at least five days prior to the date set for the hearing or personally
served on the licensee at least three days prior to the date set for the
hearing.
         (c)   If the licensee shall request a continuance in the date of the
hearing, any suspension in effect shall be continued until the continued
hearing date.
         (d)   All pleadings, motions, notices, and orders shall be filed with
the Village Clerk.
      (2)   Procedural rules.
         (a)   Prior to the beginning of any hearing, the Village President may
adopt additional procedural rules as may be necessary for that hearing.
         (b)   At the hearing, the licensee shall be permitted counsel and
shall have the right to respond, present evidence, and cross-examine witnesses.
         (c)   All proceedings shall be stenographically or electronically
recorded.
         (d)   Irrelevant, immaterial, or unduly repetitious evidence shall be
excluded. The rules of evidence as applied in civil cases in the circuit courts
of the state shall be followed. Evidence not admissible under those rules of
evidence may be admitted, however, if it is of a type commonly relied upon by
reasonably prudent men in the conduct of their affairs. Objections to
evidentiary offers may be made and shall be noted in the record.
         (e)   No discovery procedure shall be used prior to a hearing except
by leave of the Village President who shall supervise all or any part of any
discovery procedure.
         (f)   The standard for proof for hearings shall be by the
preponderance of the evidence.
         (g)   The Village President shall preside and render the decision
within a reasonable time after the conclusion of the hearing, but not later
than 30 days after such conclusion. The decision shall be in writing and shall
summarize the evidence and state the reasons for the decision.
      (3)   Hearing costs.
         (a)   Any licensee whose license is suspended or revoked, or a
business that operates without a license shall pay to the village the costs of
the hearing before the Village President. The Village President shall determine
the costs incurred by the village for said hearing, including, but not limited
to, court reporter fees, the costs of transcripts or records, attorneys’ fees,
the cost of preparing the mailing notices and orders, and all other
miscellaneous expenses incurred by the village or such lesser sum as the
Village President may allow.
         (b)   The licensee shall pay the costs to the village within 30 days
of notification of the costs by the Village President. Failure to pay the costs
within 30 days of notification is a violation of this section and may be cause
for license suspension or revocation, or the levy of a fine.
(Ord. 13-29, passed 8-19-2013; Am. Ord. 15-32, passed 7-6-2015)
§ 110.13 LICENSE TO BE POSTED; DESTRUCTION OR REMOVAL PROHIBITED UNLESS
AUTHORIZED.
   (A)   All licensees shall keep the license certificate, plate, tag, badge or
sticker posted at all times in a conspicuous place on the building or premises
used for the business, occupation, activity or establishment for which such
license is issued.
   (B)   No person shall destroy, obliterate, take, remove or carry away
without the consent of the licensee any certificate, plate, tag, badge or
sticker which has been issued by the village except when the certificate,
plate, tag, badge or sticker has expired or been revoked or suspended or the
building or premises for which the license is issued has been abandoned.
   (C)   In the event that a license is revoked or suspended, an authorized
village official or employee may remove the certificate, plate, tag, badge or
sticker relating thereto from the building or premises
on which it is posted if the licensee fails or refuses to forthwith surrender
it upon receiving notice of the revocation or suspension.
(Ord. 13-29, passed 8-19-2013)
§ 110.14 LICENSES NOT ASSIGNABLE; UNLAWFUL USE.
   No license may be assigned, sold, loaned, transferred, used as collateral or
otherwise encumbered. No person, firm or corporation shall use or display any
license certificate, plate, tag, badge or sticker which has been improperly
acquired. No person, firm or corporation shall alter, deface, forge or
counterfeit any license certificate, plate, tag, badge or sticker issued by the
village.
(Ord. 13-29, passed 8-19-2013)
§ 110.15 SEPARATE LICENSES REQUIRED FOR EACH LOCATION.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/16574ba874f17dfbd958615eed907c929c4100f2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7683.jpg]Publisher's Note: This Section has been AMENDED by new
legislation (Ord. 25-45, adopted 10-6-2025). The text of the amendment will be
incorporated below when the ordinance is codified.
   No license for a business, occupation, activity or establishment in the
village shall be construed to permit its operation in more than one location in
the village; a separate license shall be required for each location. For the
purpose of this chapter, the existence of a single location shall be evidenced
by the fact that all buildings and premises containing the principal and
accessory uses shall be:
   (A)   Connected or situated on the same or adjoining lots or parcels; and
   (B)   Owned or leased by the same person, firm or corporation. Unless
otherwise provided, the location of any such business, occupation, activity or
establishment may be changed upon written notification to the Village Clerk and
the payment of a $10 transfer fee.
(Ord. 13-29, passed 8-19-2013)
§ 110.16 SEPARATE LICENSES REQUIRED FOR EACH BUSINESS.
   Unless otherwise provided in this chapter or another ordinance, any person
who conducts, engages in, maintains, operates or carries on more than one
business, occupation, activity or establishment for which a license is
required, regardless of whether or not they are operated out of the same
building or premises, shall apply for and obtain a separate license for each
such business, occupation, activity and establishment.
(Ord. 13-29, passed 8-19-2013)
§ 110.17 ENFORCEMENT.
   Whenever a person neglects or refuses to apply for and obtain any license
required by this chapter or any other village ordinance, or otherwise violates
the provisions of this chapter, the village may also cause appropriate legal
action and proceedings, in law or equity, to be instituted and maintained to
enforce the license requirement.
(Ord. 13-29, passed 8-19-2013)
§ 110.18 CONFLICTS WITH CERTAIN HOME RULE COUNTY ORDINANCES REGARDING PAYMENT
OF MINIMUM HOURLY WAGES AND PAID SICK LEAVE.
   (A)   Employers located within the village shall comply with all applicable
federal and/or state laws and regulations as such laws and regulations may
exist from time to time with regard to both the payment of minimum hourly wages
and paid sick leave. Employee eligibility for paid sick leave and minimum
hourly wages shall be in compliance with all applicable federal and/or state
laws and regulations as such laws and regulations may exist from time to time.
   (B)   No additional obligations with regard to paid sick leave or minimum
hourly wages imposed by any ordinance adopted by the Cook County Board of
Commissioners shall apply to any employer located within the Cook County
portion of the village; the village opts out of any such ordinance(s) adopted
by the Cook County Board of Commissioners, and this section conflicts with any
such ordinance(s) adopted by the Cook County Board of Commissioners that
imposes additional obligations with regard to paid sick leave or minimum hourly
wages.
   (C)   For the purposes of this section, the term EMPLOYEE means an
individual permitted to work by an employer regardless of the number of persons
the employer employs, and the term EMPLOYER means any person employing one or
more employees, or seeking to employ one or more employees, if the person has
its principal place of business within the Cook County portion of the village
or does business within the Cook County portion of the village.
   (D)   For the purposes of this section, the term EMPLOYER does not mean:
      (1)   The government of the United States or corporation wholly owned by
the government of the United States;
      (2)   An Indian tribe or a corporation wholly owned by an Indian tribe;
      (3)   The government of the state or any agency or department thereof; or
      (4)   Any unit of government.
(Ord. 17-35, passed 7-17-2017)
CHAPTER 111: MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS AND SERVICES
Section
General Provisions
   
111.01   Definitions
   
111.02   Exceptions
   
111.03   Authority to make rules and regulations
Licensing Provisions
   
111.15   Establishment permit
   
111.16   Filing and fee; establishment
   
111.17   Application; establishment
   
111.18   Corporate applicant; exemption
   
111.19   Masseur or masseuse permit
   
111.20   Filing and fee; masseur and masseuse
   
111.21   Operator of establishment; exception
   
111.22   Application form; masseur or masseuse
   
111.23   Facilities necessary
   
111.24   Verification of application
   
111.25   Referral of application to other departments
   
111.26   Permit issuance; establishment
   
111.27   Permit issuance; masseur or masseuse
   
111.28   Revocation or suspension of permit
   
111.29   Sale or transfer
   
111.30   Name and place of business; change
   
111.31   Display of permit
   
111.32   Inspection
   
111.33   Permit fees
Operating Requirements
   
111.45   Generally
   
111.46   Operator to maintain register of employees
   
111.47   Identification tag
   
111.48   Employment of minors
   
111.49   Unlawful activities
   
111.50   Employment of masseurs and masseuses
 
   
111.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 111.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BONA FIDE NON-PROFIT CLUB. Any fraternal, charitable, religious, benevolent
or any other non-profit organization having a regular membership association
primarily for mutual social, mental, political and civic welfare to which
admission is limited to the members and guests and revenue accruing therefrom
to be used exclusively for the benevolent purposes of the organization and
which organization or agency is exempt from taxation, under the Internal
Revenue Laws of the United States as a bona fide fraternal, charitable,
religious, benevolent or non-profit organization.
   EMPLOYEE. Any and all persons, other than the masseurs or masseuses, who
render any service to the licensee, who receive compensation directly from the
licensee and who have no physical contact with the customers or clients.
   INSPECTOR. The Village Building Inspector or his or her authorized
representative.
   MASSAGE. Any method of pressure on or friction against, or stroking,
kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating or stimulating of the external
soft parts of the body with the hands or with the aid of any mechanical
electrical apparatus or appliances with or without supplementary aids as
rubbing alcohol, liniments, antiseptics, oils, powder, creams, lotions,
ointments or other similar preparations commonly used in this practice.
   MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT.
      (1)   Any establishment having a fixed place of business where any
person, firm, association or corporation engages in or carries on or permits to
be engaged in or carried on any of the activities mentioned in this section.
      (2)   Any establishment engaged in or carrying on or permitting any
combination of massage and bath house shall be deemed a MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT.
   MASSEUR or MASSEUSE. Any person, including a trainee, who, for any
consideration whatsoever, engages in the practice of “massage,” as herein
defined.
   PERMIT. The operator of a massage establishment.
   PERSON. Any individual, copartnership, firm, association, joint stock
company, corporation or combination of individuals of whatever form or
character.
   PUBLIC BATH HOUSE. Any place, including a private club or organization,
except as provided herein, wherein any person, firm, association, corporation
or partnership engages in, conducts or carries on or permits to be engaged in,
conducted or carried on, the business of giving or furnishing Russian, Finnish,
Swedish, hot air, vapor, electric cabinet, steam, mineral, sweat, salt,
Japanese, sauna, fomentation or electric baths or baths of any kind whatsoever,
excluding ordinary tub baths where an attendant is not required.
   RECOGNIZED SCHOOL. An educational institution offering degrees and/or
certifications in massage therapy and approved or accredited by:
      (1)   The Commission on Massage Training Accreditation/Approval,
hereinafter COMTAA, an independent affiliate of the American Massage Therapy
Association; or
      (2)   The Institutional Massage Somatic Therapies Accreditation Council,
hereinafter IMSTAC, a division of the Associated Bodywork and Massage
Professionals of Evergreen, Colorado.
(1981 Code, § 50.01)
§ 111.02 EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   This chapter shall not include hospitals, medical offices, nursing
homes, sanitariums or persons holding an unrevoked certificate to practice the
healing arts under the laws of the state or persons working under the direction
of any such persons or in any such establishments.
   (B)   This chapter shall not apply to barbers or cosmetologists lawfully
carrying out their particular profession or business as an accessory use in
accordance with the requirements set forth in §
157.085 and holding a valid, unrevoked permit or certificate of registration
issued by the state.
   (C)   This chapter shall not apply to salons and spas providing massages as
an accessory use in accordance with the requirements set forth in §
157.085 and holding a valid, unrevoked permit or certificate of registration
issued by the state.
(1981 Code, § 50.28) (Am. Ord. 23-21, passed 5-1-2023)
§ 111.03 AUTHORITY TO MAKE RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The Village Board may, after a public hearing, make and enforce reasonable
rules and regulations not in conflict with, but to carry out the intent of this
chapter.
(1981 Code, § 50.29)
LICENSING PROVISIONS
§ 111.15 ESTABLISHMENT PERMIT.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in, conduct or carry on or to
permit to be engaged in, conducted or carried on, in or upon any premises in
the village, the operation of a massage establishment, as herein defined,
without first having obtained a permit from the Village Clerk after approval of
the Building Inspector.
(1981 Code, § 50.02)
Penalty, see § 111.99
§ 111.16 FILING AND FEE; ESTABLISHMENT.
   Every applicant for a permit to maintain, operate or conduct a massage
establishment shall file an application with the Village Clerk upon a form
provided by the Village Clerk and pay a filing fee as set forth in the village
annual fee schedule, which shall not be refundable.
(1981 Code, § 50.03)
§ 111.17 APPLICATION; ESTABLISHMENT.
   (A)   The application for a permit to operate a massage establishment shall
set forth the exact nature of the massage to be administered, the proposed
place of business and facilities therefor and the name and address of each
applicant.
   (B)   (1)   In addition to the foregoing, any applicant for a permit shall
furnish the following information:
         (a)   The two previous addresses immediately prior to the present
address of the applicant;
         (b)   Written proof that the applicant is at least 18 years of age;
         (c)   Applicant’s height, weight, color of eyes and hair;
         (d)   Two portrait photographs at least two inches by two inches;
         (e)   Business, occupation or employment of the applicant for the
three years immediately preceding the date of application;
         (f)   The massage or similar business permit history of the applicant;
whether the person, in previously operating in the village or another city or
state under permit, has had the permit revoked or suspended, the reason
therefor and the business activity or occupation subsequent to the action of
suspension or revocation;
         (g)   All criminal convictions, except minor traffic violations;
         (h)   Applicant must furnish a diploma or certificate of graduation
from a recognized school or other institution of learning wherein the method,
profession and work of massage is taught; provided, however, that if the
applicant will have no physical contact with his or her customer or clients, he
or she need not possess the diploma or certificate of graduation from a
recognized school or other institution of learning wherein the method,
profession and work of massage is taught; and
         (i)   Other identification and information necessary to discover the
truth of the matters hereinbefore specified as required to be set forth in the
application.
      (2)   Nothing contained herein shall be construed to deny the Village
Clerk the right to take the fingerprints and additional photographs of the
applicant, nor shall anything contained herein be construed to deny the right
of the Village Clerk to confirm the height and weight of the applicant.
      (3)   If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation
shall be set forth exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation together
with the names and residence addresses of each of the officers, directors and
each stockholder holding more than 10% of the stock of the corporation. If the
applicant is a partnership, the application shall set forth the name and the
residence address of each of the partners, including limited partners. If one
or more of the partners is a corporation, the provisions of this section
pertaining to a corporate applicant apply.
(1981 Code, § 50.04)
§ 111.18 CORPORATE APPLICANT; EXEMPTION.
   The provisions of §
111.17(B)(1)(a) through (c) and (g) shall not apply to any of the following:
   (A)   A corporation, the stock of which is listed on a stock exchange in the
state or the City of New York, State of New York;
   (B)   A bank, trust company, financial institution or title company to which
application is made or to whom a permit is issued in a fiduciary capacity; and/
or
   (C)   A corporation which is required by law to file periodic reports with
the Securities and Exchange Commission.
(1981 Code, § 50.05)
§ 111.19 MASSEUR OR MASSEUSE PERMIT.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the practice of massage as
a masseur or masseuse, as herein defined, without first having obtained a
permit from the Village Clerk as provided herein.
(1981 Code, § 50.06)
Penalty, see § 111.99
§ 111.20 FILING AND FEE; MASSEUR OR MASSEUSE.
   Any person who engages in the practice of massage, as herein defined, shall
file an application for a permit with the Village Clerk upon a form provided by
the Village Clerk and shall pay a filing fee as set forth in the village annual
fee schedule, which shall not be refundable.
(1981 Code, § 50.07)
§ 111.21 OPERATOR OF ESTABLISHMENT; EXCEPTION.
   A diploma from a recognized school, as defined herein, will not be required
by the operator of a massage establishment or for any employee where the
operator or employee does not give a massage, as defined herein.
(1981 Code, § 50.08)
§ 111.22 APPLICATION FORM; MASSEUR OR MASSEUSE.
   (A)   The application for a masseur or masseuse permit shall contain the
following:
      (1)   Name and residence address;
      (2)   Social Security number and driver’s license number, if any;
      (3)   Applicant’s weight, height, color of hair and eyes;
      (4)   Written evidence that the applicant is at least 18 years of age;
      (5)   Business, occupation or employment of the applicant for the three
years immediately preceding the date of application;
      (6)   Whether the person has ever been convicted of any crime, except
misdemeanor traffic violations; and (If any person mentioned herein has been so
convicted, a statement must be made giving the place and court in which the
conviction was had, the specific charge under which the conviction was obtained
and the sentence imposed as a result of the conviction.)
      (7)   The name and address of the recognized school attended, the date
attended and a copy of the diploma or certificate of graduation awarded the
applicant showing the applicant has completed not less than 70 hours of
instruction.
   (B)   The Village Clerk shall have the right to direct the Chief of Police
to take fingerprints and a photograph of the applicant and the right to confirm
the information submitted.
(1981 Code, § 50.09)
§ 111.23 FACILITIES NECESSARY.
   No permit to conduct a massage establishment shall be issued unless an
inspection by the Inspector reveals that the establishment complies with each
of the following minimum requirements.
   (A)   Construction of rooms used for toilets, tubs, steam baths and showers
shall be made waterproof with approved waterproofed materials and shall be
installed in accordance with the Building Code. Plumbing fixtures shall be
installed in accordance with the Plumbing Code.
      (1)   For toilet rooms, toilet room vestibules and rooms containing
bathtubs, there shall be a waterproof floor covering, which will be carried up
all walls to a height of at least six inches. Floor shall be covered up on base
with at least three-fourths inch cover. The walls of all toilet rooms and rooms
containing bathtubs shall be finished to a height of six feet with a smooth,
non-absorbent finish surface of Keene cement, tile or similar material.
      (2)   Steam rooms and shower compartments shall have waterproof floors,
walls and ceilings approved by the Inspector.
      (3)   Floors of wet and dry heat shall be adequately pitched to one or
more floor drains properly connected to the sewer. (Exception: Dry heat rooms
with wooden floors need not be provided with pitched floors and floor drains.)
      (4)   A source of hot water must be available within the immediate
vicinity of dry and wet heat rooms to facilitate cleaning.
   (B)   Toilet facilities shall be provided in convenient locations. When five
or more employees and patrons of different sexes are on the premises at the
same time, separate toilet facilities shall be provided. A single water closet
per sex shall be provided for each 20 or more employees or patrons of that sex
on the premises at any one time. Urinals may be substituted for water closets
after one water closet has been provided. All toilet rooms shall be equipped
with self-closing doors opening in the direction of ingress to the toilet
rooms. Toilets shall be designated as to the sex accommodated therein.
   (C)   (1)   Lavatories or wash basins provided with both hot and cold
running water shall be installed in either the toilet room or the vestibule.
      (2)   Lavatories or wash basins shall be provided with soap in a
dispenser and with sanitary towels.
   (D)   (1)   All portions of massage establishments and baths shall be
provided with adequate light and ventilation by means of windows or skylights
with an area of not less than one-eighth of the total floor area or shall be
provided with approved artificial light and a mechanical operation ventilating
system. When windows or skylights are used for ventilation, at least one-half
of the total required window area shall be operable.
      (2)   To allow for adequate ventilation, cubicles, rooms and areas
provided for patrons’ use not served directly by a required window, skylight or
mechanical system of ventilation shall be constructed so that the height of
partitions does not exceed 75% of the floor-to-ceiling height of the area in
which they are located.
   (E)   All electrical equipment shall be installed in accordance with the
requirements of the Electrical Code.
(1981 Code, § 50.10)
§ 111.24 VERIFICATION OF APPLICATION.
   Every application for a permit under this chapter shall be verified as
provided in the Illinois Code of Civil Procedure for the verification of
pleadings.
(1981 Code, § 50.12)
§ 111.25 REFERRAL OF APPLICATION TO OTHER DEPARTMENTS.
   The Village Clerk, upon receiving an application for a massage establishment
permit, shall refer the application to the Building Inspection Department and
the Fire Department, which Departments shall make written recommendations to
the Village Clerk concerning compliance with the codes that they administer.
(1981 Code, § 50.13)
§ 111.26 PERMIT ISSUANCE; ESTABLISHMENT.
   (A)   The Village Clerk shall issue a permit within 14 days following
application if all requirements for a massage establishment described in this
chapter are met and shall issue a permit to all persons who apply to perform
massage services unless he or she finds:
      (1)   Operation, as proposed by the applicant, if permitted, would not
have complied with the Building, Health and Fire Codes and regulations of the
village; and/or
      (2)   The applicant and any other person who will be directly engaged in
the management and operation of a massage establishment has been convicted of
an offense involving the use of force and violence upon the person of another
that amounts to a felony or of an offense outside of the state that would have
constituted any of the following offenses if committed within the state.
   (B)   The Village Clerk may issue a permit to any person convicted of any of
the crimes described above if he or she finds that the conviction occurred at
least five years prior to the date of the application and the applicant has had
no subsequent felony convictions of any nature and no subsequent misdemeanor
convictions for crimes mentioned in this section.
(1981 Code, § 50.14)
§ 111.27 PERMIT ISSUANCE; MASSEUR OR MASSEUSE.
   The Village Clerk may issue a masseur or masseuse permit within 21 days
following submission of all information required hereunder unless he or she
finds that the applicant for a masseur or masseuse permit has been convicted of
an offense involving the use of force and violence on the person of another
that amounts to a felony.
(1981 Code, § 50.15)
§ 111.28 REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF PERMIT.
   (A)   (1)   Any permit issued for a massage establishment may be revoked or
suspended by the Village Board, after a hearing, for good cause, or in any case
where any of the provisions of this chapter are violated or where any employee
of the permittee, including a masseur or masseuse, is engaged in any conduct
which violates any of the state or local laws or ordinances at permittee’s
place of business and the permittee has actual or constructive knowledge by due
diligence, or in any case, where the permittee refuses to permit any duly
authorized police officer or Building Inspector of the village to inspect the
premises or the operations therein.
      (2)   The permit may also be revoked or suspended by the Village Board,
after hearing, upon the recommendations of the Building Inspector, that the
business is being managed, conducted or maintained without regard for the
public health or health of patrons or customers or without due regard for the
public health or health of patrons or customers or without due regard to proper
sanitation and hygiene.
(1981 Code, § 50.18)
   (B)   A masseur or masseuse permit issued by the Village Board to any
employee may be revoked or suspended after a public hearing on any of the
following grounds.
      (1)   Violation of any of the provisions of this chapter; and/or
      (2)   Violation of any section of ILCS Chapter 720, Act 5, §§ 11-6 to 11-
22.
(1981 Code, § 50.19)
§ 111.29 SALE OR TRANSFER.
   Upon sale, transfer or relocation of a massage establishment, the permit
therefor shall be null and void; provided, however, that upon the death or
incapacity of the permittee the massage establishment may continue in business
for a reasonable period of time to allow for an orderly transfer of the permit.
(1981 Code, § 50.21)
§ 111.30 NAME AND PLACE OF BUSINESS; CHANGE.
   No person granted a permit pursuant to this chapter shall operate under any
name or conduct his or her business under any designation for any location not
specified in his or her permit.
(1981 Code, § 50.22)
Penalty, see § 111.99
§ 111.31 DISPLAY OF PERMIT.
   Every person to whom or for whom a permit shall have been granted pursuant
to the provisions of this chapter shall display the permit in a conspicuous
place within the massage establishment so that the same may be readily seen by
persons entering the premises.
(1981 Code, § 50.23)
Penalty, see § 111.99
§ 111.32 INSPECTION.
   The Police Department and the Building Department shall from time to time
and at least twice a year make an inspection of each massage establishment in
the village for the purposes of determining that the provisions of this chapter
are complied with.
(1981 Code, § 50.24)
§ 111.33 PERMIT FEES.
   (A)   Every permittee under a massage establishment permit or a masseur or
masseuse permit, as defined herein, shall pay to the Village Clerk a permit fee
as set forth in the village annual fee schedule, payable in advance.
   (B)   The permit fee prescribed in this section is due and payable upon
receipt of the permit and on the anniversary date each year thereafter.
(1981 Code, § 50.25)
OPERATING REQUIREMENTS
§ 111.45 GENERALLY.
   (A)   Every portion of a massage establishment, including appliances,
apparatus and personnel shall be kept clean and operated in a sanitary
condition.
   (B)   (1)   All employees shall be clean and shall wear suitable clean outer
garments whose use is restricted to the massage establishment.
      (2)   Provision of a separate dressing room for each sex must be
available on the premises with individual lockers available for each employee
and for each customer.
      (3)   The lockers shall be equipped with a key lock or number combination
locking device.
      (4)   Doors to the dressing rooms shall open inward and shall be self-
closing.
      (5)   Public areas such as the front entrance and lobby must be visible
from the street when possible with an unobstructed view of the interior of the
front entrance and lobby.
   (C)   (1)   All massage establishments shall be provided with clean,
laundered sheets and towels in sufficient quantity and shall be laundered after
each use thereof and stored in approved, sanitary manner.
      (2)   No towels or sheets shall be laundered or dried in any massage
establishment unless the establishment is provided with approved laundry
facilities for the laundry and drying.
      (3)   Approved receptacles shall be provided for the storage of soiled
linens and paper towels.
   (D)   (1)   Wet and dry heat rooms, shower compartments and toilet rooms
shall be thoroughly cleaned each day the business is in operation.
      (2)   Bathtubs shall be thoroughly cleaned after each use.
   (E)   No massage establishment granted a permit under the provisions of this
chapter shall place, publish or distribute or cause to be placed, published or
distributed any advertising matter that depicts any portion of the human body
that would reasonably suggest to prospective patrons that any service is
available other than those services, as described in §
111.01, nor shall any massage establishment indicate in the text of the
advertising that any service is available other than those services, as
described in §
111.01.
   (F)   No service enumerated in §
111.01 may be carried on within any cubicle, room, booth or any area within a
massage establishment, which is fitted with a door capable of being locked.
(1981 Code, § 50.11) (Am. Ord. 23-21, passed 5-1-2023) Penalty, see §
Penalty, see § 111.99
§ 111.46 OPERATOR TO MAINTAIN REGISTER OF EMPLOYEES.
   (A)   The operator of a massage establishment must maintain a register of
all persons employed as masseurs or masseuses and their permit numbers.
   (B)   The register shall be available for inspection at all times during
regular business hours.
(1981 Code, § 50.16)
Penalty, see § 111.99
§ 111.47 IDENTIFICATION TAG.
   The Village Clerk shall provide each masseur and masseuse granted a permit
with an identification name tag which shall contain a photograph of the masseur
or masseuse and the first name and permit number assigned to the masseur or
masseuse, which must be worn on the front of the outermost garment at all times
during the hours of operation of any establishment granted a permit pursuant to
this chapter.
(1981 Code, § 50.17)
§ 111.48 EMPLOYMENT OF MINORS.
   It shall be unlawful for any owner, proprietor, manager or other person in
charge of any massage establishment to employ any person who is not at least 18
years of age.
(1981 Code, § 50.20)
Penalty, see § 111.99
§ 111.49 UNLAWFUL ACTIVITIES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to massage any other person or give or
administer any of the other things mentioned in this chapter which violate the
provisions of this chapter or which violate any municipal or state law or
ordinance, including any offenses as set forth in ILCS Chapter 720, Act 5, §§
11-6 to 11-22. Any violation of this provision shall be deemed grounds for
revocation of the permit granted hereunder.
(1981 Code, § 50.26)
Penalty, see § 111.99
§ 111.50 EMPLOYMENT OF MASSEURS AND MASSEUSES.
   It shall be the responsibility of the permittee for the massage
establishment or the employer of any persons purporting to act as masseurs and
masseuses, to insure that each person employed as a masseur or masseuse shall
first have obtained a valid permit pursuant to this chapter.
(1981 Code, § 50.27)
§ 111.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   Every person, except those persons who are specifically exempted by
this chapter, whether acting as an individual, owner, employee of the owner,
operator or employee of the operator or acting as a participant or worker in
any way, who gives massages or conducts a massage establishment or who in
conjunction with the massage establishment give or administers, or practices
the giving or administering of baths, as defined herein, or any of the services
defined in §
111.01 without first obtaining a permit and paying a permit fee to do so from
the village or shall violate any provisions of this chapter shall be subject to
a fine in a sum not less than $25, nor more than $750, under the power granted
the village by ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, § 1-2-1.
   (C)   Any owner, operator, manager or permittee in charge or in control of a
massage establishment who knowingly employs a person performing as a masseur or
masseuse, as defined in this chapter, who is not in possession of a valid
unrevoked permit or who allows a masseur or masseuse to perform, operate or
practice within a place of business shall be subject to a fine in a sum not
less than $25, nor more than $750, under the power granted the village by ILCS
Chapter 65, Act 5, § 1-2-1.
(1981 Code, § 50.30)
CHAPTER 112: AMUSEMENTS
Section
General Provisions
   
112.01   Billiards and pool rooms
   
112.02   Bowling alleys
   
112.03   Circuses or carnivals
   
112.04   Public dance halls
Vending Machines, Devices and Jukeboxes
   
112.15   Definitions
   
112.16   Gambling devices
   
112.17   License required
   
112.18   Application
   
112.19   Inspection
   
112.20   License fees
   
112.21   Display of license; transfer
   
112.22   Use by minors
   
112.23   Closing time; jukeboxes
   
112.24   Location
   
112.25   Revocation of license
   
112.26   Seizure and destruction of machine
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 112.01 BILLIARDS AND POOL ROOMS.
   (A)   No person shall operate, maintain or conduct billiard, pool or
bagatelle within the village, open to the public, without a license therefor.
Every person keeping for use any billiard table, pool table or bagatelle or
other table or implements for a similar purpose and open to the public, shall
pay an annual license fee as provided in the village annual fee schedule. Coin-
operated tables shall be regulated and licensed in accordance with provisions
of §§
112.15 et seq.
   (B)   All pool or ball alleys open to the public are required to be closed
for all purposes and cease doing business of any kind at the hour of 1:00 a.m.
on weekdays and 2:00 a.m, on Sunday morning, and they shall remain so closed
and no business shall be done therein until the hour of 6:00 a.m.
   (C)   Minors under the age of 16 years shall not be permitted to frequent,
loiter, go or remain within a pool hall unless at, by or upon some lawful
errand and sent by the direction and with the consent and knowledge of the
parent, guardian or other person having the legal custody and control of the
minor; and the proprietors of pool halls are not allowed to permit minors under
the age of 16 years to frequent, loiter or remain within any pool halls.
(1981 Code, § 32.01)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 112.02 BOWLING ALLEYS.
   (A)   (1)   No person shall have or keep for profit within the village any
bowling alley, pin or ball alley without a license therefor.
      (2)   Every person keeping for use any bowling alley open to the public
shall pay a license fee as provided in the village annual fee schedule.
   (B)   All bowling alleys, pin or ball alleys shall cease doing business of
any kind at the hours of 1:00 a.m. on weekdays and 2:00 a.m. Sunday morning and
they shall remain so closed and no business whatsoever shall be done therein
until the hour of 6:00 a.m.
(1981 Code, § 32.02)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 112.03 CIRCUSES OR CARNIVALS.
   (A)   No person, other than non-profit, shall conduct or operate a circus or
carnival in the village without a license.
   (B)   Every person, other than non-profit, conducting or operating a circus
or carnival within the village shall pay a license fee as provided in the
village annual fee schedule.
(1981 Code, § 32.03)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 112.04 PUBLIC DANCE HALLS.
   No person shall operate or conduct a public dance hall without a license
therefor.
(1981 Code, § 32.04) (Am. Ord. 07-26, passed 5-7-2007)
Penalty, see § 10.99
VENDING MACHINES, DEVICES AND JUKEBOXES
§ 112.15 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AMUSEMENT DEVICE. Any machine which upon the insertion of a coin, slug,
token, plate or disc may be operated by the public generally for use as a game,
entertainment or amusement, whether or not registering a score. It shall
include such devices as marble machines, pin ball machines, skill ball, pool
tables, mechanical grab machines and all games, operations or transactions
similar thereto under whatever name they may be indicated.
   JUKEBOX. Any music vending machine, contrivance or device which, upon the
insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate, disc or key into any slot, crevice or
other opening, or by the payment of any price, operates or may be operated for
the emission of songs, music or similar amusement.
   PERSON.
      (1)   Any person who owns any such machine; the person in whose place of
business any such machine is placed for use by the public; and the person
having control over the machine.
      (2)   Nothing herein contained shall apply to charitable, fraternal or
not-for-profit corporations
   VENDING MACHINE. Any automatic vending machine used for the sale of
merchandise and controlled by the insertion of a coin or coins.
(1981 Code, § 34.01)
§ 112.16 GAMBLING DEVICES.
   Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed to authorize, license or
permit any gambling devices or any mechanism that has been judicially
determined to be a gambling device or in any way contrary to law.
(1981 Code, § 34.02)
§ 112.17 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   Any person owning and displaying for public patronage or keeping for
operation any cigarette vending machine, jukebox or amusement device is
required to obtain a license from the village.
(1981 Code, § 34.03)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 112.18 APPLICATION.
   (A)   The application for a license shall contain the following information:
      (1)   Name and address of the applicant, age, date and place of birth;
      (2)   Prior convictions of applicant, if any;
      (3)   Place where machine or device is to be displayed or operated and
business conducted there; and/or
      (4)   Description of machine or device to be covered by the license,
mechanical features, name of manufacturer and serial number.
   (B)   No license shall be issued to any applicant unless he or she shall be
over 21 years of age and a citizen of the United States.
(1981 Code, § 34.04)
§ 112.19 INSPECTION.
   (A)   Application for license shall be made out in duplicate, one copy being
referred to the Chief of Police and the other copy to the Village Clerk.
   (B)   The Chief of Police shall investigate the location wherein it is
proposed to operate such a machine, ascertain if the applicant is a person of
good moral character and either approve or disapprove the application.
   (C)   No license shall be issued to any applicant unless approved by the
Chief of Police.
(1981 Code, § 34.05)
§ 112.20 LICENSE FEES.
   The provision formerly requiring a license for amusements, including vending
machines, devices and jukeboxes, has been repealed effective December 31, 2007.
Revenue traditionally generated therefrom will now be included within the
assessment of real estate taxes of residents of the village.
(Ord. 07-11, passed 3-19-2007)
§ 112.21 DISPLAY OF LICENSE; TRANSFER.
   (A)   The license provided for in this subchapter shall be posted
permanently and conspicuously at the location of the machine in the premises
wherein the device is to be operated or maintained to be operated.
   (B)   A license shall not be transferable from person-to-person, nor place-
to-place, and shall be usable only at the place and by the person designated in
the license.
(1981 Code, § 34.07)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 112.22 USE BY MINORS.
   (A)   No licensee under this subchapter shall permit persons under 18 years
of age to play or operate any cigarette vending machine or mechanical amusement
device.
   (B)   There will be no minimum age for the operation of mechanical amusement
devices when such are located in an area or room where no alcoholic beverages
are served.
(1981 Code, § 34.08)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 112.23 CLOSING TIME; JUKEBOXES.
   No licensee shall permit the playing of jukeboxes between the hours of 1:00
a.m. and 6:00 a.m. of any day, except playing may be permitted to 2:00 a.m. on
Saturdays and Sundays.
(1981 Code, § 34.09)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 112.24 LOCATION.
   No person shall permit the playing of jukeboxes or mechanical amusement
devices within 200 feet of any church, public or parochial school or
playground.
(1981 Code, § 34.10)
§ 112.25 REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   (A)   (1)   Every license issued under this subchapter is subject to the
right, which is hereby expressly reserved, to revoke the same should the
licensee, directly or indirectly, permit the operation of any cigarette vending
machine, jukebox or mechanical amusement device contrary to the provisions of
this code or the laws of the state.
      (2)   The license may be revoked by the Village Board after written
notice to the licensee, which notice shall specify the ordinance or law
violated.
      (3)   Ten days notice of the hearing shall be given the licensee.
   (B)   At the hearing, the licensee and his or her attorney may present and
submit evidence of witnesses in his or her defense.
(1981 Code, § 34.11)
§ 112.26 SEIZURE AND DESTRUCTION OF MACHINE.
   If the Chief of Police shall have reason to believe any mechanical amusement
device is used as a gambling device, the machine may be seized by the police
and impounded and if, upon trial of the exhibitor for allowing it to be used as
a gambling device the exhibitor is found guilty, the machine shall be destroyed
by the police.
(1981 Code, § 34.12)
CHAPTER 113: FOOD TRUCKS
Section
   
113.01   Definitions
   
113.02   License required
   
113.03   Requirements and restrictions
   
113.04   [Reserved]
   
113.05   [Reserved]
   
113.06   Application
   
113.07   Issuance of license
   
113.08   Fees
   
113.09   License renewal
   
113.10   License nontransferable
   
113.11   Waiver of license requirement
   
113.12   Revocation and suspension
§ 113.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   FOOD TRUCK. A vehicle or trailer-mounted food establishment from which the
retail sale of food or drink for human consumption is conducted, and is not
equipped with permanent potable water, wastewater, or electric connections, and
which is designed and operated to be readily movable.
   FOOD TRUCK LICENSE. The license issued under this chapter.
   FOOD TRUCK OPERATOR. Any person who physically operates a food truck for
purposes of vending.
   OWNER. The titleholder of the food truck.
   PERSON. Any individual, partnership, firm, corporation, trust, association
or other entity.
   PUSHCART. A self-propelled vehicle, either by foot or bicycle, serving food.
   VENDING. The act of selling, or offering to sell, any food or beverage for
human consumption from a food truck or pushcart.
(Ord. 17-10, passed 2-13-2017; Am. Ord. 24-31, passed 9-23-2024)
§ 113.02 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person shall engage in, conduct, maintain, operate or carry on any
food truck business, occupation, activity or establishment without first
obtaining a food truck license.
   (B)   In the event that the applicant will be operating more than one such
food truck, the applicant must file separate applications and obtain separate
food truck licenses for each such food truck.
(Ord. 17-10, passed 2-13-2017; Am. Ord. 24-31, passed 9-23-2024)
§ 113.03 REQUIREMENTS AND RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   Food truck licenses shall be annual, commencing no earlier than
January 1 and terminating no later than December 31 of each year.
   (B)   Food trucks may only operate on private property with the consent of
the property owner.
   (C)   Licensed food trucks may be operated from 10:00 a.m. to sunset or 8:00
p.m., whichever is earlier, Friday to Monday, or as otherwise approved by the
Village Administrator or the Village Administrator's designee.
   (D)   Food trucks operating at a place of business may only operate during
the business's normal hours of operation and within the permitted hours of
operation provided in division (C).
   (E)   Operation of a food truck on residential property is limited to the
date, time, and any other condition as determined by the Village Administrator
or the Village Administrator's designee.
   (F)   Notwithstanding any other provision in this section, food trucks may
not operate on any vacant lot or any lot with a vacant building unless approved
by the Village Administrator or the Village Administrator's designee.
   (G)   Prior to the issuance of a food truck license, the applicant shall
comply with any and all requirements or regulations maintained by the Kane
County Health Department or the Cook County Department of Public Health, as
applicable, and the Fire Protection District relating to food handling and the
operation of a food truck, which may include a consultation to review the
proposed business practices, the food truck and other equipment to be used, and
food safety operations.
   (H)   Food trucks may only operate on public property during village-
approved events or as otherwise approved by the Village Administrator or the
Village Administrator's designee.
   (I)   Pushcarts are prohibited.
   (J)   Before a food truck license is issued, a food truck owner must provide
a certificate of insurance evidencing the food truck owner has obtained a
commercial general liability insurance policy for liability arising in any way
from the issuance of the food truck license or activities conducted pursuant to
the food truck license with limits of not less than $1,000,000 per occurrence,
combined single limit, for bodily injury and property damage. The certificate
shall name the Village of East Dundee and its elected and appointed officers,
officials, agents, and employees are included as an additional insured. If a
food truck license is issued, the licensee shall maintain the insurance
described herein in full force and effect for the duration of the license
period, Certificates shall contain an agreement signed by the insurance company
that prior to modification, cancellation or termination of the subject policy,
written notice shall be sent to the Village Clerk by said insurance company.
   (K)   No person may operate a food truck without a valid driver's license.
   (L)   No food truck license shall be issued to any person, or to any entity
employing any person as a food truck operator, who has been convicted of the
commission of a felony under the laws of the State of Illinois or any other
state or federal law of the United States, within the previous five years or
convicted at any time of a crime requiring registration on any sex offender
list or database or a felony involving drugs, the use of a firearm in the
commission of an offense, or any violent felony; nor to any person who has been
convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, nor to any
person whose food truck license issued hereunder has previously been revoked as
herein provided.
   (M)   The Village President, Police Chief of the East Dundee Police
Department or Village Administrator, or their designee(s) may from time to time
reasonably restrict the locations within the municipal limits of the Village of
East Dundee in which food trucks may be operated in order to promote the public
safety. Any food truck operator failing to comply with the direction of a duly
authorized village official regarding the food truck’s location of operation
may be subject to suspension and revocation as provided herein.
   (N)   Door to door sales are prohibited.
   (O)   Vending is allowed only when the food truck is lawfully stopped.
   (P)   Vending is allowed only from the side of the food truck away from
moving traffic and as near as possible to the curb or side of the street.
Vending to a person standing in the roadway is prohibited.
   (Q)   The food truck shall contain a convex mirror mounted on the front so
the driver can see the area in front of the food truck while operating the
vehicle.
   (R)   Food trucks operating at a place of business may operate only within a
parking lot.
   (S)   Food trucks may only operate when in compliance with all applicable
health regulations.
   (T)   The food truck license fee shall be set pursuant to Chapter 37 of this
Code.
   (U)   The sale of liquor from any food truck is prohibited.
   (V)   The issuance of food truck licenses is at the discretion of the
Village Administrator or the Village Administrator's designee. The food truck
license may be denied or revoked for violation of this code or ordinance.
   (W)   At its discretion, the village may issue a food truck license for any
community event sponsored by the village regardless of the day of the week or
hours of operation.
   (X)   Food truck operators may not use tents in the operation of their food
trucks.
(Ord. 17-10, passed 2-13-2017; Am. Ord. 24-31, passed 9-23-2024)
§ 113.04 [RESERVED].
§ 113.05 [RESERVED].
§ 113.06 APPLICATION.
   (A)   Application for a food truck license shall be filed with the village
upon a form as provided by the village. Said license shall be carried by the
applicant while operating the food truck and shall be displayed at all times in
a place readily visible to all customers. The applicant shall provide in full
the information requested on the application:
      (1)   If the applicant is an individual or sole proprietorship, the
application shall contain his or her name, date of birth, business name, if
any, business and residence addresses and business and residence telephone
numbers. If the applicant is a partnership or other non-corporate business
entity, the application shall contain the business names, if any, address and
telephone number of the partnership or other entity, and the names, dates of
birth and residence addresses and residence telephone numbers of each partner
or member thereof. If the applicant is a corporation, the application shall
contain the name of the corporation and its address and telephone number and
the names, residence addresses and residence telephone numbers of each officer
and director thereof, and if a majority in interest of the stock of such
corporation is owned by one person or his or her nominee or nominees, the
application shall also contain the name, date of birth, residence address and
residence telephone number of such person;
      (2)   Copy of current applicant's photo identification or driver's
license;
      (3)   Description of the proposed operation of the food truck;
      (4)   All required state and county certificates, including, without
limitation, the applicant's certificate of registration under the Illinois
Retailers' Occupation Tax Act;
      (5)   All required food handling permits and mobile food unit permits (if
applicable) from the Kane County Health Department or the Cook County
Department of Public Health, as applicable, and the Fire Protection District;
      (6)   Valid certificate of liability insurance;
      (7)   Whether a food truck license issued under this chapter has ever
been revoked;
      (8)   Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a violation of any
of the provisions of this chapter or the ordinance of any other Illinois
municipality regulating the activities of food truck operators;
      (9)   A sworn statement from the applicant and any person to be employed
as a food truck operator that he/she has not been convicted of the commission
of a felony under the laws of the State of Illinois or any other state or
federal law of the United States, within the previous five years, and that he/
she has not been convicted, at any time, of a crime requiring registration on
any sex offender list or database or a felony involving drugs, the use of a
firearm in the commission of an offense, or any violent felony;
      (10)   Written permission from the property owner.
   (B)   All statements made by the applicant upon the application or in
connection therewith shall be under oath.
   (C)   Application fee shall be as set forth in §
37.01 of this Code of Ordinances.
(Ord. 17-10, passed 2-13-2017; Am. Ord. 24-31, passed 9-23-2024)
§ 113.07 ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.
   The village, after consideration of the application and all information
obtained relative thereto, shall, within 15 business days of application,
approve or deny the application. If the person does not possess the
qualifications for such certificate, as herein required, and the approval of
the applicant would not be in accord with the intent and purpose of this
chapter, then the village shall deny the application. Endorsement shall be made
by the village upon the denial of the application.
(Ord. 17-10, passed 2-13-2017; Am. Ord. 24-31, passed 9-23-2024)
§ 113.08 FEES.
   Each applicant shall pay the application fees required in the fee and fine
schedule set forth in §
37.01 of this Code of Ordinances.
(Ord. 17-10, passed 2-13-2017)
§ 113.09 LICENSE RENEWAL.
   In all subsequent years, the applicant must file a renewal application
covering such vending unit. License renewals not received by January 1 shall be
subject to the penalty contained within the fee and fine schedule set forth in
§
37.01 of this Code of Ordinances. License renewals not received by February 1
shall require a new application.
(Ord. 17-10, passed 2-13-2017)
§ 113.10 LICENSE NONTRANSFERABLE.
   The vending unit license issued hereunder shall not be transferable to any
other person as defined herein.
(Ord. 17-10, passed 2-13-2017)
§ 113.11 WAIVER OF LICENSE REQUIREMENT.
   (A)   The Village Administrator may waive any and all requirements of this
chapter for a temporary vending unit operating upon public property during a
village recognized community event or a temporary vending unit sponsored by or
working for a religious, educational, or charitable organization where such
organization is entirely a nonprofit organization.
   (B)   The requirements of this chapter shall not apply to the Caboose
Concession Stand owned by the Village of East Dundee.
(Ord. 17-10, passed 2-13-2017)
§ 113.12 REVOCATION AND SUSPENSION.
   Revocation and suspension of vending unit licenses shall be regulated by §
110.12 of this Code of Ordinances.
(Ord. 17-10, passed 2-13-2017)
CHAPTER 114: SOLICITORS, PEDDLERS AND TRANSIENT AND ITINERANT MERCHANTS
Section
Transient and Itinerant Merchants and Vendors
   
114.01   Zoning and setback compliance requirements
   
114.02   Restrictions on issuance of license
General Solicitors and Peddlers
   
114.15   Definitions
Solicitors
   
114.25   Registration
   
114.26   Application for certificates of registration
   
114.27   Issuance and revocation of certificate
   
114.28   Policy
   
114.29   Notice
   
114.30   Duty of solicitors
   
114.31   Uninvited solicitors
   
114.32   Time limit
   
114.33   Telephone solicitations
Peddlers
   
114.45   License required
   
114.46   Application
   
114.47   Fee
   
114.48   Limitations
   
114.49   License form
 
   
114.99   Penalty
TRANSIENT AND ITINERANT MERCHANTS AND VENDORS
§ 114.01 ZONING AND SETBACK COMPLIANCE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Licenses may be issued in any of the business zoning classifications
found in
Chapter 157 of this code of ordinances and the manufacturing zoning
classifications found in
Chapter 157 will be issued for any residentially-zoned property.
   (B)   Any structure, motor vehicle, tent, trailer or any means used for the
exhibition and sale of any goods by any itinerant business license holder shall
be located in a manner that is in compliance with the appropriate zoning
setback requirements for the place or location the license has been issued for.
   (C)   Minimum requirement: setback minimum of ten feet required landscape
area or greater depending upon zoning class requirement.
(Ord. 98-18, passed 10-5-1998)
§ 114.02 RESTRICTIONS ON ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.
   It is deemed necessary for the safety, health, life and general welfare of
the residents and motoring public in the village, that no itinerant business
license shall be issued for a place or places proposed to be located at the
intersections of any two state highways within the corporate limits due to the
nature and volume of traffic, as follows: Rt. 25 and Rt. 68, Rt. 25 and Rt. 72
and Rt. 68 and Rt. 72.
(Ord. 98-18, passed 10-5-1998)
GENERAL SOLICITORS AND PEDDLERS
§ 114.15 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of §§
114.25 et seq. and
114.45 et seq., the following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PEDDLING. Any act of solicitation in which the product is carried with the
person from place-to- place.
   REGISTERED SOLICITOR OR PEDDLER. Any person who has obtained a valid
certificate of registration, as hereinafter provided, and which certificate is
in the possession of the solicitor on his or her person while engaging in
soliciting.
   RESIDENCE. Every separate living unit occupied for residential purposes by
one or more persons, contained within an any type of building or structure.
   SOLICITING. Any one or more of the following activities:
      (1)   Seeking to obtain orders for the purchase of goods, wares,
merchandise, foodstuffs, services of any kind, character or description
whatever, for any kind of consideration whatever;
      (2)   Seeking to obtain prospective customers to application or purchase
of insurance of any type, kind or character; and/or
      (3)   Seeking to obtain subscriptions to books, magazines, periodicals,
newspapers and every other type or kind of publication.
(1981 Code, § 35.01)
SOLICITORS
§ 114.25 REGISTRATION.
   (A)   Every person, other than a charitable or non-profit association,
organization, corporation or project desiring to engage in soliciting, as
herein defined, from persons in residences within the village, is hereby
required to make written application for a certificate of registration, as
herein provided.
   (B)   Fees for certificates shall be as provided for in the village annual
fee schedule.
(1981 Code, § 35.02)
§ 114.26 APPLICATION FOR CERTIFICATES OF REGISTRATION.
   (A)   Application for a certificate of registration shall be made upon a
form provided by the Chief of Police and filed with the Chief of Police. The
applicant shall truthfully state, in full, the information requested on the
application:
      (1)   Name and address of present place of residence and length of
residence at the address; also business address, if other than residence
address; also Social Security number, driver’s license and/or other
identification;
      (2)   Address of place of residence during the past three years, if other
than present address;
      (3)   Age of applicant and marital status; if married, the name of
spouse;
      (4)   Physical description of the applicant;
      (5)   Name and address of the person, firm or corporation of association
whom the applicant is employed by or represents and the length of time of the
employment or representation;
      (6)   Name and address of employer during the past three years other than
the present employer;
      (7)   Description sufficient for identification of the subject matter of
the soliciting in which the applicant will engage;
      (8)   Period of time for which the certificate is applied for;
      (9)   The date or approximate date of the latest previous application for
certificate under this subchapter;
      (10)   Whether a certificate of registration issued to the applicant
under this subchapter was ever revoked;
      (11)   Whether the applicant was ever convicted of a violation of any
provision of this subchapter or the ordinance or any other state municipality
regulating solicitation;
      (12)   Whether the applicant was ever convicted of the commission of a
felony under the laws of the state or any other state or federal law; and
      (13)   Additional information as the Chief of Police may deem necessary
to process the application.
   (B)   All statements made by the applicant upon the application or in
connection therewith shall be under oath.
   (C)   The Chief of Police shall require every applicant to submit to
fingerprinting by the Police Department in connection with the application for
certificate.
   (D)   (1)   The Chief of Police shall cause to be kept in his or her office
an accurate record of every application received and acted upon, together with
all other information and data pertaining thereto and, all certificates of
registration issued under the provisions of this subchapter and of the denial
of applications.
      (2)   Applications for certificates shall be numbered in consecutive
order as filed and every certificate issued and any renewal thereof shall be
identified with the duplicate number of the application upon which it was
issued.
   (E)   No certificate or registration shall be issued to any person who has
been convicted of the commission of a felony under the laws of the state or any
other state of federal law, within five years of the date of application; nor
to any person whose certificate of registration issued hereunder has previously
been revoked, as herein provided.
(1981 Code, § 35.03)
§ 114.27 ISSUANCE AND REVOCATION OF CERTIFICATE.
   (A)   The Chief of Police, after consideration of the application and all
information obtained relative thereto, shall deny the application if the
applicant does not possess the qualifications for the certificate, as herein
required, and that the issuance of a certificate of registration to the
applicant would not be in accord with the intent and purpose of this
subchapter. Endorsement shall be made by the Chief of Police upon the
application of the denial of the application. When the applicant is found to be
fully qualified, the certificate of registration shall be issued forthwith. The
certificate of registration shall state the expiration date thereof.
   (B)   (1)   Any certificates of registration issued shall be received by the
Chief of Police if the holder of the certificate is convicted of a violation of
this chapter, has made a false material statement in the application or
otherwise becomes disqualified for the issuance of a certificate of
registration.
      (2)   Immediately upon the revocation, written notice thereof shall be
given by the Chief of Police to the holder of the certificate in person or by
certified U.S. mail, addressed to his or her residence address set forth in the
application.
      (3)   Immediately upon the giving of the notice, the certificate of
registration shall become null and void.
(1981 Code, § 35.04)
§ 114.28 POLICY.
   (A)   It is the policy of the Board of Trustees that the occupant or
occupants of the residences in the village shall make the determination of
whether solicitors shall be or shall not be invited to their respective
residence.
   (B)   If no determination is made, as is provided in §
114.29, registration isn’t required.
(1981 Code, § 35.05)
§ 114.29 NOTICE.
   (A)   Every person desiring to secure the protection intended to be provided
by the regulations pertaining to soliciting contained in this subchapter shall
comply with the following directions.
   (B)   Notice of the determination by the occupant of giving invitation to
solicitors or the refusal of invitation to solicitors to any residence shall be
given in the following manner:
      (1)   A weatherproof card, approximately three inches by four inches in
size, shall be exhibited upon or near the main entrance door to the residence,
indicating the determination by the occupant, containing the applicable words,
as follows:
ONLY SOLICITORS REGISTERED IN EAST DUNDEE INVITED
or
NO SOLICITORS INVITED
      (2)   (a)   The letters shall be of at least 1/3 inch in height.
         (b)   For the purpose of uniformity, the cards shall be provided by
the Chief of Police to persons requesting same, at the cost thereof.
      (3)   The card so exhibited shall constitute sufficient notice to any
solicitor of the determination by the occupant of the residence of the
information contained thereon.
(1981 Code, § 35.06)
§ 114.30 DUTY OF SOLICITORS.
   (A)   (1)   It shall be the duty of every solicitor upon going onto any
premises in the village upon which a residence, as herein defined, is located,
to first examine the notice provided for in §
114.29, if any is attached, and be governed by the statement contained on the
notice.
      (2)   If the notice states “Only Solicitors Registered in East Dundee
Invited,” then the solicitor not possessing a valid certificate of
registration, as herein provided, shall immediately and peacefully depart from
the premises.
      (3)   If the notice states “No Solicitors Invited,” then the solicitor,
whether registered or not, shall immediately and peacefully depart from the
premises.
   (B)   Any solicitor who has gained entrance to any residence, whether or not
invited, shall immediately and peacefully depart from the premises when
requested to do so by the occupant.
(1981 Code, § 35.07)
Penalty, see § 114.99
§ 114.31 UNINVITED SOLICITORS.
   It is unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for any person to go upon any
premises and ring the doorbell upon or near any door, or create any sound in
any other manner calculated to attract the attention of the occupant of the
residence, for the purpose of securing an audience with the occupant thereof
and shall engage in soliciting, as herein defined, in defiance of the notice
exhibited at the residence in accordance with the provisions of §
114.29.
(1981 Code, § 35.08)
Penalty, see § 114.99
§ 114.32 TIME LIMIT.
   It is unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for any person, whether
registered under this section or not, to go upon the premises and ring the
doorbell upon or near any door of a residence located thereon, or rap or knock
upon any door or create any sound in any other manner calculated to attract the
attention of the occupant of the residence, for the purpose of securing an
audience with the occupant thereof and engage in soliciting, prior to 9:00 a.m.
or after 9:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, and after 6:00 p.m. on Saturday, or
any time on a Sunday or on a state or national holiday.
(1981 Code, § 35.09)
Penalty, see § 114.99
§ 114.33 TELEPHONE SOLICITATIONS.
   (A)   (1)   The practice of telephoning any private residence or dwelling in
the village without having been requested or invited to do so by the owner or
occupant for the prose of soliciting orders for the sale of goods or services,
for the purpose of soliciting the purchase of goods or services, for the
purpose of soliciting as contract or agreement to purchase goods or services or
for the purpose of any commercial solicitation which results or is intended to
result in the sale of goods or services, regardless of the form, guide or
method of solicitation is prohibited.
      (2)   Any practice or act prohibited by this section may be deemed to
have occurred or to have been committed at either the place at which the
telephone call was made or received.
(1981 Code, § 35.10)
   (B)   (1)   The practice of telephoning any private residence or dwelling in
the village for the purpose of soliciting contributions, donations or gifts for
the benevolent, philanthropic, patriotic, religious, educational, charitable or
other eleemosynary purposes without a permit is prohibited.
      (2)   The Village Clerk shall issue a permit for telephone solicitation
of contributions, donations and gifts for such purposes at no fee upon the
sworn statement of the person making the telephone solicitations or of an
officer of the organization, group, association, partnership or corporation
making the telephone solicitations which shall include the following:
         (a)   The name under which the telephone solicitation is to be
conducted;
         (b)   The names and addresses and telephone numbers of persons or of
the officers and directors of the organization, group, association, partnership
or corporation who is to conduct the telephone solicitations;
         (c)   The names, addresses and telephone numbers of any professional
fund-raiser and professional solicitors who participate or will participate in
the telephone solicitations, together with a statement setting forth the terms
of the arrangements for salaries, bonuses, commissions or other remunerations
to be paid the professional fund-raisers or solicitors;
         (d)   The general purposes of the person, organization, group,
association, partnership or corporation conducting a telephone solicitation;
         (e)   The purposes for which the contributions, donations or gifts
solicited will be used;
         (f)   The period of time during which the telephone solicitation is to
be conducted; and
         (g)   The written consent of any existing person, organization, group,
association, partnership or corporation for which the telephone solicitation is
made.
      (3)   A permit issued under this section shall be valid only during the
calendar year in which it is issued.
      (4)   Any practice or act prohibited by this section may be deemed to
have occurred or to have been committee at either the place at which the
telephone call was made or was received.
(1981 Code, § 35.11)
Penalty, see § 114.99
PEDDLERS
§ 114.45 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation in the business of
hawker or peddler in the village without having first obtained a license as
provided herein.
(1981 Code, § 35.12)
Penalty, see § 114.99
§ 114.46 APPLICATION.
   (A)   Any person desiring a license hereunder shall make application to the
Chief of Police of the village, in writing, which application shall state the
purpose, object and time for which the license is desired, the name of the
party or parties desiring same.
   (B)   The applicant shall show his or her fingerprints to be taken by the
Chief of Police as part of his or her application.
   (C)   No applicant shall receive a license until the fingerprints have been
processed through the proper authorities unless the applicant is bonded in the
amount of $1,000.
(1981 Code, § 35.13)
§ 114.47 FEE.
   The fee for license hereunder shall be provided in the village annual fee
schedule and at the rate for each and every year the license is to continue.
(1981 Code, § 35.14)
§ 114.48 LIMITATIONS.
   It is unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for any person, whether
registered under this section or not, to go upon any premises and ring the
doorbell upon or near any door of a residence located thereon, or rap or knock
upon any door, or create any sound in any other manner calculated to attract
the attention of the occupant of the residence, for the purpose of securing an
audience with the occupant thereof and engage in peddling prior to 9:00 a.m. or
after 9:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, and after 6:00 p.m on Saturday or any
time on Sunday or on a state or national holiday.
(1981 Code, § 35.15)
Penalty, see § 114.99
§ 114.49 LICENSE FORM.
   The license shall be made under the name of the village and shall be
executed by the Chief of Police; shall state the object and purpose of the
license and the amount paid therefor; and shall contain a statement that the
license is issued and accepted subject to the ordinances then in force,
relating to the subject matter thereof and that the same is subject to
revocation by the President of the village. No license shall be issued to
extend beyond the last day of the municipal year.
(1981 Code, § 35.16)
§ 114.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a
fine or penalty of not less than $25, nor more than $750, exclusive of court
costs and administrative fees established by statute and the costs of
prosecution for each offense. Each day a violation continues shall constitute a
separate offense.
(1981 Code, § 35.17)
CHAPTER 115: TELECOMMUNICATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
115.001   Rules and definitions
   
115.002   Purpose
   
115.003   Registration
   
115.004   Telecommunications license
   
115.005   Telecommunications franchise
   
115.006   Cable television franchise
   
115.007   Application to existing ordinances or agreements
Registration of Carriers and Providers
   
115.020   Registration required
   
115.021   Registration fee
   
115.022   Purpose of registration
Licensing Provisions
   
115.035   License
   
115.036   Application
   
115.037   Determination by village
   
115.038   Agreement
   
115.039   Nonexclusive grant
   
115.040   Rights granted
   
115.041   Term of grant
   
115.042   License route
   
115.043   Location of facilities
   
115.044   Construction permit
   
115.045   Compensation to village
   
115.046   Service to village users
   
115.047   Amendment of grant
   
115.048   Renewal applications
   
115.049   Renewal determinations
   
115.050   Obligation to cure as condition of renewal
Franchise Provisions
   
115.060   Franchise
   
115.061   Application
   
115.062   Determination by village
   
115.063   Agreement
   
115.064   Nonexclusive grant
   
115.065   Term of grant
   
115.066   Rights granted
   
115.067   Franchise territory
   
115.068   Location of facilities
   
115.069   Construction permits
   
115.070   Compensation to village
   
115.071   Nondiscrimination
   
115.072   Service to village
   
115.073   Amendment of grant
   
115.074   Renewal applications
   
115.075   Renewal determinations
   
115.076   Obligation to cure as condition of renewal
   
115.077   Infrastructure maintenance fee
Fees and Compensation
   
115.090   Purpose
   
115.091   Application and review fee
   
115.092   Other village costs
   
115.093   Reserved compensation for public ways
   
115.094   Compensation permit fee
   
115.095   Construction permit fee
   
115.096   Annual fees
   
115.097   Cable fees
   
115.098   Regulatory fees and compensation not a tax
Conditions of Grant
   
115.110   Location of facilities
   
115.111   Construction permits
   
115.112   Interference with public ways
   
115.113   Damage to property
   
115.114   Notice of work
   
115.115   Repair and emergency work
   
115.116   Maintenance of facilities
   
115.117   Relocation or removal of facilities
   
115.118   Removal of unauthorized facilities
   
115.119   Emergency removal or relocation of facilities
   
115.120   Damage to grantee’s facilities
   
115.121   Restoration of public ways and property
   
115.122   Facilities map
   
115.123   Duty to provide information
   
115.124   Leased capacity
   
115.125   Grantee insurance
   
115.126   General indemnification
   
115.127   Performance and construction surety
   
115.128   Security fund
   
115.129   Construction and completion bond
   
115.130   Coordination of construction activities
   
115.131   Assignments or transfers of grant
   
115.132   Transactions affecting control of grant
   
115.133   Revocation or termination of grant
   
115.134   Notice and duty to cure
   
115.135   Hearing
   
115.136   Standards for revocation or lesser sanctions
Construction Standards
   
115.150   General
   
115.151   Construction codes
   
115.152   Construction permits
   
115.153   Applications
   
115.154   Engineer’s certification
   
115.155   Traffic control plan
   
115.156   Issuance of permit
   
115.157   Construction schedule
   
115.158   Compliance with permit
   
115.159   Display of permit
   
115.160   Survey of underground facilities
   
115.161   Noncomplying work
   
115.162   Completion of construction
   
115.163   As-built drawings
   
115.164   Restoration of improvements
   
115.165   Landscape restoration
   
115.166   Construction surety
 
   
115.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 115.001 RULES AND DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   The language set forth in the text of this chapter shall be
interpreted in accordance with the following rules of construction:
      (1)   The singular number includes the plural number and the plural the
singular.
      (2)   The word “shall” is mandatory; the word “may” is permissive.
      (3)   The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter.
   (B)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      AFFILIATE. A person, directly or indirectly, owns or controls, is owned
or controlled by or is under common ownership or control with another person.
      ANTENNA. As defined in
Chapter 157 of this code of ordinances.
      CABLE ACT. The Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, 47 USC 532 et
seq., as now and hereafter amended.
      CABLE OPERATOR. A telecommunications carrier providing or offering to
provide cable service within the village, as “cable service” is defined in the
Cable Act.
      CABLE SERVICE. The same meaning provided by the Cable Act.
      CORPORATE AUTHORITIES. The Village President and Board of Trustees of the
village.
      EXCESS CAPACITY. The volume or capacity in any existing or future duct,
conduit, manhole, handhole or other utility facility within the public way that
is or will be available for use for additional telecommunications facilities.
      FCC or FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION. The federal administrative
agency or lawful successor authorized to regulate and oversee
telecommunications carriers, services and providers on a national level.
      GRANTEE. Encompasses both licensees and franchisees, being a recipient of
either a license or a franchise.
      ICC or ILLINOIS COMMERCE COMMISSION. The state administrative agency or
lawful successor authorized to regulate and oversee telecommunications
carriers, services and providers in the state.
      OTHER WAYS. The highways, streets, alleys, utility easements or other
rights-of-way within the village, but under the jurisdiction and control of a
governmental entity other than the village.
      OVERHEAD FACILITIES. Utility poles, utility facilities and
telecommunications facilities located above the surface of the round,
including, the underground supports and foundations for the facilities.
      PERSON. Includes corporations, companies, associations, joint stock
companies or associations, firms, partnerships, limited liability companies and
individuals and includes their lessors, trustees and receivers.
      PUBLIC STREET. Any highway, street, alley or other public right-of-way
for motor travel under the jurisdiction and control of the village which has
been acquired, established, dedicated or devoted to highway purposes not
inconsistent with telecommunications facilities.
      PUBLIC WAY. Includes all public streets and utility easements, as those
terms are defined herein, now or hereafter owned by the village, but only to
the extent of the village’s right, title, interest or authority, to grant a
license or franchise to occupy and use the streets and easements for
telecommunications facilities.
      STATE. The State of Illinois.
      SURPLUS SPACE. The portion of the usable space on a utility pole which
has the necessary clearance from other pole users, as required by the orders
and regulations of the Illinois Commerce Commission, to allow its use by a
telecommunications carrier for a pole attachment.
      TELECOMMUNICATIONS CARRIER. Every person that directly or indirectly
owns, controls, operates or maintains plant, equipment or property within the
village used or to be used for the purpose of offering telecommunications
service.
      TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES. The plant, equipment and property,
including, but not limited to cables, wires, conduits, ducts, pedestals,
antennae, electronics and other appurtenances used or to be used to transmit,
receive, distribute, provide or offer telecommunications services.
      TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER. Includes every person who provides
telecommunications service over telecommunications facilities without any
ownership or management control of the facilities.
      TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE. The providing or offering, for rent, sale,
lease or in exchange for other value received of the transmittal of voice data,
image, graphic and video programming information between or among, points by
wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite or similar
facilities, with or without benefit of any closed transmission medium.
      TELECOMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM. The same meaning as TELECOMMUNICATIONS
FACILITIES.
      UNDERGROUND FACILITIES. Utility and telecommunications facilities located
under the surface of the ground, excluding the underground foundations or
supports for overhead facilities.
      USABLE SPACE. The total distance between the top of a utility pole and
the lowest possible attachment point that provides the minimum allowable
vertical clearance as specified in the orders and regulations of the Illinois
Commerce Commission.
      UTILITY EASEMENT. Any easement owned by the village and acquired,
established, dedicated or devoted for public utility purposes not inconsistent
with telecommunications facilities.
      UTILITY FACILITIES. The plant, equipment and property, including, but not
limited to the polls, pipes, mains, conduits, ducts, cables, wires, plant and
equipment located under, on or above the surface of the ground within public
ways of the village and used or to be used for the purpose of providing utility
or telecommunications services.
      VILLAGE. The Village of East Dundee.
      VILLAGE PROPERTY. Includes all real property owned by the village, other
than public streets and utility easements, as those terms are defined herein,
and all property held in a proprietary capacity by the village, which are not
subject to right-of-way licensing, and franchising, as provided in this
chapter.
      WORK. Undertaking any, some or all of the following: construction,
installation, operation, disconnection, relocation, removing, maintaining or
otherwise locating telecommunications facilities in, under, over or across any
public way of the village.
(1981 Code, § 18.1.01)
§ 115.002 PURPOSE.
   The purpose and intent of this chapter is to:
   (A)   Establish a local policy concerning telecommunications providers and
services;
   (B)   Establish clear local guidelines, standards and time frames for the
exercise of local authority with respect to the regulation of
telecommunications providers and services;
   (C)   Promote competition in telecommunications;
   (D)   Minimize unnecessary local regulation of telecommunications providers
and services;
   (E)   Encourage the provision of advanced and competitive telecommunications
services on the widest possible basis to the businesses, institutions and
residents of the village;
   (F)   Permit and manage reasonable access to the public ways of the village
for telecommunications purposes on a competitively neutral basis;
   (G)   Conserve the limited physical capacity of the public ways held in
public trust by the village;
   (H)   Assure that the village’s current and ongoing costs of granting and
regulating private access to and use of the public ways are fully paid by the
persons seeking the access and causing the costs;
   (I)   Secure fair and reasonable compensation to the village and the
residents of the village for permitting private use of the public ways;
   (J)   Assure that all telecommunications carriers providing facilities or
services within the village comply with the ordinances, rules and regulations
of the village;
   (K)   Assure that the village can continue to fairly and responsibly protect
the public health, safety and welfare; and
   (L)   Enable the village to discharge its public trust consistent with
rapidly involving federal and state regulatory policies, industry competition
and technological development.
(1981 Code, § 18.1.02)
§ 115.003 REGISTRATION.
   Except as otherwise provided herein, any telecommunications carrier having
any telecommunications facilities within the corporate limits of the village
and offers or provides telecommunications services to customer premises within
the village shall register with the village on forms provided by the village
pursuant hereto.
(1981 Code, § 18.1.03)
§ 115.004 TELECOMMUNICATIONS LICENSE.
   Except as otherwise provided therein, it shall be unlawful for a
telecommunications carrier to undertake work for the sole purpose of providing
telecommunications service to persons and areas outside the village without
first obtaining a license for the use of the public ways from the village
pursuant hereto.
(1981 Code, § 18.1.04)
Penalty, see § 115.999
§ 115.005 TELECOMMUNICATIONS FRANCHISE.
   Except as otherwise provided herein, it shall be unlawful for three
telecommunications carriers to undertake work in, under, over or across any
public way of the village, and to also provide telecommunications service to
persons or areas within the village, without first obtaining a franchise
license for the use of the public ways from the village pursuant hereto.
(1981 Code, § 18.1.05)
Penalty, see § 115.999
§ 115.006 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE.
   Except as otherwise provided herein, it shall be unlawful for a
telecommunications carrier to undertake work in any public way of the village
for the purpose of providing cable service to persons in the village without
first obtaining a cable franchise license from the village as provided herein.
(1981 Code, § 18.1.06)
Penalty, see § 115.999
§ 115.007 APPLICATION TO EXISTING ORDINANCES OR AGREEMENTS.
   This chapter shall have no effect on any existing franchise ordinance or
franchise agreement until:
   (A)   The expiration of the franchise ordinance or agreement; or
   (B)   An amendment to an unexpired franchise ordinance or franchise
agreement unless both parties agree to defer full compliance to a specific date
not later than the present expiration date.
(1981 Code, § 18.1.07)
REGISTRATION OF CARRIERS AND PROVIDERS
§ 115.020 REGISTRATION REQUIRED.
   All telecommunications carriers having telecommunications facilities within
the corporate limits of the village and all telecommunications carriers or
providers who offer or provide telecommunications service to customer premises
within the village shall register with the village on forms provided by the
village which shall include the following:
   (A)   The identity and legal status of the registrant, including any
affiliates;
   (B)   The name, address and telephone number of the officer, agent or
employee responsible for the accuracy of the registration statement;
   (C)   A description of registrant’s existing or proposed telecommunications
facilities within the village;
   (D)   A description of the telecommunications service that the registrant
intends to offer or provide, or is currently offering or providing, to persons,
firms, businesses or institutions within the village;
   (E)   Information sufficient to determine whether the registrant is subject
to public way licensing or franchising under this chapter;
   (F)   Information sufficient to determine whether the transmission,
origination or receipt of the telecommunications services provided or to be
provided by the registrant constitutes an occupation or privilege subject to
any municipal telecommunications tax, utility message or other occupation tax
imposed by the village;
   (G)   Information sufficient to determine that the applicant has applied for
and received any certificate of authority required by the Illinois Commerce
Commission to provide telecommunications services or facilities within the
village;
   (H)   Information sufficient to determine that the applicant has applied for
and received any construction permit, operating license or other approvals
required by the Federal Communications Commission to provide telecommunications
services or facilities within the village; and
   (I)   Other information as the Village Clerk may reasonably require.
(1981 Code, § 18.2.01)
§ 115.021 REGISTRATION FEE.
   Each application for registration as a telecommunications carrier or
provider shall be accompanied by a fee as contained in the village’s annual fee
schedule.
(1981 Code, § 18.2.02)
§ 115.022 PURPOSE OF REGISTRATION.
   The purpose of registration under this subchapter is to:
   (A)   Provide the village with accurate and current information concerning
the telecommunications carriers and providers who offer or provide
telecommunications services within the village or that own or operate
telecommunication facilities within the village;
   (B)   Assist the village in enforcement of this chapter;
   (C)   Assist the village in the collection and enforcement of any municipal
taxes, franchise fees, license fees or charges that may be due the village;
   (D)   Assist the village in monitoring compliance with local, state and
federal laws.
(1981 Code, § 18.2.03)
LICENSING PROVISIONS
§ 115.035 LICENSE.
   A telecommunications license shall be required of any telecommunications
carrier who desires to work in specific public ways of the village for the
singular purpose of providing telecommunications services solely to persons or
areas outside the village.
(1981 Code, § 18.3.01)
§ 115.036 APPLICATION.
   Any person that desires a telecommunications license pursuant to this
subchapter shall file an application with the village which shall include the
following information:
   (A)   The identity of the license applicant, including all affiliates of the
applicant;
   (B)   A description of the telecommunications services that are or will be
offered or provided by licensee over its telecommunications facilities;
   (C)   A description of the transmission medium that will be used by the
licensee to offer or provide telecommunications services;
   (D)   Preliminary engineering plans, specifications and a network map of the
facilities to be located within the village, all in sufficient detail to
identify:
      (1)   The location and route requested for applicant’s proposed
telecommunications facilities;
      (2)   The location of all overhead and underground public utility,
telecommunication, cable, water, sewer drainage and other facilities in the
public way along the proposed route;
      (3)   The location(s), if any, for interconnection with the
telecommunications facilities of other telecommunications carriers; and
      (4)   The specific trees, structures, improvements, facilities and
obstructions, if any, that applicant proposes to temporarily or permanently
remove or relocate.
   (E)   If applicant is proposing to install overhead facilities, evidence
that surplus space is available for locating its telecommunications facilities
on existing utility poles along the proposed route;
   (F)   If applicant is proposing an underground installation in existing
ducts or conduits within the public ways, information in sufficient detail to
identify:
      (1)   The excess capacity currently available in the ducts or conduits
before installation of applicant’s telecommunications facilities; and
      (2)   The excess capacity, if any, that will exist in the ducts or
conduits after installation of applicant’s telecommunications facilities.
   (G)   If applicant is proposing an underground installation within new ducts
or conduits to be constructed within the public ways:
      (1)   The location proposed for the new ducts or conduits; and
      (2)   The excess capacity that will exist in the ducts or conduits after
installation of applicant’s telecommunications facilities.
   (H)   A preliminary constriction schedule and completion date;
   (I)   A preliminary traffic control plan in accordance with the IDOT Manual
on Uniform Traffic Control Devices;
   (J)   Financial statements prepared in accordance with generally accepted
accounting principles demonstrating the applicant’s financial ability to do the
work;
   (K)   Information in sufficient detail to establish the applicant’s
technical qualifications, experience and expertise regarding the
telecommunications facilities and services described in the application;
   (L)   Information to establish that the applicant has obtained all other
governmental approvals and permits to construct and operate the facilities and
to offer or provide the telecommunications services;
   (M)   All fees, deposits or charges required pursuant to §§
115.090 et seq.; and
   (N)   Other and further information as may be required by the Village Clerk.
(1981 Code, § 18.3.02)
§ 115.037 DETERMINATION BY VILLAGE.
   (A)   Within 120 days, or as extended by the corporate authorities, after
receiving a complete application hereunder, the corporate authorities shall
make a determination granting or denying the application in whole or in part.
If the application is denied, the determination shall include the reasons for
denial.
   (B)   The following standards shall apply when determining to grant or deny
the application:
      (1)   The financial and technical ability of the applicant;
      (2)   The legal ability of the applicant;
      (3)   The capacity of the public ways to accommodate the applicant’s
proposed facilities;
      (4)   The capacity of the public ways to accommodate additional utility
and telecommunications facilities if the license is granted;
      (5)   The damage or disruption, if any, of public or private facilities,
improvements, service, travel or landscaping if the license is granted;
      (6)   The public interest in minimizing the cost and disruption of
construction within the public ways;
      (7)   The service that applicant will provide to the community and
region;
      (8)   The effect, if any, on public health, safety and welfare if the
license is granted;
      (9)   The availability of alternate routes and/or locations for the
proposed facilities;
      (10)   Applicable federal and state telecommunications laws, regulations
and policies; and
      (11)   Other factors as may demonstrate that the grant to use the public
ways will serve the community interest.
(1981 Code, § 18.3.03)
§ 115.038 AGREEMENT.
   No license granted hereunder shall be effective until the applicant and the
village have executed a written agreement setting forth the particular terms
and provisions under which the licensee will do work within the public ways of
the village well be granted.
(1981 Code, § 18.3.04)
§ 115.039 NONEXCLUSIVE GRANT.
   No license granted under this subchapter shall confer an exclusive right,
privilege, license or franchise to occupy or use the public ways of the village
for delivery of telecommunications services or any other purposes.
(1981 Code, § 18.3.05)
§ 115.040 RIGHTS GRANTED.
   (A)   No license granted hereunder shall convey any right, title or interest
in the public ways, but shall be deemed a license only to use and occupy the
public ways for the limited purposes and term stated in the grant.
   (B)   No license granted hereunder shall authorize or excuse a licensee from
securing further easements, leases, licenses, permits or other approvals as may
be required to lawfully occupy and use a public way, access capacity in any
underground facility or surplus space in an overhead facility.
   (C)   No license granted hereunder shall be construed as any warranty of
title.
(1981 Code, § 18.3.06)
§ 115.041 TERM OF GRANT.
   Unless otherwise specified in a license agreement, a telecommunications
license granted hereunder shall be in effect for a term of five years.
(1981 Code, § 18.3.07)
§ 115.042 LICENSE ROUTE.
   A telecommunications license granted under this subchapter shall be limited
to a grant of specific public ways and defined portions thereof.
(1981 Code, § 18.3.08)
§ 115.043 LOCATION OF FACILITIES.
   Unless otherwise specified in a license agreement, all facilities shall be
constructed, installed and located in accordance with the following terms and
conditions.
   (A)   Telecommunications facilities shall be installed within an existing
underground duct or conduit whenever excess capacity exists within the utility
facility.
   (B)   A licensee with written authorization to install overhead facilities
shall install its telecommunications facilities on pole attachments to existing
utility poles only, and then only, if surplus space is available.
   (C)   Whenever any existing electric utilities, cable facilities or
telecommunications facilities are located underground within a public way of
the village, a licensee, with written authorization to occupy the same public
way must also locate its telecommunications facilities underground.
   (D)   Whenever any new or existing electric utilities, cable facilities or
telecommunications facilities are located or relocated underground within a
public way of the village, a licensee that currently occupies the same public
way shall relocate, at its sole cost and expense, its facilities underground
within a reasonable period of time, which shall not be later than the end of
the grant term. Absent extraordinary circumstances or undue hardship as
determined by the Village Engineer, the relocation shall be made concurrently
to minimize the disruption of the public ways. It is the responsibility of the
licensee to obtain written authorization from the owner of the facility.
   (E)   Whenever new telecommunications facilities will exhaust the capacity
of a public street or utility easement to reasonably accommodate future
telecommunications carriers or facilities, the licensee shall provide, at its
sole cost and expense, additional ducts, conduits, manholes and other
facilities for nondiscriminatory access to future telecommunications carriers.
(1981 Code, § 18.3.09)
§ 115.044 CONSTRUCTION PERMIT.
   All licensees are required to obtain construction permits as required in §§
115.150 et seq.; provided, however, that nothing in this subchapter shall
prohibit the village and a licensee from agreeing to alternative plan review,
permit and construction procedures in a license agreement, provided the
alternative procedures provide substantially equivalent safeguards for
responsible construction practices.
(1981 Code, § 18.3.10)
§ 115.045 COMPENSATION TO VILLAGE.
   Each license granted hereunder is subject to the village’s right which is
expressly reserved to fix annually or on any other basis a fair and reasonable
compensation to be paid for the property rights granted to the licensee;
provided, nothing in this subchapter shall prohibit the village and a licensee
from agreeing to the compensation to be paid.
(1981 Code, § 18.3.11)
§ 115.046 SERVICE TO VILLAGE USERS.
   A licensee may be permitted to offer or provide telecommunications services
to persons or areas within the village upon submitting an application for
approval pursuant to this subchapter.
(1981 Code, § 18.3.12)
§ 115.047 AMENDMENT OF GRANT.
   (A)   A new license application and grant shall be required of any
telecommunications carrier that desires to work in public ways of the village
which are not included in a license previously granted under this chapter.
   (B)   If any given licensee is ordered by the village to locate or relocate
its telecommunications facilities in public ways not included in a previously
granted license, the village shall grant a license amendment without further
application.
(1981 Code, § 18.3.13)
§ 115.048 RENEWAL APPLICATIONS.
   A licensee that desires to renew its license hereunder, not more than 180
days, nor less than 90 days, before expiration of the current license, shall
file an application with the village for renewal of its license which shall
include the following information:
   (A)   The information required pursuant to §
115.036; and
   (B)   Any information required pursuant to the license agreement between the
village and the licensee.
(1981 Code, § 18.3.14)
§ 115.049 RENEWAL DETERMINATIONS.
   (A)   (1)   Within 90 days, or as extended by the corporate authorities,
after receiving a complete application under §
115.048, the corporate authorities shall make a determination granting or
denying the renewal application in whole or in part.
      (2)   If the renewal application is denied, the determination shall
include the reasons for nonrenewable.
   (B)   The following standards shall apply when determining to grant or deny
the application:
      (1)   The financial and technical ability of the applicant;
      (2)   The legal ability of the applicant;
      (3)   The continuing capacity of the public ways to accommodate the
applicant’s existing facilities;
      (4)   The applicant’s compliance with the requirements of this chapter
and the license agreement;
      (5)   Applicable federal, state and local telecommunications laws, rules
and policies; and
      (6)   Other factors as may demonstrate that the continued grant to the
licensee the public ways will serve the community interest.
(1981 Code, § 18.3.15)
§ 115.050 OBLIGATION TO CURE AS CONDITION OF RENEWAL.
   No license shall be renewed until any ongoing violations or defaults in the
licensee’s performance of the license agreement or of the requirements of this
chapter and all applicable laws, statutes, codes, ordinances, rules and
regulations have been cured or a plan detailing the corrective action to be
taken by the grantee has been approved by the village.
(1981 Code, § 18.3.16)
FRANCHISE PROVISIONS
§ 115.060 FRANCHISE.
   A telecommunications franchise license shall be required of any
telecommunication carrier who desires to work within the public ways of the
village and to provide telecommunications services to any person or area in the
village.
(1981 Code, § 18.4.01)
§ 115.061 APPLICATION.
   Any person who desires a telecommunications franchise license hereunder
shall file an application with the village which shall include the following
information.
   (A)   The identity of the franchise applicant, including all affiliates of
the applicant;
   (B)   A description of the telecommunications services that are or will be
offered or provided by the franchise applicant over its existing or proposed
facilities;
   (C)   A description of the transmission medium that will be used by the
franchisee to offer or provide the telecommunications services;
   (D)   Preliminary engineering plans, specifications and a network map of the
facilities to be located within the village, all in sufficient detail to
identify:
      (1)   The location and route requested for applicant’s proposed
telecommunications facilities;
      (2)   The location of all overhead and underground public utility,
telecommunication, cable, water, sewer drainage and other facilities in the
public way along the proposed route;
      (3)   The locations, if any, for interconnection with the
telecommunications facilities of other telecommunications carriers;
      (4)   The specific trees, structures, improvements, facilities and
obstructions, if any, that applicant proposes to temporarily or permanently
remove or relocate; and
      (5)   If applicant is proposing to install overhead facilities evidence
that surplus space is available for locating its telecommunications facilities
on existing utility poles along the proposed route.
   (E)   If the applicant is proposing an underground installation in existing
ducts or conduits within the public ways information in sufficient detail to
identify:
      (1)   The excess capacity currently available in the ducts or conduits
before installation of the applicant’s telecommunications facilities; and
      (2)   The excess capacity, if any, that will exist in the ducts or
conduits after installation of applicant’s telecommunications facilities.
   (F)   If applicant is proposing an underground installation within new ducts
or conduits to be constructed within the public ways:
      (1)   The location proposed for the new ducts or conduits; and
      (2)   The excess capacity that will exist in such ducts or conduits after
installation of applicant’s telecommunications facilities.
   (G)   A preliminary construction schedule and completion dates;
   (H)   A preliminary traffic control plan in accordance with the IDOT Manual
on Uniform Traffic Control Devices;
   (I)   Financial statements prepared in accordance with generally accepted
accounting principles, demonstrating the applicant’s financial ability to do
the work;
   (J)   Information in sufficient detail to establish the applicant’s
technical qualifications, experience and expertise regarding the
telecommunications facilities and services described in the application;
   (K)   Information to establish that the applicant has obtained all other
approvals from applicable utility companies, governmental approvals and permits
to construct and operate the facilities and to offer or provide the
telecommunications services;
   (L)   Whether the applicant intends to provide cable service, open video
system service or other video programming service and sufficient information to
determine whether the service is subject to cable franchising;
   (M)   An accurate map showing the location of any existing
telecommunications facilities in the village that applicant intends to use or
lease;
   (N)   A description of the services or facilities that the applicant will
offer or make available to the village and other public, educational and
governmental institutions;
   (O)   A description of applicant’s access and line extension policies;
   (P)   The area or areas of the village the applicant desires for build-out
to the entire franchise area; and
   (Q)   All fees, deposits or charges required pursuant to §§
115.090 et seq.
(1981 Code, § 18.4.02)
§ 115.062 DETERMINATION BY VILLAGE.
   (A)   (1)   Within 150 days, or as extended by the corporate authorities,
after receiving a complete application hereunder, the corporate authorities
shall make a determination granting or denying the application in whole or in
part.
      (2)   If the application is denied, the determination shall include the
reasons for denial.
   (B)   The following standards shall apply when determining to grant or deny
the application:
      (1)   The financial and technical ability of the applicant;
      (2)   The legal ability of the applicant;
      (3)   The capacity of the public ways to accommodate the applicant’s
proposed facilities;
      (4)   The capacity of the public ways to accommodate additional utility
and telecommunications facilities if the franchise is granted;
      (5)   The damage or disruption, if any, of public or private facilities,
improvements, service, travel or landscaping if the franchise is granted;
      (6)   The public interest in minimizing the cost and disruption of
construction within the public ways;
      (7)   The service that applicant will provide to the community and
region;
      (8)   The effect, if any, on public health, safety and welfare if the
franchise requested is granted;
      (9)   The availability of alternate routes and/or locations for the
proposed facilities;
      (10)   Applicable federal and state laws, regulations and policies; and
      (11)   Other factors as may demonstrate that the grant to use the pubic
ways will serve the community interest.
(1981 Code, § 18.4.03)
§ 115.063 AGREEMENT.
   No franchise shall be granted hereunder unless the applicant and the village
have executed a written agreement setting forth the particular terms and
provisions under which the franchise license to do work within the public ways
of the village will be granted.
(1981 Code, § 18.4.04)
§ 115.064 NONEXCLUSIVE GRANT.
   No franchise granted hereunder shall confer any exclusive right, private
license or franchise to occupy or use the public ways of the village in
delivery of telecommunications services or any other purposes.
(1981 Code, § 18.4.05)
§ 115.065 TERM OF GRANT.
   Unless otherwise specified in a franchise agreement, a telecommunications
franchise granted hereunder shall be valid for a term of five years, with an
option for an additional five years.
(1981 Code, § 18.4.06)
§ 115.066 RIGHTS GRANTED.
   (A)   No franchise granted hereunder shall convey any right, title or
interest in the public ways, but shall be deemed a franchise only to use and
occupy the public ways for the limited purposes and terms stated in the grant.
   (B)   No franchise granted hereunder shall authorize or excuse a franchisee
from securing further easements, leases, franchises, permits or other approvals
as may be required to lawfully occupy and use a public way, excess capacity in
an underground facility or surplus space in an overhead facility.
   (C)   No franchise granted hereunder shall be construed as any warranty of
title.
(1981 Code, § 18.4.07)
§ 115.067 FRANCHISE TERRITORY.
   A telecommunications franchise granted hereunder shall be limited to the
specific geographic area of the village to be served by the franchisee and the
specific public ways necessary to serve the areas.
(1981 Code, § 18.4.08)
§ 115.068 LOCATION OF FACILITIES.
   Unless otherwise specified in a franchise agreement, all facilities shall be
constructed, installed and located in accordance with the following terms and
conditions.
   (A)   Telecommunications facilities shall be installed within an existing
underground duct or conduit whenever excess capacity exists within the utility
facility.
   (B)   A franchisee with permission to install overhead facilities shall
install its telecommunications facilities on pole attachments to existing
utility poles and then only if surplus space is available.
   (C)   Whenever any existing electric utilities, cable facilities or
telecommunications facilities are located underground within a public way of
the village, a franchisee with written authorization to occupy the same public
way must also locate its telecommunications underground.
   (D)   Whenever any new or existing electric utilities, cable facilities or
telecommunications facilities are located or relocated underground within a
public way of the village, a franchisee who currently occupies the same public
way, shall relocate, at its sole cost and expense, its facilities underground
within a reasonable period of time, which shall not be later than the end of
the grant term. Absent extraordinary circumstances or undue hardship as
determined by the Village Engineer, the relocation shall be made concurrently
to minimize the disruption of the public ways. It is the responsibility of the
franchise to obtain written authorization form the owner of the facility.
   (E)   Whenever new telecommunications facilities will exhaust the capacity
of a public street or utility easement to reasonably accommodate future
telecommunications carriers or facilities, the franchisee shall provide, at its
sole cost and expense, additional ducts, conduits, manholes and other
facilities for nondiscriminatory access to future carriers.
(1981 Code, § 18.4.09)
§ 115.069 CONSTRUCTION PERMITS.
   All franchisees are required to obtain construction permits for
telecommunications facilities as required in §§
115.150 et seq.; provided, however, that nothing in this chapter shall prohibit
the village and a franchisee from agreeing to alternative plan review, permit
and construction procedures in a franchise agreement provided the alternative
procedures provide substantially equivalent safeguards for responsible
construction practices.
(1981 Code, § 18.4.10)
§ 115.070 COMPENSATION TO VILLAGE.
   Each franchise license granted hereunder is subject to the village’s right
which is expressly reserved, to fix annually or on any other basis a fair and
reasonable compensation to be paid for the property rights granted to the
franchisee; provided, nothing in this subchapter shall prohibit the village and
a franchisee from agreeing to the compensation to be paid.
(1981 Code, § 18.4.11)
§ 115.071 NONDISCRIMINATION.
   A franchisee shall make its telecommunications services available to any
customer within its franchise area who shall request the service without
discrimination as to the terms, conditions, rates or charges for franchisee’s
services; provided, however, that nothing in this chapter shall prohibit a
franchisee from making any reasonable classifications among differently
situated customers.
(1981 Code, § 18.4.12)
§ 115.072 SERVICE TO VILLAGE.
   A franchisee shall make its telecommunications services available to the
village at its most favorable rate for similarly situated users unless
otherwise provided in a license or franchise agreement.
(1981 Code, § 18.4.13)
§ 115.073 AMENDMENT OF GRANT.
   (A)   A new franchise application and grant shall be required of any
telecommunications carrier that desires to work in public ways of the village
which are not included in a franchise preciously granted under this chapter.
   (B)   If any given licensee is ordered by the village to locate or relocate
its telecommunications facilities in public ways not included in a previously
granted franchise, the village shall grant a franchise amendment without
further application.
(1981 Code, § 18.4.14)
§ 115.074 RENEWAL APPLICATIONS.
   A franchisee who desires to renew its franchise hereunder shall, not more
than 240 days, nor less than 150 days, before expiration of the current
franchise, file an application with the village for renewal of its franchise,
which shall include the following information:
   (A)   The information required pursuant to §
115.061; and
   (B)   Any information required pursuant to the franchise agreement between
the village and the franchisee.
(1981 Code, § 18.4.15)
§ 115.075 RENEWAL DETERMINATIONS.
   (A)   (1)   Within 150 days, or as extended by the corporate authorities,
after receiving a complete application hereunder, the corporate authorities
shall make a determination granting or denying the renewal application in whole
or in part.
      (2)   If the renewal application is denied, the determination shall
include the reasons for non- renewal.
   (B)   The following standards shall apply, when determining to grant or deny
the application:
      (1)   The financial and technical ability of the applicant;
      (2)   The legal ability of the applicant;
      (3)   The continuing capacity of the public ways to accommodate the
applicant’s existing facilities; and
      (4)   The applicant’s compliance with the requirements of this chapter
and the franchise agreement.
(1981 Code, § 18.4.16)
§ 115.076 OBLIGATION TO CURE AS CONDITION OF RENEWAL.
   No franchise shall be renewed until any ongoing violations or defaults in
the franchisee’s performance of the franchise agreement or of the requirements
of this chapter and all applicable laws, statutes, codes, ordinances, rules or
regulations have been cured or a plan detailing the corrective action to be
taken by the grantee has been approved by the village.
(1981 Code, § 18.4.17)
§ 115.077 INFRASTRUCTURE MAINTENANCE FEE.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      GROSS CHARGES.
         (a)   The amount paid to a telecommunications retailer for the act or
privilege of originating or receiving telecommunications within the village and
for all services rendered in connection therewith, valued in money whether paid
in money or otherwise, including cash, credits, services and property of every
kind or nature, and shall be determined without any deduction on account of the
cost of such telecommunications, the cost of the materials used, labor or
service costs or any other expense whatsoever. In case credit is extended, the
amount thereof shall be included only as and when paid. GROSS CHARGES for
private line service shall include charges imposed at each channel point within
the village, charges for the channel mileage between each channel point within
the village and charges for that portion of the interstate inter-office channel
provided within the village.
         (b)   However, GROSS CHARGES shall not include:
            1.   Any amounts added to a purchaser’s bill because of a charge
made under:
               a.   The fee imposed by this section;
               b.   Additional charges added to a purchaser’s bill under ILCS
Chapter 220, Act 5, §§ 9-221 or 9-222, the Public Utilities Act;
               c.   Amounts collected under ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5;
               d.   The tax imposed by the Telecommunications Excise Tax Act,
ILCS Chapter 35, Act 630, §§ 1 et seq.;
               e.   911 surcharges; or
               f.   The tax imposed by § 4251 of the Internal Revenue Code.
            2.   Charges for a sent collect telecommunication received outside
the village;
            3.   Charges for leased time on equipment or charges for the
storage of data or information or subsequent retrieval or the processing of
data or information intended to change its form or content; (The equipment
includes, but is not limited to the use of calculators, computers, data
processing equipment, tabulating equipment or accounting equipment and also
includes the usage of computers under a time-sharing agreement.)
            4.   Charges for customer equipment, including such equipment that
is leased or rented by the customer from any source, wherein the charges are
dis-aggregated and separately identified from other charges;
            5.   Charges to business enterprises certified under ILCS Chapter
220, Act 5, § 9-222.1, the Public Utilities Act to the extent of the exemption
and during the period of time specified by the village;
            6.   Charges for telecommunications and all services and equipment
provided in connection therewith between a parent corporation and its wholly
owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, and only to the extent
that the charges between the parent corporation and wholly owned subsidiaries
or between wholly owned subsidiaries represent expense allocation between the
corporations and not the generation of profit other than a regulatory required
profit for the corporation rendering the services;
            7.   Any portion of a debt that is related to a sale at retail for
which gross charges are not otherwise deductible or excludable that has become
worthless or uncollectible, as determined under applicable federal income tax
standards; if the portion of the debt deemed to be had is subsequently paid,
the retailer shall report and pay the tax on that portion during the reporting
period in which the payment is made;
            8.   Charges paid by inserting coins in coin-operated
telecommunications devices; or
            9.   Carges for telecommunications and all services and equipment
provided to the village.
      PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY. Any municipal street, alley, water or public right-
of-way dedicated or commonly used for utility purposes, including utility
easements wherein the village has acquired the right and authority to locate or
permit the location of utilities consistent with telecommunications facilities.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY shall not include any real or personal village property
that is not specifically described in the previous sentence and shall not
include village buildings and other structures or improvements, regardless of
whether they are situated in the public right-of-way.
      RETAILER MAINTAINING A PLACE OF BUSINESS IN THE STATE. Any retailer
having or maintaining within the state, directly or by a subsidiary, an office,
distribution facilities, transmission facilities, sales office, warehouse or
other place of business, or any agent or other representative operating within
the state under the authority of the retailer or its subsidiary, irrespective
of whether the place of business or agent or other representative is located
here, permanently or temporarily, or whether the retailer or subsidiary is
licensed to do business in the state.
      SALE OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS AT RETAIL. The transmitting, supplying or
furnishing of telecommunications and all services rendered in connection
therewith for a consideration, other than between a parent corporation and its
wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, when the gross
charge made by one such corporation to another such corporation is not greater
than the gross charge paid to the retailer for their use or consumption and not
for sale.
      SERVICE ADDRESS. The location of telecommunications equipment from which
telecommunications services are originated or at which telecommunications
services are received. If this is not a defined location, as in the case of
wireless telecommunications, paging systems, maritime systems, air-to-ground
systems and the like. SERVICE ADDRESS shall mean the location of the customer’s
primary use of the telecommunications equipment, as defined by the location in
Illinois where bills are sent.
      TELECOMMUNICATIONS.
         (a)   Messages or information transmitted through use of local, toll
and wide area telephone service, channel services, telegraph services,
teletypewriter service, computer exchange services, private line services,
specialized mobile radio services or any other transmission of messages or
information by electronic or similar means, between or among points by wire,
cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite or similar facilities.
Unless the context clearly requires otherwise, TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall also
include wireless telecommunications, as hereinafter defined.
         (b)   TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall not include value added services in
which computer processing applications are used to act on the form, content,
code and protocol of the information for purposes other than transmission.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall not include purchase of telecommunications by a
telecommunications service provider for use as a component part of the service
provided by him or her to the ultimate retail consumer who originates or
terminates the end-to-end communications. Retailer access charges, right of
access charges, charges for use of inter-company facilities, and all
telecommunications resold in the subsequent provision and used as a component
of, or integrated into, end-to-end telecommunications service shall not be
included in gross charges as sales for resale. TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall not
include the provision of cable services through a cable system, as defined in
the Cable Communications Act of 1984, 47 USC 521 et seq., as now or hereafter
amended, or cable or other programming services subject to an open video system
fee payable to the village through an open video system, as defined in the
Rules of the Federal Communications Commission, 47 CFR 76.1550 et seq., as now
or hereafter amended.
      TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER.
         (a)   Any telecommunications retailer; and
         (b)   Any person that is not a telecommunications retailer that
installs, owns, operates or controls equipment in the public right-of-way that
is used or designed to be used to transmit telecommunications in any form.
      TELECOMMUNICATIONS RETAILER, RETAILER or CARRIER. Every person engaged in
the business of making sales of telecommunications at retail, as defined in
this section. The village may, in its discretion, upon application, authorize
the collection of the fee hereby imposed by any retailer not maintaining a
place of business within the state, who, to the satisfaction of the village,
furnishes adequate security to ensure collection and payment of the fee. When
so authorized, it shall be the duty of the retailer to pay the fee upon all of
the gross charges for telecommunications in the same manner and subject to the
same requirements as a retailer maintaining a place of business within the
village.
      WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS. Cellular mobile telephone services, personal
wireless services as defined in Section 704(C) of the Telecommunications Act of
1996, P.L. 104-104, 42 USC § 332(c)(7), as now or hereafter amended, including
all commercial mobile radio services and paging services.
   (B)   (1)   Every telecommunications provider, as defined by this section,
shall register with the village within 30 days after the effective date of this
section or becoming a telecommunications provider, whichever is later, on a
form to be provided by the village; provided, however, that any
telecommunications retailer that has filed a return pursuant hereto shall be
deemed to have registered in accordance with this section.
      (2)   Every telecommunications provider who has registered with the
village pursuant hereto has an affirmative duty to submit an amended
registration form or current return as required hereby, as the case may be, to
the village within 30 days from the date of the occurrence of any changes in
the information provided by the telecommunications provider in the registration
form or most recent return on file with the village.
   (C)   (1)   A village telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee is
hereby imposed upon all telecommunications retailers in the amount of 1% of all
gross charges charged by the telecommunications retailer to service addresses
within the village for telecommunications originating or received in the
village.
      (2)   Upon the effective date of the infrastructure maintenance fee
authorized in this section, the village infrastructure maintenance fee
authorized hereunder shall be the only fee or compensation for the use of all
public rights-of-way within the village by telecommunications retailers.
Imposition of the infrastructure maintenance fee provided under this section
does not, however, serve as a limitation on the levying of any taxes or
imposition of any fees otherwise authorized by law.
      (3)   The village telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee
authorized by this section shall be collected, enforced and administered as set
forth herein.
   (D)   (1)   A telecommunications retailer shall charge to and collect from
each customer an additional charge in an amount equal to the village
infrastructure maintenance fee attributable to that customer’s service address.
      (2)   (a)   Unless otherwise approved by the Village Administrator the
infrastructure maintenance fee shall be remitted by the telecommunications
retailer to the village not later than the last day of the month subsequent to
the month in which a bill is issued to the customer.
         (b)   The telecommunications retailer may retain an amount not to
exceed 2% of the village infrastructure maintenance fee collected by it to
reimburse itself for expenses incurred in accounting for and remitting the fee.
      (3)   Remittance of the municipal infrastructure fee to the village shall
be accompanied by a return, in a form to be prescribed by the Village
Administrator, which shall contain the information as the Village Administrator
may reasonably require.
      (4)   (a)   Any infrastructure maintenance fee required to be collected
pursuant to this section and any infrastructure maintenance fee collected by
the telecommunications retailer shall constitute a debt owed by the
telecommunications retailer to the village.
         (b)   The charge imposed hereunder by the telecommunications retailer
pursuant to this section shall constitute a debt of the purchaser to the
telecommunications retailer who provides such services until paid and, if
unpaid, is recoverable at law in the same manner as the original charge for
such services.
      (5)   If it shall appear that an amount of infrastructure maintenance fee
has been paid that was not due under the provisions of this section, whether as
a result of a mistake of fact or an error of law, then the amount shall be
credited against any infrastructure maintenance fee due, or to become due,
under this section, from the telecommunications retailer who made the erroneous
payment; provided, however, the Village Administrator may request, and
telecommunications retailer shall provide, written substantiation for the
credit. However, no claim for such credit may be made more than three years
after the date of the erroneous payment unless:
         (a)   The credit is used only to offset a claim of underpayment made
by the village within the applicable statutory period of limitations; and
         (b)   The credit derives from an overpayment made by the same
telecommunications retailer during the applicable statutory period of
limitations.
      (6)   Amounts paid under this section by telecommunications retailers
shall not be included in the tax base under any of the following acts as
described immediately below:
         (a)   Gross charges for purposes of the Telecommunications Excise Tax
Act, ILCS Chapter 35, Act 630, §§ 1 et seq.;
         (b)   Gross receipts for purposes of the municipal utility tax as
prescribed in ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5;
         (c)   Gross charges for purposes of the municipal telecommunications
tax as prescribed in ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5; and
         (d)   Gross revenue for purposes of the tax on annual gross revenue of
public utilities prescribed in ILCS Chapter 220, Act 5, § 2-202, the Public
Utilities Act.
      (7)   (a)   The village shall have the right, in its discretion, to audit
the books and records of all telecommunications retailers subject to this
section to determine whether the telecommunications retailer has properly
accounted to the village for the village infrastructure maintenance fee.
         (b)   Any underpayment of the amount of the village infrastructure
maintenance fee due to the village by the telecommunications retailer shall be
paid to the village, plus 5% of the total amount of the underpayment determined
in an audit, plus any costs incurred by the village in conducting the audit, in
an amount not to exceed 5% of the total amount of the underpayment determined
in an audit.
         (c)   The sum shall be paid to the village within 21 days after the
date of issuance of an invoice for same.
      (8)   The Village Administrator, or his or her designee, may promulgate
further or additional regulations concerning the administration and enforcement
of this section, consistent with its provisions, as may be required from time
to time and shall notify all telecommunications retailers that are registered
pursuant hereto.
   (E)   Nothing in this section shall excuse any person or entity from
obligations imposed under any law, including, but not limited to:
      (1)   Generally applicable taxes;
      (2)   Standards for construction on, over, under or within, use of or
repair of the public rights- of-way, including standards relating to free
standing towers and other structures upon the public rights-of-way, as
provided;
      (3)   Any liability imposed for the failure to comply with such generally
applicable taxes or standards governing construction on, over, under or within,
use of or repair of the public rights-of-way; and
      (4)   Compliance with any ordinance or provision of this code concerning
uses or structures not located on, over or within the right-of-way.
   (F)   Any franchise, license or similar agreements between
telecommunications retailers and the village entered into before the effective
date of this section regarding the use of public rights-of-way shall remain
valid according to and for their stated terms, except for any fees, charges or
other compensation to the extent waived.
   (G)   Any telecommunications provider who violates, disobeys, omits,
neglects or refuses to comply with any of the provisions of this section shall
be subject to fine in accordance with the general penalty provisions hereof.
   (H)   Nothing in this section shall be construed as limiting any additional
or further remedies that the village may have for enforcement of this section.
(Ord. 97-37, passed 12-15-1997)
Penalty, see § 115.999
FEES AND COMPENSATION
§ 115.090 PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of this subchapter to provide for the payment and recovery
of all direct and indirect costs and expenses of the village related to the
enforcement and administration of this chapter.
(1981 Code, § 18.6.01) (Ord. 97-36, passed 12-15-1997)
§ 115.091 APPLICATION AND REVIEW FEE.
   (A)   Any applicant for a license or franchise pursuant to §§
115.035 et seq. and
115.060 et seq. shall pay a fee as contained in the village’s annual fee
schedule.
   (B)   The application and review fee shall be deposited with the village as
part of the application filed pursuant to §§
115.035 et seq. and
115.060 et seq.
   (C)   An applicant whose license or franchise application has been
withdrawn, abandoned or denied shall, within 60 days of its application and
review fee written request, be refunded the balance of its deposit under this
section unless:
      (1)   A fee as contained in the annual fee schedule; and
      (2)   All ascertainable costs and expenses incurred by the village in
connection with the application.
(1981 Code, § 18.6.02) (Ord. 97-36, passed 12-15-1997)
§ 115.092 OTHER VILLAGE COSTS.
   All license or franchise grantees shall, within 30 days after written demand
therefore, reimburse the village for all direct and indirect costs and expenses
incurred by the village in connection with any modification, amendment, renewal
or transfer of the license or franchise or any license of franchise agreement.
(1981 Code, § 18.6.03) (Ord. 97-36, passed 12-15-1997)
§ 115.093 RESERVED COMPENSATION FOR PUBLIC WAYS.
   The village reserves its right to annually fix a fair and reasonable
compensation to be paid for the property rights granted to a telecommunications
license or franchise grantee. Nothing in this subchapter shall prohibit the
village and a grantee from agreeing to the compensation to be paid for the
granted property rights.
(1981 Code, § 18.6.04) (Ord. 97-36, passed 12-15-1997)
§ 115.094 COMPENSATION PERMIT FEE.
   If the right is granted by lease, license, franchise or other manner to use
or occupy village property for the installation of telecommunications
facilities, the compensation to be paid shall be fixed by the village.
(1981 Code, § 18.6.05) (Ord. 97-36, passed 12-15-1997)
§ 115.095 CONSTRUCTION PERMIT FEE.
   Prior to issuance of a construction permit, the permittee shall pay a permit
fee as contained in the annual fee schedule.
(1981 Code, § 18.6.06) (Ord. 97-36, passed 12-15-1997)
§ 115.096 ANNUAL FEES.
   Unless otherwise agreed in a license or franchise grant agreement, each
license or franchise grantee shall pay on annual license fee to the village as
contained in the annual fee schedule as reimbursement for the village’s costs
in connection with reviewing, inspecting and supervising the use and occupancy
of the public ways on behalf of the public and existing or future users.
(1981 Code, § 18.6.07) (Ord. 97-36, passed 12-15-1997)
§ 115.097 CABLE FEES.
   Cable television franchisees shall be subject to the franchise fees,
payments and costs provided herein.
(1981 Code, § 18.6.08) (Ord. 97-36, passed 12-15-1997)
§ 115.098 REGULATORY FEES AND COMPENSATION NOT A TAX.
   The regulatory fees and costs provided for in this subchapter and any
compensation charged and paid for the public ways provided for in § 115.094 are
separate from, and additional to, any and all federal, state, local and village
taxes as may be levied, imposed or due from a telecommunications carrier or
provider, its customers or subscribers or on account of the lease, sale,
delivery or transmission of telecommunications services.
(1981 Code, § 18.6.09) (Ord. 97-36, passed 12-15-1997)
CONDITIONS OF GRANT
§ 115.110 LOCATION OF FACILITIES.
   All facilities shall be constructed, installed and located in accordance
with the following terms and conditions unless otherwise specified in a license
or franchise agreement.
   (A)   A grantee shall install its telecommunications facilities within an
existing underground duct or conduit whenever excess capacity exists within the
utility facility.
   (B)   A grantee with written authorization to install overhead facilities
shall install its telecommunications facilities on pole attachments to existing
utility poles only and then only if surplus space is available.
   (C)   Whenever any existing electric utilities, cable facilities or
telecommunications facilities are located underground within a public way of
the village, a grantee with written authorization to occupy the same public way
must also locate its telecommunications facilities underground.
   (D)   Whenever any new or existing electric utilities, cable facilities or
telecommunications facilities are located or relocated underground within a
public way of the village, a grantee who currently occupies the same public way
shall relocate, at its sole cost and expense, its facilities underground within
a reasonable period of time, which shall not be later than the end of the grant
term. Absent extraordinary circumstances or undue hardship, as determined by
the Village Engineer, the relocation shall be made concurrently to minimize the
disruption of the public ways.
   (E)   Whenever new telecommunications facilities will exhaust the capacity
of a public street or utility easement to reasonably accommodate future
telecommunications carriers or facilities, the grantee shall provide, at its
sole cost and expense, additional ducts, conduits, manholes and other
facilities for nondiscriminatory access to future carriers.
(1981 Code, § 18.7.01)
§ 115.111 CONSTRUCTION PERMITS.
   (A)   All license or franchise grantees are required to obtain construction
permits for telecommunications facilities as required in this subchapter.
   (B)   However, nothing in this subchapter shall prohibit the village and a
grantee from agreeing to alternative plan review, permit and construction
procedures in a license or franchise agreement; provided, the alternative
procedures provide substantially equivalent safeguards for responsible
construction practices.
(1981 Code, § 18.7.02)
§ 115.112 INTERFERENCE WITH PUBLIC WAYS.
   (A)   No license or franchise grantee may locate or maintain its
telecommunication facilities so as to unreasonably interfere with the use of
the public ways by the village, by the general public or by other persons
authorized to use or be present in or upon the public ways.
   (B)   All such facilities shall be moved by the grantee, temporarily or
permanently, as determined by the Village Engineer.
(1981 Code, § 18.7.03)
Penalty, see § 115.999
§ 115.113 DAMAGE TO PROPERTY.
   No license or franchise grantee, nor any person acting on a grantee’s
behalf, shall take any action or permit any action to be done which may impair
or damage any village property, public ways of the village, other ways or other
property located in, on or adjacent thereto.
(1981 Code, § 18.7.04)
Penalty, see § 115.999
§ 115.114 NOTICE OF WORK.
   Unless otherwise provided in a license or franchise agreement, no license or
franchise grantee, nor any person acting on the grantee’s behalf, shall
commence any non-emergency work in or about the public ways of the village or
other ways without ten working days advance notice to the village.
(1981 Code, § 18.7.05)
§ 115.115 REPAIR AND EMERGENCY WORK.
   In the event of an unexpected repair or emergency, a grantee may commence
the repair and emergency response work as required under the circumstances;
provided, the grantee shall notify the village as promptly as possible, before
the repair or emergency work or as soon thereafter as possible if advance
notice is not practicable.
(1981 Code, § 18.7.06)
§ 115.116 MAINTENANCE OF FACILITIES.
   (A)   Each license or franchise grantee shall maintain its facilities in
good and safe condition and in a manner that complies with all applicable
federal, state and local requirements.
   (B)   Each license or franchise grantee shall maintain a staff consisting of
personnel certified in the technology necessary to maintain find repair utility
facilities.
(1981 Code, § 18.7.07)
§ 115.117 RELOCATION OR REMOVAL OF FACILITIES.
   Within 30 days following written notice from the village, a license or
franchise grantee shall, at its own expense, temporarily or permanently remove,
relocate, change or alter the position of any telecommunications facilities
within the public ways whenever the corporate authorities shall have determined
that the removal, relocation, chance or alteration is reasonably necessary for:
   (A)   The construction, repair, maintenance or installation of any village
or other public improvement in or upon the public ways;
   (B)   The operations of the village or other governmental entity in or upon
the public ways;
   (C)   The vacation of a public street or the release of a utility easement;
and
   (D)   (1)   Abandonment of a facility within the public ways of the village.
      (2)   A facility, will be considered abandoned when it is deactivated,
out of service or not used for its intended and authorized purpose for a period
of 90 days or longer.
      (3)   A facility will not be considered abandoned if it is temporarily
out of service during performance of repairs or if the facility is being
replaced.
(1981 Code, § 18.7.08)
§ 115.118 REMOVAL OF UNAUTHORIZED FACILITIES.
   (A)   (1)   Within 30 days following written notice from the village, any
grantee, telecommunications carrier or other person who owns, controls or
maintains any unauthorized telecommunications system, facility or related
appurtenances within the public ways of the village shall, at its own expense,
remove the facilities or appurtenances from the public ways of the village.
      (2)   If the grantee fails to remove the facilities or appurtenances, the
village may cause the removal and charge the grantee its costs incurred.
   (B)   A telecommunications system or facility is unauthorized and subject to
removal in the following circumstances:
      (1)   Upon expiration or termination of the grantee’s telecommunications
license or franchise;
      (2)   Upon abandonment of a facility within the public ways of the
village;
      (3)   If the system or facility was constructed or installed without the
prior grant of a telecommunications license or franchise;
      (4)   If the system or facility was constructed or installed without the
prior issuance of a required construction permit;
      (5)   If the system or facility was constructed or installed at a
location not permitted by the grantee’s telecommunications license or
franchise; and
      (6)   Any other circumstances deemed necessary by the Village
Administrator.
(1981 Code, § 18.7.09)
§ 115.119 EMERGENCY REMOVAL OR RELOCATION OF FACILITIES.
   The village retains the right and privilege to cut or move any
telecommunications facilities located within the public ways of the village, as
the village may determine to be necessary, appropriate or useful in response to
any public health or safety emergency.
(1981 Code, § 18.7.10)
§ 115.120 DAMAGE TO GRANTEE’S FACILITIES.
   Unless directly and proximately caused by willful, intentional or malicious
acts by the village, the village shall not be liable for any damage to or loss
of any telecommunications facility within the public ways of the village as a
result of or in connection with any public works, public improvements,
construction, excavation, grading, falling or work of any kind in the public
ways by or on behalf of the village.
(1981 Code, § 18.7.11)
§ 115.121 RESTORATION OF PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY.
   (A)   When a license or franchise grantee or any person acting on its behalf
does any work in or affecting any public ways, other ways or village property,
it shall, at its own expense, promptly remove any obstructions therefrom and
restore the ways or property to as good a condition as existed before the work
was undertaken unless otherwise directed by the Village Engineer.
   (B)   (1)   If weather or other conditions do not permit the complete
restoration required hereunder, the grantee shall temporarily restore the
affected ways or property.
      (2)   The temporary restoration shall be at the grantee’s sole expense
and the grantee shall promptly undertake and complete the required permanent
restoration when the weather or other conditions no longer prevent the
permanent restoration.
   (C)   A grantee or other person acting in its behalf shall use suitable
barricades, flags, flag persons, lights, flares and other measures as required
for the safety of all members of the general public and to prevent injury or
damage to any person, vehicle or property by reason of the work in or affecting
the ways or property.
(1981 Code, § 18.7.12)
Penalty, see § 115.999
§ 115.122 FACILITIES MAP.
   (A)   Each license or franchise grantee shall provide the village with an
accurate map or maps certifying the location of all telecommunications
facilities within the public ways.
   (B)   Each grantee shall provide updated maps annually.
(1981 Code, § 18.7.13)
§ 115.123 DUTY TO PROVIDE INFORMATION.
   Within ten days of a written request from the Village Administrator, each
license or franchise grantee shall furnish the village with information
sufficient to demonstrate:
   (A)   The grantee has complied with all requirements of this chapter;
   (B)   All municipal sales, message and/or telecommunications taxes due the
village in connection with the telecommunications services and facilities
provided by the grantee have been properly collected and paid by the grantee;
and
   (C)   All books, records, maps and other documents maintained by the grantee
with respect to its facilities within the public ways shall be made available
for inspection by the village at reasonable times and intervals.
(1981 Code, § 18.7.14)
§ 115.124 LEASED CAPACITY.
   A license or franchise grantee shall have the right, without prior village
approval, to offer or provide capacity or bandwidth to its customers; provided:
   (A)   The grantee shall furnish the village with a copy of any such lease or
agreement; and
   (B)   The customer or lessee has complied, to the extent applicable, with
the requirements of this chapter.
(1981 Code, § 18.7.15)
§ 115.125 GRANTEE INSURANCE.
   Unless otherwise provided in a license or franchise agreement, each grantee
shall, as a condition of the grant, secure and maintain the following liability
insurance policies provided by an insurer rated at least “A” by Best Insurance
Rating Service and insuring both the grantee and the village, and its elected
and appointed officers, officials, agents and employees as co-insured:
   (A)   Comprehensive general liability insurance with limits not less than:
      (1)   Five million dollars for bodily injured or death to each person;
      (2)   Five million dollars for property damage resulting from any one
accident; and
      (3)   Five million dollars for all other types of liability.
   (B)   Automobile liability for owned, non-owned and hired vehicles with a
limit of $3,000,000 for each person and $3,000,000 for each accident;
   (C)   Worker’s compensation within statutory limits and employer’s liability
insurance with limits of not less than $1,000,000;
   (D)   Comprehensive form premises-operations, explosions and collapse
hazard, underground hazard and products completed hazard with limits of not
less than $3,000,000;
   (E)   (1)   The liability insurance policies required by this section shall
be maintained by the grantee throughout the term of the telecommunications
license or franchise and such other period of time during which the grantee is
operating without a franchise or license hereunder, or is engaged in the
removal of its telecommunications facilities.
      (2)   Each insurance policy shall contain the following endorsement:
      “It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be canceled
nor the intention not to renew be stated until 90 days after receipt by the
village, by registered mail, of a written notice addressed to the Village
Administrator of the intent to cancel or not to renew.”
   (F)   Within 60 days after receipt by the village of the notice and, in no
event, later than 30 days prior to the cancellation, the grantee shall obtain
and furnish to the village replacement insurance policies meeting the
requirements of this section.
(1981 Code, § 18.7.16)
§ 115.126 GENERAL INDEMNIFICATION.
   Each license or franchise agreement shall include, to the extent permitted
by law, grantee’s express undertaking to defend, indemnify and hold the village
and its officers, employees, agents and representatives harmless from and
against any and all damages, losses and expenses, including reasonable
attorney’s fees and costs of suit or defense, arising out of, resulting from or
alleged to arise out of or result from the negligent, careless or wrongful
acts, omissions, failures to act or misconduct of the grantee or its
affiliates, officers, employees, agents, contractors or subcontractors in the
construction, operation, maintenance, repair or removal of its
telecommunications facilities, and in providing or offering telecommunications
services over the facilities or network, whether the acts or omissions are
authorized, allowed or prohibited by this chapter or by a grant agreement made
or entered into pursuant of this chapter.
(1981 Code, § 18.7.17)
§ 115.127 PERFORMANCE AND CONSTRUCTION SURETY.
   Before a license or franchise granted pursuant to this chapter is effective,
and as necessary thereafter, the grantee shall provide and deposit the monies,
bonds, letters of credit or other instruments in form and substance acceptable
to the village as may be required by this chapter or by an applicable license
or franchise agreement.
(1981 Code, § 18.7.18)
§ 115.128 SECURITY FUND.
   (A)   Each grantee shall establish a permanent security fund with the
village by depositing the amount of $50,000 with the village in cash, an
unconditional letter of credit or other instrument acceptable to the village
which fund shall be maintained at the sole expense of the grantee so long as
any of grantees telecommunications facilities are located within the public
ways of the village. The fund shall serve as security for the full and complete
performance of this chapter, including any costs, expenses, damages or loss the
village pays or incurs because of any failure attributable to the grantee to
comply with the codes, ordinances, rules, regulations or permits of the
village.
   (B)   Before any sums are withdrawn from the security fund, the village
shall give written notice to the grantee:
      (1)   Describing the act, default or failure to be remedied or the
damages, costs or expenses which the village has incurred by reason of
grantee’s act or default;
      (2)   Providing a reasonable opportunity for grantee to first remedy the
existing or ongoing default or failure, if applicable;
      (3)   Providing a reasonable opportunity for grantee to pay any movies
due the village before the village withdraws the amount thereof from the
security fund, if applicable; and
      (4)   The grantee will be given an opportunity to review the act, default
or failure described in the notice with the Village Clerk or his or her
designee.
   (C)   The grantees shall replenish the security fund within 14 days after
written notice from the village that there is a deficiency in the amount of the
fund.
(1981 Code, § 18.7.19)
§ 115.129 CONSTRUCTION AND COMPLETION BOND.
   Unless otherwise provided in a license or franchise agreement, a performance
bond written by a corporate surety acceptable to the village equal to at least
100% of the estimated cost of constructing grantee’s telecommunications
facilities within the public ways of the village shall be deposited before
construction is commenced.
   (A)   The construction bond shall remain in force until 60 days after
substantial completion of the work, as determined by the Village Engineer,
including restoration of public ways and other property affected by the
construction.
   (B)   The construction bond shall guarantee, to the satisfaction of the
village:
      (1)   Timely completion of construction;
      (2)   Construction in compliance with applicable plans, permits,
technical codes and standards;
      (3)   Proper location of the facilities as specified by the village;
      (4)   Restoration of the public ways and other property affected by the
construction;
      (5)   The submission of “as-built” drawings after completion of the work
as required by this chapter; and
      (6)   Timely payment and satisfaction of all claims, demands or liens for
labor, material or services provided in connection with the work.
(1981 Code, § 18.7.20)
§ 115.130 COORDINATION OF CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES.
   All grantees are required to cooperate with the village and with each other.
   (A)   By February 1 of each year, the grantee shall provide the village with
a schedule of their proposed construction activities in around or that may
affect the public ways.
   (B)   Each grantee shall meet with the village, other grantees and users of
the public ways annually or as determined by the village to schedule and
coordinate construction in the public ways.
   (C)   All construction locations, activities and schedules shall be
coordinated, as ordered by the Village Engineer, to minimize public
inconvenience, disruption or damages.
(1981 Code, § 18.7.21)
§ 115.131 ASSIGNMENTS OR TRANSFERS OF GRANT.
   Ownership or control of a telecommunications system license or franchise may
not, directly or indirectly, be transferred, assigned or disposed of by sale,
lease, merger, consolidation or other act of the grantee, by operation of law
or otherwise, without the prior written consent of the village, which consent
shall not be unreasonably withheld or delayed, as expressed by ordinance and
then only on reasonable conditions as may be prescribed therein.
   (A)   No grant shall be assigned or transferred in any manner within 12
months after the initial grant of the license or franchise unless otherwise
provided in a license or franchise agreement.
   (B)   Absent extraordinary and unforeseeable circumstances, no grant, system
or integral part of a system shall be assigned or transferred before
construction of the telecommunications system has been completed.
   (C)   Grantee and the proposed assignee or transferee of the grant or system
shall provide and certify the following information to the village not less
than 150 days prior to the proposed date of transfer:
      (1)   Complete information setting forth the nature, terms and conditions
of the proposed transfer or assignment;
      (2)   All information required of a telecommunications license or
franchise applicant pursuant to §§
115.035 et seq. and
115.060 et seq. with respect to the proposed transferee or assignee; and
      (3)   Any other information reasonably required by the village.
   (D)   No transfer shall be approved unless the assignee or transferee has
the legal, technical, financial and other requisite qualifications to own, hold
and operate the telecommunications system pursuant to this chapter.
   (E)   The grantee shall reimburse the village for all direct and indirect
fees, costs and expenses reasonably incurred by the village in considering a
request to transfer or assign a telecommunications license or franchise.
   (F)   Any transfer or assignment of a telecommunications grant, system or
integral part of a system without prior approval of the village under this
section or pursuant to a license or franchise agreement shall be void and is
cause for revocation of the grant.
(1981 Code, § 18.7.22)
§ 115.132 TRANSACTIONS AFFECTING CONTROL OF GRANT.
   (A)   Any transactions which singularly or collectively result in a change
of 10% or more of the ownership or working control of the grantee of the
ownership or working control of a telecommunications license or franchise of
the ownership or working control of affiliated entities having ownership or
working control of the grantee or of a telecommunications system, or of control
of the capacity or bandwidth of grantee’s telecommunication system, facilities
or substantial parts thereof, shall be considered an assignment or transfer
requiring village approval pursuant to §
115.130.
   (B)   Transactions between affiliated entities are not exempt from village
approval.
(1981 Code, § 18.7.23)
§ 115.133 REVOCATION OR TERMINATION OF GRANT.
   A license or franchise granted by the village to use or occupy public ways
of the village may be revoked for the following reasons:
   (A)   Construction or operation in the village or in the public ways of the
village without a license or franchise grant of authorization;
   (B)   Construction or operation at an unauthorized location;
   (C)   Unauthorized substantial transfer of control of the grantee;
   (D)   Unauthorized assignment of a license or franchise;
   (E)   Unauthorized sale, assignment or transfer of grantee’s franchise or
license assets or a substantial interest therein;
   (F)   Misrepresentation or lack of candor by or on behalf of a grantee in
any application to the village;
   (G)   Abandonment of telecommunications facilities in the public ways;
   (H)   Failure to relocate or remove facilities as required in this chapter;
   (I)   Failure to pay taxes, compensation, fees or costs when and as due the
village;
   (J)   Insolvency or bankruptcy of the grantee;
   (K)   Violation of material provisions of this chapter; and
   (L)   Violation of the material terms of a license or franchise agreement.
(1981 Code, § 18.7.24)
§ 115.134 NOTICE AND DUTY TO CURE.
   In the event that the Village Administrator believes that grounds exist for
revocation of a license or franchise, he or she shall give the grantee written
notice of the apparent violation or noncompliance, providing a short and
concise statement of the nature and general facts of the violation or
noncompliance, and providing the grantee a reasonable period of time, not
exceeding 30 days, to furnish evidence:
   (A)   Corrective action has been, or is being actively and expeditiously
pursued, to remedy the violation or noncompliance;
   (B)   Rebuts the alleged violation or noncompliance; and/or
   (C)   It would be in the public interest to impose some penalty or sanction
less than revocation.
(1981 Code, § 18.7.25)
§ 115.135 HEARING.
   In the event that a grantee fails to provide evidence reasonably
satisfactory to the Village Administrator, as provided in §
115.134, the Village Administrator shall refer the apparent violation or
noncompliance to the corporate authorities. The corporate authorities shall
provide the grantee with notice and a reasonable opportunity to be heard
concerning the matter.
(1981 Code, § 18.7.26)
§ 115.136 STANDARDS FOR REVOCATION OR LESSER SANCTIONS.
   If persuaded that the grantee has violated or failed to comply with material
provisions of this chapter or of a franchise or license agreement, the
corporate authorities shall determine whether to revoke the license or
franchise, or to establish some lesser sanction and cure, considering the
nature, circumstances, extent and gravity of the violation as reflected by one
or more of the following factors:
   (A)   Whether the misconduct was egregious;
   (B)   Whether substantial harm resulted;
   (C)   Whether the violation was intentional;
   (D)   Whether there is a history of prior violations of the same or other
requirements;
   (E)   Whether there is a history of overall compliance; and
   (F)   Whether the violation was voluntarily disclosed, admitted or cured.
(1981 Code, § 18.7.27)
CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS
§ 115.150 GENERAL.
   No person shall commence or continue work within the village, except as
provided in this subchapter.
(1981 Code, § 18.8.01)
§ 115.151 CONSTRUCTION CODES.
   Telecommunications facilities shall be constructed, installed, operated and
maintained in accordance with all applicable federal, state and local codes,
rules and regulations including the National Electrical Safety Code and the
National Electrical Code.
(1981 Code, § 18.8.02)
§ 115.152 CONSTRUCTION PERMITS.
   No person shall work within the village without first obtaining a
construction permit thereof; provided, however:
   (A)   No permit shall be issued for work within the village unless the
telecommunications carrier has filed a registration statement with the village
pursuant to §§
115.020 et seq.
   (B)   No permit shall be issued for work in the public ways unless the
telecommunications carrier has applied for and received a license or franchise
pursuant to §§
115.035 et seq. and
115.060 et seq.
   (C)   No permit shall be issued for work without payment of the construction
permit fee established herein.
(1981 Code, § 18.8.03)
§ 115.153 APPLICATIONS.
   Applications for permits to work shall be submitted upon forms to be
provided by the village and shall be accompanied by drawings, plans and
specifications in sufficient detail to demonstrate:
   (A)   The facilities will be constructed in accordance with all applicable
codes, rules and regulations;
   (B)   The location and route of all facilities to be installed on existing
utility polls;
   (C)   The location and route of all facilities to be located under the
surface of the ground, including the line and grade proposed for the burial at
all points alone, the route which are within the public ways;
   (D)   The location of a existing underground utilities, conduits, ducts,
pipes, mains and installations which are within the public ways alone, the
underground route proposed by the applicant;
   (E)   The location of all other facilities to be constructed within the
village, but not within the public ways;
   (F)   The construction methods to be employed for protection of existing
structures, fixtures and facilities within or adjacent to the public ways;
   (G)   The location, dimension and types of all trees within or adjacent to
the public ways along the route proposed by the applicant, together with a
landscape plan for protecting trimming, removing, replacing and restoring any
trees or areas to be disturbed during construction; and
   (H)   A written construction schedule.
(1981 Code, § 18.8.04)
§ 115.154 ENGINEER’S CERTIFICATION.
   All permit applications shall be accompanied by the certification of three
registered professional engineer that the drawings, plans and specifications
submitted with the application comply with applicable technical codes, rules
and regulations.
(1981 Code, § 18.8.05)
§ 115.155 TRAFFIC CONTROL PLAN.
   All permit applications which involve work on, in, under, across or alone
any public ways shall be accompanied by a traffic control plan demonstrating
the protective measures and devices that will be employed, consistent with the
Uniform Manual of Traffic Control Devices, to prevent injury or damage to
persons or property and to minimize disruptions to efficient pedestrian and
vehicular traffic.
(1981 Code, § 18.8.06)
§ 115.156 ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.
   Within 45 days after submission of all plans and documents required of the
applicant and payment of the permit fees required by this chapter, the Village
Engineer, if satisfied that the applications, plans and document comply with
all requirements of this chapter, shall issue a permit authorizing construction
of the facilities, subject to further conditions, restrictions or regulations
affecting the time, place and manner of performing the work as he or she may
deem necessary or appropriate.
(1981 Code, § 18.8.07)
§ 115.157 CONSTRUCTION SCHEDULE.
   (A)   The permittee shall submit a written construction schedule to the
Village Engineer ten working days before commencing any work in or about the
public ways.
   (B)   The permittee shall further notify the Village Engineer not less than
two working days in advance of any excavation or work in the public ways.
(1981 Code, § 18.8.08)
§ 115.158 COMPLIANCE WITH PERMIT.
   All construction practices and activities shall be in accordance with the
permit and approved final
plans and specifications for the facilities. The Village Engineer and his or
her representatives shall be provided access to the work and further
information as he or she may require to ensure compliance with the
requirements.
(1981 Code, § 18.8.09)
§ 115.159 DISPLAY OF PERMIT.
   The permittee shall maintain a copy of the construction permit and approved
plans at the construction site, which shall be displayed and made available for
inspection by the Village Engineer or his or her representatives at all times
when construction work is occurring.
(1981 Code, § 18.8.10)
§ 115.160 SURVEY OF UNDERGROUND FACILITIES.
   (A)   If the construction permit specifies the location of facilities by
depth, line, grade, proximity to other facilities or other standard, the
permittee shall cause the location of the facilities to be verified by a
registered Illinois land surveyor.
   (B)   The permittee shall relocate any facilities which are not located in
compliance with permit requirements.
(1981 Code, § 18.8.11)
§ 115.161 NONCOMPLYING WORK.
   Upon order of the Village Engineer, all work which does not comply with the
permit, the approved plans and specifications for the work or the requirements
of this chapter shall be removed.
(1981 Code, § 18.8.12)
§ 115.162 COMPLETION OF CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   The permittee shall promptly complete all construction activities so
as to minimize disruption of the village ways and other public and private
property.
   (B)   All construction work authorized by a permit within village ways,
including restoration, must be completed within 120 days of the date of
issuance.
(1981 Code, § 18.8.13)
§ 115.163 AS-BUILT DRAWINGS.
   Within 60 days after completion of construction, the permittee shall furnish
the village with two complete sets of plans, drawn to scale and certified to
the village as accurately depicting the location of all telecommunications
facilities constructed pursuant to the permit. The village may require that the
information be provided in an electronic digitized format, the specifications
of which will be determined by the village.
(1981 Code, § 18.8.14)
§ 115.164 RESTORATION OF IMPROVEMENTS.
   Upon completion of any construction work, the permittee shall promptly
repair any and all public ways and provide property, improvements, fixtures,
structures and facilities in the public ways or otherwise damaged during the
course of construction, restoring the same as nearly as practicable to its
condition before the start of construction.
(1981 Code, § 18.8.15)
§ 115.165 LANDSCAPE RESTORATION.
   (A)   All trees, landscaping and grounds removed, damaged or disturbed as a
result of the construction, installation, maintenance, repair or replacement of
telecommunications facilities, whether the work is done pursuant to a franchise
license permit replaced or restored as nearly as may be practicable, to the
condition existing prior to performance of work.
   (B)   All restoration work within the public ways shall be done is
accordance with landscape plans approved by the Village Engineer.
(1981 Code, § 18.8.16)
§ 115.166 CONSTRUCTION SURVEY.
   Prior to issuance of a construction permit, the permittee shall provide a
performance bond, as provided in §
115.129.
(1981 Code, § 18.8.17)
§ 115.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   (1)   Any person found guilty of violating, disobeying, omitting,
neglecting or refusing to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter
shall be fined not less than $300, nor more than $1,000, for each offense.
      (2)   A separate and distinct offense shall be deemed committed each day
on which a violation occurs or continues.
(1981 Code, § 18.1.08)
   (B)   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as limiting any judicial
remedies that the village may have, at law or in equity, for enforcement of
this chapter.
(1981 Code, § 18.1.09)
CHAPTER 116: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Section
General Provisions
   
116.01   Definitions
   
116.02   Local Liquor Control Commissioner
   
116.03   License required
   
116.04   Employee training and registration
   
116.05   Licenses
   
116.06   Transfer of license
   
116.07   Change of location
   
116.08   Offenses by licensee
   
116.09   Offenses by other than licensee
   
116.10   Suspension or revocation
   
116.11   Appeals procedure
Prohibited Sales and Possession
   
116.30   Persons under 21 years; disabilities
   
116.31   Right to refuse sale
   
116.32   Evidence of age and identity; reliance upon
   
116.33   False or fraudulent evidence of age and identity
   
116.34   Possession by persons under 21 years
   
116.35   Private property; possession by persons under 21 years
   
116.36   Hotels and motels; possession by persons under 21 years
   
116.37   Consumption by persons under 21 years prohibited
Happy Hour Regulations
   
116.50   Prohibited happy hours
   
116.51   Permitted happy hours
   
116.52   Mandatory schedule of prices
 
   
116.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   State law provisions concerning sale and possession, see ILCS Ch. 235, Act
5, §§ 6 et seq.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 116.01 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   Words or phrases as used herein shall be defined as provided by An Act
Relating to Alcoholic Liquors, passed by the Second Special Session of the 58th
General Assembly, ILCS Chapter 235, Act 5, §§ 1-1 et seq.
   (B)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      BANQUET HALL. A business conducted on premises at which the exclusive
activity is the hosting of private events with food and/or beverage consumption
at a prearranged, fixed unit price, and at which alcoholic liquor may or may
not be served or sold incidental to such services, provided that each of such
private event is prearranged under the sponsorship of a particular person or
organization.
      BEER GARDEN. An outdoor area where alcoholic liquors are sold for
consumption and which is contiguous to a Class A-1 or A-2 liquor licensed
establishment as identified in the Village Code.
      BREW PUB. A brewery that brews beer and cider only on the premises for
sale to distributers and non-licensees only for consumption, which stores beer
and cider on the premises, and which shall make retail sales of beer and cider
for both on and off premises consumption. A brew pub may, but is not required,
to offer food service. Total sales for off-premises consumption shall not
exceed 155,000 gallons per calendar year. A brew pub shall include a
microbrewery or nano-brewery on the premises.
      COCKTAIL or MIXED DRINK. Any beverage obtained by combining ingredients
alcoholic in nature, whether brewed, fermented, or distilled, with ingredients
non-alcoholic in nature, such as fruit juice, lemonade, cream, or a carbonated
beverage.
      ENCLOSED FLOOR AREA OPEN TO THE PUBLIC. The area of available retail
sales space.
      PERSON or PERSONS. Individuals, partnerships, firms, associations and
corporations.
      PREMISES. The interior of a building having a valid occupancy permit,
except as expressly otherwise set forth herein.
      PRIVATE PARTIES. Private parties means a prearranged function by
invitation or reservation and not open to the general public, where the guests
in attendance are served in a room or rooms designated and used exclusively for
the private party, function or event.
      RESTAURANT. Specifically limited to public places kept, used, maintained,
advertised, and held out to the public as a place where meals are served, as
such term is defined in the state Liquor Control Law, ILCS Chapter 235, Act 5,
§ 1-3.23, and, in addition, which offers patrons complete meals, including at
least dinner and optionally luncheon at which the service of alcoholic
beverages is incidental and complementary to the service of such meals. Limited
food service, such as provided by lounges, luncheonettes, diners, coffee shops,
drive-ins, pizza parlors, and similar uses, does not satisfy the requirements
of this definition.
      SEALED CONTAINER. A rigid container that contains a mixed drink, is new,
has never been used, has a secured lid or cap designed to prevent consumption
without removal of the lid or cap, and is tamper-evident. SEALED CONTAINER does
not include a container with a lid with sipping holes or openings for straws or
a container made of plastic, paper, or polystyrene foam.
      TAP ROOM. The portion of a brew pub open to the public for the retail
sale of beer and cider for consumption on premises, and for the retail sale of
beer and cider to be consumed off the premises.
(1981 Code, § 36.01) (Am. Ord. 87-26, passed 12-7-1987; Am. Ord. 94-25, passed
10-17-1994; Am. Ord. 09-02, passed 1-5-2009; Am. Ord. 12-56, passed 7-16-2012;
Am. Ord. 17-59, passed 12-18-2017; Am. Ord. 18-35, passed 10-15-2018; Am. Ord.
20-12, passed 5-4-2020; Am. Ord. 20-26, passed 6-15-2020; Am. Ord. 22-03,
passed 1-24-2022; Am. Ord. 23-24, passed 5-15-2023)
§ 116.02 LOCAL LIQUOR CONTROL COMMISSIONER.
   (A)   The Village President shall be the Local Liquor Control Commissioner
and shall be charged with the administration of the laws of the state and the
village, pertaining to the sale of alcoholic liquor.
   (B)   The Village President shall appoint two Trustees to serve as Assistant
Liquor Control Commissioners to assist in the exercise of the duties of office
and shall, with the Village President, comprise the membership of the Local
Liquor Control Commission.
   (C)   Officials shall receive compensation as set by the Board of Trustees.
   (D)   Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary, the Liquor Control
Commissioner may forego any, or all, compensation to which he or she is
otherwise entitled for any part of his or her term by notifying the Village
Treasurer, in writing, of such an election, the amount the Liquor Control
Commissioner wishes to forego, the length of time the Liquor Control
Commissioner wishes to forego such compensation, and the effective date of the
election, Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent any Liquor
Control Commissioner from rescinding the election to forego compensation, upon
written notice to the Village Treasurer of his or her desire to rescind the
election to forego compensation.
(1981 Code, § 36.02) (Am. Ord. 94-19, passed 9-6-1994; Am. Ord. 94-22, passed
9-19-1994; Am. Ord. 10-22, passed 5-3-2010; Am. Ord. 13-39, passed 10-21-2013)
§ 116.03 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall sell, batter, transport, deliver, solicit, or receive orders
for, keep, or expose for sale, keep with intent to sell or furnish any
alcoholic liquor for beverage purposes for sale at retail without being first
licensed to do so by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner of the village.
(1981 Code, § 36.03) (Am. Ord. 94-25, passed 10-17-1994; Am. Ord. 04-11, passed
4-19-2003; Am. Ord. 13-39, passed 10-21-2013) Penalty, see §
116.99
Statutory reference:
   Scope of state liquor control act, see ILCS Chapter 235, Act 5, § 2-1
§ 116.04 EMPLOYEE TRAINING AND REGISTRATION.
   (A)   For licenses effective on or after July 1, 1994, and all original or
renewal application for all classes of liquor licenses shall be accompanied
with proof of completion of a State Beverage Alcohol Sellers and Servers
Educational Training (BASSET) program or Training for Intervention Procedures
(TIPS) program, for at least one management employee working on the premises
pursuant to that license.
   (B)   All persons whose job description entails the checking of
identification for the purchase of alcoholic beverages in establishments where
the majority of gross revenue is collected by the retail sale of alcoholic
beverages shall be required to complete BASSET or TIPS training.
   (C)   All personnel who prepare mixed alcoholic beverages or serve alcoholic
beverages for consumption on premises, in premises licensed under license
classes A, A-1, A-2, B-5, C, D, E, E-1, and E-4, shall be required to complete
BASSET or TIPS training.
   (D)   At least one person who has completed BASSET or TIPS training shall be
required to be on premises, in all licensed premises during hours when
alcoholic beverages may be purchased.
   (E)   A “state certified BASSET training program” or “TIPS training program”
shall be defined as a program licensed by the State Liquor Control Commission.
Providers of BASSET or TIPS training shall be required to have on file with the
County Clerk all licenses and certificates to prove current qualifications.
   (F)   (1)   After July 1, 1994, any new employee, manager or agent,
requiring BASSET or TIPS training, shall, within 90 days from the beginning of
their employment with that licensee, complete a BASSET or TIPS program and
shall until completion of the BASSET or TIPS program work under the supervision
of a person who has completed BASSET or TIPS training.
      (2)   In addition to the other requirements of this section, all liquor
managers shall attend a program conducted by the East Dundee Police Department
relative to alcohol awareness at least once every two years commencing July 1,
2023, provided that any liquor manager hired after July 1, 2023, shall attend
the next available alcohol awareness program.
   (G)   A photo copy of certificate of completion for all employees, managers
or agents required by this chapter to have BASSET or TIPS training shall be
maintained, by the establishment, in a manner that will allow inspection, upon
demand, by any designee of the Liquor Control Board.
   (H)   The Liquor Commissioner reserves the right to require BASSET or TIPS
training for all employees of any establishment when deemed necessary. A ruling
of this kind shall remain binding until repealed by the Liquor Commissioner.
(1981 Code, § 36.04) (Am. Ord. 89-20, passed 9-18-1989; Am. Ord. 94-02, passed
2-22-1994; Am. Ord. 94-10, passed 6-6-1994; Am. Ord. 97-13, passed 6-16-1997;
Am. Ord. 13-39, passed 10-21-2013; Am. Ord. 22-03, passed 1-24-2022; Am. Ord.
22-09, passed 3-7-2022; Am. Ord. 22-31, passed 7-18-2022; Am. Ord. 22-49,
passed 11-7-2022; Am. Ord. 23-03, passed 1-23-2023) Penalty, see §
116.99
§ 116.05 LICENSES.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/16574ba874f17dfbd958615eed907c929c4100f2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7683.jpg]Publisher's Note: This Section has been AMENDED by new
legislation (Ord. 25-38, adopted 8-4-2025). The text of the amendment will be
incorporated below when the ordinance is codified.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/16574ba874f17dfbd958615eed907c929c4100f2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7683.jpg]Publisher's Note: This Section has been AMENDED by new
legislation (Ord. 25-40, adopted 8-4-2025). The text of the amendment will be
incorporated below when the ordinance is codified.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/16574ba874f17dfbd958615eed907c929c4100f2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7683.jpg]Publisher's Note: This Section has been AMENDED by new
legislation (Ord. 25-44, adopted 9-15-2025). The text of the amendment will be
incorporated below when the ordinance is codified.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/16574ba874f17dfbd958615eed907c929c4100f2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7683.jpg]Publisher's Note: This Section has been AMENDED by new
legislation (Ord. 25-51, adopted 11-3-2025). The text of the amendment will be
incorporated below when the ordinance is codified.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/16574ba874f17dfbd958615eed907c929c4100f2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7683.jpg]Publisher's Note: This Section has been AMENDED by new
legislation (Ord. 25-52, adopted 11-17-2025). The text of the amendment will be
incorporated below when the ordinance is codified.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/16574ba874f17dfbd958615eed907c929c4100f2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7683.jpg]Publisher's Note: This Section has been AMENDED by new
legislation (Ord. 25-62, adopted 12-8-2025). The text of the amendment will be
incorporated below when the ordinance is codified.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/16574ba874f17dfbd958615eed907c929c4100f2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7683.jpg]Publisher's Note: This Section has been AMENDED by new
legislation (Ord. 25-63, adopted 12-8-2025). The text of the amendment will be
incorporated below when the ordinance is codified.
   (A)   Classifications. Licenses for retail sales of alcoholic liquors shall
be of the following kinds and classifications and their annual fees shall be as
provided in the village annual fee schedule:
      (1)   Class A. For the retail sale, on the premises specified of all
kinds of legalized alcoholic liquors for consumption on the premises as well as
other retail sales of the alcoholic liquors which include sales by original
package to be consumed off the premises where sold. Beer and wine, in the
original package, however, may be sold for consumption on the premises where
sold.
      (2)   Class A-1. For retail sale, on the premises specified, of all kinds
of legalized alcoholic liquors for consumption on the premises as well as other
retail sales of the alcoholic liquors which include sales in the original
package to be consumed off the premises where sold. Beer and wine, in the
original package, may be sold for consumption on the premises where sold. The
retail sale and consumption shall be permitted both in the interior of a
building having a valid occupancy permit as well as an adjoining contiguous
exterior area, so long as the following conditions are maintained by the
licensee:
         (a)   Any beer garden must be on the existing premises contiguous to
the building occupied by the licensee.
         (b)   Any beer garden must be completely enclosed by a fence or a wall
with a height of at least four feet.
         (c)   Any beer garden must be completely enclosed by a solid opaque
eight-foot fence or wall, when a property is within 100 feet of a residential
district or when required by the Liquor Commissioner.
      (2-1)   Class A-2. For retail sale, on the premises specified, of beer
and wine solely in the original package for consumption on the premises and not
for consumption off the premises where sold. The retail sale and consumption
shall be permitted both in the interior of a building having a valid occupancy
permit as well as an adjoining contiguous exterior area, known as a "beer
garden," subject to the following conditions:
         (a)   Any beer garden must be on the existing premises contiguous to
the building occupied by the licensee.
         (b)   Any beer garden must be completely enclosed by a fence or a wall
with a height of at least four feet.
         (c)   Any beer garden must be completely enclosed by a solid opaque
eight-foot fence or wall, when a property is within 100 feet of a residential
district or when required by the Liquor Commissioner.
         (d)   Beer and wine consumed in a beer garden shall only be consumed
by prequalified persons who have been given and are wearing a wrist band after
verification of age and within specifically controlled areas surrounded by a
barrier limiting access to other areas of controlled areas of the
establishment, as approved in writing by the Liquor Commissioner, or his or her
designee, and posted at the entrance to the designated area.
         (e)   If the Liquor Commissioner determines that the beer garden is a
nuisance, the Liquor Commissioner may 1. revoke permission for the beer garden
to operate on the premises, and/or 2. rescind any waivers of this chapter
granted to the licensee.
      (3)   Class B.
         (a)   Package store license which shall allow licensee to sell and
offer to sell at retail in the premises specified in the license alcoholic
liquor solely in the original package not for consumption on the premises where
sold.
         (b)   This license shall not be issued to any applicant whose
principal business is the retail sale to the general public of products or
services other than alcoholic liquors.
      (4)   Class B-1. Package store license which shall allow licensee to sell
and offer to sell, at retail in the premises specified in the license,
alcoholic liquor solely in the original package not for consumption on the
premises where sold subject to the condition that the license will be issued
only to an applicant whose retail alcoholic liquor sales business is an adjunct
to one of the following enumerated primary businesses and whose total area of
the licensed premises devoted to the retail sale of all products be a minimum
of 5,000 square feet:
         (a)   Supermarket or grocery store; and/or
         (b)   Drug store.
      (5)   Class B-2.
         (a)   Package store license which shall allow licensee to sell and
offer to sell, at retail in the premises specified in the license, beer and
wine only solely in the original package not for consumption on the premises
where sold.
         (b)   This license shall be issued to retail food stores, department
stores and retail food stores also selling gasoline only if the following
conditions are met at all times when the license is in force:
            1.    Only “beer” and “wine,” as defined in the Illinois Liquor
Control Act, may be sold.
            2.   The minimum enclosed floor area open to the public for retail
sales for store products shall be 1,800 square feet, of which no more than 15%
may be devoted to beer and wine.
            3.    The minimum inventory level shall be $35,000 retail value,
excluding beer, wine, fuel and automotive products.
            4.   The maximum percentage of beer and wine sales to total store
sales, exclusive of gasoline sales, shall be 35% on a retail basis during any
consecutive 12-month period.
            5.   No displays of beer and wine shall be located within five feet
of the store’s entrance.
            6.   Cold beer or cold wine shall only be sold from, or displayed
in electrical refrigeration coolers.
            7.   Employees engaged in the sale of beer and wine must be at
least 21 years of age.
         (c)   In addition, retail food stores selling gasoline shall meet the
following conditions:
            1.   (Reserved).
            2.   No mechanical or repair work of any kind may be performed on
automobiles on the licensed premises.
      (6)   Class B-3. Mail order liquor license which shall allow licensee to
sell and offer to sell, at retail in the premises specified in the license,
alcoholic liquor solely in the original package by mail order only. Sales are
not permitted either for consumption on the licensed premises or for retail
sale to the consumer on the licensed premises. It is the intent that this
classification of license be issued only to mail order or similar businesses
which ship alcoholic liquor products associated with other merchandise by U.S.
postal carrier or commercial carrier.
      (7)   Class B-4.
         (a)   Package store license which shall allow licensee to sell and
offer to sell, at retail in the premises specified in the license, beer, wine
and spirits only solely in the original package not for consumption on the
premises where sold.
         (b)   This license shall be issued to retail food stores, department
stores and retail food stores also selling gasoline only if the following
conditions are met at all times when the license is in force:
            1.   Only “beer” and “wine,” and “spirits” as defined in the
Illinois Liquor Control Act (ILCS Chapter 235, Act 5), may be sold.
            2.   The minimum enclosed floor area open to the public for retail
sales for store products shall be 1,800 square feet, of which no more than 20%
may be devoted to beer, wine and hard liquor.
            3.    The minimum inventory level shall be $35,000 retail value,
excluding beer, wine, spirits, fuel and automotive products.
            4.   The maximum percentage of beer, wine, and hard liquor sales to
total store sales, exclusive of gasoline sales, shall be 3 5% on a retail basis
during any consecutive 12-month period.
            5.   No displays of beer, wine or spirits shall be located within
five feet of the store’s entrance.
            6.   Cold beer, cold wine or cold spirits shall only be sold from,
or displayed in electrical refrigeration coolers.
            7.   Employees engaged in the sale of beer, wine or hard liquor
must be at least 21 years of age.
         (c)   In addition, retail food stores selling gasoline shall meet the
following conditions:
            1.   (Reserved).
            2.   No mechanical or repair work of any kind may be performed on
automobiles on the licensed premises.
      (7-1)   Class B-5.
         (a)   Package store license which shall allow licensee to sell and
offer to sell, at retail in the premises specified in the license, (1) beer,
wine and spirits in the original package not for consumption on the premises
where sold; and (2) beer and wine poured from an original package by the
licensee for consumption on the premises where sold.
         (b)   This license shall be issued to retail food stores, department
stores and retail food stores also selling gasoline only if the following
conditions are met at all times when the license is in force:
            1.   Only "beer," "wine" and "spirits" as defined in the Illinois
Liquor Control Act (ILCS Chapter 235, Act 5, §§ 1-1, et seq.), may be sold.
            2.   The minimum enclosed floor area open to the public for retail
sales for store products shall be 1,800 square feet, of which no more than 20%
may be devoted to the sale and consumption of beer and wine.
            3.   The minimum inventory level shall be $35,000 retail value,
excluding beer, wine, spirits, fuel and automotive products.
            4.   The maximum percentage of beer and wine to total store sales,
exclusive of gasoline sales, shall be 3% to 5% on a retail basis during any
consecutive 12-month period.
            5.   No displays of beer, wine or spirits shall be located within
five feet of the store's entrance.
            6.   Cold beer, cold wine or cold spirits shall only be sold from,
or displayed in, electrical refrigeration coolers.
            7.   Employees engaged in the sale of beer, wine or spirits must be
at least 21 years of age.
            8.   The premises shall include an indoor area dedicated
exclusively to alcohol consumption and video gaming, if any.
            9.   Alcohol consumption on the premises shall be strictly limited
to a designated area approved by the Liquor Commissioner and may only occur
during the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 a.m. daily. Any video gaming license
shall be limited to the hours in which on-premises consumption of beer and wine
is authorized as provided herein.
            10.   The licensee may not serve more than one serving of an
alcoholic beverage per customer, per hour for on-premises consumption, and in
no event shall a licensee serve more than two servings of an alcoholic beverage
to an individual for on-premises consumption in a single calendar day. For
purposes of this division, one serving of an alcoholic beverage means 12 ounces
of beer or five ounces of wine.
            11.   The licensee may only sell and serve beer and wine for on-
premises consumption to a person who is actively playing at a video game
terminal. For purposes of this division, actively playing means that a person
is presently engaged in real-time inputs and interaction with a video gaming
terminal and shall be distinguished from passively watching a video gaming
terminal or another person actively playing.
         (c)   In addition, retail food stores selling gasoline shall meet the
condition that no mechanical or repair work of any kind may be performed on
automobiles on the licensed premises.
      (8)   Class C. For the retail sale, on the premises specified, of all
kinds of legalized alcoholic liquors for consumption on the premises, but not
for the sale of spirits in the original package for consumption on the
premises, so long as the licensee is an incorporated not-for-profit
organization, as defined in ILCS Chapter 805, Act 105, § 101.80(m) or a public
purpose body duly formed pursuant to Illinois Statutes and having the power to
levy taxes. The term “premises” when applied to a license granted to such an
organization, may include, at the licensee’s request, a premises to which the
following conditions and restrictions shall apply. However, beer and wine, in
the original package, may be sold for consumption on the premises where sold.
         (a)   Use of the premises shall be limited to no more than two
separate three-day periods during the annual term of the license.
         (b)   The license, when granted, shall identify the street address of
the premises and must on each separate use identify the dates of the use not
less than 30 days prior to the intended use.
         (c)   The premises may include a building having a valid occupancy
permit, an open structure not intended for occupancy or a field or park subject
to reasonable restrictions as are necessary to protect the public health,
safety and welfare.
         (d)   At all other times the premises shall not be deemed to be a
licensed premises within this chapter.
      (9)   Class C-1. For the retail sale on the premises specified of
alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises, but not for the sale of
spirits in the original package for consumption on the premises. This license
shall be applicable only to premises operating as a public golf course,
including within the definition of the premises, both structures located
thereon for or intended for use as restaurants, bars and clubhouses and the
like, as well as the grounds of such public golf course. The license shall be
further limited to public golf courses and related facilities owned or operated
by a public body organized as a park district under the Park District Code,
ILCS Chapter 70, Act 1205, §§ 1-1 et seq. However, beer and wine, in the
original package, may be sold for consumption on the premises where sold.
      (10)   Class D. For the retail sale of alcoholic beverages for
consumption on premises, but not for the sale of spirits (as defined in ILCS
Chapter 235, Act 5, § 1-3.02) in its original package for consumption on the
premises, within or adjacent to food service locations solely within outdoor
amusement park recreational facilities, a single primary liquor license may be
issued for a structure which serves as a restaurant facility and auxiliary
licenses may be issued for additional beer and wine dispensing locations, also
referred to herein as “points of distribution,” subject to the following
conditions and restrictions:
         (a)   At least one primary food service location must be maintained
within outdoor amusement park and a primary license may be issued to the
location with the following requirements:
            1.   Legal seating capacity under local ordinance and state law
must be maintained to seat 100 patrons with seating facilities regularly and
ordinarily present on the licensed premises.
            2.   Licensed location must be within structure approved for
occupancy pursuant to the village building codes.
            3.   Under the primary license, one outdoor picnic area within the
amusement park may be used for the sale for consumption on premises of beer and
wine only.
         (b)   Alcoholic beverage service from points of distribution, other
than the structure bearing the primary license, shall be limited to beer and
wine. A license shall be required for each location referred to herein as a
“point of distribution license,” subject to the following requirements:
            1.   The points of distribution may provide walk-up counter
dispensing of beer and wine only for consumption within the subject amusement
park, so long as food service is available from the locations.
            2.   Each point of distribution shall be from a fixed structure
complying with the Building Code of the village and shall not be from a
temporary or portable structure, cart, or the like.
            3.   Each point of distribution license shall be separately
approved for a fixed location and shall be prominently displayed therein. The
licenses shall not be relocated without express action by the Liquor Control
Commissioner.
            4.   Each point of distribution license shall be under the same
ownership as the primary license and shall be issued only in conjunction with
and subject to the conditions and restrictions of the primary license.
            5.   At all times when a facility holding a point of distribution
license is in operation, at least one person registered pursuant to the
provisions hereof shall be on the licensed premises at all times that alcoholic
beverages are served.
            6.   Each point of distribution license may be open for business
for not more than 120 days per calendar year.
      (11)   Class E; Restaurant with Bar. For the retail sale in premises, as
defined below, of all kinds of legalized alcoholic liquors for consumption on
the premises, subject to the following conditions and restrictions. This
license does not permit the sale of spirits in the original package for
consumption on the premises. Upon approval of the Liquor Commissioner, the
premises of a Class E license may include a contiguous adjoining exterior area,
subject to the additional conditions set forth below:
         (a)   The outside dining area shall be enclosed by a minimum three-
foot high wall, fence, or structure designed to be decorative and to prevent
unauthorized entry. The maximum height of such fence or wall shall be eight
feet.
         (b)   At least five feet of public right-of-way must be provided and
maintained at all times for pedestrian traffic.
         (c)   At least ten feet of public right-of-way traffic must be
provided between the outdoor dining area and vehicular traffic, unless
otherwise approved by the Liquor Commissioner.
         (d)   The outside dining area shall have ingress and egress for
emergency purposes and for handicap accessibility.
         (e)   The outside dining area shall not have a covered roof, unless
otherwise approved by the Liquor Commissioner, although umbrellas, awnings,
screening, and the like may be allowed, and a limited roof structure may be
permitted over any service bar.
         (f)   No signs shall be attached to any furniture, umbrellas, awnings,
or other structure related to the operation of the outdoor dining area.
         (g)   No permanent fixtures are to be installed and only those
fixtures authorized by the permit and shown in the diagram may be stored in the
public right-of-way when the outdoor dining area is not in operation. Should
the licensee not utilize the sidewalk as authorized for a period of 48 hours or
more, all the tables and materials must be removed.
         (h)   A service bar or service window for the service of alcoholic
beverages may be permitted in the outside dining area. Permission for the sale
of alcoholic beverages must be secured from the Liquor Commissioner prior to
issuance of an Outdoor Dining/Sidewalk Café Permit.
         (i)   Outside meal seating will be permitted; however, no alcohol
shall be served or consumed in the outside seating area no later than 12:00
a.m. Sunday through Thursday, and 1:00 a.m. Friday and Saturday.
         (j)   The outside dining area seating shall not be used in subdivision
(b) above for calculating the required number of seats for this liquor license
classification.
         (k)   Seating for the outdoor dining area is to be restricted to the
right-of-way approved by the village.
         (l)   The outside dining area seating capacity when combined with the
indoor seating capacity shall meet the requirements of the State Plumbing Code
and village plumbing ordinances with regard to restroom facilities.
         (m)   Persons issued a permit for an outdoor dining area/sidewalk café
shall maintain the sidewalk area in a clean and safe condition. The permit
holder shall clean said area at the end of each business day, so as not to have
any food or drink leftovers remaining. The permit holder shall wash daily the
sidewalk area approved by the village for the outdoor dining area/sidewalk café
removing any food or drink residue.
         (n)   If the outdoor dining area interferes with a public event
planned on the public right-of-way, the public event shall take precedence. The
village will endeavor to notify the licensee 30 days in advance of the
scheduled event.
         (o)   Such other requirements as may reasonably be imposed by the
Liquor Commissioner taking into account the unique circumstances of the
licensee’s premises and location.
      (12)   Class E-1: Restaurant with Service Bar Only. For the retail sale
of all kinds of legalized alcoholic liquors for consumption on the premises and
with all conditions and restrictions as imposed under the Class E
classification and including the following additional conditions:
         (a)   The service of alcoholic beverages shall only be permitted
during such hours as complete meals are available from the licensed premises,
including such reasonable time thereafter as may be incidental to the service
of meals.
         (b)   Alcoholic beverages shall be served only at tables where
complete meal service is available by employees of the licensed premises.
Alcoholic beverage service shall not be permitted from a bar or similar
facility.
         (c)   Premises licensed hereunder must have the legal capacity under
local ordinance and state law to seat at least 50 patrons. Seating capacity
must be regularly and ordinarily present on the premises and may not include
temporary or folding tables or chairs not customarily used in the ordinary
course of licensee’s business.
         (d)   This license does not permit the sale of spirits in its original
package for consumption on the premises.
      (13)   Class E-2; Restaurant with Beer and Wine Only.
         (a)   For the retail sale in the premises specified in the license,
beer, wine and spirits of 40 proof or less only, for consumption on the
premises where sold, but not for the retail sale of spirits, in its original
package with all conditions and restrictions as imposed under the Class E
classification and the following additional conditions:
         (b)   The issuance of this license is specifically limited to public
places kept, used, maintained, advertised, and held out to the public as a
place where meals are served, as such term is defined in the Illinois Liquor
Control Act and which offers patrons complete, freshly prepared meals at which
the service of alcoholic beverages is incidental and complimentary to the
service of such meals.
Notwithstanding the conditions and restrictions as imposed for restaurants,
pizza parlors are an allowable use under this section provided there is
compliance with the conditions and restrictions set forth herein.
      (14)   Class E-3; Restaurant with Beer and Wine Only and Packaged Sales.
         (a)   For the retail sale of beer, wine and spirits of 40 proof or
less only, for consumption on the premises and for the retail sale of packaged
beer, wine, and spirits of 40 proof or less only its original package for
consumption off the premises. This license shall be subject to all of the
conditions and restrictions imposed under the Class E license and the following
additional conditions:
         (b)   The issuance of this license is specifically limited to public
places kept, used, maintained, advertised, and held out to the public as a
place where meals are served, as such term is defined in the Illinois Liquor
Control Act and which offers patrons complete, freshly prepared meals at which
the service of alcoholic beverages is incidental and complimentary to the
service of such meals.
      (14-1)   Class E-4; Restaurant with Bar and Packaged Sales. The
regulations governing Class E, Restaurant with Bar, and the regulations
governing Class E-3, Restaurant with Beer and Wine Only and Packaged Sales,
shall apply to this section. The retail sale of alcoholic liquors under the
regulation of Class E-3 for consumption off the premises in the original
package shall be permitted except in the area of premises where food is sold
for immediate consumption. The tasting of alcoholic liquors or food shall be
permitted if the tasting or sampling is part of a promotion or sales device and
no charge of any kind is made for such sampling or tasting. The retail sales
area shall not exceed 50% of the total square footage of the premises.
      (15)   Class F. Special events license for the retail sale of all kinds
of legal alcoholic liquors for consumption on the premises as defined below.
This license is not a right of any current license holder and shall be granted
at the sole discretion of the Liquor Commissioner and upon a finding that the
applicant has adequately met or provided for the following conditions and
restrictions:
         (a)   The applicant must submit a site map depicting the premises to
be licensed upon which the special event will occur including depicting all
structures and rights-of-way within 100 feet of the licensed premises perimeter
and proof of a legal right to occupy such premises during the duration of the
special event.
         (b)   The license would be issued only to licensees holding a valid
class of license permitting the consumption of alcoholic beverages on premises,
and the Liquor Commissioner, in their discretion, may grant a one-day license
to exceed the licensee’s currently-held valid class of license for the purpose
of the special event.
         (c)   Each licensee would be limited to hours of operation for
alcoholic liquor sales of no greater than between the hours of 11:00 a.m. to 8:
00 p.m. However, more expansive or limited hours may be approved by the Liquor
Commissioner in their discretion.
         (d)   Applicant for a special events license would be required to give
proof, satisfactory to the Liquor Commissioner, of adequate provision for the
following:
            1.   Public sanitary facilities;
            2.   Refuse and waste disposal arrangements;
            3. General security and crowd control;
            4.   Liability and property damage insurance with carriers and in
amounts satisfactory to the Commissioner; and
            5.   Means of securing the physical perimeter of the premises from
entry by minors and adequate security arrangements to ensure that minors are
not served alcoholic beverages.
         (e)   In the event a portion of public right-of-way is requested for
such license, permission would be required from the Village Board.
         (f)   Fees would be established for each event as set forth in the
annual fee schedule.
         (g)   This license does include the retail sale of spirits in its
original package for one day of the special event, at the discretion of the
Liquor Commissioner, but in no event may the spirits sold at the special event
be consumed at the special event or on the public way. It shall be the
responsibility of the licensee to ensure that said packaged spirits are not
consumed at the special event or on the public way.
      (16)   Class G. Banquet license for the retail sales of alcoholic liquor
on the specified premises for consumption on said premises only by patrons of
the banquet hall facilities and does not allow the sale of alcoholic liquor to
the general public. This license does not authorize the sale of spirits, as
defined in ILCS Chapter 235, Act 5, § 1-3.02, in its original package for
consumption on the premises. This license does not authorize the sale of
alcoholic liquor in its original package for consumption off the premises.
      (17)   Class H; Entertainment Venue. A commercial establishment with a
maximum permitted occupancy of greater than 500 people, which regularly devotes
25% or more of its total entertainment area to indoor and/or outdoor
activities, including competitive contests, dance floors, live performance
areas, live entertainment, disc jockey areas, or athletic events and which
serves alcoholic beverages to the patrons for consumption on the premises. The
entertainment venue also includes establishments used primarily for serving
alcoholic beverages for patrons to consume on the premises; where the sale of
prepared food, if any, is accessory to the primary use; and where entertainment
opportunities such as live, or prerecorded music, dancing or other
entertainment is provided. Alcoholic beverages, when dispensed out of doors,
shall only be consumed by prequalified persons who have been given and are
wearing a wrist band after verification of age and within specifically
controlled areas surrounded by a barrier limiting access to other areas of
controlled areas of the establishment, as approved in writing by the Liquor
Commissioner, or his or her designee, and posted at the entrance to the
designated area. It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct, maintain or
operate or engage in the business of conducting, maintaining or operating an
entertainment venue without a valid entertainment venue liquor license pursuant
to this chapter.
      (18)   Class I; Specialty Food and Beverage Establishment.  For the
retail sale of wine, beer and spirits for consumption on the premises and in
its original package for consumption off the premises for establishments that
sell specialty food and beverage items (i.e. desserts, snacks, candies, non-
alcoholic beverages, and similar specialty food and beverage items), and which
are not restaurants. Alcoholic beverage tasting events shall be permitted only
when there is a participant fee charged. The license hours for purposes of
serving and sale of alcoholic beverages shall be daily from 7:00 a.m. until 10:
00 p.m. The license fee shall be $1,000 per year or as included in the annual
fee schedule, whichever is greater.
      (19)   Adjoining village sidewalk service endorsement. A license holder
may expand its premises under their existing license with a sidewalk
endorsement granted by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner to allow sales and
service of alcoholic beverages authorized pursuant to its license on the public
sidewalk immediately adjoining the premises used by the licensee subject to
compliance with the following regulations:
         (a)   The sidewalk service area shall be that portion of the village
sidewalk adjacent to the premises used by the licensee.
         (b)   Not having seating for more than 16 customers and customers must
be seated.
         (c)   At least four feet of public sidewalk must be provided and
maintained at all times for pedestrian traffic.
         (d)   The sidewalk service area shall have ingress and egress for
emergency purposes and for handicap accessibility.
         (e)   The sidewalk service area shall not have a covered roof,
although umbrellas, awnings, screening, and the like may be allowed.
         (f)   No signs shall be attached to any furniture, umbrellas, awnings,
or other structure related to the operation of the sidewalk service area.
         (g)   No permanent fixtures are to be installed and only those
fixtures authorized by the endorsement and shown in the diagram may be stored
in the public right-of-way when the sidewalk service area is not in operation.
Should the license not utilize the sidewalk as authorized for a period of 48
hours or more, all the tables and materials must be removed.
         (h)   A service bar or service window for the service of alcoholic
beverages may be permitted in the sidewalk service area.
         (i)   Live entertainment shall not be allowed.
         (j)   No alcohol shall be served or consumed in the outside seating
area later than 10:00 p.m. Sunday through Thursday, and 11:00 p.m. Friday and
Saturday.
         (k)   The sidewalk service area seating shall not be used for
calculating the required number of seats for the liquor license classification.
         (l)   Seating for the sidewalk service area is to be restricted to the
right-of-way approved by the village.
         (m)   The sidewalk service area seating capacity when combined with
the indoor seating capacity shall meet the requirements of the State Plumbing
Code and village plumbing ordinances with regard to restroom facilities.
         (n)   Persons issued an endorsement for a sidewalk service area shall
maintain the sidewalk area in a clean and safe condition. The holder shall
clean said area at the end of each business day, so as not to have any food or
drink leftovers remaining. The holder shall wash daily the sidewalk area
approved by the village for the sidewalk service area removing any food or
drink residue.
         (o)   If the sidewalk service are interferes with a public event
planned on the public right-of-way, the public event shall take precedence. The
village will endeavor to notify the licensee 30 days in advance of the
scheduled event.
         (p)   Such other requirements as may reasonably be imposed by the
Liquor Commissioner taking into account the unique circumstances of the
licensee’s premises and location.
         (q)   Every applicant for an endorsement for a sidewalk service area
shall annually file an application with the Village Clerk upon a form provided
by the Village Clerk and pay a filing fee of $100, which shall not be
refundable. Said application shall be submitted to the village by the applicant
no later than February 1 of each year.
         (r)   An endorsement for operation of a sidewalk service area which is
granted shall permit operation between March 1 and November 1 of that calendar
year only.
         (s)   Moderate noise levels shall be maintained.
         (t)   The application for an endorsement to operate a sidewalk service
area must include the following:
            1.   A certificate of insurance in the amount of $1,000,000 naming
the Village of East Dundee as an additional insured, which must be renewed each
year the sidewalk service area is in operation.
            2.   A signed hold harmless agreement.
            3.   A diagram of the proposed layout of the sidewalk service area,
including sizes of fixtures and their location. A layout is to be submitted for
approval should the layout change in any way from the layout originally
approved by the village. The village may reduce the requested number of tables
to provide for safe pedestrian passage.
      (20)   (a)   1.   Class J - Village Caterer. For the retail sale and
service of alcoholic liquor by a bona fide catering company for consumption on
the premises of a catered event with a licensed place of business located in
the village.
            2.   Class J-1 - Caterer with business location outside of village.
For the retail sale and service of alcoholic liquor by a bona fide catering
company for consumption on the premises of the catered event with a place of
business not located in the village; and with an existing valid caterer’s
liquor license issued by the municipality in which it is located and its
related state liquor license.
         (b)   1.   The sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages shall only
be on the premises where the catered event is being held.
            2.   For the purpose of the application of the regulations of this
chapter, the location of the catered event shall be deemed the licensed
premises and such sales shall be subject to all applicable village and other
taxes.
            3.   The holder of a Class J or J-1 catering license shall have the
affirmative obligation to notify the East Dundee Police Department, in writing,
not less than five business days prior to the catering event of the date, time
and street location of the event.
            4.   A Class J or J-1 license shall not be used at a premise for
the purpose of that premise avoiding another class of liquor license.
            5.   The service of alcoholic liquor shall only take place during a
day from 10:00 a.m. until 11:59 p.m., except as otherwise authorized by the
Local Liquor Control Commissioner.
            6.   Video gaming as defined in the Illinois Video Gaming Act (ILCS
Ch. 230, Act 40, §§ 1 et seq.) shall not be allowed in a Class J or J-
1 licensed premises.
            7.   The license fee shall be as provided in the village’s annual
fee schedule and shall not be prorated as provided in division (H)(1) below.
      (21)   Adjoining village right-of-way service endorsement. A license
holder may expand its premises under their existing license with a right-of-way
endorsement granted by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner to allow sales and
service of alcoholic beverages authorized pursuant to its license on the public
right-of-way subject to compliance with the following regulations:
         (a)   The right-of-way service area shall be the Depot grounds (319 N
River Street, East Dundee, IL 60118) or that portion of the village sidewalk or
right-of-way adjacent to the premise of the licensee and shall only be
permitted during a special event sponsored by the village or an event approved
by the Village Board;
         (b)   The licensee shall comply with all rules and regulations
established by the village for the event;
         (c)   All temporary seating or structures in the village’s right-of-
way shall be approved by the village;
         (d)   All activities in the village right-of-way shall comply with all
ordinances and regulations of the village;
         (e)   The licensee shall submit a plan as part of its application for
compliance with all liquor regulations in this chapter;
         (f)   Licensees issued an endorsement for a right-of-way service area
shall maintain the right-of-way area in a clean and safe condition. The
licensee shall clean said area at the end of each event day, so as not to have
any food or drink leftovers or refuse remaining on the right-of-way.
         (g)   Such other requirements as may be imposed by the Liquor
Commissioner taking into account the unique circumstances of the licensee’s
premises, location and type of event;
         (h)   Every applicant for an endorsement for a right-of-way service
area shall annually file an application with the Village Clerk upon a form
provided by the Village Clerk;
         (i)   The application for an endorsement to operate a right-of-way
service area must include the following:
            1.   A certificate of insurance in the amount of $1,000,000 naming
the Village of East Dundee as an additional insured for the duration of the
event;
            2.   A signed hold harmless agreement; and
            3.   A diagram of the proposed layout of the right-of-way service
area, including sizes of fixtures and their location.
         (j)   An endorsement for operation of a right-of-way service area
which is granted shall permit operation for one calendar year following the
granting of the endorsement.
      (22)   Class K; Caboose Concession Stand. For the retail sale of beer and
wine only for consumption on the premises of the caboose concession stand owned
by the village at 112 Railroad Street, East Dundee, Illinois, and operated by
the holder of the Class K license under an approved license agreement with the
village. The license is subject to the following conditions and restrictions:
         (a)   Package sales are prohibited.
         (b)   Sales, service and consumption of alcoholic liquor in or from
glass containers and pitchers is prohibited.
         (c)   Sales, service and consumption of alcoholic liquor shall only be
permitted during such hours as complete meals are available from the licensed
premises, including such reasonable time thereafter as may be incidental to the
service of meals.
         (d)   Sales, service and consumption of alcoholic liquor shall only be
permitted within the approved outside dining area where complete meal service
is available on the licensed premises.
         (e)   The outdoor dining area of the licensed premises is restricted
to the portion of the right-of-way approved by the village.
         (f)   Sales, service and consumption of alcoholic liquor are
prohibited earlier than 10:00 a.m. or later than 9:00 p.m. Sunday through
Saturday.
         (g)   If required by the Liquor Commissioner, the outside dining area
shall be enclosed by a fence or other structure or materials approved by the
village and designed to be decorative and to prevent unauthorized entry, at the
licensee's sole cost and expense.
         (h)   The licensee shall maintain the licensed premises and adjacent
right-of-way area in a clean and safe condition, and shall clean said area at
the end of each business day, so as not to have any food or drink leftovers
remaining.
         (i)   Such other conditions and restrictions as may reasonably be
imposed by the Liquor Commissioner from time to time taking into account the
unique circumstances of the licensed premises and its location.
      (23)   Class L; Brew Pub. For the retail sale, at a specified brew pub as
defined within this section, beer and cider only for consumption on the
premises and the retail sale of beer and cider in its original package
manufactured by the specified brew pub to be consumed off the premises where
sold. The license is subject to the following conditions and restrictions:
         (a)   A portion of the licensed premises shall be dedicated as the tap
room, as defined within this section, which shall be open to the public for the
service, consumption, and retail sale of beer and cider as permitted within
this section.
         (b)   The portion of the licensed premises dedicated to the
manufacturing of beer shall be segregated from the tap room, as defined within
this section, and shall not be generally accessible to the public.
         (c)   Any public tours of the portion of the licensed premises
dedicated to the manufacturing of beer and cider shall be subject to public
safety restrictions imposed by the Building Department.
         (d)   The brew pub is not required to have food service and is
permitted to have outside prepared food consumed on the licensed premises, as
may be permitted by the Kane County Health Department.
         (e)   The licensed premises shall be permitted to have an outside beer
garden subject to the following restrictions:
            1.   Any beer garden must be on the existing premises contiguous to
the building occupied by the licensee.
            2.   Any beer garden must be completely enclosed by a fence or a
wall with a height of at least four feet or such other height as approved by
the Village Board.
            3.   Any beer garden must be completely enclosed by a solid opaque
eight-foot fence or wall, when the beer garden is within 100 feet of a
residential district or when required by the Liquor Commissioner.
            4.   No alcohol shall be served or consumed in any beer garden
later than 12:00 a.m. Sunday through Thursday, and 1:00 a.m. Friday and
Saturday.
   (B)   Number of licenses to be permitted. The number of licenses issued in
all preceding classes shall be as follows, except as modified from time to time
by ordinance:
Classification Number Permitted
Classification Number Permitted
A              5
A-1            4
A-2            1
B              0
B-1            0
B-2            0
B-3            0
B-4            4
B-5            2
C              0
C-1            1
D              1
E              4
E-1            3
E-2            5
E-3            0
E-4            2
F              No limit
G              1
H              0
I              2
J              1
J-1            0
K              0
L              1
 
   (C)   Applications; where filed. Applications shall be directed to and filed
with the Local Liquor Control Commissioner and shall be accompanied by a
certified or cashier’s check of a local bank, postal money order or cash in the
full amount of the annual license fee required to be paid for the kind of
license applied for by the applicant. If any applicant is denied, the deposit
required shall be returned to applicant by the Local Commissioner.
   (D)   Contents of application. All applications shall be on forms approved
by the Local Liquor Commissioner and provided by the village; shall be executed
by the applicant seeking license; and shall be under oath stating all material
information required in ILCS Chapter 235, Act 5, § 7-1.Any license application
which is not the renewal of an existing license by the same licensee shall be
charged an application fee to cover the village’s costs for fingerprinting,
background checks, and processing.
   (E)   Manner of payment, renewals, terms.
      (1)   All license fees shall be payable in one installment. All licenses
shall expire on December 31 next after the date of issue.
      (2)   (a)   All license applications shall be stamped as to date of
filing and shall be given a filing number and shall be considered by the Local
Commissioner in numerical order. Applications for renewal shall be considered
in the same numerical order as determined by the original application filing
number. Failure to make application for renewal 30 days or more before
expiration date of license shall be deemed a waiver of priority listing and
subsequent application provided for the application.
         (b)   In addition, the failure to make application at least 30 days
prior to the expiration date shall entitle the Local Liquor Commissioner to
close the applicant one day for every date late in filing. Application for
renewal shall be made in same manner as for new applications, except that the
application shall state thereon the fact. Forfeited application listings shall
be stricken from the application list and shall not again be used.
         (c)   There shall be no property right in any such license, but
priority shall receive proper consideration whenever all requirements of this
chapter have been complied with. The Village President and the Board of
Trustees shall have the power at any time to decrease the number of licenses to
be issued within its jurisdiction.
   (F)   Qualified persons. No license shall be granted to any person or for
any premises not qualified for such license under the laws of the state.
   (G)   Restrictions.
      (1)   No Class A or Class A-l license shall be issued to any person or
entity whose principal business on the licensed premises is the retail sale to
the general public or products other than alcoholic liquor for consumption of
the licensed premises.
      (2)   It shall not be permitted for any owner, manager, supervisor, or
other employee or agent of any commercial establishment, to permit or allow any
other person to bring any form of alcoholic beverage onto the premises for
consumption, otherwise known as “brown bagging, bring your own, or BYOB”.
   (H)   Fees.
      (1)   Liquor licenses issued on January 1 of each year and the fees for
licenses issued shall be prorated based for issue date, determined as follows:
         (a)   January 1 through March 31: not prorated;
         (b)   April 1 through June 30: fee to be prorated 75%;
         (c)   July 1 through September 30: fee to be prorated 50%; and
         (d)   October 1 through December 31: fee to be prorated 25%.
      (2)   Licenses, regardless of issue date, will expire December 31 of each
year.
   (I)   Reduction in the number of liquor licenses or video gaming licenses.
If a license of any class or a video gaming license is revoked, expires without
renewal, surrendered by the licensee or is otherwise terminated pursuant to
this chapter, the total number of licenses available in that class shall be
automatically reduced by that license unless thereafter the number of licenses
is increased by the Village Board.
   (J)   Supplemental video gaming license.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful to permit any gambling on any premises
licensed to sell alcoholic liquor, except as otherwise provided in this Code.
      (2)   Only premises licensed to sell alcoholic liquor for consumption on
the premises as defined by ILCS Ch. 230, Act 40, § 1 as a "licensed
establishment", a "licensed fraternal establishment", or a "licensed veterans
establishment", "licensed truck stop establishment" that has a liquor license
to sell package goods, or a “licensed large truck stop establishment” that has
a liquor license to sell package goods, are authorized to obtain a supplemental
video gaming license to operate video gaming terminals and only when licensed
by the Illinois Gaming Board pursuant to the provisions of the Illinois Gaming
Act (ILCS Ch. 230, Act 40, §§ 1 et seq.) and in accordance with the regulations
contained in Section 137.05 of this Code, except that no convenience store may
receive a supplemental video gaming license from the village, unless (a) the
convenience store is part of gas station; and (b) the convenience store has
more than 3,000 square feet of interior floor area.
      (3)   There shall be no more than 22 supplemental video gaming licenses
issued by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner as part of the liquor license
process.
      (4)   Only establishments having a business license for six months or
more are eligible for supplemental video gaming license approval.
      (5)   Video gaming licenses will be issued on January 1 of each year and
expires on December 31 of the following year.
   (K)   Sales and deliveries of “to-go” cocktails and mixed drinks. During a
disaster proclamation regarding public health by the Governor of the State of
Illinois pursuant to Section 7 of the Illinois Emergency Management Agency Act,
ILCS Chapter 20, Act 3305, § 7, that covers the village, a cocktail or mixed
drink placed in a sealed container by a Class A licensee, a Class E licensee or
a Class I licensee at the licensee’s location may be transferred and sold for
off-premises consumption if the requirements of ILCS Chapter 235, Act 5, § 6-
28.8, as amended from time to time, are met, which requirements are
incorporated as set forth herein. The transfer and sale of cocktails or mixed
drinks in sealed containers herein shall only be permitted if, and for so long
as, ILCS Chapter 235, Act 5, § 6-28.8 is in effect.
(1981 Code, § 36.05) (Am. Ord. 00-04, passed 1-18-2000; Am. Ord. 01-01, passed
3-5-2001; Am. Ord. 01-07, passed 7-2-2001; Am. Ord. 03-20, passed 10-20-2003;
Am. Ord. 04-11, passed 4-19-2004; Am. Ord. 04-28, passed 8-2-2004; Am. Ord. 04-
31, passed 9-7-2004; Am. Ord. 04-37, passed 11-1-2004; Am. Ord. 05-25, passed
10-17-2005; Am. Ord. 06-18, passed 6-5-2006; Am. Ord. 06-25, passed 7-17-2006;
Am. Ord. 06-34, passed 8-21-2006; Am. Ord. 08-10, passed 3-17-2008; Am. Ord.
08-12, passed 4-7-2008; Am. Ord. 08-55, passed 9-22-2008; Am. Ord. 09-01,
passed 1-5-2009; Am. Ord. 09-23, passed 8-17-2009; Am. Ord. 09-19, passed 8-3-
2009; Am. Ord. 09-36, passed 11-16-2009; Am. Ord. 09-39, passed 12-7-2009; Am.
Ord. 10-39, passed 9-9-2010; Am. Ord. 11-44, passed 10-17-2011; Am. Ord. 11-46,
passed 10-17-2011; Am. Ord. 11-47, passed 10-17-2011; Am. Ord. 12-54, passed 7-
16-2012; Am. Ord. 12-57, passed 7-16-2012; Am. Ord. 12-76, passed 9-17-2012;
Am. Ord. 13-39, passed 10-21-2013; Am. Ord. 13-48, passed 12-2-2013; Am. Ord.
13-51, passed 12-16-2013; Am. Ord. 14-09, passed 4-7-2014; Am. Ord. 14-11,
passed 6-2-2014; Am. Ord. 14-25, passed 8-18-2014; Am. Ord. 14-42, passed 12-8-
2014; Am. Ord. 15-07, passed 2-16-2015; Am. Ord. 15-23, passed 5-18-2015; Am.
Ord. 15-44, passed 10-19-2015; Am. Ord. 16-03, passed 2-8-2016; Am. Ord. 16-13,
passed 4-25-2016; Am. Ord. 16-18, passed 6-6-2016; Am. Ord. 16-31, passed 9-6-
2016; Am. Ord. 17-14, passed 3-6-2017; Am. Ord. 17-46, passed 9-11-2017; Am.
Ord. 17-55, passed 12-4-2017; Am. Ord. 17-59, passed 12-18-2017; Am. Ord. 18-
08, passed 5-7-2018; Am. Ord. 18-25, passed 9-10-2018; Am. Ord. 18-35, passed
10-15-2018; Am. Ord. 18-37, passed 11-19-2018; Am. Ord. 19-03, passed 1-21-
2019; Am. Ord. 19-27, passed 8-5-2019; Am. Ord. 19-30, passed 9-16-2019; Am.
Ord. 19-35, passed 11-4-2019; Am. Ord. 20-12, passed 5-4-2020; Am. Ord. 20-13,
passed 5-4-2020; Am. Ord. 20-26, passed 6-15-2020; Am. Ord. 21-07, passed 3-1-
2021; Am. Ord. 21-11, passed 4-5-2021; Am. Ord. 21-26, passed 7-19-2021; Am.
Ord. 21-27, passed 8-2-2021; Am. Ord. 21-37, passed 12-6-2021; Am. Ord. 22-03,
passed 1-24-2022; Am. Ord. 22-04, passed 1-24-2022; Am. Ord. 22- 05, passed 1-
25-2022; Am. Ord. 22-10, passed 4-4-2022; Am. Ord. 22-19, passed 5-16-2022; Am.
Ord. 22-23, passed 6-20-2022; Am. Ord. 22-30, passed 7-18-2022; Am. Ord. 22-31,
passed 7-18-2022; Am. Ord. 22-32, passed 7-18-2022; Am. Ord. 22-38, passed 8-
22-2022; Am. Ord. 22-49, passed 11-7-2022; Am. Ord. 23-03, passed 1-23-2023;
Am. Ord. 23-04, passed 1-23-2023; Am. Ord. 23-11, passed 3-6-2023; Am. Ord. 23-
29, passed 6-26-2023; Am. Ord. 23-31, passed 7-17-2023; Am. Ord. 23-39, passed
9-18-2023; Am. Ord. 23-56, passed 12-18-2023; Am. Ord. 24-02, passed 1-22-2024;
Am. Ord. 24- 05, passed 2-5-2024; Am. Ord. 24-12, passed 4-15-2024; Am. Ord.
24-32, passed 9-23-2024; Am. Ord. 24-35, passed 10-7-2024; Am. Ord. 25-01,
passed 1-13-2025; Am. Ord. 25-02, passed 1-13-2025; Am. Ord. 25-20, passed 4-
21-2025; Am. Ord. 25-21, passed 4-21-2025)
§ 116.06 TRANSFER OF LICENSE.
   (A)   A license shall be purely a personal privilege good for, but not to
exceed, one year after issuance unless sooner revoked as in this chapter
provided and shall not constitute property, nor shall it be alienable or
transferrable, voluntarily or involuntarily, or subject to being encumbered or
hypothecated.
   (B)   The license shall not descend by the laws of testate or intestate
devolution, but it shall cease upon the death of the licensee; provided that,
executors or administrators of estate of any deceased licensee and the trustee
of any insolvent or bankrupt licensee, when the estate consists of part of
alcoholic liquor, may continue the business of the sale of alcoholic liquor
under the order of the appropriate court, and may exercise the privileges of
the decease or insolvent or bankrupt licensee after the death of the decedent
or insolvency or bankruptcy, until expiration of the license, but not longer
than six months after the death, insolvency or bankruptcy of the licensee.
   (C)   Except as provided for in this code, there shall be no proration of
license fee irrespective of when the application for license is received by the
Local Control Commissioner. Any licensee may renew his or her license at the
expiration thereof; provided, he or she is then qualified to receive a license
and the premises for which the renewal license is sought are suitable for such
purpose; and provided that, he or she has made application for renewal; and
provided further, that the renewal privilege herein provided for shall not be
construed as a vested right which shall, in any case, prevent the President and
Board of Trustees from decreasing the number of licenses to be issued within
its jurisdiction.
(1981 Code, § 36.06) (Am. Ord. 84-10, passed 6-18-1984; Am. Ord. 99-16, passed
6-7-1999; Am. Ord. 13-39, passed 10-21-2013; Am. Ord. 18-34, passed 10-15-2018;
Am. Ord. 24-07, passed 2-19-2024)
§ 116.07 CHANGE OF LOCATION.
   No change of location shall be permitted by the licensee. The licensee shall
be required, in the event of a change in location, to reapply pursuant to
appropriate procedure otherwise provided in this chapter and to pay the
appropriate licensee fee for the new location. A license shall permit the sale
of alcoholic liquor only in the premises described in the application and
license.
(1981 Code, § 36.07) (Am. Ord. 84-10, passed 6-18-1984; Am. Ord. 89-77, passed
9-5-1989; Am. Ord. 94-02, passed 2-22-1994)
§ 116.08 OFFENSES BY LICENSEE.
   No licensee, under the provisions of this chapter, shall either individually
or through his or her agents or employees:
   (A)   Sell or possess for sale any package containing alcoholic liquor
unless the same shall have affixed thereto all canceled revenue stamps which
may be required by state or federal laws;
   (B)   Sell alcoholic liquor between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. of
any day; provided, however, that, on Sundays, the licensees shall only be
permitted to sell such alcoholic liquors as their licenses permit between the
hours of 8:00 a.m. of the day and 1:00 a.m., of the following Monday morning;
provided further that, the licensee on Friday and Saturdays only shall be
permitted to sell alcoholic liquors as the license permits between the hours of
6:00 a.m. in the morning or each Friday and Saturday and 2:00 a.m. of the
Saturday and Sunday morning. The village reserves the right to revoke that
permission in the following manner: No later than December 10 of each year, and
with cause, the Liquor Commissioner may notify a licensee or licensees of the
revocation of that permission for that year, allowing such licensee to petition
the Liquor Commission for a review of that revocation. The Liquor Commission
may agree to entertain the request for review. If such a review by the Liquor
Commission is conducted, the decision of the Commission is final.
   (C)   Permit any window display of liquor or other decoration of such nature
as will obstruct that view of the interior;
   (D)   Permit any card playing or gambling on the premises;
   (E)   Withholding or failing to report information to the appropriate law
enforcement authorities of the village regarding any disturbance of the peace
or criminal activity or incident which occurs on the licensed premise and of
which the licensee, his or her agents or employees has actual knowledge;
   (F)   Harbor or permit any intoxicated persons to loiter on the premises
described in the license, or permit any conduct which shall tend to disturb the
peace and quiet of the neighborhood or the premises;
   (G)   Make sales of alcoholic liquor in excess of or contrary to the powers
granted in license for the premises or in violation of ILCS Chapter 235, Act 5,
§ 6-25;
   (H)   Serve any alcoholic beverages to any persons for consumption on the
streets of the village or to any persons in motor vehicles on the streets;
   (I)   Permit any person to consume any alcoholic liquor on the premises
described in the license unless the alcoholic liquor has been purchased on the
premises from the licensee;
   (J)   Sell alcoholic liquor to any minor, intoxicated person, habitual
drunkard, spendthrift, insane, feebleminded or distracted person;
   (K)   Permit any minor to sell, possess or give away any alcoholic liquor on
the premises for which the license is issued;
   (L)   To sell or offer for sale, at retail, or to give away, in or upon any
licensed premises, any alcoholic beverages during the hours in which sale of
alcoholic beverages is prohibited. It shall be unlawful to keep open for
business or to admit the public to or permit the public to remain within or to
permit the consumption of alcoholic liquor in or upon the premises at any time
during which the sale of the liquor is prohibited; not to include license
classes A-2 (Beer/Wine On-Premises Consumption), B-1 (Package Liquors/
Supermarket/Drug Stores), B-4 (Retail Food/Gas), B-5 (Retail Food/Gas/On-
Premises Consumption) and C-1 (Public Golf Course), provided that such
licensees may remain open for business during such hours, but that no alcoholic
liquor may be sold to or consumed by the public during those hours; provided
further that for license Classes A, A-1, B, B-2, C, D, E, E-1, E-2, E-4, F, and
G, only the licensee and any of its employees shall be allowed to remain on or
about the licensed premises in order to clean-up or maintain said premises
after the closing hour, as noted in §
116.08(B).
   (M)   To keep open for business any premises licensed under this chapter, or
to sell or give away alcoholic liquors, during any period of time when the
Chief of Police should declare a curfew on the sale of alcoholic liquor as a
result of existing or threatened riot, civil disturbance or civil unrest within
the corporate limits of the village, during which period it is his opinion that
the sale of alcoholic liquors should be suspended in the public interest; and
   (N)   To permit any outside lights on the premises to remain on during the
hours in which the sale of alcoholic liquor on the premises is prohibited.
(1981 Code, § 36.08) (Am. Ord. 87-10, passed 4-20-1987; Am. Ord. 93-21, passed
12-20-1993; Am. Ord. 94-25, passed 10-17-1994; Am. Ord. 10-45, passed 10-4-
2010; Am. Ord. 12-11, passed 2-27-2012; Am. Ord. 12-55, passed 7-16-2012; Am.
Ord. 12-91, passed 12-17-2012; Am. Ord. 22-03, passed 1-24-2022; Am. Ord. 22-
31, passed 7-18-2022; Am. Ord. 23-01, passed 1-23-2023; Am. Ord. 23-03, passed
1-23-2023) Penalty, see §
116.99
§ 116.09 OFFENSES BY OTHER THAN LICENSEE.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any bartender, servant or employee of a
licensee to commit any of the offenses enumerated in §
116.08.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any alcoholic beverage
upon any public street in the village or in any motor vehicle on any public
street in the village.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any alcoholic liquor on
any premises licensed under the provisions of this chapter unless the alcoholic
liquor has been purchased from the license holder.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any alcoholic liquor on
any premises licensed under the provisions of this chapter during the hours
when the sale of the alcoholic liquor is prohibited by ordinance.
   (E)   It shall be unlawful for any minor, intoxicated person, habitual
drunkard or spendthrift to purchase alcoholic liquor. It shall further be
unlawful for any minor or other person to misrepresent the age of any minor for
the propose of inducing any licensee hereunder to sell or give such minor any
alcoholic liquor in violation of this chapter. Every tavern or every place of
business in the village where alcoholic liquor is sold for beverage purposes
shall display in a prominent place a card or sign containing a warning to
minors to the effect that they will be subjected to the penalties of this
chapter if they purchase or misrepresent their age in the attempt to purchase
alcoholic liquor.
(1981 Code, § 36.09)
Penalty, see § 116.99
§ 116.10 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.
   (A)   Any license or registration granted may be revoked or suspended for
cause by the Liquor Commission, by notice, in writing, served either by
registered mail, personal service or posting notice on the premises. The action
may be taken after public hearing before the Liquor Commission.
   (B)   Violation of any provision of this chapter, indebtedness to the
village for other licenses or registration fees required by ordinance,
violation of criminal laws of the state or misstatement or withholding or
material information in the application for license of registration shall be
deemed cause for revocation of the license or registration. For the purposes of
this section, every licensee shall be deemed responsible for the unlawful acts
of his or her agents or employees whether or not the licensee knowingly permits
or has actual knowledge of the unlawful acts.
(1981 Code, § 36.10) (Am. Ord. 94-02, passed 2-22-1994; Am. Ord. 23-37, passed
9-18-2023)
Penalty, see § 116.99
§ 116.11 APPEALS PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Appeals from orders or actions of the Local Liquor Control Commission
may be taken to the State Commission as provided by law. It shall be the duty
of the Village Attorney to attend all trials before the State Commission
involving appeals from the Local Commission. The Local Commission shall have
the power to make all necessary rules and regulations governing hearings and
shall cause to be provided forms for applications, complaints and such other
proceedings as may properly come before the Local Commission.
   (B)   Appeals from an order of the Local Commission shall be limited to a
review of the official record of the proceedings of the Local Commission as
provided pursuant to ILCS Chapter 235, Act 5, § 7-9.
(1981 Code, § 36.11) (Am. Ord. 95-19, passed 9-5-1995; Am. Ord. 19-30, passed
9-16-2019)
PROHIBITED SALES AND POSSESSION
§ 116.30 PERSONS UNDER 21 YEARS; DISABILITIES.
   No licensee or any officer, associate, member, representative, agent or
employee of the licensee shall sell, give or deliver alcoholic liquor to any
person under the age of 21 years, or to any intoxicated person or to any person
known by him or her to be under legal disability or in need of mental
treatment. No person, after purchasing or otherwise obtaining alcoholic liquor,
shall sell, give or deliver alcoholic liquor to another person under the age of
21 years, except in the performance of a religious ceremony or service and
except as provided in ILCS Chapter 235, Act 5, § 6-16.1. Whoever violates the
provisions of this division is guilty of a Class A misdemeanor.
(ILCS Chapter 235, Act 5, § 6-16) (Ord. 91-10, passed 7-22-1991) Penalty, see §
116.99
§ 116.31 RIGHT TO REFUSE SALE.
   For the purpose of preventing the violation of this section, any licensee or
his or her agent or employee may refuse to sell or serve alcoholic beverages to
any person who is unable to produce adequate written evidence of identity and
of the fact that he or she is over the age of 21 years if requested by the
licensee, agent, employee, or representative.
(ILCS Chapter 235, Act 5, § 6-16) (Ord. 91-10, passed 7-22-1991)
§ 116.32 EVIDENCE OF AGE AND IDENTITY; RELIANCE UPON.
   (A)   Adequate written evidence of age and identity of the person is a
document issued by a federal, state, county or municipal government, or
subdivision or agency thereof, including but not limited to a motor vehicle
operator’s license, a registration certificate issued under the Federal
Selective Service Act, or an identification card issued to a member of the
Armed Forces. Proof that the defendant-licensee or his or her employee or agent
demanded, was shown and reasonably relied upon such written evidence in any
transaction, forbidden by this section is an affirmative defense in any
criminal prosecution therefor or to any proceedings for the suspension or
revocation of any license based thereon. It shall not, however, be an
affirmative defense if the agent or employee accepted the written evidence
knowing it to be false or fraudulent.
   (B)   However, no agent or employee of the licensee shall be disciplined or
discharged for selling or furnishing liquor to a person under 21 years of age
if the agent or employee demanded and was shown, before furnishing liquor to a
person under 21 years of age, adequate written evidence of age and identity of
the person issued by a federal, state, county or municipal government or
subdivision or agency thereof, including but not limited to a motor vehicle
operator’s license, a registration certificate issued under the Federal
Selective Service Act or an identification card issued to a member of the Armed
Forces. This division (B), however, shall not apply if the agent or employee
accepted the written evidence knowing it to be false or fraudulent.
(ILCS Chapter 235, Act 5, § 6-16) (Ord. 91-10, passed 7-22-1991) Penalty, see §
116.99
§ 116.33 FALSE OR FRAUDULENT EVIDENCE OF AGE AND IDENTITY.
   (A)   Any person who sells, gives or furnishes to any person under the age
of 21 years any false or fraudulent written, printed or photostatic evidence of
the age and identity of the person or who sells, gives and furnishes to any
person under the age of 21 years evidence of age and identification of any
other person is guilty of a Class A misdemeanor, and the person's sentence
shall include, but shall not be limited to, a fine of not less than $500.
   (B)   Any person under the age of 21 years who presents or offers to any
licensee, his agent, or employee any written, printed, or photostatic evidence
of age and identity that is false, fraudulent, or not actually his or her own
for the purpose of ordering, purchasing, attempting to purchase, or otherwise
procuring or attempting to procure the serving of any alcoholic beverage, or
who has in his or her possession any false or fraudulent written, printed, or
photostatic evidence of age and identity, is guilty of a Class A misdemeanor,
and the person's sentence shall include, but shall not be limited to, the
following: a fine of not less than $500 and at least 25 hours of community
service. If possible, any community service shall be performed for an alcohol
abuse prevention program.
(ILCS Chapter 235, Act 5, § 6-16) (Ord. 91-10, passed 7-22-1991) Penalty, see §
116.99
§ 116.34 POSSESSION BY PERSONS UNDER 21 YEARS.
   Any person under the age of 21 years who has any alcoholic beverage in his
or her possession on any street or highway or in any public place or in any
place open to the public is guilty of a Class (A) misdemeanor. This section
does not apply to possession by a person under the age of 21 years making a
delivery of an alcoholic beverage in pursuance of the order of his or her
parent or in pursuance of his or her employment.
(ILCS Chapter 235, Act 5, § 6-16) (Ord. 91-10, passed 7-22-1991) Penalty, see §
116.99
§ 116.35 PRIVATE PROPERTY; POSSESSION BY PERSONS UNDER 21 YEARS.
   (A)   Any person shall be guilty of a Class A misdemeanor where he or she
knowingly permits a gathering at a residence which he or she occupies of two or
more persons where any one or more of the persons is under 21 years of age and
the following factors also apply:
      (1)   The person occupying the residence knows that any such person under
the age of 21 is in possession of or is consuming any alcoholic beverage;
      (2)   The possession or consumption of the alcohol by the person under 21
is not otherwise permitted by ILCS Chapter 235, Act 5, §§ 1-1 et seq.; and
      (3)   The person occupying the residence knows that the person under the
age of 21 leaves the residence in an intoxicated condition.
   (B)   For purposes of this section, where the residence has an owner and a
tenant or lessee, there is a rebuttable presumption that the residence is
occupied only by the tenant or lessee.
(ILCS Chapter 235, Act 5, § 6-16) (Ord. 91-10, passed 7-22-1991) Penalty, see §
116.99
§ 116.36 HOTELS AND MOTELS; POSSESSION BY PERSONS UNDER 21 YEARS.
   Any person who rents a hotel or motel room from the proprietor or agent
thereof for the purpose of or with the knowledge that such room shall be used
for the consumption of alcoholic liquor by persons under the age of 21 years
shall be guilty of a Class A misdemeanor.
(ILCS Chapter 235, Act 5, § 6-16) (Ord. 91-10, passed 7-22-1991) Penalty, see §
116.99
§ 116.37 CONSUMPTION BY PERSONS UNDER 21 YEARS PROHIBITED.
   The consumption of alcoholic liquor by persons under 21 years of age is
forbidden.
(Ord. 91-10, passed 7-22-1991)
Penalty, see § 116.99
HAPPY HOUR REGULATIONS
§ 116.50 PROHIBITED HAPPY HOURS.
   No retail licensee or employee or agent of such licensee shall:
   (A)   Sell more than one drink of alcoholic liquor for the price of one
drink of alcoholic liquor;
   (B)   Sell, offer to sell or serve to any person an unlimited number of
drinks of alcoholic liquor during any set period of time for a fixed price,
except at private functions not open to the general public or as provided in
ILCS Chapter 235, Act 5, § 6-28.5;
   (C)   Increase the volume of alcoholic liquor contained in a drink, or the
size of a drink of alcoholic liquor, without increasing proportionately the
price regularly charged for the drink on that day;
   (D)   Encourage or permit, on the licensed premises, any game or contest
which involves drinking alcoholic liquor or the awarding of drinks of alcoholic
liquor as prizes for such game or contest on the licensed premises; or
   (E)   Advertise or promote in any way, whether on or off the licensed
premises, any of the practices prohibited under divisions (A) through (D) of
this section.
(Ord. 15-38, passed 8-17-2015) Penalty, see §
116.99
§ 116.51 PERMITTED HAPPY HOURS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      DEDICATED EVENT SPACE. A room or rooms or other clearly delineated space
within a retail licensee’s premises that is reserved for the exclusive use of
party package invitees during the entirety of a party package. Furniture,
stanchions and ropes, or other room dividers may be used to clearly delineate a
DEDICATED EVENT SPACE.
      MEAL PACKAGE. A food and beverage package, which may or may not include
entertainment, where the service of alcoholic liquor is an accompaniment to the
food, including, but not limited to, a meal, tour, tasting, or any combination
thereof for a fixed price by a retail licensee or any other licensee operating
within a sports facility, restaurant, winery, brewery, or distillery.
      PARTY PACKAGE. A private party, function, or event for a specific social
or business occasion, either arranged by invitation or reservation for a
defined number of individuals, that is not open to the general public and where
attendees are served both food and alcohol for a fixed price in a dedicated
event space.
   (B)   A retail licensee may:
      (1)   Offer free food or entertainment at any time;
      (2)   Include drinks of alcoholic liquor as part of a meal package;
      (3)   Sell or offer for sale a party package only if the retail licensee:
         (a)   Offers food in the dedicated event space;
         (b)   Limits the party package to no more than three hours;
         (c)   Distributes wristbands, lanyards, shirts, or any other such
wearable items to identify party package attendees so the attendees may be
granted access to the dedicated event space; and
         (d) Excludes individuals not participating in the party package from
the dedicated event space;
      (4)   Include drinks of alcoholic liquor as part of a hotel package;
      (5)   Negotiate drinks of alcoholic liquor as part of a hotel package;
      (6)   Provide room service to persons renting rooms at a hotel;
      (7)   Sell pitchers (or the equivalent, including, but not limited to,
buckets of bottled beer), carafes, or bottles of alcoholic liquor which are
customarily sold in such manner, or sell bottles of spirits;
      (8)   Advertise events permitted under this section;
      (9)   Include drinks of alcoholic liquor as part of an entertainment
package where the licensee is separately licensed by a license that (a)
restricts dates of operation to dates during which there is an event at an
adjacent stadium, (b) restricts hours of serving alcoholic liquor to two hours
before the event and one hour after the event, (c) restricts alcoholic liquor
sales to beer and wine, (d) requires tickets for admission to the
establishment, and (e) prohibits sale of admission tickets on the day of an
event and permits the sale of admission tickets for single events only; and
      (10)   Discount any drink of alcoholic liquor during a specified time
period only if:
         (a)   The price of the drink of alcoholic liquor is not changed during
the time that it is discounted;
         (b)   The period of time during which any drink of alcoholic liquor is
discounted does not exceed four hours per day and 15 hours per week; however,
this period of time is not required to be consecutive and may be divided by the
licensee in any manner;
         (c)   The drink of alcoholic liquor is not discounted between the
hours of 10:00 p.m. and the licensed premises’ closing hour; and
         (d)   Notice of the discount of the drink of alcoholic liquor during a
specified time is posted on the licensed premises or on the licensee’s publicly
available website at least seven days prior to the specified time.
(Ord. 15-38, passed 8-17-2015)
§ 116.52 MANDATORY SCHEDULE OF PRICES.
   All retail licensees shall maintain a schedule of the prices charged for all
drinks of alcoholic liquor to be served and consumed on the licensed premises
or in any room or part thereof. Whenever a hotel or multi-use establishment
which holds a valid retailer’s license operates on its premises more than one
establishment at which drinks of alcoholic liquor are sold at retail, the hotel
or multi-use establishment shall maintain at each such establishment a separate
schedule of the prices charged for such drinks at that establishment.
(Ord. 15-38, passed 8-17-2015)
§ 116.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined not
less than $25 nor more than $1,000 for a first violation within a 12-month
period; and for a second offense not less than $50 nor more than $1,500 within
a 12-month period; and for a third offense shall be fined not less than $100
nor more than $2,500 within a 12-month period. Each day the violation continues
shall constitute a separate offense. In addition to any other penalties set
forth in this chapter, the Liquor Commission may order the licensee to pay
costs incurred by the village in preparing or hearing the case including, but
not limited to, reasonable attorneys’ fees and court reporter’s fees. The levy
and/or payment of any penalty herein provided shall not be deemed a waiver of
the power of the Local Commission to suspend or revoke any license.
(1981 Code, § 36.12) (Am. Ord. 94-02, passed 2-22-1994; Am. Ord. 04-11, passed
4-19-2004; Am. Ord. 19-06, passed 2-18-2019; Am. Ord. 23-37, passed 9-18-2023)
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided herein, whoever violates §§
116.30 through
116.37 shall, in addition to other penalties provided for in ILCS Chapter 235,
Act 5, §§ 1-1 et seq., be guilty of a Class (A) misdemeanor.
(ILCS Chapter 235, Act 5, § 6-16) (Ord. 91-10, passed 7-22-1991)
CHAPTER 117: ADULT USE BUSINESS LICENSE
Section
   
117.01   Required license
   
117.02   Definitions
   
117.03   Application; standards for issuance
   
117.04   Conditions and regulations governing operation; violation
   
117.05   Suspension or revocation
   
117.06   Alcoholic beverages
 
   
117.99   Penalty
§ 117.01 REQUIRED LICENSE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of operating
an adult use in the village without first having obtained a license therefor
from the Village Clerk.
(Ord. 04-43, passed 12-20-2004)
Penalty, see § 117.99
§ 117.02 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
   ADULT BOOKSTORE. An establishment having, as a substantial portion of its
stock in trade, books, magazines, films or videotapes for sale or viewing on
the premises by use of motion picture devices or other coin-operated means, and
other periodicals which are distinguished by their emphasis on matter
depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas as such terms are defined in this section, or an establishment
with a segment or section devoted to the sale or display of such material.
Adult bookstores may alternatively or in conjunction with the above stock in
trade sell undergarments and other clothing designed for the display of
specified anatomical areas or for the enhancement of specified sexual
activities. Further, an adult bookstore may alternatively or in conjunction
with the above stock in trade sell prosthetic devices, dolls, candles,
vibrators and other objects for sexual gratification which take the form of
specified anatomical areas and for the purpose of enhancing specified sexual
activities.
   ADULT ENTERTAINMENT CABARET. An establishment offering to its patrons, as
entertainment, any exhibition or display or any theatrical or other live
performances which include topless or go-go dancers, exotic dancers, strippers,
male or female impersonators, or similar entertainers, or any persons singing,
reading, posing, modeling, or serving food or beverages, where the exhibition,
performance, display or dance is intended to sexually arouse the entertainer or
the patrons, or where the attire of persons involved is such as to expose
specified anatomical areas, as defined in this section.
   ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER. An enclosed building, regardless of its
seating capacity, which is used to present for public view on the premises,
films, movies, previews, trailers or advertisements which are distinguished by
their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas, as defined in this section.
   ADULT USE. Includes adult bookstores, adult entertainment cabarets, and
adult motion picture theaters as defined in this section.
   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS.
      (1)   Less than completely and opaquely covered human or animal genitals,
pubic region, or pubic hair, buttocks; and female breasts below a point
immediately above the top of the areola; and
      (2)   Genitals of humans or animals in a discernible turgid state, even
if completely opaquely covered.
   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES.
      (1)   Human or animal genitals in the state of sexual stimulation or
arousal.
      (2)   Acts or representations of acts of human or animal masturbation,
sexual intercourse or sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation or flagellation.
      (3)   Fondling or erotic touching of human or animal genitals, pubic
region, buttock or female breast.
      (4)   Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any activities
set forth in subdivisions (1) and (2) of this definition.
(Ord. 04-43, passed 12-20-2004)
§ 117.03 APPLICATION; STANDARDS FOR ISSUANCE.
   (A)   Application for an adult use license shall be made in writing and
shall state the following:
      (1)   The name, address, telephone number and age of the applicant and
the registered agent of the applicant if the applicant is a corporation.
      (2)   The location of the adult use business.
      (3)   The exact nature of the adult use to be conducted and of the
proposed place of business and the facilities related thereto.
      (4)   A statement by the applicant that he or she is familiar with the
provisions of this chapter and is in compliance with them.
      (5)   A statement of whether the business will be conducted by a manager
and, if so, the name, address, telephone number, and age of each such manager.
      (6)   A statement that no manager or principal operating the business has
been convicted of any offense of prostitution, soliciting for prostitution, or
obscenity or public indecency as defined in the Illinois Compiled Statutes
within the last two years, and that the applicant has not had any license for
an adult use in any other community revoked within the last two years.
   (B)   Within 15 days after receipt of an application for an adult use
license, the village shall investigate the information contained in the
application and shall determine the following:
      (1)   That the premises designated by the applicant as the location of
the business are in full compliance with all applicable ordinances of the
village, including zoning ordinances.
      (2)   That the premises and each manager and employee comply with the
provisions of division (A) of this section as such provisions apply to them.
      (3)   That the applicant, each manager and each employee are over 21
years of age.
      (4)   That no manager or principal operator of the business has been
convicted of any offense of prostitution, solicitation for prostitution, or
obscenity or public indecency, as defined in the Illinois Compiled Statutes
within the last two years, and that the applicant has not had any license for
an adult use revoked within the last two years.
   (C)   If the investigation shows the compliance of the applicant for an
adult use license, the premises upon which the business is to be conducted, and
each manager and employee, if applicable, with each of the requirements
established in divisions (A) and (B) of this section, and with the conditions
and regulations set forth in § 117.04 within 15 days after completion of such
investigation, the Village Clerk shall issue a license, and upon payment by the
applicant of the license fee required under this chapter, the license shall be
issued.
   (D)   If the investigation shows that the applicant for an adult use
license, the premises on which the business is to be conducted, or the managers
and employees, if applicable, do not comply with each of the requirements
established in division (A) of this section, and with the conditions and
regulations set forth in § 117.04 within 15 days after completion of such
investigation, the Village Clerk shall notify the applicant in writing that the
license has been denied. Such denial shall be the final administrative action
of the village with respect to the license application, and shall be subject to
the immediate appeal by the applicant to the circuit court.
(Ord. 04-43, passed 12-20-2004)
§ 117.04 CONDITIONS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OPERATION; VIOLATION.
   (A)   The following regulations shall govern and control the business of
operating an adult use in the village:
      (1)   No person under 21 years of age shall be allowed on the licensed
premises.
      (2)   At all times during the hours of operation there shall be present a
manager or other employee of the licensee who shall be not less than 21 years
of age.
      (3)   Upon a change of any manager conducting business for the licensee,
the licensee shall, within ten regular business days, give the Village Clerk
written notice of such change by actual delivery or by registered or certified
mail. The licensee shall, thereafter, as promptly as practicable, but in any
event within five regular business days, provide the information concerning the
new manager which is required in §
117.03.
      (4)   No adult use shall be located on premises for which a license to
sell alcoholic liquor has been issued, and no alcoholic liquor shall be
permitted on such premises.
      (5)   No adult use shall be permitted unless the premises on which such
business is located complies with the requirements of the Zoning Code.
      (6)   No licensee or manager under the provisions of this chapter shall
knowingly permit any person to remain in or upon licensed premises who commits
any act of public indecency or obscenity as defined in the Illinois Compiled
Statutes.
      (7)   No licensee or manager under the provisions of this chapter shall
permit any act of prostitution, solicitation for prostitution or patronization
of a prostitute on the licensed premises.
      (8)   No sign shall be posted on the licensed premises which depicts,
displays or refers to specified anatomical areas or specified sexual
activities, as defined in this chapter.
   (B)   In addition to the requirements established in division (A) of this
section, the following regulations shall govern and control the operation of an
adult bookstore which offers any films or videotapes for viewing on premises by
use of motion picture devices or other such operations means:
      (1)   All viewing areas, which shall be defined as the area where a
patron or customer would ordinarily be positioned while watching a film or
viewing device, shall be visible from a continuous main aisle or public room
and shall not be obscured by any curtain, door, wall or other enclosure.
      (2)   There shall be no aperture whatsoever in any wall or partition
between viewing areas.
      (3)   Each viewing area shall be lighted at a minimum level of ten foot
candles in all parts thereof.
   (C)   In addition to the requirements established in division (A) of this
section, the following regulations shall govern and control the operation of an
adult entertainment cabaret:
      (1)   All performers shall be at least 21 years of age.
      (2)   All performances, exhibitions or displays shall take place on a
platform raised at least two feet from the level of the floor, and located at
least ten feet from any patron.
      (3)   No performer shall fondle or caress any patron or other performer
and no patron shall fondle or caress any performer.
      (4)   No patron shall be permitted to pay or give any gratuity to any
performer, and no performer shall solicit any pay or gratuity from any patron.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any person licensed to engage in the business
of operating an adult use within the village to fail to comply with the
conditions and regulations set forth in this section and §
117.03 as they are applicable to the licensed business, or to suffer or permit
noncompliance with such conditions and regulations on or within the licensed
premises. In this regard, any act or omission of an employee shall be deemed
the act or omission of the owner if such act or omission occurred either with
the authorization, knowledge or approval of the owner or as a result of the
owner's negligent failure to supervise the employee's conduct. All conduct
occurring while on the premises shall be presumed to be the responsibility of
the owner.
(Ord. 04-43, passed 12-20-2004)
Penalty, see § 117.99
§ 117.05 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.
   Nothing in the terms of this chapter shall preclude the right of the
President to suspend or revoke the license of the licensee, as follows:
   (A)   The President may temporarily suspend any license issued under the
terms of this chapter when he or she has reason to believe that the continued
operation of a particular licensed premises will immediately threaten the
welfare of the community or create an imminent danger of violation of
applicable law. In such case, he or she may, upon the issuance of a written
order stating the reason for such determination, and without notice or hearing,
order the licensed premises closed for not more than seven days; provided, that
the licensee shall be given an opportunity to be heard in a public hearing
during the seven-day period, and further provided that if such licensee shall
also be engaged in the conduct of other business on the licensed premises, such
order shall not be applicable to such other businesses.
   (B)   The President may suspend or revoke any license issued under the terms
of this chapter upon ten days notice to the licensee of the time and place of a
public hearing, and a public hearing at which the licensee may appear and
present evidence, if the President determines upon such hearing that the
licensee has failed or refused to comply with the terms of this chapter, has
failed or refused to comply with other law applicable to the business of
operating an adult use, has knowingly permitted the failure of any manager or
employee on the premises to comply with the terms of this chapter or with other
law applicable to the business of operating an adult use, has knowingly
furnished false or misleading information on any application required for any
license under this section or has suffered or caused another to furnish or
withhold such information on his or her behalf, or has been convicted by a
court of competent jurisdiction of a violation of any provision of this
section.
(Ord. 04-43, passed 12-20-2004)
§ 117.06 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES.
   No premises shall be licensed if such premises are to be operated as an
adult use as defined in this chapter or if the activity proposed to be
conducted thereon includes any adult entertainment as defined in this chapter.
(Ord. 04-43, passed 12-20-2004)
Penalty, see § 117.99
§ 117.99 PENALTY.
   Any person convicted of a violation of this section shall be subject to a
fine pursuant to §
10.99 of this Code of Ordinances.
(Ord. 04-43, passed 12-20-2004)
CHAPTER 118: INDOOR COMMERCIAL SPORTS AND ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENT
Section
General Provisions
   
118.01   Definitions
Licenses
   
118.15   Annual license required
   
118.16   Application
   
118.17   License fee
   
118.18   Display of license
   
118.19   Non-transferability of license
   
118.20   Monthly list of events
Large Events License
   
118.35   Large event license required
   
118.36   Application
   
118.37   License fee
   
118.38   Display of license
   
118.39   Non-transferability of license
Enforcement
   
118.45   Validity
   
118.46   Inspection and enforcement
   
118.47   License violations
   
118.48   License suspension and revocation
   
118.49   Prosecution of offenses and fines
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 118.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COMMERCIAL SPORTS AND ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENT, INDOOR. See definition
provided in §
157.003 of this code.
(Ord. 11-27, passed 5-16-2011)
LICENSES
§ 118.15 ANNUAL LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person shall conduct, offer, allow, permit or operate any facility
meeting the definition of an indoor commercial sports and entertainment
establishment without obtaining and maintaining in good standing, an annual
license.
   (B)   Annual licenses issued hereunder shall be in addition to all other
licenses applicable to the establishment except a license for a public dance
hall.
   (C)   Annual small event licenses shall cover all lawful events with less
than 100 combined participants and spectators, provided such events do not
involve live animals other than domestic animals permitted as pets per the
provisions of Chapter 92 of this code.
(Ord. 11-27, passed 5-16-2011)
§ 118.16 APPLICATION.
   (A)   The person operating the establishment (the proposed license holder)
shall complete and sign an application form as provided by the Village Clerk.
If the operator of the establishment is not the owner of the property on which
the establishment is located, the property owner also shall sign the
application.
   (B)   At a minimum, information to be provided by the applicant shall
include the following:
      (1)   Owner and operator contact information:
         (a)   Name of the operating entity and contact information for the
entity's owner or authorized representative;
            1.   The license holder, if an individual, any partner of a
partnership or any of the directors of a corporation, may not have a felony
conviction of any type.
         (b)   Name and contact information for the property owner if different
than the operating entity; and
         (c)   Name, address and phone number of the individual who will serve
as the establishment's primary contact to the village and the same information
for two individuals who will serve as back-ups in the event the village is
unable to reach the primary contact.
            1.   The primary and back-up contacts shall each be 21 years of age
or older and may not have a felony conviction of any type.
      (2)   A description of the date(s), hours of operation, fee and/or
admission changed and the general types of anticipated events with less than
100 combined participants and spectators.
      (3)   A traffic and parking control plan including the location of
primary and secondary vehicular access points, drive aisles, parking areas, and
a description of proposed on-site traffic control measures, if any, such as
signage, removable barriers, parking lot attendants, valet parking service,
etc.
      (4)   A description of the security measures to be provided to maintain a
peaceful and orderly environment before, during, and after the event, with
specific reference to: the exterior of the property; public entries and exits;
general crowd control plans; and areas of potential high risk (box office,
sales areas, areas serving alcohol).
      (5)   Evidence of a broad form policy of public liability insurance
meeting the following:
         (a)   Insurance issued by an insurance company qualified to do
business in Illinois and rated A or better by Best's Insurance Rating System,
or its equivalent;
         (b)   Provides coverage for all claims for property damage and
personal injury arising in connection with an event;
         (c)   Minimum limits of $500,000 for any single claim and $3,000,00
for any one occurrence;
         (d)   The village its officers, employees and agents named as an
additional insured; and
         (e)   An effective period covering the entire period of the license.
      (6)   Detailed floor plan, where food is prepared and/or served including
whether alcoholic beverages are to be served.
      (7)   Information regarding similar events where this entertainment was
provided.
      (8)   Information as to what, if any, village support is being requested
or required.
   (C)   A completed and signed application shall be submitted to the Village
Clerk no less than 60 days prior to the initial proposed opening date of the
establishment. The Village Clerk shall have 30 days to act upon an application
for a license and shall forward the application to the village Building
Inspector and Chief of Police for their review and comment prior to acting on
the application. Failure to act within this time period shall be considered to
be a denial of the license.
   (D)   Applications for renewal of a license shall be submitted to the
Village Clerk by October 1 of the year preceding the year of the requested
renewal.
   (E)   The initial approved license shall be valid until the end of the
calendar year in which it is issued. Licenses shall be renewed annually
thereafter.
   (F)   The entertainment event shall be in compliance with all other sections
of this Code of Ordinances and village rules, regulations and policies.
(Ord. 11-27, passed 5-16-2011)
§ 118.17 LICENSE FEE.
   Each application for an annual license shall be accompanied by a fee of
$100.
(Ord. 11-27, passed 5-16-2011)
§ 118.18 DISPLAY OF LICENSE.
   The license shall be displayed in a conspicuous place within the
establishment so that the same may be readily seen by persons entering the
establishment.
(Ord. 11-27, passed 5-16-2011)
§ 118.19 NON-TRANSFERABILITY OF LICENSE.
   Each license is issued to a specific license holder and is non-transferable.
If the operating entity for the establishment changes, or has a change in
ownership, the previous license shall be void and an application for a new
license shall be submitted.
(Ord. 11-27, passed 5-16-2011)
§ 118.20 MONTHLY LIST OF EVENTS.
   (A)   The license holder shall provide a monthly list of scheduled events to
the Village Clerk on the fifteenth (or next business day thereafter) of the
month preceding the month in which the events are to occur.
   (B)   The monthly list of events shall include the following at a minimum.
For repetitive events (such as league sports, etc.) this information may be
provided only one time each year.
      (1)   Name of the event;
      (2)   Date of the event;
      (3)   Type of event;
      (4)   Hours of the event;
      (5)   Whether the event is targeted primarily to minors;
      (6)   Whether alcoholic beverages will be available;
      (7)   Number of permitted participants;
      (8)   Number of permitted spectators;
      (9)   Minimum number of staff to be present;
      (10)   Name and contact information for primary responsible party for the
event; and
      (11)   Name of lessee, if applicable.
(Ord. 11-27, passed 5-16-2011)
LARGE EVENT LICENSES
§ 118.35 LARGE EVENT LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   Any facility defined as an indoor commercial sports and entertainment
establishment per the provisions of §
157.003 of this code proposing to conduct an event with 100 or more combined
participants and spectators or an event involving live animals other than
domestic animals permitted as pets per the provisions of
Chapter 92 of this code shall be required to obtain, and maintain in good
standing, a large event license.
   (B)   Large event licenses issues hereunder shal) be in addition to the
required annual license for the establishment and all other licenses applicable
to the establishment except a license for a public dance hall.
(Ord. 11-27, passed 5-16-2011)
§ 118.36 APPLICATION.
   (A)   An application for a large event shall be submitted to the Village
Clerk no less than 90 days prior to the date of the event.
   (B)   Only one large event license per year shall be required for repetitive
events meeting the large event criteria.
   (C)   At a minimum, information to be provided by the applicant shall
include the following:
      (1)   Name of the event;
      (2)   Date of the event;
      (3)   Type of event;
      (4)   Hours of the event;
      (5)   Whether the event is targeted primarily to minors;
      (6)   Whether alcoholic beverages will be available;
      (7)   Whether the event will involve live animals other than domestic
animals permitted as pets per the provisions of Chapter 92 of this code;
      (8)   Number of permitted participants;
      (9)   Number of permitted spectators;
      (10)   Minimum number of staff to be present;
      (11)   Name and contact information for primary responsible party for the
event;
      (12)   Name of lessee, if applicable;
      (13)   The traffic and parking control plan approved as part of the
annual license;
      (14)   The security plan approved as part of the annual license;
      (15)   The liability insurance approved as part of the annual license;
and
      (16)   Any other information required for a small event license.
   (D)   The Village Clerk shall have 30 days to act upon an application for a
license and shall forward the application to the Village Building Inspector and
Chief of Police for their review and comment prior to acting on the
application. Failure to act within this time period shall be considered to be a
denial of the license.
(Ord. 11-27, passed 5-16-2011)
§ 118.37 LICENSE FEE.
   Each application for a large event license shall be accompanied by a fee of
$100.
(Ord. 11-27, passed 5-16-2011)
§ 118.38 DISPLAY OF LICENSE.
   The license shall be displayed in a conspicuous place within the
establishment so that the same may be readily seen by persons entering the
establishment.
(Ord. 11-27, passed 5-16-2011)
§ 118.39 NON-TRANSFERABILITY OF LICENSE.
   Each license is issued to a specific license holder and is non-transferable.
If the operating entity for the establishment changes, or has a change in
ownership, the previous license shall be void and an application for a new
license shall be submitted.
(Ord. 11-27, passed 5-16-2011)
ENFORCEMENT
§ 118.45 VALIDITY.
   (A)   An annual small event license shall remain valid for the calendar year
for which it is issued as long as it remains in good standing per the
provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   A large event license shall remain valid only for the event for which
it is issued (including a repetitive event covered under a single large event
license) as long as it remains in good standing per the provisions of this
chapter.
(Ord. 11-27, passed 5-16-2011)
§ 118.46 INSPECTION AND ENFORCEMENT.
   Authorized village personnel including building inspectors and police
officers ("village enforcement officials") shall be responsible for the
enforcement of all provisions of this chapter and shall be permitted to enter
all areas of a licensed establishment whenever the building is occupied.
(Ord. 11-27, passed 5-16-2011)
§ 118.47 LICENSE VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   Any one of the following shall constitute a violation of an annual
small event license or large event license and shall subject the license holder
to the suspension and revocation provisions of §
118.48:
      (1)   A violation of any condition imposed as part of the special use
permit approval for the establishment;
      (2)   Operating in a manner contrary to that indicated on the approved
application(s);
      (3)   An inability of a village enforcement official to make contact with
at one of the license holder's listed contacts at any time; or
      (4)   A violation of any health or safety regulation applicable to the
property or the Village Code.
(Ord. 11-27, passed 5-16-2011)
§ 118.48 LICENSE SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION.
   The procedures for suspending and/or revoking an annual small event license
or a large event license shall be as set forth in §
110.12 of the Code of the Village of East Dundee.
(Ord. 11-27, passed 5-16-2011; Am. Ord. 15-32, passed 7-6-2015)
§ 118.49 PROSECUTION OF OFFENSES AND FINES.
   Nothing in the terms of this chapter shall preclude the village from
pursuing all other legal remedies available to it to prosecute offenses of this
chapter or other laws. In addition to all other penalties described in this
chapter, violators of this chapter shall be subject to fines as described in §
10.99 of this code.
(Ord. 11-27, passed 5-16-2011)
CHAPTER 119: RENTAL LICENSE
Section
   
119.01   Purpose
   
119.02   Definitions
   
119.03   Rental license required
   
119.04   Application; inspection; enforcement
§ 119.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to provide for property maintenance
standards, inspection and licensing of rental property so as to protect the
public health, safety and welfare of the residents and guests of rental units
including:
   (A)   To protect the public health and safety by obtaining compliance with
the property maintenance standards of the village.
   (B)   To protect the character and stability of residential and commercial
areas.
   (C)   To correct and prevent housing conditions that adversely affect or are
likely to adversely affect the life, safety, general welfare and health,
including the physical, mental and social well-being, of persons occupying
rental residential dwelling units.
   (D)   To prevent the overcrowding of dwellings by requiring compliance with
minimum space standards per occupant for each dwelling unit.
   (E)   To facilitate the enforcement of property maintenance for the
maintenance of existing buildings and thus to prevent deteriorating buildings
and blight.
(Ord. 15-30, passed 7-6-2015)
§ 119.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PROPERTY. Any unimproved or improved real property or portion thereof,
situated in the Village of East Dundee and includes the buildings or structures
located on the property regardless of condition.
   RENTAL LICENSE. A license required for any owner of a building, structure,
dwelling or dwelling unit who rents, leases, or controls any portion of the
property, building or structure to another person, business, corporation or
entity for any fixed period of time.
(Ord. 15-30, passed 7-6-2015)
§ 119.03 RENTAL LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   License required. No person shall engage in the business of renting
without having obtained a license.
      (1)   Residential property. It shall be unlawful to rent a residential
dwelling or dwelling unit without first obtaining a rental license issued by
the Building Department for the specific location.
      (2)   Nonresidential property. It shall be unlawful to rent a
nonresidential building or structure without first obtaining a rental license
issued by the Building Department for the specific location.
   (B)   It is unlawful for a person to occupy a rental building or residential
unit, or for any owner or property agent to allow anyone to occupy a rental
building or residential unit, which is not licensed.
   (C)   It is unlawful for any person to offer for rent or to occupy any
vacant building or dwelling unit or any building or dwelling unit that becomes
vacant for which a license is under suspension.
   (D)   This chapter shall not apply to the following structures:
      (1)   Hotels, motels, and other structures which rent rooms to occupants
which are primarily transient in nature.
      (2)   Dwellings, buildings, structures and uses licensed and inspected by
village, state or federal government, including but not limited to nursing
homes, retirement centers, rest homes, and the like.
      (3)   Dwellings, buildings, structures and uses owned by governmental
agencies and public housing authorities.
   (E)   A license for a rental residential property cannot be transferred to
another rental residential property or a succeeding owner.
(Ord. 15-30, passed 7-6-2015)
§ 119.04 APPLICATION; INSPECTION; ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Application for a license hereunder shall be made in writing and shall
be processed in accordance with
Chapter 110 of this title and shall submit the following information in an
application provided by the village:
      (1)   Name, address, and home and business telephone numbers of the owner
of the property and, if property is held in trust, the name, address, home and
business telephone numbers of the beneficiaries and the percentages of
ownership of all the beneficiaries of the trust, appropriate corporate or
partnership information. The name, address and phone number of the management
company and agent representing an owner shall be provided.
      (2)   Name, address (no P.O. boxes), business and home telephone numbers
of the owner or agent to be contacted when potential violations of municipal
ordinances occur.
      (3)   Telephone number of the owner or agent to be contacted when an
emergency exists.
      (4)   An acknowledgment that the agent or owner shall be reasonably
accessible to the village and have a telephone number which shall be available
to the village at any time. The owner or agent shall have a local office
available for contact in Illinois.
      (5)   In the event any of the information requested should change, it
shall be the obligation of the owner to notify the village in writing within
ten days of the change.
      (6)   No license shall be issued or renewed unless the owner or operator
agrees in their application to an inspection pursuant to this chapter as the
Village Administrator may require to determine whether the location in
connection with which such license is sought is in compliance with the
applicable provisions of this chapter and with the applicable rules and
regulations pursuant thereto in this code.
   (B)   Fees.
      (1)   License fees. Each application for a license shall be accompanied
by the license fees established in the annual fee schedule.
      (2)   Inspection fees. No inspection fee other than the license fee
provided in division (B)(1) of this section shall be charged for the first
inspection made upon application for issuance or renewal of a license or one
reinspection to determine if violations cited in the first inspection have been
corrected if all units are in compliance at the time of the second inspection.
For every failed third or subsequent inspection required thereafter to
determine if a violation has been corrected, a reinspection fee as established
in the annual fee schedule shall be charged per rental residential dwelling
unit or for the common exterior area. If any third or subsequent inspection fee
is not paid prior to the inspection, then the inspection fee, an administrative
fee as established in the annual fee schedule, and interest at 6% shall become
a lien upon the property after notice as provided in division (B)(4) of this
section.
      (3)   Inspection cancellation fees. An owner shall be permitted to
reschedule one appointment per building per license year if notice is given to
the village code official scheduled to conduct the inspection at least 24 hours
before that inspection. If the owner fails to attend a scheduled inspection or
cancels a scheduled inspection with less than 24 hours notice, a rescheduling
fee as established in the annual fee schedule shall be paid prior to the
issuance of the license.
      (4)   Notice. Notice shall be given to the owner of the property or
taxpayer of record by personal service or certified mail advising of the
delinquent fees and penalties, and that if not paid within 30 days they shall
become a lien upon the property.
      (5)   Lien. If the delinquent fees and penalties are not paid, that
amount shall become a lien on the property upon the filing of a notice of lien
in the office of the recorder in the county in which the real estate is
located. Such lien shall not be valid as to any purchaser whose rights in and
to such property have arisen prior to the filing of such notice of lien.
   (C)   License term. The term of a license shall be for a calendar year
beginning January 1 and ending December 31 of each year.
   (D)   Notice of maximum occupancy. The owner of a rental residential
property shall inform each tenant in writing, prior to occupancy, of the
maximum number of persons allowable by the occupancy standards of the village’s
Property Maintenance Code as determined by the code official or the lease,
whichever is less.
   (E)   Inspections. The Village Administrator may require inspections to
determine whether the location in connection with which such license is in
compliance with the applicable provisions of this chapter and with the
applicable rules and regulations pursuant thereto. After inspection, no such
license shall be issued unless the location is found to meet all applicable
requirements of this chapter and applicable rules and regulations pursuant
thereto. Locations that change ownership may be required to be inspected before
a new license can be issued.
      After inspection, no such license shall be issued unless the location is
found to meet all applicable requirements of the Code of the Village of East
Dundee including but not limited to this chapter,
Chapter 50 (Garbage and Refuse),
Chapter 52 (Cross-Connection Control),
Chapter 151 (Building Regulations),
Chapter 156 (Signs), and
Chapter 157 (Zoning).
      (1)   Whenever, upon inspection of the location, the Building Official or
designee finds that conditions or practices exist which are in violation of the
provisions of this chapter or of any applicable rules and regulations pursuant
thereto, the owner shall be served with notice of such violation in the manner
herein provided. Such notice shall state that unless the violations cited are
corrected within reasonable time, the license may be suspended.
      (2)   At the end of the time allowed for correction of any violation
cited, the Building Official or designee shall reinspect the location, and if
the reinspection reveals that such conditions have not been corrected, a
request to the Village Administrator to suspend the license may be made.
      (3)   In the alternative, the Building Official may file a complaint in
the village’s administrative adjudication system or file a complaint against
the owner in the circuit court.
      (4)   Any person whose license has been recommended for suspension shall
be entitled to an appeal to the Village Administrator in the manner provided by
this title. Any written request for appeal shall be filed with the Village
Administrator within 15 days following the issuance of the notice.
      (5)   If, upon reinspection, the Building Official or designee finds that
the location in connection with which the notice was issued is now in
compliance with this chapter and with the applicable rules and regulations
issued pursuant thereto, a recommendation of the reinstatement of the license
may be made to the Village Administrator.
      (6)   When the Building Official or designee determines after an initial
inspection that additional follow up inspections are necessary for enforcement
of this chapter, one additional follow up inspection for noncompliance shall be
granted each license holder without charge. In the event more than one follow
up inspection is needed, the license holder shall be assessed a noncompliance
inspection service charge to make the reinspection. Payments must be made in
full prior to the license being renewed. Failure to pay any balance will serve
as grounds to deny further permits or licenses from being issued by the
village.
   (F)   Crime free housing. Any owner, agent or designee of residential rental
property shall lease only pursuant to a written lease containing their rules
and regulations and utilize a crime free lease addendum or have a clause in the
lease similar to a crime free lease addendum. A copy of a sample crime free
lease addendum shall be provided by the village to any owner, agent or designee
of residential rental property. The clause is to make criminal activity (not
limited to violent criminal activity or drug related criminal activity engaged
by, facilitated by or permitted by the renter, member of the household, guest
or other party under the control of the renter) a lease violation. The landlord
shall have authority under that clause to initiate an eviction proceeding as
specified in the Illinois Compiled Statutes Forcible Entry and Detainer
statutes. Proof of criminal violation in the Forcible Entry and Detainer
Statutes shall be by a preponderance of the evidence.
(Ord. 15-30, passed 7-6-2015)
CHAPTER 120: REQUESTS FOR THE USE OF THE DEPOT AND DEPOT PARK
Section
   
120.01   Permit required
   
120.02   Park permit application
   
120.03   Issuance of permit
   
120.04   Permit fees and insurance
   
120.05   Revocation of permit
   
120.06   Supervision/security
   
120.07   Rules and regulations
§ 120.01 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   A permit shall be obtained from the Village Administrator's office by
any person, group or organization wishing to reserve the Depot or Depot Park or
any portion thereof for any rental period.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to any person, group or organization to utilize
the Depot or Depot Park for any activity, event or time period without said
permit.
   (C)   Persons attending an event during a rental period shall be permitted
to use the Depot or Depot Park consistent with applicable rules and only during
the time designated by the permit.
(Ord. 17-42, passed 8-7-2017; Am. Ord. 23-14, passed 3-20-2023)
§ 120.02 PARK PERMIT APPLICATION.
    A permit shall only be issued upon proper application as prescribed by the
Village Administrator's office. The application shall be filed not less than 30
days before the rental period or event. That application shall include, but
shall not be limited to:
   (A)   Applicant information;
   (B)   Location;
   (C)   The date and hours for which the permit is desired;
   (D)   An estimate of anticipated attendance and admission rate, if
applicable;
   (E)   A site plan for how the Depot and Depot Park will be utilized;
   (F)   If there is alcohol, whether it will be sold or served and containment
plan;
   (G)   Description of any entertainment/activities planned (i.e. live music,
DJ, etc.); and
   (H)   Such other information the Village Administrator's office reasonably
requires.
(Ord. 17-42, passed 8-7-2017; Am. Ord. 23-14, passed 3-20-2023)
§ 120.03 ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.
   The Village Administrator, or designee, shall review the permit application
and shall approve and issue the permit if the Village Administrator, or
designee, determines:
   (A)   The proposed activity and use will not unreasonably interfere with or
detract from the promotion of public health, welfare, and safety.
   (B)   The proposed activity and use is not reasonably anticipated to cause
violations, crime or disorderly conduct.
   (C)   The proposed activity will not entail unusual, extraordinary, or
burdensome expense or police operation by the village.
   (D)   The facilities desired have not been reserved for other use at the day
and hour requested on the application.
   (E)   The conditions of the Depot or Depot Park are deemed safe and/or
suitable for the event.
   (F)   The proposed activity and use shall not interfere with surrounding
businesses, residents, and/or traffic, and may require notification to
surrounding businesses and residents in a pre-determined time frame prior to
the rental event, as determined by the village.
   (G)   Certain proposed activities and use may require permission by the
Village Board of Trustees.
   (H)   Certain proposed activities and use may require an approved valid
permit from the East Dundee Fire Prevention District or other applicable
jurisdictions.
(Ord. 17-42, passed 8-7-2017; Am. Ord. 23-14, passed 3-20-2023)
§ 120.04 PERMIT FEES AND INSURANCE.
   (A)   The permit fees for the use of the Depot and/or Depot Park are per the
fee schedule in Chapter
37 of the Code of the Village of East Dundee.
   (B)   Additional fees may be assessed for additional services by the village
as stated in the current annual fee schedule.
   (C)   If village labor or equipment is requested and approved by the Village
Administrator, or designee, any associated costs will be charged to the
applicant.
   (D)   A valid certificate of insurance, in ACORD format, shall be filed in
amounts and coverages as described on the application form.
   (E)   Village-owned fence to be assembled and disassembled at the Depot Park
only by Village Public Works staff only or their designee.
   (F)   No other fencing is permitted at this location unless approved by the
Village Administrator, or designee, or the Village Board of Trustees.
(Ord. 17-42, passed 8-7-2017; Am. Ord. 23-14, passed 3-20-2023; Am. Ord. 23-38,
passed 9-18-2023)
§ 120.05 REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   A permit may be revoked at any time by the Village Administrator or
designee, for violation of any law or rules applicable to such event if in the
interest of public health, welfare or safety.
(Ord. 17-42, passed 8-7-2017; Am. Ord. 23-14, passed 3-20-2023)
§ 120.06 SUPERVISION/SECURITY.
   The village shall not provide any supervision or security for non-village
sponsored events. It will be the responsibility of the applicant/sponsor of the
event to provide any supervision or security that is reasonably expected to be
needed for the permitted event with review and approval of the Village
Administrator and/or designee.
(Ord. 17-42, passed 8-7-2017; Am. Ord. 23-14, passed 3-20-2023)
§ 120.07 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   (A)   All rules and regulations governing the conduct of persons and
operation of village property either contained within this Code or authorized
by the ordinances of the village are applicable to the Depot and Depot Park.
   (B)   The permit applicant and its guests, agents or other third-parties
present shall comply with all applicable village and state laws and the rules
and regulations that are included as part of the application as filed by the
applicant.
(Ord. 17-42, passed 8-7-2017; Am. Ord. 23-14, passed 3-20-2023)
CHAPTER 121: RAFFLE LICENSE
Section
   
121.01   Purpose
   
121.02   Definitions
   
121.03   Raffle license required
   
121.04   Multiple raffles
   
121.05   Licensee qualifications
   
121.06   License application
   
121.07   License issuance
   
121.08   Conduct of raffles
   
121.09   Raffles manager
   
121.10   Records
   
121.11   Prize limitations
   
121.12   Chance limitation
 
   
121.99   Penalty
§ 121.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to regulate and control the conduct of
raffles within the corporate limits of the village.
(Ord. 17-44, passed 8-21-2017)
§ 121.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
   ANNUAL AGGREGATE RETAIL VALUE OF PRIZES. The total retail value of all
prizes to be raffled by any organization, licensed under this chapter, during
the license period.
   BUSINESS ORGANIZATION. A voluntary organization composed of individuals and
businesses who have joined together to advance the commercial, financial,
industrial and civic interests of a community.
   CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION. An organization or institution organized and
operated to benefit an indefinite number of the public. The service rendered to
those eligible for benefits must also confer some benefit upon the public.
   EDUCATION ORGANIZATION. An organization or institution organized and
operated to provide systematic instruction in useful branches of learning by
methods common to schools and institutions of learning which compare favorably
in their scope and intensity with the course of study presented in tax-
supported schools.
   FRATERNAL ORGANIZATION. An organization of persons having a common interest,
the primary interest of which is to both promote the welfare of its members and
to provide assistance to the general public in such a way as to lessen the
burdens of government by caring for those who otherwise would be cared for by
the government.
   LABOR ORGANIZATION. An organization composed of workers organized with the
objective of the betterment of conditions of those engaged in such pursuit and
the development of a higher degree of efficiency in their respective
occupations.
   LICENSEE. An organization which has been issued a license to operate a
raffle.
   NET PROCEEDS. The gross receipts from the conduct of raffles, less
reasonable sums expended for prizes, local license fees and other reasonable
operating expenses incurred as a result of operating a raffle.
   NONPROFIT. An organization organized, operated and conducted on a not-for-
profit basis with no personal profit incurring to anyone as a result of said
operation.
   PERSON. An individual, firm, organization, public or private corporation,
government, partnership or unincorporated association.
   RAFFLE. A form of lottery, as defined in Section 28-2(b) of the "Criminal
Code of 1961," conducted by an organization licensed under this chapter in
which:
      (1)   The player pays or agrees to pay something of value for a chance,
represented and differentiated by a number or by a combination of numbers or by
some other medium, one or more of which chances is to be designated the winning
chance;
      (2)   The winning chance is to be determined through a drawing or by some
other method based on an element of chance by an act or set of acts on the part
of persons conducting or connected with the lottery, except that the winning
chance shall not be determined by the outcome of a publicly exhibited sporting
contest.
   RELIGIOUS ORGANIZATION. Any church, congregation, society or organization
founded for the purpose of religious worship.
   VETERANS' ORGANIZATION. An organization or association comprised of members
of which substantially all are individuals who are veterans or spouses, widows
or widowers of veterans, the primary purpose of which is to promote the welfare
of its members and to provide assistance to the general public in such a way as
to confer a public benefit.
(Ord. 17-44, passed 8-21-2017)
§ 121.03 RAFFLE LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person or organization to conduct or operate a
raffle or to sell, offer for sale, convey, issue or otherwise transfer for
value a chance on a raffle without first having obtained a license therefor
pursuant to this chapter.
(Ord. 17-44, passed 8-21-2017) Penalty, see §
121.99
§ 121.04 MULTIPLE RAFFLES.
   A person eligible for licensure under this chapter desiring to hold more
than one raffle during the license period may apply for a multiple raffle
license. For purposes of this section only, a "raffle" is considered to be a
single location and time of determining a winning chance(s). Multiple prizes
and drawings may be held at any one time and location.
(Ord. 17-44, passed 8-21-2017)
§ 121.05 LICENSEE QUALIFICATIONS.
   (A)   Licenses shall be issued only to bona fide religious, charitable,
labor, business, fraternal, educational or veterans' organizations that operate
without profit to their member and which have been in existence continuously
for a period of five years immediately before making application for a raffle
license and which have had during that five-year period a bona fide membership
engaged in carrying out their objects, or to a non-profit fundraising
organization that the Village Administrator, or his or her designee, determines
is organized for the sole purpose of providing financial assistance to an
identified individual or group of individuals suffering extreme financial
hardship as the result of an illness, disability, accident or disaster.
   (B)   The following are ineligible for any license under this chapter:
      (1)   Any person who has been convicted of a felony;
      (2)   Any person who is or has been a professional gambler or gambling
promoter;
      (3)   Any person who is not of good moral character;
      (4)   Any organization in which a person defined in division (B)(1), (B)
(2), or (B)(3) above has a proprietary, equitable or credit interest, or in
which such person is active or employed;
      (5)   Any organization in which a person defined in division (B)(1), (B)
(2), or (B)(3) above is an officer, director or employee, whether compensated
or not; and,
      (6)   Any organization in which a person defined in division (B)(1), (B)
(2), or (B)(3) above is to participate in the management or operation of a
raffle as defined herein.
(Ord. 17-44, passed 8-21-2017)
§ 121.06 LICENSE APPLICATION.
   Any person seeking to conduct or operate a raffle shall file an application
for a license with the Village Administrator, or his or her designee, on forms
provided by the village. Said application shall contain the following
information:
   (A)   The name, address and type of organization;
   (B)   The length of existence of the organization and, if incorporated, the
date and state of incorporation;
   (C)   The name, address, telephone number, and date of birth of the
organization's presiding officer, secretary, raffles manager and any other
members responsible for the conduct and operation of the raffle;
   (D)   The aggregate retail value of all prizes to be awarded in the raffle;
   (E)   The maximum retail value of each price to be award in the raffle;
   (F)   The maximum price charged for each raffle chance issued or sold;
   (G)   The maximum number of raffle chances to be issued;
   (H)   The area or areas in which the raffle chances will be sold or issued;
   (I)   The time period during which raffle chances will be issued or sold;
   (J)   The date, time and location at which winning chances will be
determined;
   (K)   A sworn statement attesting to the not for profit character of the
applicant organization, signed by the presiding officer and secretary of that
organization; and,
   (L)   A certificate signed by the presiding officer of the applicant
organization attesting to the fact that the information contained in the
application is true and correct.
(Ord. 17-44, passed 8-21-2017)
§ 121.07 LICENSE ISSUANCE.
   The Village Administrator, or his or her designee, shall review all raffle
license applications within ten days from the date of application and shall,
within 30 days from the date of application, approve or deny a license
application. If an application is approved, the Village Administrator, or his
or her designee, shall forthwith issue a license to the applicant. A raffle
license shall be valid for a period of one year from the effective date.
(Ord. 17-44, passed 8-21-2017)
§ 121.08 CONDUCT OF RAFFLES.
   The operation and conduct of raffles are subject to the following
restrictions:
   (A)   The entire net proceeds of any raffle must be exclusively devoted to
the lawful purpose of the licensee;
   (B)   No person except a bona fide member of the licensee may participate in
the management or operation of the raffle;
   (C)   No person may receive remuneration or profit for participating in the
management or operation of the raffle;
   (D)   A licensee may rent a premises on which to determine the winning
chance or chances in a raffle only from an organization which is also licensed
under this chapter;
   (E)   Raffle chances may be sold, offered for sale, conveyed, issued or
otherwise transferred for value only within the area specified on the license;
and the winning chances may be determined only at the location specified on the
license;
   (F)   No person under the age of 18 years may participate in the operation
or conduct of raffles. A person under the age of 18 years may be within the
area where winning chances in a raffle are being determined only when
accompanied by his parent or legal guardian.
(Ord. 17-44, passed 8-21-2017) Penalty, see §
121.99
§ 121.09 RAFFLES MANAGER.
   The operation and conduct of a raffle shall be under the supervision of a
single raffle manager designated by an application to the village and
subsequent licensee if approved. The raffle manager shall provide a valid ACORD
Certificate of Liability Insurance policy equal to or greater than $1,000,000
aggregate. The following language must be included on the certificate of
liability: “The Village of East Dundee and its elected and appointed officers,
officials, agents, and employees are included as additional insureds.”
(Ord. 17-44, passed 8-21-2017; Am. Ord. 24-22, passed 6-24-2024)
§ 121.10 RECORDS.
   (A)   Each licensee shall keep records of its gross receipts, expenses and
net proceeds for each single gathering or occasion at which winning chances are
determined. All deductions from gross receipts for each single gathering or
occasion shall be documented with receipts or other records indicating the
amount, a description of the purchased item or service or other reason for the
deduction, and the recipient. The distribution of net proceeds shall be
itemized as to payee, purpose, amount and date of payment.
   (B)   Gross receipts from the operation of raffles shall be segregated from
other revenues of the licensee, including bingo gross receipts. If bingo games
are also conducted by the same nonprofit organization pursuant to license
therefor issued by the State Department of Revenue, proceeds must be placed in
a separate account. Each licensee shall keep separate records of its raffles.
The person who accounts for gross receipts, expenses and net proceeds from the
operation of raffles shall not be the same person who accounts for other
revenues of the licensee.
   (C)   Each licensee shall report promptly after the conclusion of each
raffle to its membership. Each raffle licensee shall report promptly to the
Village Administrator, or his or her designee, its gross receipts, expenses and
net proceeds from the raffle, and the distribution of net proceeds itemized as
required herein.
   (D)   Raffle records shall be preserved for three years, and organizations
shall make available their records relating to the operation of raffles for
public inspection at reasonable times and places.
(Ord. 17-44, passed 8-21-2017) Penalty, see §
121.99
§ 121.11 PRIZE LIMITATIONS.
   The annual aggregate retail value of all prizes awarded in a single year by
a single raffle licensee shall not exceed $10,000, and the retail value of any
one prize awarded in a single raffle shall not exceed $10,000.
(Ord. 17-44, passed 8-21-2017) Penalty, see §
121.99
§ 121.12 CHANCE LIMITATION.
   The price which may be charged for each raffle chance sold, offered for
sale, conveyed, issued or otherwise transferred for value shall not exceed
$500.
(Ord. 17-44, passed 8-21-2017) Penalty, see §
121.99
§ 121.99 PENALTY.
   Failure to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter shall
constitute a violation; and any person, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined
not more than $750 for each offense. Each day the violation continues shall
constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 17-44, passed 8-21-2017)
CHAPTER 122:
CANNABIS BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENTS
Section
   
122.01   Purpose and applicability
   
122.02   Definitions
   
122.03   Consumption, purchase, acceptance or possession prohibited
   
122.04   Building enhancements
   
122.05   Conduct of employees and agents; supervisor on premises
   
122.06   Compliance with other regulations
   
122.07   On-site consumption or use
   
122.08   Signage prohibiting sales
   
122.09   Advertisement prohibited
   
122.10   Other restrictions on cannabis dispensing organizations
§ 122.01 PURPOSE AND APPLICABILITY.
   It is the intent and purpose of this chapter to provide regulations
regarding the cultivation, processing and dispensing of cannabis occurring
within the corporate limits of the Village of East Dundee. Such facilities
shall comply with all regulations provided in the Cannabis Regulation and Tax
Act (ILCS Chapter 410, Act 705, §§ 1 et seq.) (“Act”) and the Compassionate Use
of Medical Cannabis Program Act (ILCS Chapter 410, Act 130, §§ 1 et seq.)
(“Medical Cannabis Act”), as they may be amended from time to time, and
regulations promulgated thereunder, and the regulations provided below. In the
event that either the Act or Medical Cannabis Act is amended, the more
restrictive of the state or local regulations shall apply.
(Ord. 20-03, passed 2-25-2020)
§ 122.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CANNABIS BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENT. A cultivation center, craft grower,
processing organization, infuser organization, dispensing organization or
transporting organization. As used in this section, a cannabis business
establishment shall also include all medical cannabis cultivation centers and
dispensaries licensed under the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program
Act (ILCS Chapter 410, Act 130, §§ 1 et seq.).
   CANNABIS CRAFT GROWER. A facility operated by an organization or business
that is licensed by the Illinois Department of Agriculture to cultivate, dry,
cure and package cannabis and perform other necessary activities to make
cannabis available for sale at a dispensing organization or use at a processing
organization, per the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act ( ILCS Chapter 410, Act
705, §§ 1 et seq.), as it may be amended from time to time, and regulations
promulgated thereunder.
   CANNABIS CULTIVATION CENTER. A facility operated by an organization or
business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of Agriculture to
cultivate, process, transport and perform necessary activities to provide
cannabis and cannabis-infused products to licensed cannabis business
establishments, per the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act (ILCS Chapter 410, Act
705, §§ 1 et seq.), as it may be amended from time to time, and regulations
promulgated thereunder.
   CANNABIS DISPENSING ORGANIZATION OR DISPENSARY. A facility operated by an
organization or business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of
Financial and Professional Regulation to acquire cannabis from licensed
cannabis business establishments for the purpose of selling or dispensing
cannabis, cannabis-infused products, cannabis seeds, paraphernalia or related
supplies to purchasers or to qualified registered medical cannabis patients and
caregivers, per the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act (ILCS Chapter 410, Act 705,
§§ 1 et seq.), as it may be amended from time to time, and regulations
promulgated thereunder.
   CANNABIS INFUSER ORGANIZATION OR INFUSER. A facility operated by an
organization or business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of
Agriculture to directly incorporate cannabis or cannabis concentrate into a
product formulation to produce a cannabis-infused product, per the Cannabis
Regulation and Tax Act (ILCS Chapter 410, Act 705, §§ 1 et seq.), as it may be
amended from time to time, and regulations promulgated thereunder.
   CANNABIS PROCESSING ORGANIZATION OR PROCESSOR. A facility operated by an
organization or business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of
Agriculture to either extract constituent chemicals or compounds to produce
cannabis concentrate or incorporate cannabis or cannabis concentrate into a
product formulation to produce a cannabis product, per the Cannabis Regulation
and Tax Act (ILCS Chapter 410, Act 705, §§ 1 et seq.), as it may be amended
from time to time, and regulations promulgated thereunder.
   CANNABIS TRANSPORTING ORGANIZATION OR TRANSPORTER. An organization or
business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of Agriculture to
transport cannabis on behalf of a cannabis business establishment or a
community college licensed under the Community College Cannabis Vocational
Training Pilot Program, per the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act (ILCS Chapter
410, Act 705, §§ 1 et seq.), as it may be amended from time to time, and
regulations promulgated thereunder.
   PERSON. Any person, firm, corporation, association, club, society or other
organization, including any owner, manager, proprietor, employee, volunteer or
agent.
(Ord. 20-03, passed 2-25-2020)
§ 122.03 CONSUMPTION, PURCHASE, ACCEPTANCE OR POSSESSION PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to sell, give
away, deliver, possess with intent to sell at wholesale or retail, possess with
intent to give away or deliver for promotional purposes, either retail or
wholesale, any cannabis, cannabis-infused products, cannabis seeds,
paraphernalia or related supplies within the village without first having
obtained a license from the state. A dispensing organization’s license allows
for a dispensary to be operated only at a single location.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to sell, give
away, deliver, possess with intent to sell at wholesale or retail, possess with
intent to give away or deliver for promotional purposes, either retail or
wholesale, any cannabis, cannabis-infused products, cannabis seeds,
paraphernalia or related supplies to persons under 21 years of age and in
contravention to the provisions of the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act (ILCS
Chapter 410, Act 705, §§ 1 et seq.). The prohibitions set forth in this section
shall not apply to persons who consume, purchase, or possess cannabis,
cannabis-infused products, cannabis seeds, paraphernalia or related supplies
pursuant to the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program, ILCS Chapter
410, Act 130, §§ 1 et seq.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person under 21 years of age to consume,
purchase, accept as a gift of or have cannabis, cannabis-infused products,
cannabis seeds, paraphernalia or related supplies in his or her possession or
in his or her bloodstream. The prohibitions set forth in this section shall not
apply to persons who consume, purchase, or possess cannabis, cannabis-infused
products, cannabis seeds, paraphernalia or related supplies pursuant to the
Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program, ILCS Chapter 410, Act 130, §§ 1
et seq.
(Ord. 20-03, passed 2-25-2020) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 122.04 BUILDING ENHANCEMENTS.
   (A)   Any licensee of a cannabis business establishment shall install
building enhancements, such as security cameras, lighting or other improvements
to ensure the safety of employees and customers of the cannabis business
establishments, as well as its environs. Said improvements shall be determined
based on the specific characteristics of the floor plan for a cannabis business
establishment and the site on which it is located, consistent with the
requirements of the Act and the Medical Cannabis Act. The Village Administrator
or his or her designee may, at his or her discretion, require the cannabis
business establishment to install improvements and buildings enhancements
beyond the state’s requirements based on the specific characteristics of the
cannabis business establishment in order to ensure the safety of employees,
customers and village residents.
   (B)   A cannabis use establishment must keep all lighting outside and inside
the dispensary in good working order and wattage sufficient for security
cameras.
   (C)   Any cannabis business establishment shall install building
enhancements, following approval of a ventilation plan, so that no cannabis
odors shall be detectable outside of the establishment. The Village
Administrator or his or her designee may, at his or her discretion, require the
cannabis business establishment to install improvements and building
enhancements beyond the state’s requirements based on the specific
characteristics of the cannabis business establishment in order to ensure the
safety of employees, customers and village residents.
(Ord. 20-03, passed 2-25-2020)
§ 122.05 CONDUCT OF EMPLOYEES AND AGENTS; SUPERVISOR ON PREMISES.
   (A)   Any act or failure to act of an employee or agent of either the
licensee or a management company with respect to the licensed business shall be
deemed to be the act of the licensee. Any duty set forth in this chapter as a
duty of the licensee shall also be the duty of any agent or employee of the
licensee.
   (B)   No employee or other server of cannabis may consume or be permitted to
consume any cannabis product on the licensed premises while on duty or while
performing any duties of employment.
   (C)   No person, including any employee, manager, owner or agent of the
licensee may consume cannabis products on the licensed premises before or after
the permitted hours of operation.
   (D)   A person must be at least 21 years of age to sell cannabis products.
   (E)   A manager shall be on the premises at all times that the licensed
premises are open for business.
   (F)   A dispensing organization shall submit a list to the state of the
names of all service professionals that will work at the dispensary.
(Ord. 20-03, passed 2-25-2020)
§ 122.06 COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER REGULATIONS.
   (A)   All licensed premises shall be maintained in full compliance with all
other regulations of the state, the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, the
Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program Act and the village, including,
but not limited to, those relating to the storage or sale of food, sanitary
conditions, building and safety conditions.
   (B)   Applicants seeking to open a cannabis business establishment facility
shall provide the village with proof of state licensing approval prior to the
issuance by the village of a special use permit. Persons operating a cannabis
business establishment shall annually provide to the village all state
inspection reports and other information necessary to verify ongoing compliance
with state and village requirements. Applicants shall, after commencing
operations, provide to the village, within seven days of receipt, copies of any
notices, citations or other enforcement actions undertaken against the facility
by the state, along with an explanation as to what steps are being taken by the
applicant to bring the facility back into compliance.
   (C)   Cooperation with village. Cannabis business establishments and
property owners where such cannabis business establishments are located shall
provide access to village police, fire and code enforcement personnel during
periods when employees are present to verify compliance with this chapter and
other village ordinances. Cannabis business establishments and property owners
where such cannabis business establishments are located shall cooperate with
the village police, fire and code enforcement personnel in the provision of
security footage when requested, and in any related prosecution of any persons
who violate state law or local ordinances within a cannabis business
establishment and on properties where such organizations are located.
(Ord. 20-03, passed 2-25-2020)
§ 122.07 ON-SITE CONSUMPTION OR USE.
   No cannabis shall be smoked, eaten or otherwise consumed or ingested within
any cannabis business establishment unless specifically authorized by the
village pursuant to the establishment’s special use permit.
(Ord. 20-03, passed 2-25-2020)
§ 122.08 SIGNAGE PROHIBITING SALES.
   (A)   Signs informing the public of the age restrictions of this chapter,
shall be posted by every licensee in conspicuous view on the premises. Each
such sign shall state:
      The sale of cannabis products to persons under twenty-one (21) years of
age is prohibited by law. A photo identification showing proof of age shall be
required of everyone under twenty-seven (27) years of age desiring to purchase
cannabis products. Violations shall be reported to the Police Department.
   (B)   Said sign(s) shall be plainly visible and shall measure at least eight
and one-half inches in height and 11 inches in width. Lettering on said sign
shall be at least one-half inch in height. Said signs shall also inform the
public that the Village Police Department is to be contacted should the law be
violated.
   (C)   The signage requirement set forth in this section shall not apply to
any medical cannabis cultivation center or dispensary which operates
exclusively under a license issued pursuant to the Compassionate Use of Medical
Cannabis Program, ILCS Chapter 410, Act 130, §§ 1 et seq.
(Ord. 20-03, passed 2-25-2020)
§ 122.09 ADVERTISEMENT PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Cannabis business establishments cannot advertise cannabis or a
cannabis-infused product in any form or through any medium:
      (1)   Within 1,000 feet of school grounds, playground, hospital,
healthcare facility, recreation center or facility, child care center, public
park or library or any arcade that admits persons under age 21;
      (2)   On or in a public transit vehicle or public transit shelter;
      (3)   On a billboard as defined in §
156.02;
      (4)   On or in a publicly-owned or publicly-operated property; or
      (5)   Which contains information that:
         (a)   Is false or misleading;
         (b)   Promotes excessive consumption; or
         (c)   Depicts a person under 21 years of age consuming cannabis.
   (B)   This includes the image of a cannabis leaf or any image designed or
likely to appeal to minors, including cartoons, toys, animals or children, or
any other likeness to images, characters or phrases that are popularly used to
advertise to children, or any imitation of candy packaging or labeling or that
promotes consumption of cannabis.
(Ord. 20-03, passed 2-25-2020) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 122.10 OTHER RESTRICTIONS ON CANNABIS DISPENSING ORGANIZATIONS.
   (A)   Hours of operation. Cannabis dispensing organizations shall operate
only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.
   (B)   Product display. No products sold by a cannabis dispensing
organization shall be visible from the public street, sidewalk or other public
place.
   (C)   A dispensing organization may only accept cannabis deliveries into a
restricted access area. Deliveries may not be accepted through the public or
limited access areas unless otherwise approved under the Act or Medical
Cannabis Act.
   (D)   A dispensing organization must include the legal name of the
dispensary on the packaging of any cannabis product it sells.
   (E)   Dispensing organizations are prohibited from selling any product
containing alcohol except tinctures, which must be limited to containers that
are no larger than 100 milliliters.
   (F)   Dispensing organizations shall not:
      (1)   Sell cannabis, cannabis concentrate, or cannabis-infused products
in combination or bundled with each other or any other items for one price, and
each item of cannabis, concentrate, or cannabis-infused product must be
separately identified by quantity and price on the receipt;
      (2)   Sell clones or any other live plant material;
      (3)   Have fewer than two people working at the dispensary at any time
while the dispensary is open;
      (4)   Operate a dispensary if its video surveillance equipment is
inoperative;
      (5)   Operate a dispensary if the point-of-sale equipment is inoperative;
      (6)   Operate a dispensary if the state’s cannabis electronic
verification system is inoperative;
      (7)   Enter into agreements to allow persons who are not dispensing
organization agents to deliver cannabis or to transport cannabis to purchasers;
      (8)   Operate drive-through windows;
      (9)   Allow for the dispensing of cannabis or cannabis-infused products
in vending machines;
      (10)   Transport cannabis to residences or other locations where
purchasers may be for delivery;
      (11)   Produce or manufacture cannabis;
      (12)   Accept a cannabis product from an adult use cultivation center,
craft grower, infuser, dispensing organization, or transporting organization
unless it is pre-packaged and labeled in accordance with the Act and any rules
that may be adopted pursuant to the Act;
      (13)   Obtain cannabis or cannabis-infused products from outside the
State of Illinois;
      (14)   Sell cannabis or cannabis-infused products to a purchaser unless
the dispensary organization is licensed under the Compassionate Use of Medical
Cannabis Pilot Program, and the individual is registered under the
Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Pilot Program or the purchaser has been
verified to be over the age of 21;
      (15)   Violate any other requirements or prohibitions set by state rules.
(Ord. 20-03, passed 2-25-2020) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 123: VIDEO GAMING
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/16574ba874f17dfbd958615eed907c929c4100f2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7683.jpg]Publisher's Note: This Chapter has been AMENDED by new
legislation (Ord. 25-62, adopted 12-8-2025). The text of the amendment will be
incorporated below when the ordinance is codified.
Section
   
123.01   Applicability of provisions
   
123.02   Definitions
   
123.03   Supplemental video gaming license
   
123.04   Supplemental video gaming license application requirements
   
123.05   Application filing; renewals
   
123.06   Supplemental video gaming license fees
   
123.07   Operational requirements
   
123.08   Video gaming license revocation or suspension
   
123.09   Licensed establishments
   
123.10   Seizure of unauthorized video gaming terminals and gambling funds
   
123.11   Transferability
§ 123.01 APPLICABILITY OF PROVISIONS.
   Video gaming in accordance with the Video Gaming Act (ILCS Chapter 230, Act
40, §§ 1 et seq.) shall be permitted in the village in compliance with the
provisions of this chapter, except as otherwise provided, whether specifically
licensed or regulated under other provisions of this code or other ordinances.
(Ord. 24-35, passed 10-7-2024)
§ 123.02 DEFINITIONS.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/16574ba874f17dfbd958615eed907c929c4100f2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7683.jpg]Publisher's Note: This Section has been AMENDED by new
legislation (Ord. 25-62, adopted 12-8-2025). The text of the amendment will be
incorporated below when the ordinance is codified.
   (A)   Words or phrases as used herein shall be defined as provided by An Act
Relating to Alcoholic Liquors, passed by the Second Special Session of the 58th
General Assembly, ILCS Chapter 235, Act 5, §§ 1-1 et seq.
   (B)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLES. As defined in the Illinois Vehicle Code, ILCS
Chapter 625, Act 5, § 18b-101.
      GAMING CAFÉ. An establishment whose primary or a major focus is video
gaming, and the service of alcohol and food is secondary to the video gaming
operation, as determined by the Village Board.
      LICENSED ESTABLISHMENT. Any business licensed by the State of Illinois to
have or operate a video gaming terminal in the village, including any licensed
fraternal establishment, licensed veterans establishment, licensed truck stop
establishment, and licensed large truck stop establishment as those terms are
defined in the Video Gaming Act, ILCS Chapter 230, Act 40, § 5.
      LICENSED FRATERNAL ESTABLISHMENT. The location where a qualified
fraternal organization that derives its charter from a national fraternal
organization regularly meets.
      LICENSED LARGE TRUCK STOP ESTABLISHMENT. A facility located within three
road miles from a freeway interchange, as measured in accordance with the
Department of Transportation's rules regarding the criteria for the
installation of business signs: (i) that is at least a three-acre facility with
a convenience store; (ii) with separate diesel islands for fueling commercial
motor vehicles; (iii) that sells at retail more than 50,000 gallons of diesel
or biodiesel fuel per month; and (iv) with parking spaces for commercial motor
vehicles. The requirement of item (iii) of this definition may be met by
showing that estimated future sales or past sales average at least 50,000
gallons per month.
      LICENSED TRUCK STOP ESTABLISHMENT. A facility (i) that is at least a
three-acre facility with a convenience store; (ii) with separate diesel islands
for fueling commercial motor vehicles; (iii) that sells at retail more than
10,000 gallons of diesel or biodiesel fuel per month; and (iv) with parking
spaces for commercial motor vehicles. The requirement of item (iii) of this
definition may be met by showing that estimated future sales or past sales
average at least 10,000 gallons per month.
      LICENSED VETERANS ESTABLISHMENT. The location where a qualified veterans
organization that derives its charter from a national veterans organization
regularly meets.
      VIDEO GAMING TERMINAL. Any electronic video game machine that, upon
insertion of cash, is available to play or simulate the play of a video game,
including but not limited to, video poker, line up and blackjack, as authorized
by the Illinois Gaming Board utilizing a video display and microprocessors in
which the player may receive free games or credits that can be redeemed for
cash. The term does not include a machine that directly dispenses coins, cash
or tokens or is for amusement purposes only.
(Ord. 24-35, passed 10-7-2024)
§ 123.03 SUPPLEMENTAL VIDEO GAMING LICENSE.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/16574ba874f17dfbd958615eed907c929c4100f2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7683.jpg]Publisher's Note: This Section has been AMENDED by new
legislation (Ord. 25-62, adopted 12-8-2025). The text of the amendment will be
incorporated below when the ordinance is codified.
   (A)   No person, either as owner, lessee, manager, officer or agent, or in
any other capacity, shall operate or permit to be operated any video gaming
terminal, as defined herein, at any premises within the village without first
having obtained a video gaming license from the village. The license provided
for in this chapter shall allow a licensee to operate video gaming terminals at
the specified establishment.
   (B)   No applicant, including any person, either as owner, lessee, manager,
officer, or agent, shall be eligible for a video gaming license from the
village, nor shall an existing video gaming license holder be entitled to
maintain a video gaming license unless each of the following requirements are
met and continue to be met:
      (1)   The establishment holds a valid liquor license issued by the
Illinois Liquor Control Commission and the village;
      (2)   The applicant holds the appropriate certificate or license from the
Illinois Gaming Board permitting it to operate a video gaming terminal at such
establishment and is in good standing with same, may apply for and obtain a
supplemental video gaming license for the establishment from the village
pursuant to §
116.05(J) of Code of the Village of East Dundee;
      (3)   The establishment has been in operation at the same location for at
least six months at the time the application is filed;
      (4)   The establishment must maintain customer seating outside of the
gaming area but within the premises at a ratio of at least five seats for each
permitted video gaming terminal;
      (5)   The applicant is not in arrears in any tax, fee or bill due to the
village or State of Illinois;
      (6)   The applicant has completed and complies with all the application
requirements set forth in §
123.03 of this chapter and is not disqualified due to a felony, gambling
offense, or crime of moral turpitude;
      (7)   The establishment is located outside of a residential zoning
district;
      (8)   The establishment is not located within 100 feet of a school or
place of worship;
      (9)   Only establishments that hold 1) a valid liquor license from the
State of Illinois; and 2) a liquor license issued by the village Liquor Control
Commissioner can obtain a license to operate a video gaming terminal;
      (10)   No establishment shall operate a video gaming terminal without
having obtained a license and video gaming terminal sticker for each video
gaming terminal from the village pursuant to the video gaming license
application procedures of this Code;
      (11)   No establishment shall operate a gaming café in the B-1 downtown
business district.
   (C)   Large truck stop and regular truck stop establishments do not need to
meet the requirements set forth in §
123.03(B) of this chapter.
   (D)   All applications for a video gaming license must be approved by the
Village Board.
(Ord. 24-35, passed 10-7-2024)
§ 123.04 SUPPLEMENTAL VIDEO GAMING LICENSE APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS.
   The video gaming license applicant shall provide the following information
to the village on a form provided by the village:
   (A)   The legal name of the establishment;
   (B)   The business name of the establishment;
   (C)   The address of the establishment where the video gaming terminals are
to be located;
   (D)   The type of establishment, including whether it is classified as a
veteran, fraternal, regular truck stop, large truck stop or liquor
establishment and supporting documentation demonstrating the classification;
   (E)   A floor plan, drawn to scale using a computer, detailing the overall
layout of the establishment, including the location and count of dining
seating, the location and count of video gaming terminals and seating for said
terminals, and other significant features of the establishment, including exit
locations, restrooms, and other equipment. A high-resolution electronic copy of
the floor plan, as well as a paper printed copy (no smaller than 11 inches by
17 inches), shall be submitted at the time of application: hand-drawn floor
plans and floor plans not including a scale will not be accepted;
   (F)   The amount of time the establishment has been in business under the
ownership of the applicant at the location where video gaming is proposed to
take place;
   (G)   The business office address of the establishment if different from the
address of the establishment;
   (H)   In the case of a corporation, limited liability company, or trust, the
name and address of an agent authorized and designated to accept service on
behalf of the video gaming licensee;
   (I)   A phone number for the establishment;
   (J)   An e-mail address for the establishment;
   (K)   The name and address of every person owning more than a 5% share of
the establishment;
   (L)   The name, address, phone number, and e-mail address of any terminal
operator or distributor proposed to own, service or maintain video gaming
terminals at the establishment;
   (M)   A copy of the establishment's State of Illinois video gaming license;
   (N)   In the case of a corporation, limited liability company, or
partnership, a copy of the establishment's state certificate of good standing;
   (O)   A statement as to the number of video gaming terminals which the
establishment proposes to have on its premises, in accordance with §
123.07;
   (P)   A statement that the establishment is not in arrears in any tax, fee,
or bill due to the village or State of Illinois;
   (Q)   A statement that the establishment agrees to abide by all federal,
state, and local laws;
   (R)   A statement that no manager or owner with more than 5% interest in the
establishment has ever been convicted of a felony, a gambling offense, or a
crime of moral turpitude. In the event that an establishment cannot provide
such a statement, the establishment may apply for a certificate of
rehabilitation from the Village Administrator or the Village Administrator's
designee indicating that the individual who would disqualify the establishment
from obtaining the video gaming license has been rehabilitated and is no longer
a threat to violate the law. The Village Administrator or the Village
Administrator's designee may consider the nature of the offense, the length of
time since the offense, the length of time since release from custody, and
other factors to determine if the individual has been rehabilitated, such that
he or she is no longer likely to commit another offense.
(Ord. 24-35, passed 10-7-2024)
§ 123.05 APPLICATION FILING; RENEWALS.
   (A)   Applications shall be processed by the Village Clerk on a first come,
first served basis. Every application shall be date and time stamped upon
filing. An application received in the mail shall be considered filed on the
date and time it is received by the Village Clerk.
   (B)   Every video gaming license holder shall be required to file a renewal
application annually, which may contain the same or similar information as set
forth in §
123.04. Renewal applications shall be due on or before December 31 unless that
day falls on a holiday, in which case the Clerk may receive the application on
the following business day.
(Ord. 24-35, passed 10-7-2024)
§ 123.06 SUPPLEMENTAL VIDEO GAMING LICENSE FEES.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/16574ba874f17dfbd958615eed907c929c4100f2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7683.jpg]Publisher's Note: This Section has been AMENDED by new
legislation (Ord. 25-62, adopted 12-8-2025). The text of the amendment will be
incorporated below when the ordinance is codified.
   (A)   The fee for a supplemental video gaming license shall be $1,000 per
license year, and the fee for each video gaming terminal in an establishment in
the village shall be $500 per machine per license year. The terminal operator
and licensed establishment must share the video gaming terminal fee equally,
per ILCS Chapter 230, Act 40, § 65. The video gaming license fees shall not be
prorated or refunded.
   (B)   The application fee is not subject to reimbursement or refund upon
denial of a video gaming license.
   (C)   Said fees are not subject to proration or refund and are due prior to
issuance of the video gaming license.
(Ord. 24-35, passed 10-7-2024)
§ 123.07 OPERATIONAL REQUIREMENTS.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/16574ba874f17dfbd958615eed907c929c4100f2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7683.jpg]Publisher's Note: This Section has been AMENDED by new
legislation (Ord. 25-62, adopted 12-8-2025). The text of the amendment will be
incorporated below when the ordinance is codified.
   (A)   The number of video gaming terminals at any establishment shall be
limited as follows, which square footage shall apply to establishments that are
first approved by the village for a supplemental video gaming license on and
after July 18, 2022:
      (1)   There shall not be more than fewer of (a) six video gaming
terminals on the premises of any licensed establishment, licensed truck stop
establishment, licensed veterans establishment, or licensed fraternal
establishment, as defined in the Video Gaming Act (ILCS Chapter 230, Act 40);
and (b) one video gaming terminal per 750 square feet as measured by each of
interior floor area on the premises that is accessible to patrons and excluding
any unfinished basements.
      (2)   There shall not be more than the fewer of (a) ten video gaming
terminals on the premises of any large truck stop establishment, as defined in
the Video Gaming Act, (LCS Chapter 230, Act 40); and (b) one video gaming
terminal per 750 square feet as measured by each of interior floor area on the
premises that is accessible to patrons and excluding any unfinished basements.
   (B)   Video gaming terminals must be located in an area that is restricted
to persons over 21 years of age. The entrance to such area must be within the
view of at least one employee of the video gaming licensee.
   (C)   Those establishments that are licensed establishments, licensed
fraternal establishments, licensed veterans establishments, and licensed large
truck stop establishments, all as defined in the Video Gaming Act llLCS Chapter
230, Act 40), may operate video gaming terminals only during the hours of
operation for the consumption of alcoholic beverages at the establishment.
   (D)   Noise from video gaming terminals shall not extend beyond the portion
of the establishment within which video gaming terminals are located.
   (E)   Every licensed establishment shall comply with all provisions of the
Video Gaming Act and all rules, regulations, and restrictions imposed by the
Illinois Gaming Board.
(Ord. 24-35, passed 10-7-2024)
§ 123.08 VIDEO GAMING LICENSE REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION.
   (A)   The Village President, at any time, may give written notice to any
video gaming licensee within ten business days of any charge of a violation of
any of the provisions of this chapter in connection with the operation of any
video gaming terminal. The license may be revoked after a determination by the
Village Board that a violation has occurred and the video gaming license shall
be terminated.
   (B)   In the event of the revocation or denial of a video gaming license
under this section, such person shall not be issued any license provided for in
this chapter for one calendar year following the revocation or any appeal
thereof.
(Ord. 24-35, passed 10-7-2024)
§ 123.09 LICENSED ESTABLISHMENTS.
   Any business, liquor, or food licensee within the corporate limits of the
village that allows gambling to occur on premises in violation of this section
shall be subject to having its video gaming license immediately revoked for a
period of 60 days. Any business, liquor, or food licensee within the corporate
limits of the village that allows gambling to occur on premises in violation of
this chapter a second time shall have its video gaming license permanently
revoked and, thereafter, barred from obtaining any business, liquor, or food
license within the village.
(Ord. 24-35, passed 10-7-2024)
§ 123.10 SEIZURE OF UNAUTHORIZED VIDEO GAMING TERMINALS AND GAMBLING FUNDS.
   Any video gaming terminal which is not authorized by this chapter shall be
subject to immediate seizure and confiscation by the village. Any money or
other thing of value intrinsically related to acts of gambling not authorized
by this chapter shall be seized and forfeited as contraband. Disposition of
such video gaming terminal and funds seized or confiscated shall be made in
accordance with the law.
(Ord. 24-35, passed 10-7-2024)
§ 123.11 TRANSFERABILITY.
   Video gaming licenses are a personal privilege and nontransferable in
accordance with §
116.06 of this code.
(Ord. 24-35, passed 10-7-2024)
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
Chapter
   
130.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
   
131.   OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
   
132.   OFFENSES AGAINST PERSONS
   
133.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC MORALITY
   
134.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE
   
135.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC JUSTICE AND ADMINISTRATION
   
136.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY
   
137.   GAMBLING OFFENSES
   
138.   WEAPONS
   
139.   SMOKING BAN
CHAPTER 130: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
130.001   Short title
   
130.002   Purposes
   
130.003   Applicability of common law
   
130.004   Civil remedies preserved
   
130.005   Village criminal jurisdiction
   
130.006   Definitions
Rights of Defendant
   
130.020   Presumption of innocence and proof of guilt
   
130.021   Affirmative defense
   
130.022   Multiple prosecutions for same act
   
130.023   Effect of former prosecution
   
130.024   Administrative bond fees
Criminal Act and Mental State
   
130.035   Voluntary act
   
130.036   Possession as voluntary act
   
130.037   Mental state
   
130.038   Intent
   
130.039   Knowledge
   
130.040   Recklessness
   
130.041   Negligence
   
130.042   Ignorance or mistake
   
130.043   Absolute liability
Parties to Crime
   
130.055   Accountability for conduct of another
   
130.056   When accountability exists
   
130.057   Separate conviction of person accountable
   
130.058   Responsibility of corporation
   
130.059   Accountability for conduct of corporation
Responsibility
   
130.070   Infancy
   
130.071   Insanity
   
130.072   Intoxicated or drugged condition
   
130.073   Affirmative defense
Justifiable Use of Force; Exoneration
   
130.085   Use of force in defense of person
   
130.086   Use of force in defense of dwelling
   
130.087   Use of force in defense of other property
   
130.088   Use of force by aggressor
   
130.089   Peace officer’s use of force in making arrest
   
130.090   Private person’s use of force in making arrest
   
130.091   Private person’s use of force in resisting arrest
   
130.092   Force likely to cause death or great bodily harm
   
130.093   Use of force to prevent escape
   
130.094   Execution of death sentence
   
130.095   Compulsion
   
130.096   Entrapment
   
130.097   Necessity
   
130.098   Affirmative defense
Solicitation, Conspiracy and Attempt
   
130.110   Solicitation
   
130.111   Conspiracy
   
130.112   Defense
   
130.113   Attempt
   
130.114   Multiple convictions
   
130.115   Offense
 
   
130.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 130.001 SHORT TITLE.
   (A)   This General Offenses Code, Title XIII, shall be known and may be
cited as the “General Offenses Code.”
   (B)   Provisions herein may be cited as “this chapter,” “this subchapter,”
“this section” and the like.
(1981 Code, § 42.01, 1-1)
§ 130.002 PURPOSES.
   The provisions of this code shall be construed in accordance with the
general purposes hereof to:
   (A)   Forbid and prevent the commission of offenses;
   (B)   Define adequately the act and mental state which constitute each
offense and limit the condemnation of conduct as criminal when it is without
fault;
   (C)   Prescribe penalties which are proportionate to the seriousness of
offenses and which permit recognition of differences in rehabilitation
possibilities among individual offenders; and
   (D)   Prevent arbitrary or oppressive treatment of persons accused or
convicted of offenses.
(1981 Code, § 42.01, 1-2)
§ 130.003 APPLICABILITY OF COMMON LAW.
   (A)   No conduct constitutes an offense unless it is described as an offense
in this code or in another ordinance of the village.
   (B)   However, this provision does not affect the power of a court to punish
for contempt or to employ any sanction authorized by law for the enforcement of
an order or civil judgement.
(1981 Code, § 42.01, 1-3)
§ 130.004 CIVIL REMEDIES PRESERVED.
   This code does not bar, suspend or otherwise affect any right or liability
to damages, penalty, forfeiture or other remedy authorized by law to be
recovered or enforced in a civil action for any conduct which this code makes
punishable and the civil injury is not merged in the offense.
(1981 Code, § 42.01, 1-4)
§ 130.005 VILLAGE CRIMINAL JURISDICTION.
   (A)   A person is subject to prosecution in the village for an offense which
he or she commits, while either within or outside the village, by his or her
own conduct or that of another for which he or she is legally his or her own
conduct or that of another for which he or she is legally accountable, if:
      (1)   The offense is committed either wholly or partly within the
village;
      (2)   The conduct outside the village constitutes an attempt to commit an
offense within the village;
      (3)   The conduct outside the village constitutes a conspiracy to commit
an offense within the village and an act in furtherance of the conspiracy
occurs in the village; or
      (4)   The conduct within the village constitutes an attempt, solicitation
or conspiracy to commit in another jurisdiction an offense under the laws of
both the village and other jurisdiction.
   (B)   An offense is committed partly within the village, if either the
conduct which is an element of the offense or the result which is such an
element occurs within the village.
   (C)   An offense which is based on an omission to perform a duty imposed by
the law of the village is committed within the village, regardless of the
location of the offender at the time of the omission.
(1981 Code, § 42.01, 1-5)
§ 130.006 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this code, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACQUITTAL. A verdict or finding of not guilty of an offense, rendered by a
legally constituted jury or by a court of competent jurisdiction authorized to
try the case without a jury.
   ACT. A failure or omission to take action.
   ANOTHER. A person or persons, as defined in this code, other than the
offender.
   CONDUCT. An act or series of acts, and the accompanying mental state.
   CONVICTION. A judgement of conviction or sentence entered upon a plea of
guilty or upon a verdict or finding of guilty of an offense, rendered by a
legally constituted jury or by a court of competent jurisdiction authorized to
try the case without a jury.
   DWELLING. A building or portion thereof, a tent, a vehicle or other enclosed
space which is used or intended for use as a human habitation, home or
residence.
   INCLUDED OFFENSES. An offense which:
      (1)   Is established by proof of the same or less than all of the facts
or a less culpable mental state (or both), than that which is required to
establish the commission of the offense charged; or
      (2)   Consists of an attempt to commit the offense charged or an offense
included therein.
   INCLUDES. Comprehending among other particulars, without limiting the
generality of the foregoing word or phrase.
   MISDEMEANOR. Any offense for which a sentence to a term of imprisonment in
other than a penitentiary for less than one year may be imposed.
   OFFENSE. A violation of any statute or ordinance of the village.
   PEACE OFFICER. Any person who, by virtue of his or her office or public
employment, is vested by law with a duty to maintain public order or to make
arrests for offenses, whether that duty extends to all offenses or is limited
to a specific offenses.
   PERSON. An individual, public or private corporation, government,
partnership or unincorporated association.
   PROSECUTION. All legal proceedings by which a person’s liability for an
offense is determined, commencing with the return of the indictment or the
issuance of the information and including the final disposition of the case
upon appeal.
   PUBLIC EMPLOYEE. A person, other than a public officer, who is authorized to
perform any official function on behalf of, and is paid by, the state or any of
its political subdivisions.
   PUBLIC OFFICER. A person who is elected to office pursuant to statute or
ordinance or who is appointed to an office which is established and the
qualifications and duties of which are prescribed, by statute or ordinance to
discharge a public duty for the village.
   REASONABLE BELIEF. The person concerned, acting as a reasonable human,
believes that the described facts exist.
   SOLICIT or SOLICITATION. To command, authorize, urge, incite, request or
advises another to commit an offense.
   STATUTE or ORDINANCE. The constitution or an act of the Board of Trustees of
the village.
   VILLAGE.
      (1)   The Village of East Dundee and all the land and water in respect to
which the Village of East Dundee has either exclusive or concurrent
jurisdiction and air space above the land and water.
      (2)   OTHER VILLAGE or OTHER MUNICIPALITY means any other village or
other municipality in the state.
(ILCS Chapter 720, Act 5, §§ 2.05 et seq.) (1981 Code, § 42.02)
RIGHTS OF DEFENDANT
§ 130.020 PRESUMPTION OF INNOCENCE AND PROOF OF GUILT.
   Every person is presumed innocent until proven guilty. No person shall be
convicted of any offense unless his or her guilt thereof is proved beyond a
reasonable doubt.
(ILCS Chapter 720, Act 5, § 3-1) (1981 Code, § 42.03, 3-1)
§ 130.021 AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSE.
   (A)   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSE. Unless the village’s evidence raises the issue
involving the alleged defense, the defendant, to raise the issue, must prevent
some evidence thereon.
   (B)   If the issue involved in an affirmative defense is raised, then the
village must sustain the burden of proving the defendant guilty beyond a
reasonable doubt as to that issue together with all the other elements of the
offense.
(ILCS Chapter 720, Act 5, § 3-2) (1981 Code, § 42.03, 3-2)
§ 130.022 MULTIPLE PROSECUTIONS FOR SAME ACT.
   (A)   When the same conduct of a defendant may establish the commission of
more than one offense, the defendant may be prosecuted for each such offense.
   (B)   If the several offenses are known to the proper prosecuting officer at
the time of the commencing the prosecution and are within the jurisdiction of a
single court, they must be prosecuted in a single prosecution, except as
provided in division (C) below, if they are based on the same act.
   (C)   When two or more offenses are charged as required by division (B)
above, the court, in the interest of justice, may order that one or more of the
charges shall be tried separately.
(ILCS Chapter 720, Act 5, § 3-3) (1981 Code, § 42.03, 3-3)
§ 130.023 EFFECT OF FORMER PROSECUTION.
   (A)   (1)   A prosecution is barred if the defendant was formerly prosecuted
for the same offense, based upon the same facts, if the former prosecution:
         (a)   Resulted in either a conviction or an acquittal or in a
determination that the evidence was insufficient to warrant a conviction;
         (b)   Was terminated by a final order or judgement, even if entered
before trial, which required a determination inconsistent with any fact or
legal proposition necessary to a conviction in the subsequent prosecution; or
         (c)   Was terminated improperly after the jury was impaneled and sworn
or, in a trial before a court without a jury, after first witness was sworn,
but before findings were rendered by the trier of facts or after a plea of
guilty was accepted by the court.
      (2)   A conviction of an included offense is an acquittal of the offenses
charged.
   (B)   A prosecution is barred if the defendant was formerly prosecuted for a
different offense or for the same offense based upon different facts, if the
former prosecution:
      (1)   Resulted in either a conviction or an acquittal and the subsequent
prosecution is for an offense of which the defendant could have been convicted
on the former prosecution; or was for an offense with which the defendant
should have been charged on the former prosecution, as provided herein unless
the court ordered a separate trial of the charge; or was for an offense which
involves the same conduct unless each prosecution required proof of a fact not
required on the other prosecution or the offense was not consummated when the
former trial began;
      (2)   Was terminated by a final order or judgement even if entered before
trial, which required a determination inconsistent with any fact necessary to a
conviction in the subsequent prosecution; or
      (3)   Was terminated improperly under the circumstances stated in
division (A) above and the subsequent prosecution is for an offense of which
the defendant could have been convicted if the former prosecution had not been
terminated improperly.
   (C)   A prosecution is barred if the defendant was formerly prosecuted in a
Circuit Court of Kane County or in a sister Circuit Court in Illinois for an
offense which is within the concurrent jurisdiction of the village, if the
former prosecution:
      (1)   Resulted in either a conviction or an acquittal and the subsequent
prosecution is for the same conduct unless each prosecution requires proof of
fact not required in the other prosecution or the offense was not consummated
when the former trial began; or
      (2)   Was terminated by a final order or judgement, even if entered
before trial, which required a determination inconsistent with any fact
necessary to a conviction in the prosecution in the village.
   (D)   However, a prosecution is not barred within the meaning hereof if the
former prosecution:
      (1)   Was before a court which lacked jurisdiction over the defendant or
the offense; or
      (2)   Was procured by the defendant without the knowledge of the proper
prosecuting officer and with the purpose of avoiding the sentence which
otherwise might be imposed; or if subsequent proceedings resulted in the
invalidation, setting aside, reversal or vacating of the conviction unless the
defendant was thereby adjudged not guilty.
(ILCS Chapter 720, Act 5, § 3-4) (1981 Code, § 42.03, 3-4)
§ 130.024 ADMINISTRATIVE BOND FEES.
   When posting bail or bond on any legal process, civil or criminal, or on any
bookable arrest, including warrant, an administrative fee shall be assessed by
the village, as established in the Annual Fee Schedule.
(Ord. 07-05, passed 2-19-2007)
CRIMINAL ACT AND MENTAL STATE
§ 130.035 VOLUNTARY ACT.
   A material element of every offense is a voluntary act, which includes an
omission to perform a duty which he or she is physically capable of performing.
(ILCS Chapter 720, Act 5, § 4-1) (1981 Code, § 42.04, 4-1)
§ 130.036 POSSESSION AS VOLUNTARY ACT.
   Possession is a voluntary act if the offender knowingly procured or received
the thing possessed or was aware of his or her control thereof for sufficient
time to have been able to terminate his or her possession.
(ILCS Chapter 720, Act 5, § 4-2) (1981 Code, § 42.04, 4-2)
§ 130.037 MENTAL STATE.
   (A)   A person is not guilty of an offense, other than an offense which
involves absolute liability, unless, with respect to each element described by
the statute defining the offense, he or she acts while having one of the mental
states described herein.
   (B)   (1)   If the statute defining an offense prescribed a particular
mental state with respect to the offense as a whole without distinguishing
among the elements thereof, the prescribed mental state applies to each such
element.
      (2)   If the statute does not prescribe a particular mental state
applicable to an element of an offense, other than an offense which involves
absolute liability, any mental state, defined herein, is applicable.
   (C)   Knowledge that certain conduct constitutes an offense or knowledge of
the existence, meaning or application of the statute defining an offense is not
an offense unless the statute defines it as such.
(ILCS Chapter 720, Act 5, § 4-3) (1981 Code, § 42.04, 4-3)
§ 130.038 INTENT.
   A person intends or acts intentionally or with intent to accomplish a result
or engage in conduct, described by the statute defining the offense, when his
or her conscious objective or purpose is to accomplish that result or engage in
that conduct.
(ILCS Chapter 720, Act 5, § 4-4) (1981 Code, § 42.04, 4-4)
§ 130.039 KNOWLEDGE.
   A person knows or acts knowingly or with knowledge of:
   (A)   The nature or attendant circumstances of his or her conduct, described
by the statute defining the offense, when he or she is consciously aware that
his or her conduct is of a nature or that the circumstances exist; (Knowledge
of a material fact includes awareness of the substantial probability that the
fact exists.)
   (B)   The result of his or her conduct, described by the statute defining
the offense, when he or she is consciously aware that the result is practically
certain to be caused by his or her conduct; and
   (C)   Conduct performed knowingly or with knowledge is performed willfully,
within the meaning of a statute using the latter term unless the statute
clearly requires another meaning.
(ILCS Chapter 720, Act 5, § 4-5) (1981 Code, § 42.04, 4-5)
§ 130.040 RECKLESSNESS.
   (A)   A person is reckless or acts recklessly when he or she conscious
disregards a substantial and unjustifiable risk that circumstances exist or
that a result will follow, described by the statute defining the offense and
the disregard constitutes a gross deviation from the standard of care which a
reasonable person would exercise in the situation.
   (B)   An act performed recklessly is performed wantonly, within the meaning
of a statute using the latter term, unless the statute clearly requires another
meaning.
(ILCS Chapter 720, Act 5, § 4-6) (1981 Code, § 42.04, 4-6)
§ 130.041 NEGLIGENCE.
   A person is negligent or acts negligently when he or she fails to be aware
of a substantial and unjustifiable risk that circumstances exist or a result
will follow, described by the statute defining the offense and the failure
constitutes a substantial deviation from the standard care which a reasonable
person would exercise in the situation.
(ILCS Chapter 720, Act 5, § 4-7) (1981 Code, § 42.04, 4-7)
§ 130.042 IGNORANCE OR MISTAKE.
   (A)   A person’s ignorance or mistake as to a matter of fact or law, except
as provided herein, is a defense if it negates the existence of a mental state
which the statute prescribes with respect to an element of the offense.
   (B)   A person’s reasonable belief that his or her conduct does not
constitute an offense is a defense if:
      (1)   The offense is defined by an administrative regulation or order
which is not known to him or her has not been published or otherwise made
reasonably available to him or her, and he or she could not have acquired the
knowledge by the exercise of due diligence pursuant to facts known to him or
her;
      (2)   He or she acts in reliance upon a statute which later determined to
be invalid;
      (3)   He or she acts in reliance upon an order or opinion of an Illinois
Appellate or Supreme Court or a United States Appellate Court later overruled
or reversed; or
      (4)   He or she acts in reliance upon an official interpretation of the
statute, regulation or order defining the offense, made by a public officer or
agency legally authorized to interpret the statute.
   (C)   Although a person’s ignorance or mistake of fact or law or reasonable
belief, described in this section, is a defense to the offense charged, he or
she may be convicted of an included offense of which he or she would be guilty
if the fact or law were as he or she believed it to be.
   (D)   A defense based upon this section is an affirmative defense.
(ILCS Chapter 720, Act 5, § 4-8) (1981 Code, § 42.04, 4-8)
§ 130.043 ABSOLUTE LIABILITY.
   A person may be guilty of an offense without having, as to each element
thereof, one of the mental states described in §§
130.038 through
130.041 if:
   (A)   The offense is a misdemeanor which is not punishable by incarceration
or by fine exceeding $1,000; or
   (B)   The statute defining the offense clearly indicates a legislative
purpose to impose absolute liability for the conduct prescribed.
(ILCS Chapter 720, Act 5, § 4-9) (1981 Code, § 42.04, 4-9)
Cross-reference:
   Responsibility, see §§
130.070 et seq.
PARTIES TO CRIME
§ 130.055 ACCOUNTABILITY FOR CONDUCT OF ANOTHER.
   A person is responsible for conduct which is an element of an offense if the
conduct is either that of the person himself or herself or that of another and
he or she is legally accountable for the conduct, as provided in §
130.056, or both.
(ILCS Chapter 720, Act 5, § 5-1) (1981 Code, § 42.05, 5-1)
§ 130.056 WHEN ACCOUNTABILITY EXISTS.
   A person is legally accountable for the conduct of another when:
   (A)   Having a mental state described by the statute defining the offense,
he or she causes another to perform the conduct and the other person in fact or
by reason of legal incapacity lacks a mental state;
   (B)   The statute defining the offense makes him or her so accountable; or
   (C)   (1)   Either before or during the commission of an offense and with
the intent to promote or facilitate the commission, he or she solicits, aids,
abets, agrees or attempts to aid, the other person in the planning or
commission of the offense.
      (2)   However, a person is not so accountable unless the statute defining
the offense provides otherwise, if:
         (a)   He or she is victim if the offense committed;
         (b)   The offense is so defined that his conduct was inevitability
incident to its commission; or
         (c)   Before the commission of the offense he or she terminates his or
her effort to promote or facilitate the commission and does one of the
following: wholly deprives his or her prior efforts of effectiveness in the
commission or gives timely warning to the proper law enforcement authorities or
otherwise makes proper effort to prevent the commission of the offense.
(ILCS Chapter 720, Act 5, § 5-2) (1981 Code, § 42.05, 5-2)
§ 130.057 SEPARATE CONVICTION OF PERSON ACCOUNTABLE.
   A person who is legally accountable for the conduct of another which is an
element of an offense may be convicted upon proof that the offense was
committed and that he or she was so accountable, although the other person
claimed to have committed the offense has not been prosecuted or convicted or
has been convicted of a different offense or degree of offense, is not amenable
to justice or has been acquitted.
(ILCS Chapter 720, Act 5, § 5-3) (1981 Code, § 42.05, 5-3)
§ 130.058 RESPONSIBILITY OF CORPORATION.
   (A)   A corporation may be prosecuted for the commission of an offense if,
but only if:
      (1)   The offense is a misdemeanor, is defined hereby or is defined by
another statute which clearly indicates a legislative purpose to impose
liability on a corporation; and an agent of the corporation performs the
conduct which is an element of the offense while acting within the scope of his
or her office or employment and in behalf of the corporation, except that any
limitation in the defining statute, concerning the corporation’s accountability
for certain agents or under certain circumstances, is applicable; or
      (2)   The commission of the offense is authorized, requested, commanded
or performed, by the board of directors or by a high managerial agent who is
acting within the scope of his or her employment in behalf of the corporation.
   (B)   (1)   A corporation’s proof, by a preponderance of the evidence, that
the high managerial agent having supervisory responsibility over the conduct
which is the subject matter of the offense exercised due diligence to prevent
the commission of the offense, is a defense to a prosecution for any offense to
which division (A)(1) above refers, other than of offense for which absolute
liability is imposed.
      (2)   This division is inapplicable if the legislative purpose of the
statute defining the offense is inconsistent with the provisions of this
division.
   (C)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      AGENT. Any director, officer, servant, employee or other person who is
authorized to act in behalf of the corporation.
      HIGH MANAGERIAL AGENT. An officer of the corporation or any agent who has
a position of comparable authority for the formulation of corporate policy or
the supervision of subordinate employees in a managerial capacity.
(ILCS Chapter 720, Act 5, § 5-4) (1981 Code, § 42.05, 5-4)
§ 130.059 ACCOUNTABILITY FOR CONDUCT OF CORPORATION.
   (A)   A person is legally accountable for conduct which is an element of an
offense and which, in the name or in behalf of a corporation he or she performs
or causes to be performed, to the same extent as if the conduct were performed
in his or her own name or behalf.
   (B)   An individual who has been convicted of an offense by reason of his or
her legal accountability for the conduct of a corporation is subject to the
punishment authorized by law for an individual upon conviction of the offense,
although only a lesser or different punishment is authorized for the
corporation.
(ILCS Chapter 720, Act 5, § 5-5) (1981 Code, § 42.05, 5-5)
RESPONSIBILITY
§ 130.070 INFANCY.
   No person shall be convicted of any offense unless he or she had attained
his or her thirteenth birthday at the time the offense was committed.
(ILCS Chapter 720, Act 5, § 6-1) (1981 Code, § 42.06, 6-1)
§ 130.071 INSANITY.
   (A)   A person is not criminally responsible for conduct if at the time of
the conduct, as a result of mental disease or mental defect, he or she lacks
substantial capacity either to appreciate the criminality of his or her conduct
or to conform his or her conduct to the requirements of law.
   (B)   The terms “mental disease” or “mental defect” do not include an
abnormality manifested only by repeated criminal or otherwise anti-social
conduct.
(ILCS Chapter 720, Act 5, § 6-2) (1981 Code, § 42.06, 6-2)
§ 130.072 INTOXICATED OR DRUGGED CONDITION.
   A person who is in an intoxicated or drugged condition is criminally
responsible for conduct unless the condition either:
   (A)   Is so extreme as to suspend the power of reason and render him or her
incapable of forming a specific intent which is an element of the offense; or
   (B)   Is voluntarily produced and deprives him or her of substantial
capacity either to appreciate the criminality of his or her conduct or to
conform his or her conduct to the requirements of law.
(ILCS Chapter 720, Act 5, § 6-3) (1981 Code, § 42.06, 6-3)
§ 130.073 AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSE.
   A defense based upon any of the provisions of this subchapter is an
affirmative defense, except that mental illness is not an affirmative defense,
but an alternative plea or finding that may be accepted under appropriate
evidence, when the affirmative defense of insanity is raised or the plea of
guilty but mentally ill is made.
(ILCS Chapter 720, Act 5, § 6-4) (1981 Code, § 42.06, 6-4)
JUSTIFIABLE USE OF FORCE; EXONERATION
§ 130.085 USE OF FORCE IN DEFENSE OF PERSON.
   A person is justified in the use of force against another when and to the
extent he or she reasonably believes that the conduct is necessary to defend
himself or herself or another against such other’s imminent use of unlawful
force. However, he or she is justified in the use of force which is intended or
likely to cause death or great bodily harm only if he or she reasonably
believes that the force is necessary to prevent imminent death or great bodily
harm to himself or herself or another or the commission of a forcible felony.
   (B)   In no case shall any act involving the use of force justified under
this section give rise to any claim or liability brought by or on behalf of any
person acting within the definition of "aggressor" set forth in ILCS Chapter
720, Act 5, § 7-4, or the estate, spouse, or other family member of such a
person, against the person or estate of the person using such justified force,
unless the use of force involves willful or wanton misconduct.
(ILCS Chapter 720, Act 5, § 7-1) (1981 Code, § 42.07, 7-1)
§ 130.086 USE OF FORCE IN DEFENSE OF DWELLING.
   (A)   A person is justified in the use of force against when and to the
extent that he or she reasonably believes that the conduct is necessary to
prevent or terminate such other’s unlawful entry into or attack upon a
dwelling.
   However, he or she is justified in the use of force which is intended or
likely to cause death or great bodily harm only if:
      (1)   The entry is made or attempted in a violent, riotous or tumultuous
manner and he or she reasonably believes that the force is necessary to prevent
an assault upon, or offer of personal violence to him or her or another in the
dwelling; or
      (2)   He or she reasonably believes that the force is necessary to
prevent the commission of a felony in the dwelling.
   (B)   In no case shall any act involving the use of force justified under
this section give rise to any claim or liability brought by or on behalf of any
person acting within the definition of "aggressor" set forth in ILCS Chapter
720, Act 5, § 7-4, or the estate, spouse, or other family member of such a
person, against the person or estate of the person using such justified force,
unless the use of force involves willful or wanton misconduct.
(ILCS Chapter 720, Act 5, § 7-2) (1981 Code, § 42.07, 7-2)
§ 130.087 USE OF FORCE IN DEFENSE OF OTHER PROPERTY.
   (A)   A person is justified in the use of force against when and to the
extent that he or she reasonably believes that the conduct is necessary to
prevent or terminate such other’s trespass on or other tortuous or criminal
interference with either real property, other than a dwelling, or personal
property, lawfully in his or her possession or in the possession of another who
is a member of his or her immediate family or household or of a person whose
property he or she has a legal duty to protect. However, he or she is justified
in the use of force which is intended or likely to cause death or great bodily
harm only if he or she reasonably believes that the force is necessary to
prevent the commission of a forcible felony.
   (B)   In no case shall any act involving the use of force justified under
this section give rise to any claim or liability brought by or on behalf of any
person acting within the definition of "aggressor" set forth in ILCS Chapter
720, Act 5, § 7-4, or the estate, spouse, or other family member of such a
person, against the person or estate of the person using such justified force,
unless the use of force involves willful or wanton misconduct.
(ILCS Chapter 720, Act 5, § 7-3) (1981 Code, § 42.07, 7-3)
§ 130.088 USE OF FORCE BY AGGRESSOR.
   The justification described in the preceding sections of this subchapter is
not available to a person who:
   (A)   Is attempting to commit, committing or escaping after the commission
of a forcible felony;
   (B)   Initially provokes the use of force against himself or herself, with
the intent to use the force as an excuse to inflict bodily harm upon the
assailant; or
   (C)   Otherwise initially provokes the use of force against himself or
herself unless:
      (1)   The force is so great that he or she reasonably believes that he or
she is in imminent danger of death or great bodily harm and that he or she has
exhausted every reasonable means to escape the danger other than the use of
force which is likely to cause death or great bodily harm to the assailant; or
      (2)   In good faith, he or she withdraws from physical contact with the
assailant and indicated clearly to the assailant that he or she desires to
withdraw and terminate the use of force, but the assailant continues or resumes
the use of force.
(ILCS Chapter 720, Act 5, § 7-4) (1981 Code, § 42.07, 7-4)
§ 130.089 PEACE OFFICER’S USE OF FORCE IN MAKING ARREST.
   (A)   (1)   A peace officer, or any person whom he or she has summoned or
directed to assist him or her, need not retreat or desist from efforts to make
a lawful arrest because of resistance or threatened resistance to the arrest.
He or she is justified in the use of any force which he or she reasonably
believes, based on the totality of the circumstances, to be necessary to effect
the arrest and of any force which he or she reasonably believes, based on the
totality of the circumstances, to be necessary to defend himself, herself or
another from bodily harm while making the arrest. However, he or she is
justified in using force likely to cause death or great bodily harm only when
(i) he or she reasonably believes, based on the totality of the circumstances,
that such force is necessary to prevent death or great bodily harm to himself,
herself or such other person; (ii) or when he or she reasonably believes, based
on the totality of the circumstances, both that:
         (a)   Such force is necessary to prevent the arrest from being
defeated by resistance or escape and the officer reasonably believes that the
person to be arrested is likely to cause great bodily harm to another; and
         (b)   The person to be arrested committed or attempted a forcible
felony which involves the infliction or threatened infliction of great bodily
harm or is attempting to escape by use of a deadly weapon, or otherwise
indicates that he or she will endanger human life or inflict great bodily harm
unless arrested without delay.
      (2)   As used in this division (A), RETREAT does not mean tactical
repositioning or other de-escalation tactics.
      (3)   A peace officer is not justified in using force likely to cause
death or great bodily harm when there is no longer an imminent threat of great
bodily harm to the officer or another.
      (4)   Where feasible, a peace officer shall, prior to the use of force,
make reasonable efforts to identify himself or herself as a peace officer and
to warn that deadly force may be used.
      (5)   A peace officer shall not use deadly force against a person based
on the danger that the person poses to himself or herself if a reasonable
officer would believe the person does not pose an imminent threat of death or
great bodily harm to the peace officer or to another person.
      (6)   A peace officer shall not use deadly force against a person who is
suspected of committing a property offense, unless that offense is terrorism or
unless deadly force is otherwise authorized by law.
   (B)   A peace officer making an arrest pursuant to an invalid warrant is
justified in the use of any force which he or she would be justified in using
if the warrant were valid, unless he or she knows that the warrant is invalid.
   (C)   The authority to use physical force conferred on peace officers by
this section is a serious responsibility that shall be exercised judiciously
and with respect for human rights and dignity and for the sanctity of every
human life.
   (D)   Peace officers shall use deadly force only when reasonably necessary
in defense of human life. In determining whether deadly force is reasonably
necessary, officers shall evaluate each situation in light of the totality of
circumstances of each case including but not limited to the proximity in time
of the use of force to the commission of a forcible felony, and the reasonable
feasibility of safely apprehending a subject at a later time, and shall use
other available resources and techniques, if reasonably safe and feasible to a
reasonable officer.
   (E)   The decision by a peace officer to use force shall be evaluated
carefully and thoroughly, in a manner that reflects the gravity of that
authority and the serious consequences of the use of force by peace officers,
in order to ensure that officers use force consistent with law and agency
policies.
   (F)   The decision by a peace officer to use force shall be evaluated from
the perspective of a reasonable officer in the same situation, based on the
totality of the circumstances known to or perceived by the officer at the time
of the decision, rather than with the benefit of hindsight, and that the
totality of the circumstances shall account for occasions when officers may be
forced to make quick judgments about using force.
   (G)   Law enforcement agencies are encouraged to adopt and develop policies
designed to protect individuals with physical, mental health, developmental, or
intellectual disabilities, or individuals who are significantly more likely to
experience greater levels of physical force during police interactions, as
these disabilities may affect the ability of a person to understand or comply
with commands from peace officers.
   (H)   As used in this section:
      (1)   DEADLY FORCE means any use of force that creates a substantial risk
of causing death or great bodily harm, including, but not limited to, the
discharge of a firearm;
      (2)   A threat of death or serious bodily injury is IMMINENT when, based
on the totality of the circumstances, a reasonable officer in the same
situation would believe that a person has the present ability, opportunity, and
apparent intent to immediately cause death or great bodily harm to the peace
officer or another person. An imminent harm is not merely a fear of future
harm, no matter how great the fear and no matter how great the likelihood of
the harm, but is one that, from appearances, must be instantly confronted and
addressed;
      (3)   TOTALITY OF THE CIRCUMSTANCES means all facts known to the peace
officer at the time, or that would be known to a reasonable officer in the same
situation, including the conduct of the officer and the subject leading up to
the use of deadly force.
(ILCS Chapter 720, Act 5, § 7-5) (1981 Code, § 42.07, 7-5)
§ 130.090 PRIVATE PERSON’S USE OF FORCE IN MAKING ARREST.
   (A)   A private person who makes or assists another private person in making
a lawful arrest is justified in the use of any force which he or she would be
justified in using if he or she were summoned or directed by a peace officer to
make the arrest, except that he or she is justified in the use of force likely
to cause death or great bodily harm only when he or she reasonably believes
that the force is necessary to prevent death or great bodily harm to himself or
herself or another.
   (B)   A private person who is summoned or directed by a peace officer to
assist in making an arrest which is unlawful, is justified in the use of any
force which he or she would be justified in using if the arrest were lawful
unless he or she knows that the arrest is unlawful.
(ILCS Chapter 720, Act 5, § 7-6) (1981 Code, § 42.07, 7-6)
§ 130.091 PRIVATE PERSON’S USE OF FORCE IN RESISTING ARREST.
   A person is not authorized to use force to resist an arrest which he or she
knows is being made either by a peace officer or by a private person summoned
and directed by a peace officer to make the arrest, even if he or she believes
that the arrest is unlawful and the arrest in fact is unlawful.
(ILCS Chapter 720, Act 5, § 7-7) (1981 Code, § 42.07, 7-7)
§ 130.092 FORCE LIKELY TO CAUSE DEATH OR GREAT BODILY HARM.
   Force which is likely to cause death or great bodily harm, within the
meaning of §§
130.089 and
130.090, includes:
   (A)   The firing of a firearm in the direction of the person to be arrested,
even though no intent exists to kill or inflict great bodily harm; and
   (B)   The firing of a firearm at a vehicle in which the person to be
arrested is riding.
(ILCS Chapter 720, Act 5, § 7-8) (1981 Code, § 42.07, 7-8)
§ 130.093 USE OF FORCE TO PREVENT ESCAPE.
   (A)   A peace officer or other person who has an arrested person in his or
her custody is justified in the use of force, except deadly force, to prevent
the escape of the arrested person from custody as he or she would be justified
in using if he or she were arresting the person.
   (B)   A guard or other peace officer is justified in the use of force which
he or she reasonably believes necessary to prevent the escape from a penal
institution of a person whom the officer reasonably believes to be lawfully
detained in the institution under sentence for an offense or awaiting trail of
commitment for an offense.
   (C)   Deadly force shall not be used to prevent escape under this section
unless, based on the totality of the circumstances, deadly force is necessary
to prevent death or great bodily harm to himself, herself, or such other
person.
(ILCS Chapter 720, Act 5, § 7-9) (1981 Code, § 42.07, 7-9)
§ 130.094 EXECUTION OF DEATH SENTENCE.
   A public officer who, in the exercise of his or her official duty, puts a
person to death pursuant to a sentence of a court of competent jurisdiction, is
justified if he or she acts in accordance with the sentence pronounced and the
law prescribing the procedure for execution of a death sentence.
(ILCS Chapter 720, Act 5, § 7-10) (1981 Code, § 42.07, 7-10)
§ 130.095 COMPULSION.
   (A)   A person is not guilty of an offense, other than an offense punishable
with death, by reason of conduct which he or she performs under the compulsion
of threat or menace of the imminent infliction of death or great bodily harm
will be inflicted upon him or her if he or she does not perform the conduct.
   (B)   A married woman is not entitled, by reason of the presence of her
husband, to any presumption of compulsion or to any defense of compulsion,
except that stated in division (A) above.
(ILCS Chapter 720, Act 5, § 7-11) (1981 Code, § 42.07, 7-11)
§ 130.096 ENTRAPMENT.
   A person is not guilty of an offense if his or her conduct is incited or
induced by a public officer or employee or agent of either, for the purpose of
obtaining evidence for the prosecution of such person. However, this section is
inapplicable if the person was predisposed to commit the offense and a public
officer or employee or agent of either merely affords to the person the
opportunity or facility for committing an offense in furtherance of a criminal
purpose which the person has originated.
(ILCS Chapter 720, Act 5, § 7-12) (1981 Code, § 42.07, 7-12)
§ 130.097 NECESSITY.
   Conduct which would otherwise be an offense is justifiable by reason of
necessity if the accused was without blame in occasioning or developing the
situation and reasonably believed the conduct was necessary to avoid a public
or private injury greater than the injury which might reasonably result from
his or her own conduct.
(1981 Code, § 42.07, 7-13)
§ 130.098 AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSE.
   A defense of justifiable use of force or exoneration, based on the
provisions of this section is an affirmative defense.
(1981 Code, § 42.07, 7-14)
SOLICITATION, CONSPIRACY AND ATTEMPT
§ 130.110 SOLICITATION.
   (A)   A person commits solicitation when, with intent that an offense be
committed, he or she commands, encourages or requests another to commit that
offense.
   (B)   A person convicted of solicitation may be fined not to exceed the
maximum provided for the offense solicited.
(ILCS Chapter 720, Act 5, § 8-1) (1981 Code, § 42.08, 8-1)
§ 130.111 CONSPIRACY.
   (A)   A person commits conspiracy when, with intent that an offense be
committed, he or she agrees with another to the commission of that offense. No
person may be convicted of conspiracy to commit an offense unless an act in
furtherance of the agreement is alleged and proved to have been committed by
him or her or by a co-conspirator.
   (B)   It shall not be a defense to conspiracy that the person or persons
with whom the accused is alleged to have conspired:
      (1)   Has not been prosecuted or convicted;
      (2)   Has been convicted of a different offenses;
      (3)   Is not amenable to justice;
      (4)   Has been acquitted; or
      (5)   Lacked capacity to commit an offense.
   (C)   A person convicted of conspiracy may be fined not to exceed the
maximum provided for the offense which is the object of the conspiracy.
(ILCS Chapter 720, Act 5, § 8-2) (1981 Code, § 42.08, 8-2)
§ 130.112 DEFENSE.
   It is a defense to a charge of solicitation or conspiracy that if the
criminal object were achieved, the accused would not be guilty of an offense.
(ILCS Chapter 720, Act 5, § 8-3) (1981 Code, § 42.08, 8-3)
§ 130.113 ATTEMPT.
   (A)   A person commits an attempt when, with intent to commit a specific
offense, he or she does any act which constitutes a substantial step toward the
commission of that offense.
   (B)   It shall not be a defense to a charge of attempt that because of a
misapprehension of the circumstances it would have been impossible for the
accused to commit the offense attempted.
   (C)   A person convicted of an attempt may be fined or imprisoned or both
not to exceed the maximum provided for the offense attempted.
(ILCS Chapter 720, Act 5, § 8-4) (1981 Code, § 42.08, 8-4)
§ 130.114 MULTIPLE CONVICTIONS.
   No person shall be convicted of both the inchoate and the principal offense.
(ILCS Chapter 720, Act 5, § 8-5) (1981 Code, § 42.08, 8-5)
§ 130.115 OFFENSE.
   For the purpose of this section, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   OFFENSE. Includes conduct which, if performed in another municipality, would
be criminal by the laws of that municipality and which conduct, if performed in
the village, would be an offense under the laws of the village.
(ILCS Chapter 720, Act 5, § 8-6) (1981 Code, § 42.08, 8-6)
§ 130.999 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any provisions of this title for which another penalty is
not specifically provided shall be subject to the provisions of §
10.99.
CHAPTER 131: OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
Section
General Provisions
   
131.01   Definitions
   
131.02   Damage of firefighting apparatus, hydrants, or equipment
   
131.03   Trespass to land
   
131.04   Damaging village property
Theft and Related Offenses
   
131.15   Theft generally
   
131.16   Theft of lost or mislaid property
   
131.17   Theft of labor or services or use of property
   
131.18   Reserved
   
131.19   Theft from coin-operated machine
   
131.20   Theft-related devices
Vandalism
   
131.50   Background
   
131.51   Definitions
   
131.52   Offenses
   
131.53   Liability of parent or legal guardian of minor offender
Cross-reference:
   Public Demonstrations, see §§
134.01 et seq.
   Solicitors, Peddlers and Transient and Itinerant Merchants, see
Chapter 114
   Zoning, see
Chapter 157
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 131.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DECEPTION. Knowingly to:
      (1)   Create or confirm another’s impression which is false and which the
offender does not believe to be true;
      (2)   Fail to correct a false impression which the offender previously
has created or confirmed;
      (3)   Prevent another from acquiring information pertinent to the
disposition of the property involved;
      (4)   Sell or otherwise transfer or encumber property, failing to
disclose a lien, adverse claim
or other legal impediment to the enjoyment of the property, whether the
impediment is or is not valid, or is or is not a matter of official record; or
      (5)   Promise performance which the offender does not intend to perform
or knows will not be performed. Failure to perform standing alone is not
evidence that the offender did not intend to perform.
(1981 Code, § 42.15, 15-4)
   OBTAIN.
      (1)   In relation to property, to bring about a transfer of interest or
possession, whether to the offender or to another; and
      (2)   In relation to labor or services, to secure the performance
thereof.
(1981 Code, § 42.15, 15-7)
   OBTAINS CONTROL. The taking, carrying away or the sale, conveyance or
transfer of title to or interest in or possession of property.
(1981 Code, § 42.15, 15-8)
   OWNER. A person, other than the offender, who has possession of or any other
interest in the property involved, even though the interest or possession is
unlawful and without whose consent the offender has no authority to exert
control over the property.
(1981 Code, § 42.15, 15-2)
   PERMANENT DEPRIVATION. To:
      (1)   Defeat all recovery of the property by the owner;
      (2)   Deprive the owner permanently of the beneficial use of the
property;
      (3)   Retain the property with the intent to restore it to the owner only
if the owner purchases or leases it back or pays a reward or other compensation
for its return; or
      (4)   Sell, give, pledge or otherwise transfer any interest in the
property or subject it to the claim of a person other than the owner.
(1981 Code, § 42.15, 15-3)
   PROPERTY. Anything of value. PROPERTY includes real estate, money,
commercial instruments, admission or transportation tickets, written
instruments representing or embodying rights concerning anything of value,
labor or services or otherwise of value to the owner; things growing on,
affixed to or found on land or part of or affixed to any building; electricity,
gas and water; telecommunications services; birds, animals and fish, which
ordinarily are kept in state of confinement; food and drink; samples, cultures,
micro-organisms, specimens, records, recordings, documents, blueprints,
drawings, maps and whole or partial copies, descriptions, photographs, computer
programs or data, prototypes or models thereof or any other sections,
materials, devices, substances and whole or partial copies, descriptions,
photographs, prototypes or models thereof which constitute, represent,
evidence, reflect or record a secret scientific, technical, merchandising,
production or management information, design, process, procedure, formulas,
invention or improvement.
(1981 Code, § 42.15, 15-1)
   STOLEN PROPERTY. Property over which control has been obtained by theft.
(1981 Code, § 42.15, 15-6)
   THREAT. A menace, however communicated, to:
      (1)   Inflict physical harm on the person threatened or any other person
or on property;
      (2)   Subject any person to physical confinement or restraint;
      (3)   Commit any criminal offense;
      (4)   Accuse any person of a criminal offense;
      (5)   Expose any person to hatred, contempt or ridicule;
      (6)   Harm the credit or business repute of any person;
      (7)   Reveal any information sought to be concealed by the person
threatened;
      (8)   Take action as an official against anyone or anything, withhold
official action or cause the action or withholding;
      (9)   Bring about or continue a strike, boycott or other similar
collective action if the property is not demanded or received for the benefit
of the group which he or she purports to represent;
      (10)   Testify or provide information or withhold testimony or
information with respect to another’s legal claim or defense; or
      (11)   Inflict any other harm which would not benefit the offender.
(1981 Code, § 42.15, 15-5)
   VALUE. The value of property consisting of any commercial instrument or any
written instrument representing or embodying rights concerning anything of
value, labor or services or otherwise of value to the owner shall be:
      (1)   The market-value of the instrument is not negotiable or is
otherwise without a market value; and
      (2)   (a)   The ACTUAL VALUE of the instrument is not negotiable or is
otherwise without a market value.
         (b)   For the purpose of establishing ACTUAL VALUE, the interest of
any owner or owners entitled to part or all of the property represented by the
instrument, by reason of the instrument, may be shown, even if another owner
may be named in the complaint, information or indictment.
(ILCS Chapter 720, Act 5, §§ 15-1 through 15-9) (1981 Code, § 42.15, 15-9)
§ 131.02 DAMAGE OF FIREFIGHTING APPARATUS, HYDRANTS, OR EQUIPMENT.
   No person shall knowingly, without proper authorization, cut, injure,
damage, deface, destroy, or tamper with any fire hydrant or any public or
private firefighting equipment, or any apparatus appertaining to such
equipment, or intentionally open any fire hydrant.
(ILCS Chapter 720, Act 5, § 21-1)
Penalty, see § 130.999
§ 131.03 TRESPASS TO LAND.
   (A)   (1)   A person commits criminal trespass to real property when he or
she:
         (a)   Knowingly and without lawful authority enters or remains within
or on a building;
         (b)   Enters upon the land of another, after receiving prior to the
entry notice from the owner or occupant that the entry is forbidden;
         (c)   Remains upon the land of another, after receiving notice from
the owner or occupant to depart;
         (d)   Presents false documents or falsely represents his or her
identity orally to the owner or occupant of the building or land in order to
obtain permission from the owner or occupant to enter or remain in the building
or on the land;
         (e)   Intentionally removes a notice posted on residential real estate
as required by subsection (l) of Section 15-1505.8 of Article XV of the Code of
Civil Procedure before the date and time set forth in the notice; or
         (f)   Enters a field used or capable of being used for growing crops,
an enclosed area containing livestock, an agricultural building containing
livestock, or an orchard in or on a motor vehicle (including an off-road
vehicle, motorcycle, moped, or any other powered two-wheel vehicle) after
receiving, prior to the entry, notice from the owner or occupant that the entry
is forbidden or remains upon or in the area after receiving notice from the
owner or occupant to depart.
      (2)   For purposes of this division (A), this section shall not apply to
being in a building which is open to the public while the building is open to
the public during its normal hours of operation, nor shall this section apply
to a person who enters a public building under the reasonable belief that the
building is still open to the public.
   (B)   A person has received notice from the owner or occupant within the
meaning of division (A) if the person has been notified personally, either
orally or in writing, including a valid court order as defined by ILCS Chapter
725, Act 5, § 112A-3(7) granting remedy (2) of ILCS Chapter 725, Act 5, § 112A-
14(b), or if a printed or written notice forbidding such entry has been
conspicuously posted or exhibited at the main entrance to the land or the
forbidden part thereof.
   (C)   This section does not apply to any person, whether a migrant worker or
otherwise, living on the land with permission of the owner or of the owner’s
agent having apparent authority to hire workers on the land and assign them
living quarters or a place of accommodations for living thereon, nor to anyone
living on the land at the request of or by occupancy, leasing, or other
agreement or arrangement with the owner or the owner’s agent, nor to anyone
invited by the migrant worker or other person so living on the land to visit
him or her at the place that person is so living upon the land.
   (D)   (1)   A person shall be exempt from prosecution under this section if
the person beautifies unoccupied and abandoned residential and industrial
properties located within any municipality.
      (2)   For the purpose of this division (D), UNOCCUPIED AND ABANDONED
RESIDENTIAL AND INDUSTRIAL PROPERTY means any real estate:
         (a)   In which the taxes have not been paid for a period of at least
two years; and
         (b)   Which has been left unoccupied and abandoned for a period of at
least one year.
      (3)   For the purpose of this division (D), BEAUTIFIES means to
landscape, to clean up litter, or to repair dilapidated conditions on, or to
board up windows and doors.
   (E)   No person shall be liable in any civil action for money damages to the
owner of unoccupied and abandoned residential and industrial property which
that person beautifies pursuant to division (D) of this section.
   (F)   (1)   A mortgagee or agent of the mortgagee shall be exempt from
prosecution for criminal trespass for entering, securing, or maintaining an
abandoned residential property.
      (2)   No mortgagee or agent of the mortgagee shall be liable to the
mortgagor or other owner of an abandoned residential property in any civil
action for negligence or civil trespass in connection with entering, securing,
or maintaining the abandoned residential property.
      (3)   For the purposes of this division (F) only, ABANDONED RESIDENTIAL
PROPERTY means mortgaged real estate that the mortgagee or agent of the
mortgagee determines in good faith meets the definition of abandoned
residential property set forth in Section 15-1200.5 of Article XV of the Code
of Civil Procedure.
   (G)   This section does not prohibit a person from entering a building or
upon the land of another for emergency purposes. For purposes of this division
(G), EMERGENCY means a condition or circumstance in which an individual is or
is reasonably believed by the person to be in imminent danger of serious bodily
harm or in which property is or is reasonably believed to be in imminent danger
of damage or destruction.
   (H)   Division (A)(1)(d) does not apply to a peace officer or other official
of a unit of government who enters a building or land in the performance of his
or her official duties.
   (I)   A violation of divisions (A)(1)(a) through (A)(1)(d) is a Class B
misdemeanor. A violation of division (A)(1)(f) is a Class A misdemeanor.
   (J)   (1)   A person may be liable in any civil action for money damages to
the owner of the land he or she entered upon with a motor vehicle as prohibited
under division (A)(1)(f) of this section. A person may also be liable to the
owner for court costs and reasonable attorney’s fees.
         (a)   The measure of damages shall be:
            1.   The actual damages, but not less than $250, if the vehicle is
operated in a nature preserve or registered area as defined in Sections 3.11
and 3.14 of the Illinois Natural Areas Preservation Act;
            2.   Twice the actual damages if the owner has previously notified
the person to cease trespassing; or
            3.   In any other case, the actual damages, but not less than $50.
         (b)   If the person operating the vehicle is under the age of 16, the
owner of the vehicle and the parent or legal guardian of the minor are jointly
and severally liable.
      (2)   For the purposes of this division (J) the following definitions
apply:
         LAND. Includes but is not limited to land used for crop land, fallow
land, orchard, pasture, feed lot, timber land, prairie land, mine spoil nature
preserves and registered areas. LAND does not include driveways or private
roadways upon which the owner allows the public to drive.
           OWNER. The person who has the right to possession of the land,
including the owner, operator or tenant.
           VEHICLE. Has the same meaning as provided under Section 1-217 of the
Illinois Vehicle Code.
(ILCS Chapter 720, Act 5, § 21-3)
Penalty, see § 130.999
§ 131.04 DAMAGING Village PROPERTY.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to:
      (1)   Knowingly damage any village property.
      (2)   Recklessly, by means of fire or explosion, damage village property
without the village’s consent.
      (3)   Knowingly start a fire on village land.
      (4)   Knowingly deposit on village land or in a village building any
stink bomb or any offensive- smelling compound which thereby tends to interfere
with the use by the village of its land or buildings.
   (B)   For the purposes of this section, PROPERTY means anything of value
including but not limited to real estate, money, commercial instruments,
written instruments representing or embodying rights  concerning anything of
value, labor, or services, things affixed to or found on land or part of or
affixed to any building, electricity, gas, or water.
   (C)   It is an affirmative defense to a violation of divisions (A)(1), (A)
(3), or (A)(4) of this section that the village consented to such damage.
(ILCS Chapter 720, Act 5, § 21-1)
Penalty, see § 130.999
Statutory reference:
   Additional prohibitions; felonies, see ILCS Chapter 720, Act 5, § 21-1
THEFT AND RELATED OFFENSES
§ 131.15 THEFT GENERALLY.
   A person commits theft when he or she knowingly:
   (A)   Obtains or exerts unauthorized control over property of the owner;
   (B)   Obtains, by deception, control over property of the owner;
   (C)   Obtains, by threat, control over property of the owner;
   (D)   Obtains control over stolen property knowing the property to have been
stolen by another or under the circumstances as would reasonably induce him or
her to believe that the property was stolen; or
   (E)   Obtains or exerts control over property in the custody of any law
enforcement agency which is explicitly represented to him or her by any law
enforcement officer or any individual acting in behalf of a law enforcement
agency as being stolen; and
      (1)   Intends to deprive the owner permanently of the use or benefit of
the property;
      (2)   Knowingly uses, conceals or abandons the property knowing in such
manner as to deprive the owner permanently of the use or benefit; or
      (3)   Uses, conceals or abandons the property knowing the use,
concealment or abandonment probably will deprive the owner permanently of the
use or benefit.
   (F)   The theft of property not from the person and not exceeding $500 in
value is a Class A misdemeanor.
   (G)   Theft by lessee; permissive inference. The trier of fact may infer
evidence that a person intends to deprive the owner permanently of the use or
benefit of the property:
      (1)   If a lessee of the personal property of another fails to return it
to the owner within ten days after written demand from the owner for its
return; or
      (2)   If a lessee of the personal property of another fails to return it
to the owner within 24 hours after written demand from the owner for its return
and the lessee had presented identification to the owner that contained a
materially fictitious name, address, or telephone number. A notice in writing,
given after the expiration of the leasing agreement, addressed and mailed, by
registered mail, to the lessee at the address given by him and shown on the
leasing agreement shall constitute proper demand.
   (H)   Permissive inference; evidence of intent that a person obtains by
deception control over property. The trier of fact may infer that a person
"knowingly obtains by deception control over property of the owner" when he or
she fails to return, within 45 days after written demand from the owner, the
downpayment and any additional payments accepted under a promise, oral or in
writing, to perform services for the owner for consideration of $3,000 or more,
and the promisor knowingly without good cause failed to substantially perform
pursuant to the agreement after taking a down payment of 10% or more of the
agreed upon consideration. This provision shall not apply where the owner
initiated the suspension of performance under the agreement, or where the
promisor responds to the notice within the 45-day notice period. A notice in
writing, addressed and mailed, by registered mail, to the promisor at the last
known address of the promisor, shall constitute proper demand.
   (I)   Offender's interest in the property.
      (1)   It is no defense to a charge of theft of property that the offender
has an interest therein, when the owner also has an interest to which the
offender is not entitled.
      (2)   Where the property involved is that of the offender's spouse, no
prosecution for theft may be maintained unless the parties were not living
together as man and wife and were living in separate abodes at the time of the
alleged theft.
(ILCS Chapter 720, Act 5, § 16-1) (1981 Code, § 42.16, 16-1)
§ 131.16 THEFT OF LOST OR MISLAID PROPERTY.
   (A)   A person commits theft of lost or mislaid property when he or she
obtains control over the property and:
      (1)   Knows or learns the identity of the owner or knows or is aware of,
or learns of a reasonable method of identifying the owner;
      (2)   Fails to take reasonable measures to restore the property to the
owner; and
      (3)   Intends to deprive the owner permanently of the use or benefit of
the property.
   (B)   Theft of lost or mislaid property where:
      (1)   The value does not exceed $500 is a Class B misdemeanor;
      (2)   The value exceeds $500 but does not exceed $10,000 is a Class A
misdemeanor; and
      (3)   The value exceeds $10,000 is a Class 4 felony.
(ILCS Chapter 720, Act 5, § 16-2) (1981 Code, § 42.16, 16-2)
§ 131.17 THEFT OF LABOR OR SERVICES OR USE OF PROPERTY.
   (A)   A person commits theft when he or she knowingly obtains the temporary
use of property, labor or services of another which are available only for
hire, by means of threat or deception or knowing that the use is without the
consent of the person providing the property, labor or services. For the
purposes of this subsection, library material is available for hire.
   (B)   A person commits theft when after:
      (1)   Renting or leasing a motor vehicle;
      (2)   Obtaining a motor vehicle through a “driveway” service mode of
transportation;
      (3)   Renting or leasing any type of equipment exceeding $500 in value
including tools, construction or industry equipment, and such items as linens,
tableware, tents, tables, chairs and other equipment specially rented for a
party or special event; or
      (4)   Renting or leasing any other type of personal property exceeding
$500 in value, under an agreement in writing which provides for the return of
the vehicle, equipment, or other personal property to a particular place at a
particular time, he or she without good cause knowingly fails to return the
vehicle, equipment, or other personal property to that place within the time
specified, and is thereafter served or sent a written demand mailed to the last
known address, made by certified mail return receipt requested, to return the
vehicle, equipment, or other personal property within three days from the
mailing of the written demand, and who without good cause knowingly fails to
return the vehicle, equipment, or any other personal property to any place of
business of the lessor within the return period. The trier of fact may infer
evidence that the person is without good cause if the person signs the
agreement with a name or address other than his or her own.
   (C)   A person commits theft when he or she borrows from a library facility
library material which has an aggregate value of $50 or more pursuant to an
agreement with or procedure established by the library facility for the return
of such library material and knowingly without good cause fails to return the
library material so borrowed in accordance with such agreement or procedure,
and further knowingly without good cause fails to return such library material
within 30 days after receiving written notice by certified mail from the
library facility demanding the return of such library material.
   (D)   A person convicted of theft under this subsection (A) is guilty of a
Class A misdemeanor, except that the theft of library material where the
aggregate value exceeds $300 is a Class 3 felony. A person convicted of theft
under subsection (B) is guilty of a Class 4 felony. A person convicted of theft
under subsection (C) is guilty of a petty offense for which the offender may be
fined an amount not to exceed $500 and shall be ordered to reimburse the
library for postage costs, attorney’s fees and actual replacement costs of the
materials not returned, except that theft under subsection (C) where the
aggregate value exceeds $300 is a Class 3 felony. For the purposes of
sentencing on theft of library material, separate transactions totalling more
than $300 within a 90-day period shall constitute a single offense.
(ILCS Chapter 720, Act 5, § 16-3) (1981 Code, § 42.16, 16-3)
§ 131.18 RESERVED.
§ 131.19 THEFT FROM COIN-OPERATED MACHINE.
   (A)   A person commits theft from a coin-operated machine when he or she
knowingly and without authority opens, breaks into, tampers with, triggers or
damages a coin-operated machine either:
      (1)   To operate or use the machine; or
      (2)   With the intent to commit a theft from the machine.
   (B)   A violation of subdivision (A)(1) is a Class B misdemeanor. A
violation of subdivision (A)(2) is a Class A misdemeanor.
(ILCS Chapter 720, Act 5, § 16-5) (1981 Code, § 42.16, 16-5)
§ 131.20 THEFT-RELATED DEVICES.
   (A)   (1)   A person commits unlawful possession of a key or device for a
coin-operated machine when he or she possesses a key, or a drawing, print mold
of a key, device or substance designed to open, break into, tamper with or
damage a coin-operated machine with intent to commit a theft from the machine.
      (2)   A person commits unlawful use of a key or device for a coin-
operated machine when he or she with intent to commit a theft from a coin-
operated machine uses a key, drawing, print, mold of a key, device or substance
and causes damage or loss to the coin-operated machine of more than $300.
   (B)   (1)   A person commits unlawful use of a theft detection shielding
device when he or she knowingly manufactures, sells, offers for sale or
distributes any theft detection shielding device.
         (2)   A person commits unlawful possession of a theft detection
shielding device when he or she knowingly possesses a theft detection shielding
device with the intent to commit theft or retail theft.
         (3)   A person commits unlawful possession of a theft detection device
remover when he or she knowingly possesses a theft detection device remover
with the intent to use such tool to remove any theft detection device from any
merchandise without the permission of the merchant or person owning or holding
the merchandise.
   (C)   A person commits use of a scanning device or reencoder to defraud when
the person knowingly uses:
      (1)   A scanning device to access, read, obtain, memorize, or store,
temporarily or permanently, information encoded on the magnetic strip of stripe
of a payment card without the permission of the authorized user of the payment
and with the intent to defraud the authorized user, the issuer of the
authorized user’s payment card, or a merchant; or
      (2)   A reencoder to place information encoded on the magnetic strip or
stripe of a payment card onto the magnetic strip or stripe of a different card
without the permission of the authorized user of the card from which the
information is being reencoded and with the intent to defraud the authorized
user, the issuer of the authorized user’s payment card or a merchant.
   (D)   A violation of subdivision (A)(1), (B)(1), (B)(2) or (B)(3) is a Class
A misdemeanor. A second or subsequent violation of subdivision (B)(1), (B)(2)
or (B)(3) is a Class 4 felony. A violation of subdivision (A)(2), (C)(1), or
(C)(2) is a Class 4 felony. A second or subsequent violation of subdivision (C)
(1) or (C)(2) is a Class 3 felony.
   (E)   The owner of a coin-operated machine may maintain a civil cause of
action against a person engaged in the activities covered in subdivisions (A)
(1) and (A)(2) and may recover treble actual damages, reasonable attorney fees
and costs.
   (F)   As used in this section:
      SUBSTANCE means a corrosive or acidic liquid or solid but does not
include items purchased through a coin-operated machine at the location or
acquired as condiments at the location of the coin- operated machine.
      THEFT DETECTION SHIELDING DEVICE means any laminating or coated bag or
device peculiar to and marketed for shielding and intended to shield
merchandise from detection by an electronic or magnetic theft alarm sensor.
(ILCS Chapter 720, Act 5, § 16-6) (1981 Code, § 42.16, 16-6)
VANDALISM
§ 131.50 BACKGROUND.
   Acts of vandalism resulting in damage to real or personal property within
the village have increased posing a threat to the value of property and the
welfare of residents. It is in the best interests of the village that the acts
be prosecuted by the village as a local offense; that penalties therefor be
imposed which are related to the nature of the act and the type of offender;
and that parents or legal guardians of minors found guilty of such acts be held
responsible for any monetary penalty or order of restitution or reparation
imposed. The diligent pursuit of the interests will tend to increase parental
supervision of minors and reduce the incidence of juvenile vandalism, thus
advancing the welfare of residents of the village.
(1981 Code, § 42.20)
§ 131.51 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   LEGAL GUARDIAN. A person appointed guardian, or given custody, of a minor by
a Circuit Court of the state, but does include a person appointed guardian or
given custody of a minor under the Illinois Juvenile Court Act.
   MINOR. A person who has attained 11 years of age, but who has not yet
reached 18 years of age.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company
or organization of any kind.
   PROPERTY. Any real estate including improvements thereon and tangible
personalty.
(1981 Code, § 42.20, 20-2)
§ 131.52 OFFENSES.
   Within the corporate limits of the village no person shall:
   (A)   Knowingly or recklessly damage any property of another person without
his or her consent; or
   (B)   Knowingly and without authority enter into or obtain control over any
motor vehicle, bicycle, aircraft or water craft or any part thereof of another
person without his or her consent.
(1981 Code, § 42.20, 20-3)
§ 131.53 LIABILITY OF PARENT OR LEGAL GUARDIAN OF MINOR OFFENDER.
   The parent or legal guardian of a minor defendant who resides with the
parent or legal guardian shall be liable for any fine or condition of
restitution or reparation imposed by a court upon a minor for violation of this
section; provided that, the minor has not paid the fine or made restitution or
reparation within the time ordered by the court; and further provided that, the
parent or legal guardian has been served with summons or notice to appear in
the original cause and all proceedings thereafter as provided by law.
(1981 Code, § 42.20, 20-5)
CHAPTER 132: OFFENSES AGAINST PERSONS
Section
Bodily Harm
   
132.01   Assault
   
132.02   Aggravated assault
   
132.03   Battery
   
132.04   Reckless conduct
   
132.05   Criminal housing management
   
132.06   Tattooing body of minor
Civil Rights
   
132.20   Definitions
   
132.21   Elements of the offense
   
132.22   Sanctions
   
132.23   Enforcement
BODILY HARM
§ 132.01 ASSAULT.
   (A)   A person commits an assault when, without lawful authority, he or she
engages in conduct which places another in reasonable apprehension of receiving
a battery.
   (B)   Assault is a Class C misdemeanor.
(ILCS Chapter 720, Act 5, § 12-1) (1981 Code, § 42.12, 12-1)
§ 132.02 AGGRAVATED ASSAULT.
   (A)   A person commits an aggravated assault, when, in committing an
assault, he or she:
      (1)   Uses a deadly weapon, an air rifle as defined in ILCS Chapter 720,
Act 5, § 24.8-0.1, or any device manufactured and designed to be substantially
similar in appearance to a firearm, other than by discharging a firearm in the
direction of another person, a peace officer, a person summoned or directed by
a peace officer, a correctional officer, a private security officer, or a
fireman or in the direction of a vehicle occupied by another person, a peace
officer, a person summoned or directed by a peace officer, a correctional
officer, a private security officer, or a fireman while the officer or fireman
is engaged in the execution of any of his official duties, or to prevent the
officer or fireman from performing his official duties, or in retaliation for
the officer or fireman performing his official duties;
      (2)   Is hooded, robed or masked in such manner as to conceal his
identity or any device manufactured and designed to be substantially similar in
appearance to a firearm;
      (3)   Knows the individual assaulted to be a teacher or other person
employed in any school and such teacher or other employee is upon the grounds
of a school or grounds adjacent thereto, or is in any part of a building used
for school purposes;
      (4)   Knows the individual assaulted to be a supervisor, director,
instructor or other person employed in any park district and such supervisor,
director, instructor or other employee is upon the grounds of the park or
grounds adjacent thereto, or is in any part of a building used for park
purposes;
      (5)   Knows the individual assaulted to be a caseworker, investigator, or
other person employed by the Department of Healthcare and Family Services
(formerly State Department of Public Aid), a County Department of Public Aid,
or the Department of Human Services (acting as successor to the Illinois
Department of Public Aid under the Department of Human Services Act) and such
caseworker, investigator, or other person is upon the grounds of a public aid
office or grounds adjacent thereto, or is in any part of a building used for
public aid purposes, or upon the grounds of a home of a public aid applicant,
recipient or any other person being interviewed or investigated in the
employee’s discharge of his duties, or on grounds adjacent thereto, or is in
any part of a building in which the applicant, recipient, or other such person
resides or is located;
      (6)   Knows the individual assaulted to be a peace officer, a community
policing volunteer, a private security officer, or a fireman while the officer
or fireman is engaged in the execution of any of his official duties, or to
prevent the officer, community policing volunteer, or fireman from performing
his official duties, or in retaliation for the officer, community policing
volunteer, or fireman performing his official duties, and the assault is
committed other than by the discharge of a firearm in the direction of the
officer or fireman or in the direction of a vehicle occupied by the officer or
fireman;
      (7)   Knows the individual assaulted to be an emergency medical
technician - ambulance, emergency medical technician - intermediate, emergency
medical technician - paramedic, ambulance driver or other medical assistance or
first aid personnel employed by a municipality or other governmental unit
engaged in the execution of any of his official duties, or to prevent the
emergency medical technician - ambulance, emergency medical technician -
intermediate, emergency medical technician - paramedic, ambulance driver, or
other medical assistance or first aid personnel from performing his official
duties, or in retaliation for the emergency medical technician - ambulance,
emergency medical technician - intermediate, emergency medical technician -
paramedic, ambulance driver, or other medical assistance or first aid personnel
performing his official duties;
      (8)   Knows the individual assaulted to be the driver, operator, employee
or passenger of any transportation facility or system engaged in the business
of transportation of the public for hire and the individual assaulted is then
performing in such capacity or then using such public transportation as a
passenger or using any area of any description designated by the transportation
facility or system as a vehicle boarding, departure, or transfer location;
      (9)   Or the individual assaulted is on or about a public way, public
property, or public place of accommodation or amusement;
      (10)   Is, or the person battered is, on a publicly or privately owned
sports or entertainment arena, stadium, community or convention hall, special
event center, amusement facility, or a special event center in a public park
during any 24-hour period when a professional sporting event, National
Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA)-sanctioned sporting event, United States
Olympic Committee-sanctioned sporting event, or International Olympic
Committee-sanctioned sporting event is taking place in this venue;
      (11)   Knows the individual assaulted to be an employee of the State of
Illinois, a municipal corporation therein or a political subdivision thereof,
engaged in the performance of his authorized duties as such employee;
      (12)   Knowingly and without legal justification, commits an assault on a
physically handicapped person;
      (13)   Knowingly and without legal justification, commits an assault on a
person 60 years of age or older;
      (14)   Discharges a firearm, other than from a motor vehicle;
      (15)   Discharges a firearm from a motor vehicle;
      (16)   Knows the individual assaulted to be an employee of a police or
sheriff's department, or a person who is employed by a municipality and whose
duties include traffic control, engaged in the performance of his or her
official duties as such employee;
      (17)   Knows the individual assaulted to be a sports official or coach at
any level of competition and the act causing the assault to the sports official
or coach occurred within an athletic facility or an indoor or outdoor playing
field or within the immediate vicinity of the athletic facility or an indoor or
outdoor playing field at which the sports official or coach was an active
participant in the athletic contest held at the athletic facility. For the
purposes of this subsection, SPORTS OFFICIAL means a person at an athletic
contest who enforces the rules of the contest, such as an umpire or referee;
and COACH means a person recognized as a coach by the sanctioning authority
that conducted the athletic contest;
      (18)   Knows the individual assaulted to be an emergency management
worker, while the emergency management worker is engaged in the execution of
any of his or her official duties, or to prevent the emergency management
worker from performing his or her official duties, or in retaliation for the
emergency management worker performing his or her official duties, and the
assault is committed other than by the discharge of a firearm in the direction
of the emergency management worker or in the direction of a vehicle occupied by
the emergency management worker; or
      (19)   Knows the individual assaulted to be a utility worker, while the
utility worker is engaged in the execution of his or her duties, or to prevent
the utility worker from performing his or her duties, or in retaliation for the
utility worker performing his or her duties. In this division, UTILITY WORKER
means a person employed by a public utility as defined in ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5,
§ 3-105 and also includes an employee of a municipally owned utility, an
employee of a cable television company, an employee of an electric cooperative
as defined in ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, § 3-119, an independent contractor or an
employee of an independent contractor working on behalf of a cable television
company, public utility, municipally owned utility, or an electric cooperative,
or an employee of a telecommunications carrier as defined in ILCS Ch. 220, Act
5, § 13-202, an independent contractor or an employee of an independent
contractor working on behalf of a telecommunications carrier, or an employee of
a telephone or telecommunications cooperative as defined in ILCS Ch. 220, Act
5, §13-212, or an independent contractor or an employee of an independent
contractor working on behalf of a telephone or telecommunications cooperative.
      (20)   Knows the individual assaulted to be either:
         (a)   A person authorized to serve process under Section 2-202 of the
Code of Civil Procedure; or
         (b)   A special process server appointed by the circuit court
while that individual is in the performance of his or her duties as a process
server.
   (B)   Aggravated assault is a Class A misdemeanor. Aggravated assault as
defined in subsection (6) is a Class A misdemeanor if a firearm is not used in
the commission of the assault.
   (C)   For purposes of divisions (A)(1) and (6) of this section, PRIVATE
SECURITY OFFICER means a registered employee of a private security contractor
agency under the Private Detective, Private Alarm, Private Security,
Fingerprint Vendor, and Locksmith Act of 2004.
(ILCS Chapter 720, Act 5, § 12-2) (1981 Code, § 42.12, 12-2)
§ 132.03 BATTERY.
   (A)   A person commits battery if he or she intentionally or knowingly
without legal justification and by any means:
      (1)   Causes bodily harm to an individual; or
      (2)   Makes physical contact of an insulting or provoking nature with an
individual.
   (B)   Battery is a Class A misdemeanor.
(ILCS Chapter 720, Act 5, § 12-3) (1981 Code, § 42.12, 12-3)
§ 132.04 RECKLESS CONDUCT.
   (A)   A person who causes bodily harm to or endangers the bodily safety of
an individual, by any means, commits reckless conduct if he or she performs
recklessly the acts which cause the harm or endanger safety, whether they
otherwise are lawful or unlawful.
   (B)   Reckless conduct is a Class A misdemeanor.
(ILCS Chapter 720, Act 5, § 12-5) (1981 Code, § 42.12, 12-5)
§ 132.05 CRIMINAL HOUSING MANAGEMENT.
   (A)   A person commits the offense of criminal housing management when,
having personal management or control of residential real estate, whether as a
legal or equitable owner or as a managing agent or otherwise, he or she
recklessly permits the physical condition or facilities of the residential real
estate to become or remain in any condition which endangers the health or
safety of any person.
   (B)   Criminal housing management is a Class A misdemeanor.
(ILCS Chapter 720, Act 5, § 12-5.1) (1981 Code, § 42.12, 12-5.1)
§ 132.06 TATTOOING BODY OF MINOR.
   (A)   A person, other than a person licensed to practice medicine in all its
branches, commits tattooing the body of a minor when he or she knowingly or
recklessly tattoos or offers to tattoo a person under the age of 18.
   (B)   A person who is an owner or employee of a business that performs
tattooing, other than a person licensed to practice medicine in all its
branches, may not permit a person under 18 years of age to enter or remain on
the premises where tattooing is being performed unless the person under 18
years of age is accompanied by his or her parent or legal guardian.
   (C)   For the purpose of this section, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      TATTOO. To insert pigment under the surface of the skin of a human being,
by pricking with a needle or otherwise, so as to produce an indelible mark or
figure visible through the skin.
   (D)   Division (A) of this section does not apply to a person under 18 years
of age who tattoos or offers to tattoo another person under 18 years of age
away from the premises of any business at which tattooing is performed.
   (E)   A violation of this section is a Class A misdemeanor.
(ILCS Chapter 720, Act 5, § 12C-35) (1981 Code, § 42.12, 12-10)
CIVIL RIGHTS
§ 132.20 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   OFFICIAL. An official is any officer or employee of the state or any agency
thereof, including state political divisions, municipal corporations, park
districts, forest preserve districts, educational institutions and schools.
   OPERATOR OF A PUBLIC PLACE OF ACCOMMODATION OR AMUSEMENT. An operator of a
public place of accommodation or amusement is any owner, lessee, proprietor,
manager, superintendent, agent or occupant of the public place of accommodation
or amusement or an employee of any such person or persons.
   PUBLIC PLACE OF ACCOMMODATION OR AMUSEMENT. A public place of amusement or
accommodation includes inns restaurants, eating houses, hotels, soda fountains,
soft drink parlors, taverns, road houses, barber shops, department stores,
clothing stores, hat stores, shoe stores, bath rooms, rest rooms, theaters,
skating rinks, public golf courses, public golf driving ranges, concerts,
cafes, bicycle rinks, elevators, ice cream parlors or rooms, railroads,
omnibuses, busses, stages, airplanes, street cars, boats, funeral hearses,
crematories, cemeteries and public conveyances on land, water or air, public
swimming pools and other places of public accommodation and amusement.
(1981 Code, § 42.13)
§ 132.21 ELEMENTS OF THE OFFENSE.
   A person commits a violation of civil rights when:
   (A)   He or she denies to another the full and equal enjoyment of the
facilities and services of any public place of accommodation or amusement
because of race, religion, color, national ancestry or physical or mental
handicap;
   (B)   He or she, as the operator of a public place of accommodation or
amusement, directly or indirectly, publishes, circulates, displays or mails any
written communications, except a private communication sent in response to a
specific inquiry, which the operator knows is to the effect that any of the
facilities of the public place of accommodation or amusement will be denied to
any person because of race, religion, color, national ancestry or offenses
physical or mental handicap or that the patronage of a person is unwelcome,
objectionable or unacceptable for any of those reasons;
   (C)   He or she, as an official, refuses to employ or discriminates in the
employment of another for any work relief project because of race, religion,
color or national ancestry or because of physical or mental handicap unrelated
to ability; or
   (D)   He or she, as an official, denies or refuses to any person the full
and equal enjoyment of the accommodations, advantages, facilities or privileges
of the official’s office or services or of any property under the official’s
care because of race, color, national ancestry or physical or mental handicap.
(1981 Code, § 42.13)
§ 132.22 SANCTIONS.
   Violation of civil rights is a Class B misdemeanor.
(1981 Code, § 42.13)
§ 132.23 ENFORCEMENT.
   It shall be the duty of all state, county and municipal officials to
cooperate in the enforcement of this subchapter. If any sheriff, deputy
sheriff, chief of police, marshal, police officer or other peace officer shall
have knowledge or information of any violation of any provisions of this
subchapter, he or she shall diligently investigate and secure evidence of the
same and shall, before the proper officer, make and sign a complaint against
the offending person, anything in the ordinance or by-laws of any municipality
to the contrary notwithstanding.
(1981 Code, § 42.13)
CHAPTER 133: OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC MORALITY
Section
General Regulations
   
133.001   Disorderly conduct
   
133.002   Public indecency
   
133.003   Obscenity
   
133.004   Harmful material
Deceptive Practices
   
133.015   Generally
   
133.016   Impersonating officer and the like
   
133.017   Deceptive altering or sale of coins
   
133.018   Deceptive collection practices
Curfew
   
133.030   Curfew
Cannabis Control Act
   
133.060   Legislative declaration
   
133.061   Short title
   
133.062   Definitions
   
133.063   Possession
   
133.064   Manufacture
   
133.065   Casual delivery
   
133.066   Minors
   
133.067   Production
Mob Action
   
133.080   Mob action generally
Tobacco
   
133.095   Definition
   
133.096   Purchase by minors
   
133.097   Sale to minors
   
133.098   Possession by minors
Drug Paraphernalia
   
133.100   Drug paraphernalia
   
133.101   Determining factors
   
133.102   Sale, display, etc. of drug paraphernalia prohibited
   
133.103   Exemptions
 
   
133.999   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Alcohol; prohibited sales and possession, see §
116.30 et seq.
GENERAL REGULATIONS
§ 133.001 DISORDERLY CONDUCT.
   (A)   A person commits disorderly conduct when he knowingly:
      (1)   Does any act in such unreasonable manner as to alarm or disturb
another and to provoke a breach of the peace;
      (2)   Enters upon the property of another, and for a lewd or unlawful
purpose deliberately looks into a dwelling on the property through any window
or other opening in it; or
      (3)   While acting as a collection agency as defined in the “Collection
Agency Act,” or as an employee of such collection agency, and while attempting
to collect an alleged debt, makes a telephone call to the alleged debtor which
is designed to harass, annoy or intimidate the alleged debtor;
      (4)   Transmits or causes to be transmitted a false report to the
Department of Children and Family Services under the Abused and Neglected Child
Reporting Act, ILCS Chapter 325, Act 5, §4;
      (5)   Transmits or causes to be transmitted a false report to the
Department of Public Health under the Nursing Home Care Act, ILCS Chapter 210,
Act 45, §§ 1-101 et seq., the Specialized Mental Health Rehabilitation Act of
2013, or the ID/DD Community Care Act;
      (6)   Transmits or causes to be transmitted a false report to any public
safety agency without the reasonable grounds necessary to believe that
transmitting such a report is necessary for the safety and welfare of the
public; or
      (7)   Calls the number “911” for the purpose of making or transmitting a
false alarm or complaint and reporting information when, at the time the call
or transmission is made, the person knows there is no reasonable ground for
making the call or transmission and further knows that the call or transmission
could result in the emergency response of any public safety agency.
      (8)   Engages in or aids or abets any fight, quarrel, or other
disturbance.
      (9)   Disturbs any religious service, funeral, or public or private
meeting or assembly of persons.
      (10)   Loiters continuously in public places or is idle or dissolute and
goes about begging.
      (11)   Is intoxicated in public places or in any place to the annoyance
and disturbance of other persons or consumes beer or liquor on the streets or
in any public place or premises not licensed for such purpose.
      (12)   Gives any false alarm of fire or disturbance to any person or
false information to any peace officer or firefighter or any village officer.
      (13)   Engages in obscene or indecent activities or entertainment.
      (14)   Uses any obscene, profane, threatening, or inciting language in
any public place.
      (15)   Throws stones or missiles in public places or at any person or
property or uses, brandishes, or threatens to use any missile or dangerous
weapon or object.
      (16)   Disturbs the peace or quiet or any other person by creating
excessive noise on his or her own or on any property. Excessive noise shall
include, but not by way of limitation, any of the following:
         (a)   Loud playing of phonographs, radios, television sets, music
machines, or musical instruments.
         (b)   Vehicles or gasoline motors without mufflers or the unnecessary
use of horns on vehicles.
      (17)   Knowingly urinates or defecates in a public place and not in
sanitary waste facilities maintained for such purpose and installed pursuant to
the buildings codes of the village.
   (B)   In addition to any penalty imposed as set forth in §133.999, any
person convicted of disorderly conduct shall be ordered by the court to perform
community service, as set forth under the provisions of ILCS Chapter 720, Act
5, §26-1.
(ILCS Chapter 720, Act 5, §26-1) (Am. Ord. 89-14, passed 8-21-1989; Am. Ord.
03-15, passed 8-4-2003; Am. Ord. 07-32, passed 5-7-2007)
Penalty, see § 133.999
Statutory reference:
   Please note that the statute from which this section derives, ILCS Chapter
720, Act 5, §26-1, contains additional provisions which are classified as
felonies and which are not set forth as part of this section.
§ 133.002 PUBLIC INDECENCY.
   (A)   Any person of the age of 17 years and upwards who performs any of the
following acts in a public place commits a public indecency:
      (1)   An act of sexual penetration or sexual conduct as defined in ILCS
Chapter 720, Act 5, § 12-12; or
      (2)   A lewd exposure of the body done with intent to arouse or to
satisfy the sexual desire of the person.
   (B)   Breast-feeding of infants is not an act of public indecency.
   (C)   PUBLIC PLACE. For purposes of this section means any place where the
conduct may reasonably be expected to be viewed by others.
(ILCS Chapter 720, Act 5, § 11-30)
Penalty, see § 133.999
§ 133.003 OBSCENITY.
   (A)   Elements of the offense. A person commits obscenity when, with
knowledge of the nature or content thereof, or recklessly failing to exercise
reasonable inspection which would have disclosed the nature or content thereof,
he:
      (1)   Sells, delivers, or provides, or offers or agrees to sell, deliver,
or provide any obscene writing, picture, record, or other representation or
embodiment of the obscene;
      (2)   Presents or directs an obscene play, dance or other performance or
participates directly in that portion thereof which makes it obscene;
      (3)   Publishes, exhibits, or otherwise makes available anything obscene;
      (4)   Performs an obscene act or otherwise presents an obscene exhibition
of his body for gain;
      (5)   Creates, buys, procures, or possesses obscene matter or material
with intent to disseminate it in violation of this section, or of the penal
laws or regulations of any other jurisdiction; or
      (6)   Advertises or otherwise promotes the sale of material represented
or held out by him to be obscene, whether or not it is obscene.
   (B)   Obscene defined. Any material or performance is OBSCENE if:
      (1)   The average person, applying contemporary adult community
standards, would find that, taken as a whole, it appeals to the prurient
interest;
      (2)   The average person, applying contemporary adult community
standards, would find that it depicts or describes, in a patently offensive
way, ultimate sexual acts or sadomasochistic sexual acts, whether normal or
perverted, actual or simulated, or masturbation, excretory functions, or lewd
exhibition of the genitals; and
      (3)   Taken as a whole, it lacks serious literary, artistic, political,
or scientific value.
   (C)   Interpretation of evidence.
      (1)   Obscenity shall be judged with reference to ordinary adults except
that it shall be judged with reference to children or other specially
susceptible audiences if it appears from the character of the material or the
circumstances of its dissemination to be specially designed for or directed to
such an audience.
      (2)   Where circumstances of production, presentation, sale,
dissemination, distribution, or publicity indicate that material is being
commercially exploited for the sake of its prurient appeal, such evidence is
probative with respect to the nature of the matter and can justify the
conclusion that the matter is lacking in serious literary, artistic, political,
or scientific value.
      (3)   In any prosecution for an offense under this section, evidence
shall be admissible to show:
         (a)   The character of the audience for which the material was
designed or to which it was directed;
         (b)   What the predominant appeal of the material would be for
ordinary adults or a special audience, and what effect, if any, it would
probably have on the behavior of such people;
         (c)   The artistic, literary, scientific, educational, or other merits
of the material, or absence thereof;
         (d)   The degree, if any, of public acceptance of the material in this
state;
         (e)   Appeal to prurient interest, or absence thereof, in advertising
or other promotion of the material;
         (f)   Purpose of the author, creator, publisher, or disseminator.
   (D)   Prima facie evidence. The creation, purchase, procurement, or
possession of a mold, engraved plate, or other embodiment of obscenity
specially adapted for reproducing multiple copies, or the possession of more
than three copies of obscene material shall be prima facie evidence of an
intent to disseminate.
   (E)   Affirmative defenses. It shall be an affirmative defense to obscenity
that the dissemination:
      (1)   Was not for gain and was made to personal associates other than
children under 18 years of age;
      (2)   Was to institutions or individuals having scientific or other
special justification for possession of such material.
(ILCS Chapter 720, Act 5, § 11-20)
Penalty, see § 133.999
§ 133.004 HARMFUL MATERIAL.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      DISTRIBUTE. Transfer possession of, whether with or without
consideration.
      HARMFUL TO MINORS. That quality of any description or representation, in
whatever form, of nudity, sexual conduct, sexual excitement, or sado-
masochistic abuse, when, taken as a whole, it (i) predominately appeals to the
prurient interest in sex of minors, (ii) is patently offensive to prevailing
standards in the adult community in the state as a whole with respect to what
is suitable material for minors, and (iii) lacks serious literary, artistic,
political, or scientific value for minors.
      KNOWINGLY. Having knowledge of the contents of the subject matter, or
recklessly failing to exercise reasonable inspection which would have disclosed
the contents.
      MATERIAL.  
         (a)   Any picture, photograph, drawing, sculpture, film, video game,
computer game, video or similar visual depiction, including any such
representation or image which is stored electronically; or
         (b)   Any book, magazine, printed matter however reproduced, or
recorded audio of any sort.
      MINOR. Any person under the age of 18.
      NUDITY. The showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area or
buttocks with less than a full opaque covering, or the showing of the female
breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any portion below the top of
the nipple, or the depiction of covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid
state.
      SADO-MASOCHISTIC ABUSE. Flagellation or torture by or upon a person clad
in undergarments, a mask or bizarre costume, or the condition of being
fettered, bound or otherwise physically restrained on the part of one clothed
for sexual gratification or stimulation.
      SEXUAL CONDUCT. Acts of masturbation, sexual intercourse, or physical
contact with a person's clothed or unclothed genitals, pubic area, buttocks or,
if such person be a female, breast.
      SEXUAL EXCITEMENT. The condition of human male or female genitals when in
a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
   (B)   A person is guilty of distributing harmful material to a minor when he
or she:
      (1)   Knowingly sells, lends, distributes, exhibits to, depicts to, or
gives away to a minor, knowing that the minor is under the age of 18 or failing
to exercise reasonable care in ascertaining the person’s true age:
         (a)   Any material which depicts nudity, sexual conduct or sado-
masochistic abuse, or which contains explicit and detailed verbal descriptions
or narrative accounts of sexual excitement, sexual conduct or sado-masochistic
abuse, and which taken as a whole is harmful to minors;
         (b)   A motion picture, show, or other presentation which depicts
nudity, sexual conduct or sado-masochistic abuse and is harmful to minors; or
         (c)   An admission ticket or pass to premises where there is exhibited
or to be exhibited such a motion picture, show, or other presentation; or
      (2)   Admits a minor to premises where there is exhibited or to be
exhibited such a motion picture, show, or other presentation, knowing that the
minor is a person under the age of 18 or failing to exercise reasonable care in
ascertaining the person's true age.
   (C)   In any prosecution arising under this section, it is an affirmative
defense:
      (1)   That the minor as to whom the offense is alleged to have been
committed exhibited to the accused a draft card, driver's license, birth
certificate or other official or apparently official document purporting to
establish that the minor was 18 years of age or older, which was relied upon by
the accused;
      (2)   That the defendant was in a parental or guardianship relationship
with the minor or that the minor was accompanied by a parent or legal guardian;
      (3)   That the defendant was a bona fide school, museum, or public
library, or was a person acting in the course of his or her employment as an
employee or official of such organization or retail outlet affiliated with and
serving the educational purpose of such organization;
      (4)   That the act charged was committed in aid of legitimate scientific
or educational purposes; or
      (5)   That an advertisement of harmful material as defined in this
section culminated in the sale or distribution of such harmful material to a
child under circumstances where there was no personal confrontation of the
child by the defendant, his employees, or agents, as where the order or request
for such harmful material was transmitted by mail, telephone, Internet or
similar means of communication, and delivery of such harmful material to the
child was by mail, freight, Internet or similar means of transport, which
advertisement contained the following statement, or a substantially similar
statement, and that the defendant required the purchaser to certify that he or
she was not under the age of 18 and that the purchaser falsely stated that he
or she was not under the age of 18: "NOTICE: It is unlawful for any person
under the age of 18 to purchase the matter advertised. Any person under the age
of 18 that falsely states that he or she is not under the age of 18 for the
purpose of obtaining the material advertised is guilty of a Class B misdemeanor
under the laws of the State."
   (D)   The predominant appeal to prurient interest of the material shall be
judged with reference to average children of the same general age of the child
to whom such material was sold, lent, distributed or given, unless it appears
from the nature of the matter or the circumstances of its dissemination or
distribution that it is designed for specially susceptible groups, in which
case the predominant appeal of the material shall be judged with reference to
its intended or probable recipient group.
   (E)   Distribution of harmful material in violation of this section is a
Class A misdemeanor. A second or subsequent offense is a Class 4 felony.
   (F)   Any person under the age of 18 that falsely states, either orally or
in writing, that he or she is not under the age of 18, or that presents or
offers to any person any evidence of age and identity that is false or not
actually his or her own for the purpose of ordering, obtaining, viewing, or
otherwise procuring or attempting to procure or view any harmful material is
guilty of a Class B misdemeanor.
(ILCS Chapter 720, Act 5, § 11-21)
Penalty, see § 133.999
DECEPTIVE PRACTICES
§ 133.015 GENERALLY.
   (A)   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      ACCOUNT HOLDER. Any person having a checking account or savings account
in a financial institution.
      FINANCIAL INSTITUTION. Any bank, savings and loan association, credit
union or other depository of money or medium of savings and collective
investment.
      INTENT TO DEFRAUD. To act wilfully, and with the specific intent to
deceive or cheat, for the purpose of causing financial loss to another, or to
bring some financial gain to oneself. It is not necessary to establish that any
person was actually defrauded or deceived.
   (B)   (1)   A person commits a deceptive practice when, with the intent to
defraud, the person does any of the following:
         (a)   He or she causes another, by deception or threat, to execute a
document disposing of property or a document by which a pecuniary obligation is
incurred;
         (b)   Being an officer, manager or other person participating in the
direction of a financial institution, he or she knowingly receives or permits
the receipt of a deposit or other investment, knowing that the institution is
insolvent;
         (c)   He or she knowingly makes or directs another to make a false or
deceptive statement addressed to the public for the purpose of promoting the
sale of property or services;
         (d)   With intent to obtain control over property or to pay for
property, labor or services of another, or in satisfaction of an obligation for
payment of tax under the Retailers’ Occupation Tax Act or any other tax due to
the state, he or she issues or delivers a check or other order upon a real or
fictitious depository for the payment of money, knowing that it will not be
paid by the depository. Failure to have sufficient funds or credit with the
depository when the check or other order is issued or delivered, or when such
check or other order is presented for payment and dishonored on each of two
occasions at least seven days apart, is prima facie evidence that the offender
knows that it will not be paid by the depository and that he or she has the
intent to defraud. In this subsection (d), PROPERTY includes rental property
(real or personal); or
         (e)   He or she issues or delivers a check or other order upon a real
or fictitious depository in an amount exceeding $150 in payment of an amount
owed on any credit transaction for property, labor or services, or in payment
of the entire amount owed on any credit transaction for property, labor or
services, knowing that it will not be paid by the depository, and thereafter
fails to provide funds or credit with the depository in the face amount of the
check or order within seven days of receiving actual notice from the depository
or payee of the dishonor of the check or order.
      (2)   A person convicted of a deceptive practice under division (B)(1)
(a), (b), (c), (d), or (e) above, except as otherwise provided by this section,
is guilty of a Class A misdemeanor.
   (C)   (1)   Any person who, with the intent to defraud, makes or causes to
be made, any false statement, in writing, in order to obtain an account with a
bank or other financial institution, or to obtain credit from a bank or other
financial institution, or to obtain services from a currency exchange, knowing
the writing to be false and with the intent that it be relied upon, is guilty
of a Class A misdemeanor.
      (2)   For the purpose of this division (C), the following definition
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
         FALSE STATEMENT. Any false statement representing identity, address or
employment of any person, firm or corporation.
      (3)   Any person who possesses with the intent to defraud, any check or
order for the payment of money, upon a real or fictitious account, without the
consent of the account holder or the issuing financial institution is guilty of
a Class A misdemeanor.
      (4)   Any person who possesses, with the intent to defraud, and without
the authority of the account holder or financial institution, any check
imprinter, signature imprinter or “certified” stamp is guilty of a Class A
misdemeanor.
      (5)   Any person who, with the intent to defraud, possesses any check
guarantee card or key card or identification card for cash dispensing machines
without the authority of the account holder or financial institution is guilty
of a Class A misdemeanor.
(ILCS Chapter 720, Act 5, § 17-1) (1981 Code, § 42.17, 17-1)
§ 133.016 IMPERSONATING OFFICER AND THE LIKE.
   (A)   A person commits a false personation when he or she falsely represents
himself or herself to be a member of any police, fraternal or veteran’s
organization, including the Illinois Police Association or a representative of
any charitable organization or when any person exhibits or uses in any manner
any decal, badge or insignia of any police organization.
   (B)   No person shall use the words “East Dundee Police,” “East Dundee
Police Department,” “East Dundee patrol person,” “East Dundee sergeant,” “East
Dundee lieutenant,” “East Dundee peace officer” or any words to the same effect
in the title of any organization, magazine or other publication without the
express approval of the Police Board.
   (C)   False impersonation or unapproved use of a name or title in violation
of this section is a Class C misdemeanor.
(1981 Code, § 42.17, 17-2)
Penalty, see § 133.999
Statutory reference:
   False personation; use of title; solicitation; certain entities, see ILCS
Chapter 720, Act 5, § 17-2
§ 133.017 DECEPTIVE ALTERING OR SALE OF COINS.
   (A)   A person commits a deceptive altering of coins when he or she, in any
manner, alters any coin to increase the value of the coin-to-coin collectors.
   (B)   A person commits a deceptive sale of coins when he or she sells or
advertises, for sale, coins he or she knows has been deceptively altered for a
higher rate or value than is indicated by the denomination of the coin.
   (C)   Deceptive altering or sale of coins is a Class A misdemeanor.
(1981 Code, § 42.17, 17-4)
§ 133.018 DECEPTIVE COLLECTION PRACTICES.
   A collection agency, as defined in the Collection Agency Act, or any
employee of a collection agency commits a deceptive collection practice, when,
with the intent to collect a debt owed to a person, corporation or other
entity, he or she:
   (A)   Represents falsely that he or she is an attorney, a police officer, a
sheriff or deputy sheriff, a bailiff, a county clerk or employee of a County
Clerk’s office or any other person who by statute is authorized to enforce the
law or any order of a court;
   (B)   While attempting to collect an alleged debt, misrepresents to the
alleged debtor or to his or her immediate family the corporate, partnership or
propriety name or other trade or business name under which the debt collector
is engaging in debt collections and which he or she is legally authorized to
use;
   (C)   While attempting to collect an alleged debt, adds to the debt any
service charge, interest or penalty which he or she is not entitled by law to
add;
   (D)   Threatens to ruin, destroy or otherwise adversely affect an alleged
debtor’s credit rating unless, at the same time, a disclosure is made in
accordance with federal law that the alleged debtor has a right to inspect his
or her credit rating; or
   (E)   Accepts from an alleged debtor a payment which he or she knows is not
owed. The commission of a deceptive collection practice is a business offense
punishable by a fine not to exceed $3,000.
(ILCS Chapter 720, Act 5, § 17-5) (1981 Code, § 42.17, 17-5)
CURFEW
§ 133.030 CURFEW.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      CURFEW HOURS.
         (a)   10:30 p.m. on any Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, or
Thursday until 6:00 a.m. of the following day.
         (b)   11:30 p.m. on any Friday or Saturday and until 6:00 a.m. of the
following day.
      EMERGENCY. An unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting
state that calls for immediate action. The term includes but is not limited to
a fire, a natural disaster, an automobile accident, or any situation requiring
immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life.
      ESTABLISHMENT. Any privately owned place of business operated for a
profit to which the public is invited, including but not limited to any place
of amusement or entertainment.
      GUARDIAN.
         (a)   A person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person
of a minor; or
         (b)   A public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by
a court.
      MINOR. Any person under 17 years of age.
      OPERATOR. Any individual, firm, association, partnership, or corporation
operating, managing, or conducting any establishment. The term includes the
members or partners of an association or partnership and the officers of a
corporation.
      PARENT. A person who is:
         (a)   A natural parent, adoptive parent, or step-parent of another
person; or
         (b)   At least 18 years of age and authorized by a parent or guardian
to have the care and custody of a minor.
      PUBLIC PLACE. Any place to which the public or a substantial group of the
public has access and includes but is not limit to streets, highways, and the
common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings,
transport facilities, and shops.
      REMAIN.
         (a)   To linger or stay; or
         (b)   To fail to leave premises when requested to do so by a police
officer or the owner, operator, or other person in control of the premises.
      SERIOUS BODILY INJURY. Bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of
death or that causes death, serious permanent disfigurement, or protracted loss
or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ.
   (B)   Offenses.
      (1)   A minor commits an offense if he or she remains in any public place
or on the premises of any establishment within the village during curfew hours.
      (2)   A parent or guardian of a minor commits an offense if he or she
knowingly permits, or by insufficient control, allows the minor to remain in
any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the village
during curfew hours.
      (3)   The owner, operator, or any employee of an establishment commits an
offense if he or she knowingly allows a minor to remain on the premises of the
establishment during curfew hours.
   (C)   Defenses.
      (1)   It is a defense to prosecution division (B) of this section that
the minor was:
         (a)   Accompanied by the minor’s parent or guardian;
         (b)   On an errand at the direction of the minor’s parent or guardian
without any detour orstop;
         (c)   In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;
         (d)   Engaged in an employment activity or going to or returning from
and employment activity without any detour or stop;
         (e)   Involved in an emergency;
         (f)   On the sidewalk abutting the minor's residence or abutting the
residence of a next-door neighbor if the neighbor did not complain to the
police department about the minor's presence;
         (g)   Attending an official school, religious, or other recreational
activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the village, a civic
organization, or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the
minor, or going to or returning home from, without any detour or stop, an
official school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults
and sponsored by the village, a civic organization, or another similar entity
that takes responsibility for the minor;
         (h)   Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States
Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the
right of assembly; or
         (i)   Married or had been married or is an emancipated minor under the
Emancipation ofMature Minors Act, as amended.
      (2)   It is a defense to prosecution under division (B)(3) that the
owner, operator, or employee of an establishment promptly notified the police
department that a minor was present on the premises of the establishment during
curfew hours and refused to leave.
   (D)   Enforcement. Before taking any enforcement action under this section,
a police officer shall ask the apparent offender’s age and reason for being in
the public place. The officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest
under this section unless the officer reasonably believes that an offense has
occurred and that, based on any response and other circumstances, no defense in
division (C) is present.
(1981 Code, § 42.19) (Am. Ord. 94-33, passed 12-5-1994; Am. Ord. 04-18, passed
6-7-2004)
Penalty, see § 133.999
CANNABIS CONTROL ACT
§ 133.060 LEGISLATIVE DECLARATION.
   (A)   The Board of Trustees of the village recognize that:
      (1)   The current state of scientific and medical knowledge concerning
the effects of cannabis makes it necessary to acknowledge the physical,
psychological and sociological damage which is incumbent upon its use;
      (2)   The use of cannabis occupies the unusual position of being widely
used and pervasive among the citizens of Illinois despite its harmful effects;
and
      (3)   Previous legislation enacted to control or forbid the use of
cannabis has often unnecessarily and unrealistically drawn a large segment of
our population within the criminal justice system without succeeding in
deterring the expansion of cannabis use.
   (B)   It is therefore, the intent of the Board of Trustees of the village,
in the interest of the health and welfare of the citizens of the village, to
establish a reasonable penalty system which is responsive to the current state
of knowledge concerning cannabis and which directs the greatest efforts of law
enforcement towards the commercial traffickers.
(ILCS Chapter 720, Act 550, § 1) (1981 Code, § 42.23, 23-701)
§ 133.061 SHORT TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Cannabis Control
Act.”
(ILCS Chapter 720, Act 550, § 2) (1981 Code, § 42.23, 23-702)
§ 133.062 DEFINITIONS.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/16574ba874f17dfbd958615eed907c929c4100f2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7683.jpg]Publisher's Note: This Section has been AMENDED by new
legislation (Ord. 25-33, adopted 6-2-2025). The text of the amendment will be
incorporated below when the ordinance is codified.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CANNABIS.
      (1)   Marihuana, hashish and other substances which are identified as
including any parts of the plant cannabis sativa, whether growing or not; the
seeds thereof, the resin extracted from any part of such plant; and any
compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or preparation of the plant,
its seeds or resin, including tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) and all other
cannabinol derivatives, including its naturally occurring or synthetically
produced ingredients, whether produced directly or indirectly by extraction, or
independently by means of chemical synthesis or by combination of extraction
and chemical synthesis.
      (2)   CANNABIS shall not include the mature stalks of the plant, fiber
produced from the stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of the plants, any
other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or preparation of the
mature stalks, except the resin extracted therefrom, fiber, oil or cake or the
sterilized seed of the plant which is incapable of germination.
   CASUAL DELIVERY. The delivery of not more than ten grams of any substance
containing cannabis without consideration.
   DELIVERY. The actual, constructive or attempted transfer or possession of
cannabis, with or without consideration, whether or not there is an agency
relationship.
   MANUFACTURE. The production, preparation, propagation, compounding,
conversion or processing of cannabis, either directly or indirectly, by
extraction from substances of natural origin, or independently by means of
chemical synthesis, and includes any packaging or repacking of cannabis or
labeling of its container, except that this term does not include preparation,
compounding, packaging or labeling of cannabis as an incident to lawful
research, teaching or chemical analysis and not for sale.
   PERSON. Any individual, corporation, government or governmental subdivision
or agency, business trust, estate, trust, partnership or association or any
other entity.
   PRODUCE or PRODUCTION. Planting, cultivating, tending or harvesting.
(ILCS Chapter 720, Act 550, § 3) (1981 Code, § 42.23, 23-703)
§ 133.063 POSSESSION.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/16574ba874f17dfbd958615eed907c929c4100f2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7683.jpg]Publisher's Note: This Section has been AMENDED by new
legislation (Ord. 25-33, adopted 6-2-2025). The text of the amendment will be
incorporated below when the ordinance is codified.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person knowingly to possess cannabis in
violation of the Cannabis Control Act (ILCS Chapter 720, Act 550, §§ 1 et
seq.), Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act (ILCS Chapter 410, Act 705, §§ 1 et
seq.) or the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program Act (ILCS Chapter
410, Act 130, §§ 1 et seq.).
   (B)   Any person who violates this subchapter with respect to:
      (1)   (a)   Not more than ten grams of any substance containing cannabis
is guilty of a civil law violation punishable by a minimum fine of $100 and a
maximum fine of $200. The proceeds of the fine shall be payable to the Clerk of
Circuit Court. Within 30 days after the deposit of the fine, the Clerk shall
distribute the proceeds of the fine as follows:
            1.   Ten dollars of the fine to the Circuit Clerk and $10 of the
fine to the law enforcement agency that issued the citation; the proceeds of
each $10 fine distributed to the Circuit Clerk and each $10 fine distributed to
the law enforcement agency that issued the citation for the violation shall be
used to defer the cost of automatic expungements under Criminal Identification
Act, § 5.2(a)(2.5);
            2.   Fifteen dollars to the county to fund drug addiction services;
            3.   Ten dollars to the Office of the State’s Attorneys Appellate
Prosecutor for use in training programs;
            4.   Ten dollars to the State’s Attorney; and
            5.   Any remainder of the fine to the law enforcement agency that
issued the citation for the violation.
         (b)   With respect to funds designated for the Department of State
Police, the moneys shall be remitted by the Circuit Court Clerk to the
Department of State Police within one month after receipt for deposit into the
State Police Operations Assistance Fund. With respect to funds designated for
the Department of Natural Resources, the Department of Natural Resources shall
deposit the moneys into the Conservation Police Operations Assistance Fund.
      (2)   More than ten grams, but not more than ten grams, of any substance
containing cannabis is guilty of a Class B misdemeanor; and
      (3)   More than 30 grams, but not more than 100 grams, of any substance
containing cannabis is guilty of a Class A misdemeanor.
(1981 Code, § 42.23, 23-704) (Am. Ord. 20-03, passed 2-25-2020) Penalty, see §
133.999
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see ILCS Chapter 720, Act 550, § 4
§ 133.064 MANUFACTURE.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person knowingly to manufacture, deliver or
possess with intent to deliver or manufacture cannabis in violation of the
Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act (ILCS Chapter 410, Act 705, §§ 1 et seq.) or
the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program Act (ILCS Chapter 410, Act
130, §§ 1 et seq.).
   (B)   Any person who violates this subchapter with respect to:
      (1)   Not more than two and one-half grams of any substance containing
cannabis is guilty of a Class B misdemeanor; and
      (2)   More than two and one-half grams, but not more than ten grams, of
any substance containing cannabis is guilty of a Class A misdemeanor.
(1981 Code, § 42.23, 23-705) (Am. Ord. 20-03, passed 2-25-2020)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see ILCS Chapter 720, Act 550, § 5
§ 133.065 CASUAL DELIVERY.
   Any delivery of cannabis which is a casual delivery shall be treated, in all
respects, as possession of cannabis for purposes of penalties.
(ILCS Chapter 720, Act 550, § 6) (1981 Code, § 42.23, 23-706)
§ 133.066 MINORS.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/16574ba874f17dfbd958615eed907c929c4100f2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7683.jpg]Publisher's Note: This Section has been AMENDED by new
legislation (Ord. 25-33, adopted 6-2-2025). The text of the amendment will be
incorporated below when the ordinance is codified.
   Any person under 18 years of age who violates §§
133.063 and
133.064 may be treated by the court in accordance with the Juvenile Court Act.
(ILCS Chapter 720, Act 550, § 7(b)) (1981 Code, § 42.23, 23-707)
§ 133.067 PRODUCTION.
   (A)   Any person who knowingly produces not more than five cannabis sativa
plants is guilty of a civil violation punishable by a minimum fine of $100 and
a maximum fine of $200. The proceeds of the fine are payable to the Clerk of
the Circuit Court. Within 30 days after the deposit of the fine, the Clerk
shall distribute the proceeds of the fine as follows:
      (1)   Ten dollar fine to the Circuit Clerk and $10 fine to the law
enforcement agency that issued the citation; the proceeds of each $10 fine
distributed to the Circuit Clerk and each $10 fine distributed to the law
enforcement agency that issued the citation for the violation shall be used to
defer the cost of automatic expungements under division (B) of the Criminal
Identification Act;
      (2)   Fifteen dollars to the county to fund drug addiction services;
      (3)   Ten dollars to the Office of the State’s Attorneys Appellate
Prosecutor for use in training programs;
      (4)   Ten dollars to the State’s Attorney; and
      (5)   Any remainder of the fine to the law enforcement agency that issued
the citation for the violation.
   (B)   With respect to funds designated for the Illinois State Police, the
moneys shall be remitted by the Circuit Court Clerk to the Illinois State
Police within one month after receipt for deposit into the State Police
Operations Assistance Fund. With respect to funds designated for the Department
of Natural Resources, the Department of Natural Resources shall deposit the
moneys into the Conservation Police Operations Assistance Fund.
(ILCS Chapter 720, Act 550, § 8(a)) (1981 Code, § 42.23, 23-708)
MOB ACTION
§ 133.080 MOB ACTION GENERALLY.
   (A)   Mob action consists of any of the following:
      (1)   The assembly of two or more persons to do an unlawful act; or
      (2)   The assembly of two or more persons, without authority of law, for
the purpose of doing violence to the person or property of any one supposed to
have been guilty of a violation of the law, or for the purpose of exercising
correctional powers or regulative powers over any person by violence.
   (B)   Mob action is a Class C misdemeanor.
   (C)   A participant in a mob action who does not withdraw when commanded to
do so by a peace officer commits a Class A misdemeanor.
(ILCS Chapter 720, Act 5, § 25-1) (1981 Code, § 42.25, 25-1)
TOBACCO
§ 133.095 DEFINITION.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/16574ba874f17dfbd958615eed907c929c4100f2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7683.jpg]Publisher's Note: This Section has been AMENDED by new
legislation (Ord. 25-33, adopted 6-2-2025). The text of the amendment will be
incorporated below when the ordinance is codified.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE PRODUCTS. A product or device not consisting of or
containing tobacco products that provides for the ingestion into the body of
nicotine, whether by chewing, smoking, absorbing, dissolving, inhaling,
snorting, sniffing, or by any other means. ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE PRODUCT
excludes cigarettes, smokeless tobacco, or other tobacco products and any
product approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration as a non-
tobacco product for sale as a tobacco cessation product, as a tobacco
dependence product, or for other medical purposes, and is being marketed and
sold solely for that approved purpose.
   TOBACCO PRODUCTS. Any substance containing tobacco leaf, including, but not
limited to cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, snuff, chewing or dipping tobacco.
(Ord. 97-06, passed 5-5-1997; Am. Ord. 18-11, passed 6-18-2018)
§ 133.096 PURCHASE BY MINORS.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/16574ba874f17dfbd958615eed907c929c4100f2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7683.jpg]Publisher's Note: This Section has been AMENDED by new
legislation (Ord. 25-33, adopted 6-2-2025). The text of the amendment will be
incorporated below when the ordinance is codified.
   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 21 years of age to
purchase tobacco products or alternative nicotine products or to misrepresent
their identity or age or to use any false or altered identification for the
purpose of purchasing tobacco products or alternative nicotine products.
(Ord. 97-06, passed 5-5-1997; Am. Ord. 18-11, passed 6-18-2018; Am. Ord. 19-23,
passed 7-8-2019)
Penalty, see § 133.999
§ 133.097 SALE TO MINORS.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/16574ba874f17dfbd958615eed907c929c4100f2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7683.jpg]Publisher's Note: This Section has been AMENDED by new
legislation (Ord. 25-33, adopted 6-2-2025). The text of the amendment will be
incorporated below when the ordinance is codified.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to sell, cause to be
sold, offer for sale, give away or deliver tobacco products or alternative
nicotine products to any person under the age of 21 years.
   (B)   A person or entity who has reason to believe that a person attempting
to purchase tobacco products or alternative nicotine products is under the age
of 21 years, they shall require photographic identification from the individual
prior to making the sale.
(Ord. 97-06, passed 5-5-1997; Am. Ord. 18-11, passed 6-18-2018; Am. Ord. 19-23,
passed 7-8-2019)
Penalty, see § 133.999
§ 133.098 POSSESSION BY MINOR.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/16574ba874f17dfbd958615eed907c929c4100f2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7683.jpg]Publisher's Note: This Section has been AMENDED by new
legislation (Ord. 25-33, adopted 6-2-2025). The text of the amendment will be
incorporated below when the ordinance is codified.
   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 21 years to be in
possession of any tobacco product(s) or alternative nicotine product(s).
(Ord. 97-06, passed 5-5-1997; Am. Ord. 18-11, passed 6-18-2018; Am. Ord. 19-23,
passed 7-8-2019)
Penalty, see § 133.999
DRUG PARAPHERNALIA
§ 133.100 DRUG PARAPHERNALIA.
   As used in this section, unless the context otherwise requires, DRUG
PARAPHERNALIA means all equipment, products and materials of any kind, other
than methamphetamine manufacturing materials, as defined in Section 10 of the
Methamphetamine Control and Community Protection Act, which are intended to be
used unlawfully in planting, producing, processing, preparing, testing,
analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, injecting,
ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing into the human body cannabis or a
controlled substance in violation of the Cannabis Control Act, the Cannabis
Regulation and Tax Act, the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program Act,
the Illinois Controlled Substances Act, or the Methamphetamine Control and
Community Protection Act. It includes, but is not limited to:
   (A)   Kits intended to be used unlawfully in manufacturing, compounding,
converting, producing, processing or preparing cannabis or a controlled
substance;
   (B)   Isomerization devices intended to be used unlawfully in increasing the
potency of any species of plant which is cannabis or a controlled substance;
   (C)   Testing equipment intended to be used unlawfully in a private home for
identifying or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of cannabis
or controlled substances;
   (D)   Dilutents and adulterants intended to be used unlawfully for cutting
cannabis or a controlled substance by private persons;
   (E)   Objects intended to be used unlawfully in ingesting, inhaling or
otherwise introducing cannabis, cocaine, hashish, or hashish oil into the human
body including, where applicable, the following items:
      (1)   Water pipes;
      (2)   Carburetion tubes and devices;
      (3)   Smoking and carburetion masks;
      (4)   Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials;
      (5)   Carburetor pipes;
      (6)   Electric pipes;
      (7)   Air-driven pipes;
      (8)   Chillums;
      (9)   Bongs;
      (10)   Ice pipes or chillers;
      (11)   Any item whose purpose, as announced or described by the seller,
is for use in violation of this section.
(Ord. 08-38, passed 7-7-2008; Am. Ord. 20-03, passed 2-25-2020) Penalty, see §
133.999
§ 133.101 DETERMINING FACTORS.
   In determining whether an object is drug paraphernalia for the purpose of
enforcing this subchapter, the following factors should be considered in
addition to all other logically relevant factors:
   (A)   Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the object
concerning its use;
   (B)   Prior convictions, if any, of an owner, or anyone in control of the
object under any state or federal law relating to any controlled substance;
   (C)   The proximity of the object to controlled substances;
   (D)   The existence of any residue of controlled substances on the object;
   (E)   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of the owner, or of
anyone in control of the object, to deliver it to persons whom he or she knows,
or reasonably should know, intend to use the object to facilitate a violation
of this section; the innocence of an owner, or of anyone in control of the
object, as to direct violation of this section, shall not prevent a finding
that the object is intended for use, or designed for use as drug paraphernalia;
   (F)   Instructions, oral or written, provided with the object concerning its
use;
   (G)   Descriptive materials accompanying the object which explain or depict
its use;
   (H)   National and local advertising concerning its use;
   (I)   The manner in which the object is displayed for sale;
   (J)   Whether the owner, or anyone in control of the object, is a legitimate
supplier of like related items to the community, such as a licensed distributor
or dealer of tobacco products;
   (K)   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of sales of the object
(s) to the total sales of the business enterprise;
   (L)   The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the object in the
community; and
   (M)   Expert testimony concerning its use.
(Ord. 08-38, passed 7-7-2008) Penalty, see §
133.999
§ 133.102 SALE, DISPLAY, ETC. OF DRUG PARAPHERNALIA PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep for sale, offer for sale,
sell or deliver for any commercial consideration any item of drug
paraphernalia.
   (B)   The prohibition in this section shall not apply to manufacturers,
wholesalers, jobbers, licensed medical technicians, technologists, nurses,
hospitals, research teaching institutions, clinical laboratories, medical
doctors, osteopaths, physicians, dentists, chiropodists, veterinarians,
pharmacists or embalmers in the lawful course of their businesses or
professions, nor to common carriers or warehouses or their employees engaged in
the lawful transportation of such paraphernalia, nor to public officers or
employees while engaged in the performance of their official duties nor to
persons suffering from asthma, or any other medical condition requiring self-
injection.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly possess an item of
drug paraphernalia with the intent to use it in ingesting, inhaling or
otherwise introducing cannabis or a controlled substance into the human body or
in preparing cannabis or a controlled substance for that use.
(Ord. 08-38, passed 7-7-2008; Am. Ord. 14-01, passed 1-13-2014) Penalty, see §
133.999
§ 133.103 EXEMPTIONS.
   Section
133.102 does not apply to:
   (A)   Items used in the preparation, compounding, packaging, labeling, or
other use of cannabis or a controlled substance as an incident to lawful
research, teaching, or chemical analysis and not for sale.
   (B)   Items historically and customarily used in connection with the
planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing,
compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing,
packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting,
or inhaling of tobacco or any other lawful substance. Items exempt under this
division include, but are not limited to, garden hoes, rakes, sickles, baggies,
tobacco pipes, and cigarette-rolling papers.
   (C)   Items which are used for decorative purposes, when such items have
been rendered completely inoperable or incapable of being used for any illicit
purpose prohibited by this chapter.
   (D)   A person who is legally authorized to possess hypodermic syringes or
needles under the Hypodermic Syringes and Needles Act.
   (E)   Items permitted or authorized pursuant to the Cannabis Control Act
(ILCS Chapter 720, Act 550, §§ 1 et seq.), Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act
(ILCS Chapter 410, Act 705, §§ 1 et seq.) and/or the Compassionate Use of
Medical Cannabis Program, ILCS Chapter 410, Act 130, §§ 1 et seq.
(Ord. 14-01, passed 1-13-2014; Am. Ord. 20-03, passed 2-25-2020)
§ 133.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   A violation of §
133.001(A)(1) is a Class C misdemeanor. A violation of §
133.001(A)(2), (A)(6), or (A)(7) is a Class A misdemeanor. A violation of §
133.001(A)(4) or (6) is a Class B misdemeanor.
   (C)   A person convicted of a violation of §
133.030 shall be guilty of a petty offense and shall be fined not less than
$25, nor more than $500.
   (D)   Any minor or other person convicted of a violation of §§
133.095 et seq. shall be guilty of a petty offense and shall be fined not less
than $25, nor more than $750, for each offense.
   (E)   Any person who violates §§
133.100 et seq. shall be punished with a fine not to exceed $750 and not less
than $100. Each day of the violation shall be considered a separate offense.
(1981 Code, § 42.19, 19-1) (Ord. 89-14, passed 8-21-1989; Am. Ord. 94-33,
passed 12-5-1994; Am. Ord. 97-06, passed 5-5-1997; Am. Ord. 08-38, passed 7-7-
2008)
CHAPTER 134: OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE
Section
Public Demonstration
   
134.01   Declaration of purpose
   
134.02   Unlawful action; parade permit
   
134.03   Acting with other groups; size of assemblage
   
134.04   Notice of assemblage
   
134.05   Time of holding
   
134.06   Sentence
PUBLIC DEMONSTRATION
§ 134.01 DECLARATION OF PURPOSE.
   It is declared to be the public policy of the village:
   (A)   The maintenance of good order on roadways, as defined in ILCS Chapter
625, Act 5, § 1-179, is a permanent responsibility of democratic government;
   (B)   The public health, welfare and safety of the community require that
the movement of vehicular traffic on the roadways be lawfully conducted with a
minimum of disruption;
   (C)   The practice of unhindered or restrained picketing or demonstrating on
the roadways has caused disruption of police, fire and emergency services and
injury to persons regardless of participation in the march, assembly or
demonstration;
   (D)   The practice of multiple demonstrations on the same day in different
locations in municipalities and unincorporated areas of counties has
unreasonably deprived the citizens of the police, fire and emergency services;
and
   (E)   The provisions herein enacted are necessary the protection of the
health, welfare and safety to the public.
(1981 Code, § 42.30, 30-2)
§ 134.02 UNLAWFUL ACTION; PARADE PERMIT.
   It is unlawful for any person, group or organization to conduct or
participate in any march, assembly, meeting or gathering on roadways in more
than one specified area of or location in, the village, on any given day,
unless it is acting under authority of a duly issued municipal parade or
demonstration permit, or if not, with permission of the principal law
enforcement officer.
(1981 Code, § 42.30, 30-3)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 134.03 ACTING WITH OTHER GROUPS; SIZE OF ASSEMBLAGE.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any group or organization or any individual acting
with the group or organization, to conduct or participate in any march,
assembly, meeting or gathering on roadways, unless the march, assembly, meeting
or gathering is limited to such numbers as, in the opinion of the principal law
enforcement officer, will not obstruct pedestrian or vehicular traffic in an
unreasonable manner.
   (B)   The principal law enforcement officer shall, within 12 hours of
receiving the notice required by §
134.04, inform the group or organization as to the limitation on numbers of
persons allowed to participate.
(1981 Code, § 42.30, 30-4)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 134.04 NOTICE OF ASSEMBLAGE.
   It is unlawful for any group or organization to conduct or participate in
any march, assembly, meeting or gathering on roadways unless the principal law
enforcement officer has been given notice, in writing, of the location, the
maximum number of persons participating and the names and addresses of the
organizers of any such march, assembly, meeting or gathering, its route and its
time of inception and duration at least 24 hours before the inception.
(1981 Code, § 42.30, 30-5)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 134.05 TIME OF HOLDING.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any group, organization or any individual to
conduct or participate in any march, assembly, meeting or gathering on roadways
during peak traffic periods unless authorized by the principal law enforcement
officer of the village.
   (B)   Peak traffic periods, unless otherwise set by the Village Board, are
for the purposes of this section declared to from 7:30 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. in the
forenoon, and from 4:30 p.m. to 6:00 p.m. in the afternoon, Monday through
Friday, except for state and national holidays.
(1981 Code, § 42.30, 30-6)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 134.06 SENTENCE.
   Violation of the section is a Class A misdemeanor.
(1981 Code, § 42.30, 30-8)
CHAPTER 135: OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC JUSTICE AND ADMINISTRATION
Section
   
135.01   Resisting or obstructing a peace officer, firefighter, or correctional
institution employee
   
135.02   Refusing to aid an officer
   
135.03   Tampering with public notice
§ 135.01 RESISTING OR OBSTRUCTING A PEACE OFFICER, FIREFIGHTER, OR CORRECTIONAL
INSTITUTION EMPLOYEE.
   (A)   (1)   No person shall knowingly resist arrest or obstruct the
performance by one known to the person to be a peace officer, firefighter, or
correctional institution employee of any authorized act within his or her
official capacity.
      (2)   In addition to any other sentence that may be imposed, a court
shall order any person convicted of resisting or obstructing a peace officer,
firefighter, or correctional institution employee to be sentenced to a minimum
of 48 consecutive hours of imprisonment or ordered to perform community service
for not less that 100 hours as may be determined by the court. The person shall
not be eligible for probation in order to reduce the sentence of imprisonment
or community service.
      (3)   A person convicted for a violation of this section whose violation
was the proximate cause of injury to a peace officer, firefighter, or
correctional institution employee is guilty of a Class 4 felony.
   (B)   For purposes of this section, the term CORRECTIONAL INSTITUTION
EMPLOYEE shall mean any person employed to supervise and control inmates
incarcerated in a penitentiary, state farm, reformatory, prison, jail, house of
correction, police detention area, half-way house, or other institution or
place for the incarceration or custody of persons under sentence for offenses
or awaiting trial or sentence for offenses, under arrest for an offense, a
violation of probation, a violation of parole, a violation of aftercare
release, a violation of mandatory supervised release, or awaiting a hearing or
preliminary hearing on setting the conditions of pretrial release, or who are
sexually dangerous persons or who are sexually violent persons. FIREFIGHTER
means any individual, either as an employee or volunteer, of a regularly
constituted fire department of a municipality or fire protection district who
performs fire fighting duties, including, but not limited to, the fire chief,
assistant fire chief, captain, engineer, driver, ladder person, hose person,
pipe person, and any other member of a regularly constituted fire department.
FIREFIGHTER also means a person employed by the Office of the State Fire
Marshal to conduct arson investigations.
   (C)   It is an affirmative defense to a violation of this section if a
person resists or obstructs the performance of one known by the person to be a
firefighter by returning to or remaining in a dwelling, residence, building, or
other structure to rescue or to attempt to rescue any person.
   (D)   A person shall not be subject to arrest for resisting arrest under
this section unless there is an underlying offense for which the person was
initially subject to arrest.
(ILCS Chapter 720, Act 5, § 31-1)
Penalty, see § 130.999
§ 135.02 REFUSING TO AID AN OFFICER.
   No person, upon command, shall refuse or knowingly reasonably fail to aid a
person known by him to be a police officer in:
   (A)   Apprehending a person whom the officer is authorized to apprehend; or
   (B)   Preventing the commission by another of any offense.
(ILCS Chapter 720, Act 5, § 31-8)
Penalty, see § 130.999
§ 135.03 TAMPERING WITH PUBLIC NOTICE.
   No person shall knowingly and without lawful authority alter, destroy,
deface, remove, or conceal any public notice posted according to law, during
the time for which the notice was to remain posted.
(ILCS Chapter 720, Act 5, § 32-9)
Penalty, see § 130.999
CHAPTER 136: OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY
Section
Litter
   
136.01   Definitions
   
136.02   Dumping or depositing of litter prohibited; exemptions
   
136.03   Dumping or depositing litter from motor vehicle prohibited
   
136.04   Accumulation of litter prohibited
   
136.05   Presumption of violation by operator throwing litter from motor
vehicle
   
136.06   Receptacles required in public areas
   
136.07   Power of court to order removal of litter
LITTER
§ 136.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of §§
136.01 through
136.07 the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings
ascribed to them respectively.
   LITTER. Any discarded, used, or unconsumed substance or waste. LITTER may
include, but is not limited to, any garbage, trash, refuse, cigarettes, debris,
rubbish, grass clippings, or other lawn or garden waste; newspaper, magazines,
glass, metal, plastic or paper containers, or other packaging construction
material, abandoned vehicle, as defined in ILCS Chapter 625, Act 5, §§ 1-100 et
seq., motor vehicle parts, furniture, bicycles, yard maintenance equipment,
books, electronics, clothing, clothing accessories, shoes, purses, backpacks,
jewelry, small appliances, toys, housewares, oil, carcass of a dead animal, any
nauseous or offensive matter of any kind; any object likely to injure any
person or create a traffic hazard, potentially infectious medical waste as
defined in ILCS Chapter 415, Act 5, § 3.360; or anything else of an unsightly
or unsanitary nature, which has been discarded, abandoned, or otherwise
disposed of improperly.
(ILCS Chapter 415, Act 105, § 3)
   MOTOR VEHICLE. As defined in
Chapter 70 of this Code of Ordinances.
(Am. Ord. 15-29, passed 6-15-2015)
§ 136.02 DUMPING OR DEPOSITING OF LITTER PROHIBITED; EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   No person shall dump, deposit, drop, throw, discard, leave, cause, or
permit the dumping, depositing, dropping, throwing, discarding, or leaving of
litter upon any public or private property in this village, or upon or into any
river, lake, pond, or other stream or body of water in this village unless:
      (1)   The property has been designated by the village or any of its
agencies for the disposal of litter, and the litter is disposed of on that
property in accordance with the applicable rules and regulations of the state
Pollution Control Board;
      (2)   The litter is placed into a receptacle or other container intended
by the owner or tenant in lawful possession of that property for the deposit of
litter;
      (3)   The person is the owner or tenant in lawful possession of the
property or has first obtained the consent of the owner or tenant in lawful
possession, or unless the act is done under the personal direction of the owner
or tenant and does not create a public health or safety hazard, a public
nuisance, or a fire hazard;
      (4)   The person is acting under the direction of proper public officials
during special cleanup days; and/or
      (5)   The person is lawfully acting in or reacting to an emergency
situation where health and safety is threatened, and removes and properly
disposes of any litter, including but not limited to potentially infectious
medical waste as defined in ILCS Chapter 415, Act 5, § 3.360, when the
emergency situation no longer exists.
   (B)   (1)   Any person convicted of a violation of this section shall be
fined not less than $10 nor more than $500.
      (2)   An individual convicted of violating this section by disposing of
litter upon a public highway may, in addition to any other penalty, be required
to maintain litter control for 30 days over a designated portion of that
highway, including, at the discretion of the agency having jurisdiction over
the section of highway in question, the site where the offense occurred, as
provided in Section 50 of the Illinois Adopt-A-Highway Act.
(ILCS Chapter 415, Act 105, §§ 4 and 8)
§ 136.03 DUMPING OR DEPOSITING LITTER FROM MOTOR VEHICLE PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall dump, deposit, drop, throw, discard, or otherwise
dispose of litter from any motor vehicle upon any public highway, upon any
public or private property or upon or into any river, lake, pond, stream, or
body of water in this village except as permitted under §
136.02 (A)(1) through (5). Nor shall any person transport, by any means,
garbage or refuse from any dwelling, residence, place of business, farm, or
other site to and deposit the material in, around, or on top of trash barrels
or other receptacles placed along public highways or at roadside rest areas.
   (B)   (1)   Any person convicted of a violation of this section shall be
fined not less than $10 nor more than $500.
      (2)   An individual convicted of violating this section by disposing of
litter upon a public highway may, in addition to any other penalty, be required
to maintain litter control for 30 days over a designated portion of that
highway, including, at the discretion of the agency having jurisdiction over
the section of highway in question, the site where the offense occurred, as
provided in Section 50 of the Illinois Adopt-A-Highway Act.
(ILCS Chapter 415, Act 105, §§ 5 and 8)
§ 136.04 ACCUMULATION OF LITTER PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall allow litter to accumulate upon real property, of
which the person charged is the owner or tenant in control, in such a manner as
to constitute a public nuisance or in such a manner that the litter may be
blown or otherwise carried by the natural elements on to the real property of
another person.
   (B)   Any person convicted of a violation of this section shall be fined not
less than $10 nor more than $500.
(ILCS Chapter 415, Act 105, §§ 6 and 8)
§ 136.05 PRESUMPTION OF VIOLATION BY OPERATOR THROWING LITTER FROM MOTOR
VEHICLE.
   Whenever litter is thrown, deposited, dropped, or dumped from any motor
vehicle not carrying passengers for hire, the presumption is created that the
operator of that motor vehicle has violated §
136.03, but that presumption may be rebutted.
(ILCS Chapter 415, Act 105, § 9)
§ 136.06 RECEPTACLES REQUIRED IN PUBLIC AREAS.
   (A)   In order to assist the public in complying with this chapter, the
owner or person in control of any property which is held out to the public as a
place for assemblage, the transaction of business, recreation, or as a public
way shall cause to be placed and maintained receptacles for the deposit of
litter of sufficient volume and in sufficient numbers to meet the needs of the
numbers of people customarily coming on or using the property.
   (B)   For purposes of this section, PROPERTY HELD OUT TO THE PUBLIC FOR THE
TRANSACTION OF BUSINESS includes, but is not limited to commercially operated
parks, campgrounds, drive-in restaurants, automobile service stations, business
parking lots, car washes, shopping centers, marinas, boat launching areas,
industrial parking lots, boat moorage and fueling stations, piers, beaches and
bathing areas, airports, roadside rest stops, drive-in movies, and shopping
malls; and PROPERTY HELD OUT TO THE PUBLIC FOR ASSEMBLAGE, RECREATION, OR AS A
PUBLIC WAY includes, but is not limited to any property that is publicly owned
or operated for any of the purposes stated in the definition in this division
for PROPERTY HELD OUT TO THE PUBLIC FOR THE TRANSACTION OF BUSINESS but
excludes state highway rights-of-way and rest areas located thereon.
   (C)   If no litter receptacles are placed on property described in this
section, the owner or person in control of the property shall be fined $100 for
violating this section. If the owner or person in control of the property has
placed litter receptacles on his property but the number or size of the
receptacles has proved inadequate to meet the needs of the numbers of people
coming on or using his property as indicated by the condition and appearance of
that property, and the owner or person in control has failed to provide
sufficient or adequate receptacles within ten days after being made aware of
that fact by written notice from the police, he shall be fined $25 for each
receptacle not so provided and maintained.
(ILCS Chapter 415, Act 105, § 10)
§ 136.07 POWER OF COURT TO ORDER REMOVAL OF LITTER.
   The penalties prescribed in this chapter are in addition to, and not in lieu
of any penalties, rights, remedies, duties, or liabilities which may be
otherwise imposed or conferred by a court.
(ILCS Chapter 415, Act 105, § 8)
CHAPTER 137: GAMBLING OFFENSES
Section
   
137.01   Definitions
   
137.02   Gambling
   
137.03   Keeping a gambling place
   
137.04   Seizure of gambling devices and gambling funds
§ 137.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter the following words and phrases shall have
the following meanings ascribed to them respectively.
   GAMBLING DEVICE. Any clock, tape machine, slot machine, or other machines or
device for the reception of money or other thing of value on chance or skill,
or upon the action of which money or other thing of value is staked, hazarded,
bet, won, or lost; or any mechanism, furniture, fixture, equipment, or other
device designed primarily for use in a gambling place. A GAMBLING DEVICE does
not include the following, as more specifically defined in ILCS Chapter 720,
Act 5, § 28-2 (a)(1) through (a)(4) or the Video Gaming Act (ILCS Chapter 230,
Act 40, §§ 1 et seq.):
      (1)   Coin-in-the-slot operated mechanical devices.
      (2)   Vending machines.
      (3)   Crane games.
      (4)   Redemption machines.
      (5)   Video gaming terminals permitted under the Illinois Video Gaming
Act (ILCS Chapter 230, Act 40, §§ 1 et seq.)
   INTERNET. An interactive computer service or system or an information
service, system, or access software provided that provides or enables computer
access by multiple users to a computer server, including but not limited to an
information service, system, or access software provider that provides access
to a network system commonly known as the internet or any comparable system or
service, and also including but not limited to a world-wide web page,
newsgroup, message board, mailing list, or chat area on any interactive
computer service or system or other online service. ACCESS and COMPUTER have
the meanings ascribed to them in ILCS Chapter 720, Act 5, § 16D-2.
   LOTTERY. Any scheme or procedure whereby one or more prizes are distributed
by chance among persons who have paid or promised consideration for a chance to
win such prizes, whether such scheme or procedure is called a lottery, raffle,
gift, sale, or some other name, excluding savings promotion raffles authorized
under section 5g of the Illinois Banking Act (ILCS Chapter 205, Act 5, § 5g),
section 7008 of the Savings Bank Act (ILCS Chapter 205, Act 205, § 7008),
section 42.7 of the Illinois Credit Union Act (ILCS Chapter 205, Act 305, §
42.7), section 5136B of the National Bank Act (12 U.S.C. 25a), or section 4 of
the Home Owners’ Loan Act (12 U.S.C. 1463).
   POLICY GAME. Any scheme or procedure whereby a person promises or guarantees
by any instrument, bill, certificate, writing, token, or other device that any
particular number, character, ticket, or certificate shall in the event of any
contingency in the nature of a lottery entitle the purchaser or holder to
receive money, property, or evidence of debt.
(ILCS Chapter 720, Act 5, § 28-2) (Am. Ord. 12-78, passed 10-1-2012)
§ 137.02 GAMBLING.
   (A)   A person commits gambling when, within the corporate limits of the
village, he or she:
      (1)   Knowingly plays a game of chance or skill for money or other thing
of value, unless excepted in division (B);
      (2)   Knowingly makes a wager upon the result of any game, contest, or
any political nomination, appointment, or election;
      (3)   Knowingly operates, keeps, owns, uses, purchases, exhibits, rents,
sells, bargains for the sale or lease of, manufactures, or distributes any
gambling device;
      (4)   Contracts to have or give himself, herself or another the option to
buy or sell, or contracts to buy or sell, at a future time, any grain or other
commodity whatsoever, or any stock or security of any company, as described in
ILCS Chapter 720, Act 5, § 28-1(a)(4);
      (5)   Knowingly owns or possesses any book, instrument, or apparatus by
means of which bets or wagers have been, or are, recorded or registered, or
knowingly possesses any money which he or she has received in the courses of a
bet or wager;
      (6)   Knowingly sells pools upon the result of any game or contest of
skill or chance, political nomination, appointment, or election;
      (7)   Knowingly sets up or promotes any lottery or sells, offers to sell,
or transfers any ticket or share for any lottery;
      (8)   Knowingly sets up or promotes any policy game or sells, offers to
sell, or knowingly possesses or transfers any policy ticket, slip, record,
document, or other similar device;
      (9)   Knowingly drafts, prints, or publishes any lottery ticker or share,
or any policy ticket, slip, record, document or similar device, except for such
activity related to lotteries, bingo games, and raffles authorized by and
conducted in accordance with the laws of Illinois or any other state or foreign
government;
      (10)   Knowingly advertises any lottery or policy game, except for such
activity related to lotteries, bingo games, and raffles authorized by and
conducted in accordance with the laws of Illinois or any other state;
      (11)   Knowingly transmits information as to wagers, betting odds, or
changes in betting odds by telephone, telegraph, radio, semaphore, or similar
means; or knowingly installs or maintains equipment for the transmission or
receipt of such information; except that nothing in this division prohibits
transmission or receipt of such information for use in news reporting of
sporting events or contests; or
      (12)   Knowingly establishes, maintains, or operates an internet site
that permits a person to play a game of chance or skill for money or other
thing of value by means of the internet or to make a wager upon the result of
any game, contest, political nomination, appointment, or election by means of
the internet. This division (A)(12) does not apply to activities referenced in
division (B)(6) below.
   (B)   Participants in any of the following activities shall not be convicted
of gambling:
      (1)   Agreements to compensate for loss caused by the happening of chance
including without limitation contracts of indemnity or guaranty and life or
health or accident insurance;
      (2)   Offers of prizes, awards, or compensation to the actual contestants
in any bona fide contest for the determination of skill, speed, strength, or
endurance or to the owners of animals or vehicles entered in such contest;
      (3)   Pari-mutuel betting as authorized by the law of this state;
      (4)   Manufacture of gambling devices, including the acquisition of
essential parts therefor and the assembly thereof, for transportation in
interstate or foreign commerce to any place outside this state when such
transportation is not prohibited by any applicable federal law;
      (5)   The game commonly known as “bingo,” when conducted in accordance
with ILCS Chapter 230, Act 25, §§ 1 et seq.;
      (6)   (a)   Lotteries when conducted by the state in accordance with ILCS
Chapter 20, Act 1605, §§ 1 et seq. This exemption includes any activity
conducted by the Department of Revenue to sell lottery tickets pursuant to the
provisions of the Illinois Lottery Law (ILCS Chapter 20, Act 1605) and its
rules.
         (b)   The purchase of lottery tickets through the internet for a
lottery conducted by the state under the program established in § 7.12 of the
Illinois Lottery Law (ILCS Chapter 20, Act 1605, § 7.12);
      (7)   Possession of an antique slot machine that is neither used nor
intended to be used in the operation or promotion of any unlawful gambling
activity or enterprise. For the purpose of this division, an ANTIQUE SLOT
MACHINE is one manufactured 25 years ago or earlier;
      (8)   Raffles when conducted in accordance with ILCS Chapter 230, Act 15,
§§ 1 et seq.;
      (9)   Charitable games when conducted in accordance with ILCS Chapter
230, Act 30, §§ 1 et seq.;
      (10)   Pull tabs and jar games when conducted under ILCS Chapter 230, Act
20, §§ 1 et seq.;
      (11)   Gambling games conducted on riverboats when authorized under ILCS
Chapter 230, Act 10, §§ 1 et seq.;
      (12)   Video gaming terminal games at a licensed establishment, licensed
truck stop establishment, licensed fraternal establishment or licensed large
truck stop establishment, or licensed veterans establishment when conducted in
accordance with the Video Gaming Act (ILCS Chapter 230, Act 40);
      (13)   Games of skill or chance where money or other things of value can
be won but no payment or purchase is required to participate; and
      (14)   Savings promotion raffles authorized under section 5g of the
Illinois Banking Act (ILCS Chapter 205, Act 5, § 5g), section 7008 of the
Savings Bank Act (ILCS Chapter 205, Act 205, § 7008), section 42.7 of the
Illinois Credit Union Act (ILCS Chapter 205, Act 305, § 42.7), section 5136B of
the National Bank Act (12 U.S.C. 25a), or section 4 of the Home Owners’ Loan
Act (12 U.S.C. 1463).
   (C)   Circumstantial evidence. In prosecutions under division (A) of this
section, circumstantial evidence shall have the same validity and weight as in
any criminal prosecution.
(ILCS Chapter 720, Act 5, § 28-1) (Am. Ord. 12-78, passed 10-1-2012; Am. Ord.
19-27, passed 8-5-2019)
Penalty, see § 130.999
§ 137.03 KEEPING A GAMBLING PLACE.
   (A)   For purposes of this section, a GAMBLINGPLACE is any real estate,
vehicle, boat, or any other property whatsoever used for the purposes of
gambling. No person shall knowingly permit any premises or property owned or
occupied by him or her or under his or her control to be used as a gambling
place.
   (B)   When any premises is determined by the circuit court to be a gambling
place:
      (1)   The premises is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and may be
proceeded against as such; and
      (2)   The premises of any person who knowingly permits thereon a
violation of any section of this chapter shall be held liable for and may be
sold to pay any unsatisfied judgment that may be recovered and any unsatisfied
fine that may be levied under any section of this chapter.
(ILCS Chapter 720, Act 5, § 28-3)
Penalty, see § 130.999
§ 137.04 SEIZURE OF GAMBLING DEVICES AND GAMBLING FUNDS.
   (A)   Every device designed for gambling which is incapable of lawful use or
every device used unlawfully for gambling shall be considered a gambling device
and shall be subject to seizure, confiscation, and destruction by village
authorities. As used in this section, a GAMBLING DEVICE includes any slot
machine and includes any machine or device constructed for the reception of
money or other thing of value and so constructed as to return or cause someone
to return on chance to the player thereof money, property, or a right to
receive money or property, but does not include video gaming terminals
permitted under the Illinois Video Gaming Act (ILCS Chapter 230, Act 40, §§ 1
et seq.). With the exception of any device designed for gambling which is
incapable of lawful use, no gambling device shall be forfeited or destroyed
unless an individual with a property interest in the device knows of the
unlawful use thereof.
   (B)   Every gambling device shall be seized and forfeited as contraband to
the county wherein the seizure occurs. Any money or other thing of value
integrally related to acts of gambling shall be seized and forfeited as
contraband to the county wherein the seizure occurs.
(ILCS Chapter 720, Act 5, § 28-5(a),(b)) (Am. Ord. 12-78, passed 10-1-2012)
CHAPTER 138: WEAPONS
Section
Deadly Weapons
   
138.01   Unlawful use of weapons
   
138.02   Exemptions
   
138.03   Unlawful possession of firearms and firearm ammunition
   
138.04   Confiscation and disposition of weapons
   
138.05   Hunting prohibited
Air Rifles
   
138.10   Definitions
   
138.11   Selling, renting, or transferring to children; prohibition
   
138.12   Carrying or discharging on public streets
   
138.13   Permissive possession
   
138.14   Permissive sales
   
138.15   Seizure and removal
Statutory reference:
   Firearms and ammunition registration, ILCS Chapter 430, Act 65, §§ 0.01
through 16.3
   Boarding aircraft with weapons, ILCS Chapter 720, Act 545, §§ 0.01 through 7
DEADLY WEAPONS
§ 138.01 UNLAWFUL USE OF WEAPONS.
   (A)   A person commits the offense of unlawful use of weapons when he or she
knowingly:
      (1)   Sells, manufactures, purchases, possesses or carries any bludgeon,
black-jack, slung-shot, sand-club, sand-bag, metal knuckles or other knuckle
weapon regardless of its composition, throwing star, or any knife, commonly
referred to as a switchblade knife, which has a blade that opens automatically
by hand pressure applied to a button, spring or other device in the handle of
the knife, or a ballistic knife, which is a device that propels a knifelike
blade as a projectile by means of a coil spring, elastic material or compressed
gas; or
      (2)   Carries or possesses with intent to use the same unlawfully against
another, a dagger, dirk, billy, dangerous knife, razor, stiletto, broken bottle
or other piece of glass, stun gun or taser or any other dangerous or deadly
weapon or instrument of like character; or
      (3)   Carries or possesses with intent to use the same unlawfully against
another, any firearm in a church, synagogue, mosque, or other building,
structure, or place used for religious worship; or
      (4)   Carries on or about his or her person or in any vehicle, a tear gas
gun projector or bomb or any object containing noxious liquid gas or substance,
other than an object containing a non-lethal noxious liquid gas or substance
designed solely for personal defense carried by a person 18 years of age or
older; or
      (5)   Carries or possesses in any vehicle or concealed on or about his or
her person except when on his or her land or in his or her own abode, legal
dwelling, or fixed place of business, or on the land or in the legal dwelling
of another person as an invitee with that person’s permission, any pistol,
revolver, stun gun or taser or other firearm, except that this division (A)(5)
does not apply to or affect transportation of weapons that meet one of the
following conditions:
         (a)   Are broken down in a non-functioning state; or
         (b)   Are not immediately accessible; or
         (c)   Are unloaded and enclosed in a case, firearm carrying box,
shipping box, or other container by a person who has been issued a currently
valid firearm owner’s identification card; or
         (d)   Are carried or possessed in accordance with the Firearm
Concealed Carry Act by a person who has been issued a currently valid license
under the Firearm Concealed Carry Act; or
      (6)   Sets a spring gun; or
      (7)   (a)   Carries or possesses on or about his or her person, upon any
public street, alley, or other public lands within the village limits, except
when an invitee thereon or therein, for the purpose of the display of such
weapon or the lawful commerce in weapons, or except when on his or her land or
in his or her own abode, legal dwelling, or fixed place of business, or on the
land or in the legal dwelling of another person as an invitee with that
person’s permission, any pistol, revolver, stun gun or taser or other firearm,
except that this division (A)(7) does not apply to or affect transportation of
weapons that meet one of the following conditions:
            1.   Are broken down in a non-functioning state; or
            2.   Are not immediately accessible; or
            3.   Are unloaded and enclosed in a case, firearm carrying box,
shipping box, or other container by a person who has been issued a currently
valid firearm owner’s identification card; or
            4.   Are carried or possessed in accordance with the Firearm
Concealed Carry Act by a person who has been issued a currently valid license
under the Firearm Concealed Carry Act.
         (b)   A STUN GUN OR TASER, as used in this division (A) means:
            1.   Any device which is powered by electrical charging units, such
as, batteries, and which fires one or several barbs attached to a length of
wire and which, upon hitting a human, can send out a current capable of
disrupting the person’s nervous system in such a manner as to render him or her
incapable of normal functioning; or
            2.   Any device which is powered by electrical charging units, such
as batteries, and which, upon contact with a human or clothing worn by a human,
can send out current capable of disrupting the person’s nervous system in such
a manner as to render him or her incapable of normal functioning; or
      (8)   Sells, manufactures, delivers, imports, possesses, or purchases any
assault weapon attachment or .50 caliber cartridge in violation of ILCS Ch.
720, Act 5, § 24-1.9 or any explosive bullet. For purposes of this division
(A):
         (a)   CARTRIDGE means a tubular metal case having a projectile affixed
at the front thereof and a cap or primer at the rear end thereof, with the
propellant contained in such tube between the projectile and the cap.
         (b)   EXPLOSIVE BULLET means the projectile portion of an ammunition
cartridge which contains or carries an explosive charge which will explode upon
contact with the flesh of a human or an animal; or
      (9)   Carries or possesses on or about his or her person while in a
building occupied by a unit of government, a billy club, other weapon of like
character, or other instrument of like character intended for use as a weapon.
For the purposes of this division (A), BILLY CLUB means a short stick or club
commonly carried by police officers which is either telescopic or constructed
of a solid piece of wood or other man-made material; or
      (10)   Carries or possesses any assault weapon or .50 caliber rifle in
violation of ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24-1.9.
(ILCS Chapter 720, Act 5, § 24-1(a))
   (B)   Exemptions.
      (1)   Crossbows, common or compound bows and underwater spearguns are
exempted from the definition of ballistic knife as defined in division (A)(1)
above.
      (2)   The provision of division (A)(1) of this section prohibiting the
sale, manufacture, purchase, possession, or carrying of any knife, commonly
referred to as a switchblade knife, which has a blade that opens automatically
by hand pressure applied to a button, spring or other device in the handle of
the knife, does not apply to a person who possesses a currently valid Firearm
Owner's Identification Card previously issued in his or her name by the
Illinois State Police or to a person or an entity engaged in the business of
selling or manufacturing switchblade knives.
(ILCS Chapter 720, Act 5, § 24-1(e))
Penalty, see § 130.999
Statutory reference:
   For provisions concerning silencers on guns; machine guns; bombs; possession
of weapon while hooded, robed and/or masked; or possession of weapons on school
or university grounds (all of which are felonies), see ILCS Chapter 720, Act 5,
§§ 24-1(a)(6), (7), and (9) and § 24-1(c)(2) respectively
§ 138.02 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   Section
138.01(A)(4), (A)(5), (A)(7), or (A)(9) does not apply to or affect any of the
following:
      (1)   Peace officers, and any person summoned by a peace officer to
assist in making arrests or preserving the peace, while actually engaged in
assisting the officer.
      (2)   Wardens, superintendents, and keepers of prisons, penitentiaries,
jails, and other institutions for the detention of persons accused or convicted
of an offense, while in the performance of their official duty, or while
commuting between their homes and place of employment.
      (3)   Members of the Armed Services or Reserve Forces of the United
States or the Illinois National Guard or the Reserve Officers Training Corps,
while in the performance of their official duty.
      (4)   Special agents employed by a railroad or a public utility to
perform police functions or guards of armored car companies while actually
engaged in the performance of the duties of their employment or commuting
between their homes and places of employment; watchmen while actually engaged
in the performance of the duties of their employment.
      (5)   Persons licensed as private security contractors, private
detectives or private alarm contractors or employed by a private security
contractor, private detective, or private alarm contractor agency licensed by
the Department of Financial and Professional Regulation, if their duties
include the carrying of a weapon under the provisions of ILCS Chapter 225, Act
447, §§ 5-5 et seq., the Private Detective, Private Alarm, Private Security,
Fingerprint Vendor, and Locksmith Act of 2004, while actually engaged in the
performance of the duties of their employment or commuting between their homes
and places of employment. A person shall be considered eligible for this
exemption if he or she has completed the required 20 hours of training for a
private security contractor, private detective, or private alarm contractor, or
employee of a licensed private security contractor, private detective, or
private alarm contractor agency and 28 hours of required firearm training, and
has been issued a firearm control card by the Department of Financial and
Professional Regulation. Conditions for the renewal of firearm control cards
issued under the provisions of this section shall be the same as for those
cards issued under the provisions of the Private Detective, Private Alarm,
Private Security, Fingerprint Vendor, and Locksmith Act of 2004. The firearm
control card shall be carried by the private security contractor, private
detective, or private alarm contractor, or employee of the licensed private
security contractor, private detective, or private alarm contractor agency at
all times when he or she is in possession of a concealable weapon permitted by
his or her firearm control card.
      (6)   Any person regularly employed in a commercial or industrial
operation as a security guard for the protection of persons employed and
private property related to such commercial or industrial operation while
actually engaged in the performance of their duty or traveling between sites or
properties belonging to the employer, and who, as a security guard, is a member
of a security force registered with the Department of Financial and
Professional Regulation; provided, that the security guard has successfully
completed a course of study, approved by and supervised by the state Department
of Financial and Professional Regulation consisting of not less than 48 hours
of training which shall include theory of law enforcement, liability for acts,
and the handling of weapons. A person shall be considered to be in compliance
with this section who has completed the required 20 hours of training for a
security officer and 28 hours of required firearm training and who has been
issued a firearm control card by the state Department of Financial and
Professional Regulation. Conditions for the renewal of firearm control cards
issued under the provisions of this section shall be the same as for those
cards issued under the provisions of ILCS Chapter 225, Act 447, §§ 5-5 et seq.,
the Private Detective, Private Alarm, Private Security, Fingerprint Vendor, and
Locksmith Act of 2004. The firearm control card shall be carried by the
security guard at all times when he or she is in possession of a concealable
weapon permitted by his or her firearm control card.
      (7)   Agents and investigators of the Illinois Legislative Investigating
Commission authorized by the Commission to carry the weapons specified in §
138.01(A)(4) and (A)(5) while on duty in the course of any investigation for
the Commission.
      (8)   Persons employed by a financial institution as a security guard for
the protection of other employees and property related to such financial
institution, while actually engaged in the performance of their duties,
commuting between their homes and places of employment, or traveling between
sites or properties owned or operated by the financial institution, and who, as
a security guard, is a member of a security force registered with the
Department; provided that any person so employed has successfully completed a
course of study, approved by and supervised by the state Department of
Financial and Professional Regulation, consisting of not less than 48 hours of
training which includes theory of law enforcement, liability for acts, and the
handling of weapons. A person shall be considered to be eligible for this
exemption who has completed the required 20 hours of training for a security
officer and 28 hours of required firearm training and who has been issued a
firearm control card by the state Department of Financial and Professional
Regulation. Conditions for renewal of firearm control cards issued under the
provisions of this section shall be the same as for those issued under the
provisions of ILCS Chapter 225, Act 447, §§ 5-5 et seq., the Private Detective,
Private Alarm, Private Security, Fingerprint Vendor, and Locksmith Act of 2004.
The firearm control card shall be carried by the security guard at all times
when he or she is in possession of a concealable weapon permitted by his or her
firearm control card. For purposes of this division, FINANCIAL INSTITUTION
means a bank, savings and loan association, credit union, or company providing
armored car services.
      (9)   Any person employed by an armored car company to drive an armored
car while actually engaged in the performance of his or her duties.
      (10)   Persons who have been classified as peace officers pursuant to
ILCS Chapter 20, Act 2910, §§ 0.01 et seq., the Peace Officer Fire
Investigation Act.
      (11)   Investigators of the Office of the State’s Attorneys Appellate
Prosecutor authorized by the board of governors of the Office of the State’s
Attorneys Appellate Prosecutor to carry weapons pursuant to § 7.06 of the
State’s Attorneys Appellate Prosecutor’s Act, ILCS Chapter 725, Act 210, §§ 1
et seq.
      (12)   Special investigators appointed by a State’s Attorney under ILCS
Chapter 55, Act 5, § 3-9005.
      (13)   Probation officers while in the performance of their duties, or
while commuting between their homes, places of employment or specific locations
that are part of their assigned duties, with the consent of the Chief Judge of
the circuit for which they are employed, if they have received weapons training
according to requirements of the Peace Officer and Probation Officer Firearm
Training Act (ILCS Ch. 50, Act 710).
      (14)   Court security officers while in the performance of their official
duties or while commuting between their homes and places of employment, with
the consent of the Sheriff.
      (15)   A person employed as an armed security guard at a nuclear energy,
storage, weapons, or development site or facility regulated by the Nuclear
Regulatory Commission who has completed the background screening and training
mandated by the rules and regulations of the Nuclear Regulatory Commission.
      (16)   Manufacture, transportation, or sale of weapons to persons
authorized under (A)(1) through (15) of this section to possess those weapons.
(ILCS Chapter 720, Act 5, § 24-2(a))
   (B)   Section
138.01(A)(5) and (A)(7) do not apply to or affect any person carrying a
concealed pistol, revolver, or handgun and the person has been issued a
currently valid license under the Firearm Concealed Carry Act at the time of
the commission of the offense.
(ILCS Chapter 720, Act 5, § 24-2(a-5))
   (C)   Section
138.01(A)(5) and (A)(7) do not apply to or affect a qualified current or
retired law enforcement officer or a current or retired deputy, county
correctional officer, or correctional officer of the Department of Corrections
qualified under the laws of this state or under the federal Law Enforcement
Officers Safety Act.
(ILCS Chapter 720, Act 5, § 24-2(a-6))
   (D)   Section
138.01(A)(5) and (A)(7) do not apply to or affect any of the following:
      (1)   Members of any club or organization organized for the purpose of
practicing shooting at targets upon established target ranges, whether public
or private, and patrons of such ranges, while such members or patrons are using
their firearms on those target ranges.
      (2)   Duly authorized military or civil organizations while parading,
with the special permission of the Governor.
      (3)   Hunters, trappers, or fishermen while engaged in lawful hunting,
trapping, or fishing under the provisions of the Wildlife Code or the Fish and
Aquatic Life Code.
      (4)   Transportation of weapons that are broken down in a non-functioning
state or are not immediately accessible.
      (5)   Carrying or possessing any pistol, revolver, stun gun or taser or
other firearm on the land or in the legal dwelling of another person as an
invitee with that person's permission.
(ILCS Chapter 720, Act 5, § 24-2(b))
   (E)   Section
138.01(A)(1) does not apply to the purchase, possession, or carrying of a
black-jack or slung-shot by a police officer.
(ILCS Chapter 720, Act 5, § 24-2(d))
   (F)   Section
138.01(A)(8) does not apply to:
      (1)   Members of the Armed Services or Reserve Forces of the United
States or the Illinois National Guard, while in the performance of their
official duty.
      (2)   Bona fide collectors of antique or surplus military ordnance.
      (3)   Laboratories having a department of forensic ballistics, or
specializing in the development of ammunition or explosive ordnance.
      (4)   Commerce, preparation, assembly, or possession of explosive bullets
by manufacturers of ammunition licensed by the federal government, in
connection with the supply of those organizations and persons exempted by
division (F)(1) above, or like organizations and persons outside this state, or
the transportation of explosive bullets to any organization or person exempted
in this section by a common carrier or by a vehicle owned or leased by an
exempted manufacturer.
(ILCS Chapter 720, Act 5, § 24-2(g))
   (G)   Section
138.01(A)(5) and (A)(7) do not apply to any parole agent or parole supervisor
who meets the qualifications and conditions prescribed in § 3-14-1.5 of the
Unified Code of Corrections (ILCS Ch. 730, Act 5, § 3-14-1.5).
(ILCS Chapter 720, Act 5, § 24-2(g-6))
   (H)   An information or indictment based upon a violation of any provision
of this subchapter need not negative any exemptions contained in this
subchapter. The defendant shall have the burden of proving such an exemption.
(ILCS Chapter 720, Act 5, § 24-2(h))
   (I)   Nothing in this subchapter shall prohibit, apply to, or affect the
transportation, carrying, or possession of any pistol or revolver, stun gun,
taser, or other firearm consigned to a common carrier operating under license
with the state or the federal government where such transportation, carrying,
or possession is incident to the lawful transportation in which the common
carrier is engaged. Nothing in this subchapter shall prohibit, apply to, or
affect the transportation, carrying, or possession of any pistol, revolver,
stun gun, taser, or other firearm not the subject of and regulated by ILCS
Chapter 720, Act 5, § 24-1(a)(7), which is unloaded and enclosed in a case,
firearm carrying box, shipping box, or other container by the possessor of a
valid firearm owner’s identification card.
(ILCS Chapter 720, Act 5, § 24-2(i))
Statutory reference:
   Please note that the statute from which this section derives, ILCS Chapter
720, Act 5, § 24-2, contains additional provisions which are not set forth as
part of this section.
§ 138.03 UNLAWFUL POSSESSION OF FIREARMS AND FIREARM AMMUNITION.
   (A)   A person commits the offense of unlawful possession of firearms or
firearm ammunition when:
      (1)   He is under 18 years of age and has in his possession any firearm
of a size which may be concealed upon the person;
      (2)   He is under 21 years of age, has been convicted of a misdemeanor
other than a traffic offense or adjudged delinquent, and has any firearms or
firearm ammunition in his possession;
      (3)   He is a narcotic addict and has any firearms or firearm ammunition
in his possession;
      (4)   He has been a patient in a mental hospital within the past five
years and has any firearms or firearm ammunition in his possession;
      (5)   He is a person with an intellectual disability and has any firearms
or firearm ammunition in his possession; or
      (6)   He has in his possession any explosive bullet. For the purposes of
this section, EXPLOSIVE BULLET means the projectile portion of an ammunition
cartridge which contains or carries an explosive charge which will explode upon
contact with the flesh of a human or an animal. CARTRIDGE means a tubular metal
case having a projectile fixed at the front thereof and a cap or primer at the
rear end thereof with the propellent contained in the tube between the
projectile and the cap.
   (B)   Unlawful possession of firearms, other than handguns, and firearm
ammunition is punishable under §
 130.999. Unlawful possession of handguns is a felony punishable under
appropriate state law. The possession of each firearm or firearm ammunition in
violation of this section constitutes a single and separate violation.
   (C)   Nothing in division (A)(1) above prohibits a person under 18 years of
age from participating in any lawful recreational activity with a firearm such
as, but not limited to, practice shooting at targets upon established public or
private target ranges or hunting, trapping, or fishing in accordance with the
Wildlife Code or the Fish and Aquatic Life Code.
(ILCS Chapter 720, Act 5, § 24-3.1)
Penalty, see § 130.999
§ 138.04 CONFISCATION AND DISPOSITION OF WEAPONS.
   Upon conviction of an offense in which a weapon was used or possessed by the
offender, any weapon seized may be confiscated by the trial court for further
disposition consistent with state law.
(ILCS Chapter 720, Act 5, § 24-6)
§ 138.05 HUNTING PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful to hunt with any type of weapon or device.
(1981 Code, § 42.24, 24.8)
Penalty, see § 130.999
AIR RIFLES
§ 138.10 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of §§
138.10 et seq., the following words and phrases shall have the following
meanings ascribed to them respectively.
   AIR RIFLE. Any air gun, air pistol, spring gun, spring pistol, B.B. gun,
pellet gun, or any implement that is not a firearm, which impels a pellet
constructed of hard plastic, steel, lead, or other hard materials with a force
that reasonably is expected to cause bodily harm.
   DEALER. Any person, copartnership, association, or corporation engaged in
the business of selling at retail or renting any of the articles included in
the definition of AIR RIFLE.
§ 138.11 SELLING, RENTING, OR TRANSFERRING TO CHILDREN; PROHIBITION.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any dealer to sell, lend, rent, give, or otherwise
transfer an air rifle to any person under the age of 13 years where the dealer
knows or has cause to believe the person to be under 13 years of age or where
the dealer has failed to make reasonable inquiry relative to the age of the
person and the person is under 13 years of age.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to sell, give, lend, or otherwise
transfer any air rifle to any person under 13 years of age except where the
relationship of parent and child, guardian and ward, or adult instructor and
pupil exists between the person and the person under 13 years of age, or where
the person stands in loco parentis to the person under 13 years of age.
Penalty, see § 130.999
§ 138.12 CARRYING OR DISCHARGING ON PUBLIC STREETS.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to carry any air rifle on the public
streets, roads, highways, or public lands within this village, unless the
person carries the rifle unloaded.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to discharge or shoot any firearm, airgun, or bb-
gun in the village provided that this section shall not be construed to
prohibit any officer of the law from discharging a weapon in the performance of
his or her duty nor any citizen from discharging a weapon when lawfully
defending his or her person or property.
(1981 Code, § 42.24, 24.7)
§ 138.13 PERMISSIVE POSSESSION.
   Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter, it is lawful for any person
under 13 years of age to have in his possession any air rifle if it is:
   (A)   Kept within his house of residence or other private enclosure;
   (B)   Used by the person under 13 years of age and he is a duly enrolled
member of any club, team, or society organized for educational purposes and
maintaining as part of its facilities or having written permission to use an
indoor or outdoor rifle range under the supervision, guidance and instruction
of a responsible adult, and then only if the air rifle is actually being used
in connection with the activities of the club, team, or society under the
supervision of a responsible adult; or
   (C)   Used in or on any private grounds or residence under circumstances
when the air rifle is fired, discharged, or operated in a manner as not to
endanger persons or property and then only if it is used in a manner as to
prevent the projectile from passing over any grounds or space outside the
limits of such grounds or residence.
§ 138.14 PERMISSIVE SALES.
   The provisions of §§
138.10 through
138.14 do not prohibit sales of air rifles:
   (A)   By wholesale dealers or jobbers;
   (B)   To be shipped out of the state;
   (C)   To be used at a target range operated in accordance with state law or
by members of the Armed Services of the United States or veterans’
organizations.
§ 138.15 SEIZURE AND REMOVAL.
   Any police officer shall seize, take, remove, or cause to be removed at the
expense of the owner, any air rifle sold or used in any manner in violation of
this chapter.
CHAPTER 139: SMOKING BAN
Section
   
139.01   Smoke Free Illinois Act adopted
 
   
139.99   Penalty
§ 139.01 SMOKE FREE ILLINOIS ACT ADOPTED.
   There is hereby adopted for the purpose of regulating and enforcing the
smoking ban in effect throughout the State of Illinois, that certain code known
as the Smoke Free Illinois Act, ILCS Ch. 410, Act 82, §§ 1 et seq., which Act
has been and now is filed in the office of the Village Clerk, and each and all
of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions, and terms of the Act are
hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out at
length herein, and the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the
corporate limits of the village.
(Ord. 08-03, passed 2-18-2008)
§ 139.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any individual found guilty of violating, disobeying, omitting,
neglecting or refusing to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter
shall be fined not less than $100 for each offense.
   (B)   Any business found guilty of violating, disobeying, omitting,
neglecting or refusing to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter
shall be fined not less than $250 for the first offense within a 12 month
period; and for a second offense within a 12 month period not less than $500;
and for a third offense within a 12 month period shall be fined not less than
$2,500.
   (C)   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as limiting any judicial
remedies that the village may have, at law or in equity, for enforcement of
this chapter.
(Ord. 08-03, passed 2-18-2008)
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
Chapter
   
150.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
   
151.   BUILDING REGULATIONS; CONSTRUCTION
   
152.   FLOOD PLAIN REGULATIONS
   
153.   HISTORICAL DISTRICT
   
154.   STORMWATER CONTROL AND DETENTION REGULATIONS
   
155.   SUBDIVISIONS
   
156.   SIGNS
   
157.   ZONING
   
158.   MINIMUM LANDSCAPING, SCREENING AND TREE PRESERVATION STANDARDS
   
159.   DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES
   
160.   PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT COSTS
CHAPTER 150: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
Planning, Zoning, and Historic Commission
   
150.01   Organization
   
150.02   Plan Commission, Zoning Board of Appeals references
   
150.03   Duties of the Commission
   
150.04   Special Zoning Commission
   
150.05   Meetings
Comprehensive Plan
   
150.20   Comprehensive Plan adopted
Cross-reference:
   Pollution control facilities, see
§§ 50.30 et seq.
PLANNING, ZONING, AND HISTORIC COMMISSION
§ 150.01 ORGANIZATION.
   (A)   Creation. A Planning, Zoning, and Historic Commission is hereby
created for the village to carry out the duties of a plan commission, zoning
board of appeals, and those duties assigned by village ordinances to the
Historic Commission. When used in this chapter, “Commission” shall be construed
to mean the Planning, Zoning, and Historic Commission and “Commissioners” shall
be construed to mean the members of the Commission.
   (B)   Membership. The Commission shall consist of a chairman and six members
to be appointed by the President with the advice and consent of the Village
Board. The Chairman shall be appointed annually from the members of the
Commission by the President with the advice and consent of the Board of
Trustees. Annually, the Commissioners shall elect one of its own to serve as
Vice Chairman, who shall serve in the absence of the Chairman.
   (C)   Term of office. The first appointees shall serve for the following
terms, or until their respective successors, in similar manner, have been
appointed and qualified: two for two years; two for three years; and three for
four years. Successors to each member so appointed shall serve four year terms,
except that vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term of the membership
vacated. The term of each Commissioner shall expire April 30 of the year of the
expiration of its respective term of office. Thereafter, the appointments shall
be made at the annual meeting of the Village Board.
   (D)   Vacancy. Any vacancy on the Commission shall be filled in the same
manner as the original appointment.
   (E)   Removal. The President, with the approval of the Village Board, may
remove any member of the Commission for cause.
   (F)   Compensation. Commissioners shall receive compensation at the rate as
set forth by the Village Board from time to time.
   (G)   Foregoing compensation. Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary,
any member of the Planning, Zoning, and Historic Commission may elect to forego
any, or all, of the compensation to which they are otherwise entitled for any
part of their term by notifying the Village Treasurer, in writing, of such an
election and the amount the Commissioner wishes to forego, the length of time
the Commissioner wishes to forego such compensation, and the effective date of
the election. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit any
Commissioner from rescinding the election to forego compensation, upon written
notice to the Village Treasurer of their desire to rescind the election to
forego compensation.
(Ord. 01-05, passed 6-4-2001; Am. Ord. 10-21, passed 5-3-2010; Am. Ord. 22-11,
passed 4-4-2022; Am. Ord. 23-59, passed 12-18-2023)
§ 150.02 PLAN COMMISSION, ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS REFERENCES.
   Any ordinance, code, regulation, and the like of the village or state
statute that references the Plan Commission and/or Zoning Board of Appeals and/
or the Historic Commission shall mean the Planning, Zoning, and Historic
Commission.
(Ord. 01-05, passed 6-4-2001; Am. Ord. 23-59, passed 12-18-2023)
§ 150.03 DUTIES OF THE COMMISSION.
   The duties of the Commission are as follows:
   (A)   (1)   To prepare and recommend to the Village Board a comprehensive
plan of public improvements looking to the present and future development of
the village. After its adoption by the Village Board, this plan shall be known
as the Official Plan of the Village of East Dundee. Thereafter, from time to
time, the Commission may recommend changes in the Official Plan. This plan may
include reasonable requirements with reference to the streets, alleys, and
public grounds in unsubdivided land situated within the corporate limits or in
contiguous territory not more than 1 miles beyond the corporate limits and not
included in any municipality. These requirements shall be effective whenever
this unsubdivided land is subdivided after the adoption of the Official Plan.
      (2)   Following the adoption of the Official Plan, no map or plat of any
subdivision presented for record affecting land within the corporate limits of
the village or in contiguous territory outside of and not more than 1 miles
from those limits and not included in any other municipality shall be entitled
to record or shall be valid unless the subdivision thereon shall provide for
streets, alleys, and public grounds in conformity with the Official Plan.
   (B)   To prepare and recommend to the Village Board from time to time plans
for specific improvements in the pursuance of the Official Plan.
   (C)   To give aid to the village officials charged with the direction of
projects for improvements embraced within the Official Plan and to further the
making of these projects and generally promote the Official Plan.
   (D)   To perform those duties and functions assigned by
Chapter 153 to the Historic Commission.
   (E)   To exercise such other powers, germane to the powers granted by this
code, as may be conferred by the village and are granted a village under 65
ILCS, including but not limited to Act 5, §§ 11-12-1 to 11-12-12.
   (F)   (1)   To hear appeals from any order, requirement, decision, or
determination of the Building Commissioner or Village Administrator, relating
to the East Dundee Zoning Ordinance by any person, firm, or corporation
aggrieved thereby, or by any officer, department, board, or commission of the
village. The appeal shall be taken within 45 days of the action complained of
by filing a notice of appeal, in triplicate, specifying the grounds thereof, in
the office of the Village Clerk, who shall transmit forthwith one copy to the
Building Commissioner, one copy to the Village Administrator, and one copy to
the Chairman of the Commission. The Village Administrator shall forthwith
transmit to the Chairman of the Commission all the papers constituting the
record upon which the action appealed from was taken.
      (2)   An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action
appealed from unless the Building Commission or Village Administrator certifies
to the Commission that, by reason of facts stated in the certification, a stay
would cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, the proceedings
shall not be stayed except by a restraining order issued by the Commission or a
court of record after notice to the Village Administrator and on due cause
shown.
      (3)   The Commission shall select a reasonable time and place for the
hearing of the appeal, give due notice thereof to all interested parties and
shall render a written decision on the appeal without unreasonable delay. Any
person may appear at the hearing and present testimony in person or by a duly
authorized agent or attorney. The Commission may reverse or affirm, wholly or
partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision, or determination of the
Village Administrator.
   (G)   To recommend to the Village Board after holding a public hearing on
application for variations from the strict enforcement of any provisions of the
East Dundee Zoning Ordinance in accordance with the rules and standards set
forth therein.
   (H)   To recommend to the Village Board, after holding a public hearing, on
applications for special uses listed in each of the several zoning districts.
   (I)   To recommend to the Village Board, after holding a public hearing, on
applications for Planned Developments referred to it by the Village Board and
to hear and decide other matters referred to it or upon which it is required to
pass under the provisions of the East Dundee Zoning Ordinance.
   (J)   To make recommendations to the Village Board, after holding a public
hearing, on petitions for amendments to the provisions of the East Dundee
Zoning Chapter and petitions for the rezoning of property.
   (K)   To transmit to the Village Board, with every recommendation, findings
of fact, when required, and to refer to any exhibits containing plans and
specifications relating to its recommendation, which plans and specifications
shall remain a part of the permanent records of the Commission. The findings of
fact shall specify the reason or reasons for its recommendation. The terms of
the relief recommended shall be specifically set forth in a conclusion or
statement separate from the findings of fact of the Commission.
   (L)   To file immediately in the office of the Village Clerk every rule,
order, requirements, decisions, or determination of the Commission after any
meeting or hearing, which shall be a public record.
   (M)   Nothing contained herein shall be construed to authorize the
Commission to change any of the provisions of the East Dundee Zoning Ordinance
or district boundary lines established hereby. The concurring vote of four
members shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision, or
determination of the Village Administrator or to decide in favor of the
applicant any matter upon which the Commission is authorized to act.
   (N)   Additional duties of the Commission are also outlined in the East
Dundee Zoning Ordinance, Subdivision Ordinance, Historical District Ordinance,
this Code and the Illinois Municipal Code.
(Ord. 01-05, passed 6-4-2001; Am. Ord. 14-26, passed 9-15-2014; Am. Ord. 23-59,
passed 12-18- 2023)
§ 150.04 SPECIAL ZONING COMMISSION.
   The Commission shall serve as a special zoning commission whenever a text
amendment is proposed to the East Dundee Zoning Ordinance.
(Ord. 01-05, passed 6-4-2001)
§ 150.05 MEETINGS.
   All meetings of the Commission shall be held at the call of the Chairman and
at such other times as the Commission and/or Village Board may determine. The
presence of a majority of the members then holding office shall be necessary
for a quorum. All meetings shall be open to the public. The Chairman or Acting
Chairman may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. The
Commission shall keep minutes of its proceedings, keep record of its
examinations and other official actions, prepare findings of fact and record
the individual votes upon every question. Expenses incurred by the Commission
in the performance of official duties are to be itemized and shall be borne by
the village.
(Ord. 01-05, passed 6-4-2001)
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
§ 150.20 COMPREHENSIVE PLAN ADOPTED.
   The Comprehensive Plan for the Village of East Dundee which bears the date
of September 12, 2002 is approved as the Comprehensive Plan of the village and
is hereby adopted by reference and incorporated as part of this code as if
fully set out herein.
(Ord. 02-17, passed 10-21-2002; Am. Ord. 10-11, passed 4-5-2010; Am. Ord. 11-
21, passed 4-11- 2011; Am. Ord. 11-56, passed 12-12-2011; Am. Ord. 25-15,
passed 4-21-2025)
CHAPTER 151: BUILDING REGULATIONS; CONSTRUCTION
Section
Building Code
   
151.001   Short title
   
151.002   Adoption of codes
   
151.003   Inconsistent ordinances
   
151.004   Definitions
   
151.005   Sidewalks, approaches and driveways; when required
   
151.006   Fences
   
151.007   Street numbers
   
151.008   Additions, insertions, deletions and changes to the International
Building Code—2021
   
151.009   Additions, insertions, deletions, and changes to the International
Residential Code—2021
   
151.010   Additions, insertions, deletions, and changes to the International
Mechanical Code—2021
   
151.011   Additions, insertions, deletions, and changes to the NFPA 70 National
Electrical Code—2020 Edition
   
151.012   Additions, insertions, deletions, and changes to the 2021 Illinois
Energy Conservation Code 20 ILCS 3125/15
   
151.013   Additions, insertions, deletions, and changes to the International
Property Maintenance Code—2021
   
151.014   Addition, insertions, deletions and changes to the Illinois Plumbing
Code, 77 Ill. Adm. Code 890
   
151.015   Additions, insertions, deletions, and changes to the International
Existing Building Code—2021
   
151.016   Additions, insertions, deletions, and changes to the International
Fuel Gas Code—2021
   
151.017   Additions, insertions, deletions, and changes to the International
Solar Energy Provisions—2018
   
151.018   Additions, insertions, deletions, and changes to the International
Swimming and Spa Code—2021
   
151.019   [Reserved]
   
151.020   Board of Appeals under International Uniform Building Codes
   
151.021   Permit fees
Additional Village Regulations
   
151.025   Construction and maintenance of antennae and supporting towers
   
151.026   Building construction hours of operation
   
151.027   Specifications for outside dining area requires a license
   
151.028   Vacant buildings
 
   
151.999   Penalty
BUILDING CODE
§ 151.001 SHORT TITLE.
   (A)   The ordinance codified in this subchapter shall be known and cited as
the “Building Code.”
   (B)   It will be referred to herein as “this subchapter” or as “this code.”
(1981 Code, § 24.01)
§ 151.002 ADOPTION OF CODES.
   That certain documents, are hereby adopted as the Building Code of the
Village of East Dundee, in the State of Illinois, for the control of buildings
and structures as herein provided. At least one copy of each document was kept
on file in the office of the Village Clerk for a period of at least 30 days
prior to the adoption of these provisions. Three copies remain on file in the
office of the Village Clerk, and the same are hereby adopted and fully
incorporated with additions, insertions, deletions, and changes, if any, as set
out at length herein. The following codes are adopted:
   (A)   International Building Code—2021 Edition with amendments;
   (B)   International Residential Code—2021 Edition with amendments;
   (C)   International Mechanical Code—2021 Edition with amendments;
   (D)   NEPA 70 National Electric Code—2020 Edition with amendments;
   (E)   International Energy Conservation Code. as adopted by the State of
Illinois, ILCS Ch. 20, Act 3125, § 15;
   (F)   International Property Maintenance Code—2021 Edition with amendments;
   (G)   Illinois Plumbing Code. 77 Ill, Adm. Code 890, with amendments;
   (H)   International Existing Building Code—2021 Edition;
   (I)   International Fuel and Gas Code—2021 Edition with amendments;
   (J)   International Solar Energy Provisions—2018 Edition with amendments;
   (K)   International Swimming Pool and Spa Code—2021 Edition with amendments;
   (L)   Illinois Accessibility Code, 71 Ill. Adm. Code 400; and
   (M)   NEPA 101-Life Safety Code—2015 Edition, as adopted by the State of
Illinois, 41 Ill. Adm. Code 100.
(Ord. 2001-17, passed 9-17-2001; Am. Ord. 04-22, passed 6-21-2004; Am. Ord. 06-
43, passed 10-16-2006; Am. Ord. 17-54, passed 11-20-2017; Am. Ord. 24-06,
passed 2-19-2024; Am. Ord. 24-29, passed 8-19-2024; Am. Ord. 25-16, passed 4-
21-2025)
§ 151.003 INCONSISTENT ORDINANCES.
   The Municipal Code of the Village of East Dundee, Chapter 151, Building
Regulations (2006, as amended) and all other ordinances or part of ordinances
in conflict herewith are hereby repealed.
(1981 Code, § 24.05) (Ord. 2001-17, passed 9-17-2001; Am. Ord. 25-16, passed 4-
21-2025)
§ 151.004 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CODE OFFICIAL. The Building Inspector of the Building Department.
   DEPARTMENT OF BUILDING INSPECTION. The Building Department of the Village of
East Dundee.
   MUNICIPALITY. The Village of East Dundee.
(1981 Code, § 24.06) (Ord. 2001-17, passed 9-17-2001)
§ 151.005 SIDEWALKS, APPROACHES AND DRIVEWAYS; WHEN REQUIRED.
   (A)   A concrete sidewalk is required for all property classifications, and
a concrete driveway approach is required for non-single-family properties.
Single-family property approaches may be paved asphalt, conforming with the
specifications established in this code of ordinances shall be required prior
to the issuance of an occupancy permit for any new building or structure which
is to be erected or which is situated on a lot or plot of ground which abuts
upon any street in the village unless the sidewalk is specifically exempted.
   (B)   Driveways located on private property must be paved with concrete,
asphalt or other per approval of Building Inspector prior to the issuance of an
occupancy permit.
(1981 Code, § 24.07) (Ord. 2001-17, passed 9-17-2001; Am. Ord. 25-16, passed 4-
21-2025)
§ 151.006 FENCES.
   (A)   A building permit is required prior to the construction or
installation of any fence within the corporate limits of the village.
   (B)   Fences shall be constructed or installed according to the regulations
established as follows.
      (1)   Barbed-wire fences. No person shall erect any fence along any
street or alley or other public place within the village of which barbed wire
or any other sharp, pointed or dangerous material forms a part, without the
prior agreement of the Building Inspector.
      (2)   Dilapidated fences.
         (a)   Any fence within the village which has been permitted to become
and is sagging, dilapidated or fallen to the ground is hereby declared to be a
nuisance and unlawful for the owner thereof to maintain.
         (b)   Each day that a sagging, dilapidated or fallen fence is
permitted to exist, following the filing of a complaint against the owner by
the village, shall be considered a separate offense.
      (3)   Maximum height. Fences in a residential area shall be a maximum
height of six feet. The fence may be either solid as to block the passage of
light or open that light may pass between the ornamental or structural
components of the fences.
      (4)   Nonconforming structures. Fences, walls and shrubbery constructed
or planted prior to the date of the adoption of this chapter which do not
conform to the provisions of this chapter shall be considered legal
nonconforming structures. An existing fence or wall may be maintained, repaired
or structurally altered; however, no repair or structural alteration shall
create an additional nonconformity or increase the degree of nonconformity. In
the event a fence or wall is damaged or destroyed to the extent that the cost
or restoration shall exceed 50% of the cost of a new fence or wall, no repairs
or reconstruction shall be made unless the restoration or construction shall
thereafter conform to the regulations in this chapter. If the damage or
destruction does not exceed 50% of the market value of the fence or wall,
repairs and restoration shall be completed within 12 months from the date of
damage or destruction or the restoration shall conform to the regulations of
this chapter.
      (5)   Location, design and construction.
         (a)   Front yard. Split rail, picket and wrought iron style fences may
be installed in a single family residential district front yard as long as the
fence maintains a minimum of 50% open space and shall not exceed a height of
three feet above the adjoining ground in the required front yard. A side yard
adjacent to the public right-of-way shall be considered a corner side yard and
shall be regulated as a front yard with a maximum fence height of three feet. A
gate opening shall be required if the front yard fence creates a wholly
enclosed area and adjoins a street right-of-way to provide access to the right-
of-way. All other front yard fences shall be prohibited.
         (b)   All fences must be constructed within the confines of the
property for which the permit is sought and no fence shall exceed six feet in
height except as provided in Chapter 157 of this code of ordinances or herein.
This section shall not apply to limit the height of solid fences, screens or
walls around patios as set forth herein. The Building Inspector may refuse to
issue a permit for any fence which, in his or her judgment, serves no
ornamental or useful purpose or imposes an unreasonable hardship on adjoining
property owners.
         (c)   A fence, including all posts, bases and other structural parts
shall be located completely within the boundaries of the lot on which it is
located. No fence shall be located closer than 12 inches to a public sidewalk
or public right-of-way.
         (d)   All fences shall be constructed with the finished surface facing
neighboring property with support posts placed to the inside, except in cases
where the posts are an integral part of the fence design which enhances the
aesthetic appearance of the fence.
         (e)   No fence, wall or shrubbery shall exceed a maximum of two feet
above the grade of the adjoining public right-of-way within the sight line
triangle, which is defined as a triangular shaped portion of land established
at street intersections within 25 feet of the intersection, in which nothing is
erected, placed, planted or allowed to grow in a manner as to limit or obstruct
the sight distance of motorists entering or leaving the intersection. The
purpose of this requirement is to provide for visual clearance and traffic
safety.
      (6)   Fences, drainage and utility easements. Fences may be installed in
or across a drainage easement provided that the bottom of the fence has a
vertical clearance of not less than eight inches or a greater clearance as may
be required by generally accepted engineering principles as approved by the
Village Engineer. The vertical clearance shall be maintained for the entire
length of that portion of the fence that is installed in or across the drainage
easement.
      (7)   Responsibility of owners and occupants; exemptions.
         (a)   It shall be the responsibility of the owner and/or occupant of
the property where a fence or wall is erected to maintain the structure in good
repair at all times. If a fence or wall is found to be in a deteriorated
condition and/or in need of repair, including, but not limited to broken or
missing structural components and/or the fence is substantially less than
perpendicular to grade, the Building Enforcement Officer or his or her
authorized agent may order the fencing to be repaired, replaced or removed
depending on the condition of the fence. The order shall be in writing.
         (b)   The provisions of this subchapter shall not apply to fences,
walls or shrubbery owned or maintained by the village or to fences constructed
or maintained by any other governmental body or agency for which the principal
purpose is inherent to public safety.
      (8)   Limitations. Except as expressly permitted in division (B)(5)(a) of
this section, no fence shall be erected which shall extend beyond the front
building line of the house. All fences must be constructed within the confines
of the property for which the permit is sought and no fence shall exceed six
feet in height, except as provided herein, which shall control as to the
minimum and maximum height. In addition, this section shall not apply to limit
the height of solid fences, screens or walls around patios as set forth herein.
All fences shall maintain a minimum three feet distance from any neighboring
structures including a neighboring fence. In addition, the Building Inspector
is authorized and empowered to refuse permit for any fence which apparently
serves no ornamental or useful purpose and imposes on unreasonable hardships on
an adjoining property owner.
      (9)   Patio fences, screen or walls. In residential areas, solid fences,
screens or walls may be erected around the immediate boundaries of patios for
the purpose of securing privacy, provided they do not exceed seven feet in
height and are located not less than three feet from a lot line.
      (10)   Fence permits. No fence, screen or wall shall be erected without
first securing a permit from the Building Inspector. The fee for a fence permit
shall be as established in the annual fee schedule.
      (11)   Support posts. Fences must be erected so that the posts and all
other supporting members face to the owners side. The rough part of the frame
shall face the owner’s property.
   (C)   The Zoning Board of Appeals shall have the jurisdiction to hold public
hearings and offer recommendations to the Village Board of Trustees concerning
variations of this section pursuant to its powers granted by, and in accordance
with the procedures in Chapter 157 of this Code. The Village Board of Trustees
may grant variations from this section after a public hearing is held by the
Zoning Board of Appeals and upon receipt of a recommendation from the Zoning
Board of Appeals.
(1981 Code, § 24.08) (Am. Ord. 87-21, passed 9-21-1987; Am. Ord. 98-22, passed
12-21-1998; Am. Ord. 2001-17, passed 9-17-2001; Am. Ord. 18-04, passed 4-2-
2018; Am. Ord. 22-33, passed 7-18-2022; Am. Ord. 25-16, passed 4-21-2025)
§ 151.007 STREET NUMBERS.
   (A)   Required. All lots, buildings and structures within the corporate
limits of the village shall be assigned a street number in accordance with the
numbering system established by the Building Department and this code of
ordinances.
   (B)   Size and type. Street numbers shall be not less than five inches in
height and be in a contrasting color from the structure. Street numbers shall
not be in script.
   (C)   Location.
      (1)   No person shall, prior to the start of construction of any
structure on vacant land, fail to post, in a prominent location visible from
the adjoining street, the temporary assigned street number for that property.
      (2)   No person shall occupy any structure unless the assigned street
number is mounted on the structure next to the front entrance in a prominent
location and visible from the adjoining street. If that location is not readily
visible from the adjoining street, the number shall be placed elsewhere in
close proximity to the front entrance where it is not obstructed.
      (3)   The street number of multiple tenant buildings with common
entrances shall be placed in a prominent location in proximity to the adjoining
street or parking area. Each tenant space shall have the numbers or letters
assigned to that unit posted on the door of that unit.
(1981 Code, § 24.09) (Ord. 2001-17, passed 9-17-2001) Penalty, see §
151.999
§ 151.008 ADDITIONS, INSERTIONS, DELETIONS, AND CHANGES TO THE INTERNATIONAL
BUILDING CODE—2021.
   The following sections and subsections of the 2021 International Building
Code are hereby added, amended, revised, and changed as follows:
   1.   101.1 Title. Amend as follows:
Insert "the Village of East Dundee" for "[name of jurisdiction]".
   2.   101.4.3 Plumbing. Delete this subsection in its entirety, so the
subsection reads as follows:
101.4.3. Plumbing. The provisions of the latest edition of the Illinois State
Plumbing Code shall apply to the installation, alterations, repairs, and
replacement of plumbing systems. All further reference to the International
Plumbing Code shall be converted to mean Illinois State Plumbing Code, as
currently adopted, prepared and published by the Illinois Department of Public
Health.
   3.   105.2. Work Exempt from Permit. Amend the exceptions in Subsection
105.2 to remove exceptions and to read as follows:
Section 105.2. Work exempt from permit. Exemption from permit requirements of
this code shall not be deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done in
any manner in violation of the provisions of this code or any other laws or
ordinances of this jurisdiction. Permits shall not be required for the
following:
Building:
1.   Oil derricks.
2.   Retaining walls that are not over 4 feet (1219 mm) in height measured from
the bottom of the footing to the top of the wall, unless supporting a surcharge
or impounding Class I, II or IIIA liquids.
3.   Water tanks supported directly on grade if the capacity is not greater
than 5,000 gallons (18,925 L) and the ration of height to diameter or width is
not greater than 2:1.
4.   Painting, papering, tiling, carpeting, cabinets, countertops and similar
finish work.
5.   Temporary motion picture, television and theater stage sets, and scenery.
6.   Prefabricated swimming pools accessory to a Group R-3 occupancy that are
less than 24 inches (610 mm) deep, are not greater than 5,000 gallons (18,925
L) and are installed entirely above ground.
7.   Shade cloth structures constructed for nursery or agricultural purposes,
not including service systems.
8.   Swings and other playground equipment accessory to detached one-and two-
family dwellings.
9.   Window awnings in Group R-3 and U occupancies, supported by an exterior
wall that does not project more than 54 inches (1372 mm) from the exterior wall
and does not require additional support.
10.   Nonfixed and movable fixtures, cases, racks, counters and partitions not
over 5 feet 9 inches (1753 mm) in height.
Electrical:
1.   Repairs and maintenance: Minor repair work, including the replacement of
lamps for the connection of approved portable electrical equipment to approved
permanently installed receptacles.
2.   Radio and television transmitting stations: The provisions of this code
shall not apply to the electrical equipment user radio and television
transmissions, but do apply to equipment and wiring for a power supply and the
installations of towers and antennas.
3.   Temporary testing systems: a permit shall not be required for the
installation of any temporary system required for the testing or servicing
electrical equipment or apparatus.
Gas:
1.   Portable heating appliances.
2.   Replacement of any minor part that does not alter approval of equipment or
make such equipment unsafe.
Mechanical:
1.   Portable heating appliances.
2.   Portable ventilation appliances.
3.   Portable cooling units.
4.   Steam, hot-or chilled-water piping within any heating or cooling equipment
regulated by this code.
5.   Replacement of any minor part that does not alter approval of equipment or
make such equipment unsafe.
6.   Portable evaporative coolers.
7.   Self-contained refrigeration systems containing 10 pounds (4.54 kg) or
less of refrigerant or that are actuated by motors of 1 horsepower (0.75 kW) or
less.
Plumbing:
1.   The stopping of leaks in drains, water, soil, waste or vent pipe;
provided, however, that if any concealed trap, drainpipe, water, soil, waste or
vent pipe becomes defective and it becomes necessary to remove and replace the
same with new material, such work shall be considered as new work and a permit
shall be obtained and inspection made as provided in this code.
2.   The clearing of stoppages or the repairing of leaks in pipes, valves, or
fixtures, and the removal and installation of water closets, provided such
repairs do not involve or require the replacement or rearrangement of valves,
pipes, or fixtures.
   4.   105.5 Expiration. Amend so the subsection reads as follows:
105.5. Expiration. Every permit issued by the village shall expire by
limitation under the provisions of this chapter after 360 days and at that time
all work must cease. Any permittee holding an unexpired permit may apply in
writing to the Building Official for an extension for an additional 180 days at
a cost of one-half (1/2) the original permit fee before the work may
recommence.
   5.   109.3.1 Spot Survey. Add a new subsection to read as follows:
109.3.1 Spot Survey. After the foundation has been completed, prior to the
beginning of construction on the structure, a spot survey prepared, signed, and
sealed by a licensed Illinois surveyor or engineer shall be submitted to the
village. The spot survey shall show the distance from the lot lines, elevation
of the top of the foundation, established grades, and the proposed finished
grades.
   6.   110.1.1 Filing Certificates of Occupancy with Assessor. Add a new
subsection to read as follows:
110.1.1 Filing Certificates of Occupancy with Assessor. Subsequent to the
issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy pursuant to the ordinances of the
village, the Building Official shall file an executed Certificate of Occupancy
with the Dundee Township Assessor.
   7.   112.3 Qualifications. Delete subsection in its entirety.
   8.   113.1 General. Amend to delete reference to creation of a separate
board of appeals and add a sentence at the end, so the subsection reads as
follows:
113.1 General. In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or
determinations made by the building official relative to the application and
interpretation of this code, the Village Board will serve as the board of
appeals. The board shall adopt rules of procedure for conducting its business
and shall render all decisions and findings in writing to the appellant with a
duplicate copy to the building official. Applications for appeal shall be
accompanied by such plans or data, or both and shall include a statement in
writing by the applicant or adequate facts showing that the requested appeal is
within the board's authority as stipulated in Section 113.2.
   9.   113.4. Violation Penalties. Amend to and add a sentence at the end, so
the subsection reads as follows:
113.4 Violation Penalties. Any person who violates a provision of this Code or
fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who erects, constructs,
alters, or repairs a building or structure in violation of the approved
construction documents or directive of the Building Official, or of a permit or
certificate issued under the provisions of this Code shall be subject to a fine
as prescribed by Section 151.999 of the village Code of Ordinances. Each day
that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a
separate offense and shall be subject to additional fines.
   10.   114.2 Issuance. Amend to so the subsection reads as follows:
114.2 Issuance. The Stop Work Order shall be in writing and shall be posted in
a conspicuous place visible from the street. Upon issuance of a Stop Work
Order, all work shall immediately cease. The Stop Work Order shall state the
reason for the order and the conditions under which the cited work will be
permitted to resume.
   11.   114.3 Unlawful Continuance. Delete the language in this subsection in
its entirety and replace it with the following:
114.3. Failure to Comply. Any person who shall continue any work after a Stop
Work Order has been posted, except such work as that person is directed to
perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable to a fine as
prescribed in § 151.999 of the village Code of Ordinances.
   12.   Chapter 9. Fire Protection and Life Safety Systems. Delete this
Chapter in its entirety and replace with the following language:
All building code regulations related to fire prevention and safety for
proposed, existing, and temporary buildings and structures in the village are
established and enforced by the East Dundee and Countryside Fire Protection
District, pursuant to Section 94.01.
   13.   1008.3.3. Rooms and Spaces. Amend this subsection so it reads as
follows:
1008.3.3 Rooms and spaces. In the event of power supply failure. an emergency
electrical system shall automatically illuminate all the following areas:
1.   Electrical equipment rooms.
2.   Fire command centers.
3.   Fire pump rooms.
4.   Generator rooms.
5.   All Public restrooms.
a.   Exception: Single-occupant restrooms where no stalls are present.
   14.   1101. General. Amend this subsection so it reads as follows:
1101.1. General. Buildings and facilities shall be designed and constructed to
be accessible in accordance with the Illinois Accessibility Code, as published
by and amended from time to time by the Illinois Capital Development Board,
without amendments.
   15.   1102. Compliance. Delete this Section in its entirety.
   16.   1103. Scoping Requirements. Delete this Section in its entirety.
   17.   1104. Accessible Route. Delete this Section in its entirety.
   18.   1105. Accessible Entrances. Delete this Section in its entirety.
   19.   1106. Parking and Passenger Loading Facilities. Delete this Section in
its entirety.
   20.   1107. Motor-Vehicle-Related Facilities. Delete this Section in its
entirety.
   21.   1108. Dwelling Units and Sleeping Units. Delete this Section in its
entirety.
   22.   1109. Special Occupancies. Delete this Section in its entirety.
   23.   1110. Other Features and Facilities. Delete this Section in its
entirety.
   24.   1111. Recreational Facilities. Delete this Section in its entirety.
   25.   1112. Signage. Delete this Section in its entirety.
   26.   1807.1.4 Permanent wood foundation systems. This section is hereby
deleted in its entirety.
(1981 Code, § 24.10) (Am. Ord. 94-35, passed 12-19-1994; Am. Ord. 2001-17,
passed 9-17-2001; Am. Ord. 04-02, passed 1-20-2004; Am. Ord. 04-22, passed 6-
21-2004; Am. Ord. 06-43, passed 10-16-2006; Am. Ord. 25-16, passed 4-21-2025)
§ 151.009 ADDITIONS, INSERTIONS, DELETIONS, AND CHANGES TO THE INTERNATIONAL
RESIDENTIAL CODE—2021.
   The following sections and subsections of the 2021 International Residential
Code are hereby added, amended, revised, and changed as follows:
   1.   R 101.1. Title. Amend as follows.
Insert "the Village of East Dundee" for "[name of jurisdiction]".
   2.   R102.7.2. Existing non-conforming. Add a new subsection to read as
follows:
Section R102.7.2 Existing non-conforming. All existing materials, defects or
installations not meeting current code requirements that are uncovered during
the course of permitted work must be brought into code compliance.
   3.   R102.8. Electrical. Add a new subsection to read as follows:
Section R102.8 Electrical: All references within this Code to "ICC electrical
code" shall be deleted in their entirety and in lieu thereof, the following
language shall be submitted: "National Electric Code, 2020, prepared and
published by the NFPA 70.
   4.   R102.9. Plumbing. Add a new subsection to read as follows:
Section R102.9 Plumbing: All references within this Code to the ICC plumbing
code shall be deemed changed to read the Illinois Plumbing Code, 77 Ill. Adm.
Code 890, as currently adopted with amendments, prepared and published by the
Illinois Department of Public Health."
   5.   R105.2. Work Exempt from Permit. Amend the exceptions in Subsection
R105.2 to remove exceptions and to read as follows:
Section R105.2 Work exempt from permit. Exemption from permit requirements of
this code shall not be deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done in
any manner in violation of the provisions of this code or any other laws or
ordinances of this jurisdiction. Permits shall not be required for the
following:
Building:
1.   Retaining walls that are not over 4 feet (1219 mm) in height measured from
the bottom of the footing to the top of the wall, unless supporting a
surcharge.
2.   Painting, papering, tiling, carpeting, cabinets, countertops, and similar
finish work.
3.   Prefabricated swimming pools that are less than 24 inches (610 mm) deep.
4.   Swings and other playground equipment.
5.   Window awnings supported by an exterior wall that do not project more than
54 inches (1372 mm) from the exterior wall and do not require additional
support.
Electrical:
1.   Listed cord-and-plug connected temporary decorative lighting.
2.   Reinstallation of attachment plug receptacles but not the outlets
therefore.
3.   Replacement of branch circuit overcurrent devices of the required capacity
in the same location.
4.   Electrical wiring, devices, appliances, apparatus or equipment operating
at less than 25 volts and not capable of supplying more than 50 watts of
energy.
5.   Minor repair work, including the replacement of lamps or the connection of
approved portable electrical equipment to approved permanently installed
receptacles.
Gas:
1.   Portable heating, cooking, or clothes drying appliances.
2.   Replacement of any minor part that does not alter approval of equipment or
make such equipment unsafe.
3.   Portable-fuel-cell appliances that are not connected to a fixed piping
system and are not interconnected to a power grid.
Mechanical:
1.   Portable heating appliances.
2.   Portable ventilation appliances
3.   Portable cooling units.
4.   Steam, hot-or chilled-water piping within any heating or cooling equipment
regulated by this code.
5.   Replacement of any minor part that does not alter approval of equipment or
make such equipment unsafe.
6.   Portable evaporative coolers.
7.   Self-contained refrigeration systems containing 10 pounds (4.54 kg) or
less of refrigerant or that are actuated by motors of 1 horsepower (746 W) or
less.
8.   Portable-fuel-cell appliances that are not connected to a fixed piping
system and are not interconnected to a power grid.
Plumbing:
1.   The stopping of leaks in drains, water, soil, waste or vent pipe;
provided, however, that if any concealed trap, drainpipe, water, soil, waste or
vent pipe becomes defective and it becomes necessary to remove and replace the
same with new material, such work shall be considered as new work and a permit
shall be obtained and inspection made as provided in this code.
2.   The clearing of stoppages or the repairing of leaks in pipes, valves, or
fixtures, and the removal and installation of water closets, provided such
repairs do not involve or require the replacement or rearrangement of valves,
pipes, or fixtures.
   6.   R105.5. Expiration. Delete the language in this subsection in its
entirety and replace it with the following:
R-105.5 Expiration. Every permit issued by the village shall expire by
limitation under the provisions of this chapter after 360 days and at that time
all work must cease. Any permittee holding an unexpired permit may apply in
writing to the Building Official for an extension for an additional 180 days at
a cost of one-half (1/2) of the original permit fee before the work may
recommence.
   7.   R106.2.1. License required. Add a new subsection to read as follows:
R106.2.1. License required. A site plan shall be designed and stamped by a
licensed civil engineer or licensed land surveyor. The plan shall include exist
grades, proposed new construction or addition, proposed top of foundation and
proposed final grading. A foundation location shall be submitted for review
prior to the start of framing. An as-built site grading plan shall be submitted
for review prior to issuing a Certificate of Occupancy.
   8.   R108.2. Schedule of permit fees. Delete the language in this subsection
in its entirety and replace it with the following:
R108.2 Schedule of permit fees. The fees shall be as indicated in Chapter 37 of
the Village Code.
   9.   R108.5. Refunds. Delete the language in this subsection in its entirety
and replace it with the following:
R-108.5 Refunds. The Building Official shall authorize the refunding of fees as
follows:
a.   The full amount of any fee paid hereunder which was erroneously paid or
collected.
b.   Not more than 75 percent, excluding any and all costs incurred by the
village of the permit fee paid when no work has been done under a permit issued
in accordance with this Code.
c.   Not more than 75 percent of the plan review fee paid when an application
for a permit for which a plan review fee has been paid is withdrawn or
cancelled before any plan review effort has been expended.
d.   No fee shall be refunded where the permit has lapsed as specified
elsewhere in the Code.
e.   The Code official shall not authorize the refunding of any fee paid,
except upon written application filed by the original permittee not later than
180 days after the date of the fee payment.
   10.   R112.1. General. Amend to delete reference to creation of a separate
board of appeals and add a sentence at the end, so the subsection reads as
follows:
Section R112.1 General. In order to hear and decide appeals of orders,
decisions or determinations made by the building official relative to the
application and interpretation of this code, there shall be and is hereby
created a board of appeals. The building official shall be an ex officio member
of said board but shall have no vote on any matter before the board. The board
of appeals shall be the Village Board. The board shall adopt rules of procedure
for conduction its business, and shall render all decisions and findings in
writing to the appellant with a duplicate copy to the building official.
Applications for appeal shall be accompanied by such plans or data, or both and
shall include a statement in writing by the applicant or adequate facts showing
that the requested appeal is within the board's authority as stipulated in
Village Code Section 112.2.
   11.   R112.3. Qualifications. Delete subsection in its entirety.
   12.   R113.4. Violation Penalties. Amend subsection to add reference to
penalties, so the subsection reads as follows:
R113.4 Violation Penalties. Any person who violates a provision of this Code or
fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who erects, constructs,
alters, or repairs a building or structure in violation of the approved
construction documents or directive of the Building Official, or of a permit or
certificate issued under the provisions of this Code shall be subject to a fine
as prescribed by 151.999 of the village Code of Ordinances. Each day that a
violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate
offense and shall be subject to additional fines.
   13.   R114.1. Authority. Replace subsection in its entirety so the
subsection reads as follows:
R114.1. Notice to Owner. Upon notice from the Building Official that work on
any building or structure is being prosecuted contrary to the provisions of
this Code or in an unsafe and dangerous manner, such work shall be immediately
stopped. The Stop Work Order shall be in writing and shall be posted in a
conspicuous place visible from the street.
   14.   R114.4. Failure to Comply. Amend subsection to change subsection title
and add reference to penalties, so the subsection reads as follows:
R114.4. Unlawful Continuance. Any person who shall continue any work in or
about the structure after having been served with a Stop Work Order, except
such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe
condition shall be subject to a fine as prescribed by § 151.999 of the village
Code of Ordinances.
   15.   R301.2. Climate and Geographic Design Criteria. Delete Table R301.2 in
its entirety and replace it with the following:
 
Ground Snow Wind Design       Seismic Design Subject To Damage From
Load        Speed Topographic Category       Weathering Frost Line Termite
                  Effects                               Depth
25          90    No          B              Severe     42"        Moderate
 
 
Winter Design Ice Barrier
Temp          Underlayment Flood Hazards Air Freezing Index Mean Annual Temp
              Required
-4            Yes          Yes           1700               50
 
   16.   R309.6. Opening Protection. Add a new subsection to read as follows:
R309.6 Opening Protection. Openings from a private garage directly into a room
used for sleeping purposes or into a room containing a house heating unit or
other fuel burning appliance shall not be permitted. Other openings between the
garage and the residence shall be equipped with B Label fire rated doors. All
doors that open directly into a residence from an attached garage shall be
equipped with a self closing device.
   17.   R309.7. Separation Required. Add a new subsection to read as follows:
R309.7 Separation Required. The garage shall be separated from the residence
and its attic by not less than 5/8 inch, type X fire rated gypsum board applied
to the garage side. Where the separation is a floor ceiling assembly, the
structure supporting the separation shall also be protected by not less than 1-
1/4 inch, type X, fire rated gypsum board or equivalent.
   18.   R309.8. Floor Surface and Gas Curb. Add a new subsection to read as
follows:
R309.8 Floor Surface and Gas Curb. Garage floor surfaces shall be a minimum of
4 inches of concrete on top of 4 inches of compacted crushed stone (CA 6 or
better). A 6 inch curb shall be provided between the residence and the garage.
The area of the floor used for parking of automobiles or other vehicles shall
be sloped to facilitate the movement of liquids to a drain or toward the main
doorway.
   19.   R309.9. Detached Garages on Slab-On-Grade. Add a new subsection fo
read as follows:
R309.9 Detached Garages on Slab-On-Grade. Detached garages 600 square feet or
less, may be constructed on a slab-on-grade with a thickened edge grade beam a
minimum of 18 inches thick and 20 inches in width and a minimum floor thickness
of 4 inches. The grade beam shall extend a minimum of 12 inches below grade and
extend a minimum of 6 inches above grade. The grade beam shall be poured and
undisturbed soil and the floor area shall be poured on a minimum of 4 inches of
compacted crushed stone (CA-6 or better).
   20.   R314.5. Combination Alarms. Delete the language in this subsection in
its entirety and replace it with the following:
R314.5 Combination Alarms. Combination smoke and carbon monoxide alarms shall
be installed on each floor of a dwelling, within 15 feet of a sleeping room and
interconnected with the smoke alarms. Alarms shall have backup ten-year lithium
battery.
   21.   R319.1. Address Identification. Amend so the subsection reads as
follows:
R319.1 Address Identification. Each character shall not be less than 5 inches
in height with a stroke width of not less than 0.5 inch.
   22.   R401.1. Application. Amend to delete reference and exceptions related
to wood foundations, so the subsection reads as follows:
R401.1. Application. The provisions of this chapter shall control the design
and construction of the foundation and foundation spaces for buildings. In
addition to the provisions of this chapter, the design and construction of
foundations in flood hazard areas as established by Table R301.2 shall meet
provisions of Section R322.
   23.   R401.2.1. Detached Masonry and Masonry Veneer Garages. Add a new
subsection to read as follows:
R401.2.1. Detached Masonry and Masonry Veneer Garages. Single story detached
masonry accessory structures and masonry garages shall be supported by a frost
protected footing and wall foundation minimum 42 inches below grade and shall
extend a minimum of 6 inches above grade. The footing shall be a minimum of 16
inches wide and 8 inches thick. The foundation wall shall not be less than 8
inches.
   24.   R402.1. Wood Foundations. Delete subsection in its entirety.
   25.   R402.1.1. Fasteners. Delete subsection in its entirety.
   26.   R402.1.2. Wood Treatment. Delete subsection in its entirety.
   27.   R403.1 Minimums. Amend the subsection to add language so the
subsection reads as follows:
TABLE R403.1.(1). Minimum Size. Minimum sizes for concrete and masonry footings
shall be as set forth in Table R-403.1 and Figure R-403.1(1). The footing
width, W, shall be based on the load-bearing value of the soil in accordance
with Table R-401.4.1. Spread footings shall be at least 8 inches (152 mm) in
thickness and 16 inches in width. Footing projections, P, shall be at least 2
inches (51 mm) and shall not exceed the thickness of the footing. The size of
footings supporting piers and columns shall be based on the tributary load and
allowable soil pressure in accordance with Table 401.4.1.
   28.   R403.2 Footings for Wood Foundations. This section is deleted in its
entirety.
   29.   R404.1.2. Concrete Foundation Walls. Amend the subsection to add
language so the subsection reads as follows:
R-404.1.2. Concrete Foundation Walls. Concrete foundation walls shall be
constructed as set forth in Tables R-404.1.1(1), R-404.1.1(2), R-404.1.1(3),
and R-404.1.1(4) and shall also comply with the provisions of this section and
the applicable provisions of Section R-402.2. In Seismic Design Categories D
and D concrete foundation walls shall comply with Section R-404.1.4.
   30.   R401.2.3. Trench Foundations. Add a new subsection to read as follows:
R404.1.2.3 Trench Foundations. The use of trench footing and foundations shall
be permitted for single story detached accessory structures 600 square feet or
less. The minimum width shall be 10 inches and the minimum depth below grade
shall be 42 inches and 6 inches above grade.
   31.   R404.2 Wood foundation walls. Delete subsection in its entirety.
   32.   R404.2.1 Identification. Delete subsection in its entirety.
   33.   R404.2.2 Stud size. Delete subsection in its entirety.
   34.   R404.2.3 Height of Backfill. Delete subsection in its entirety.
   35.   R404.2.4 Backfilling. Delete subsection in its entirety.
   36.   R404.2.5 Drainage and dampproofing. Delete subsection in its entirety.
   37.   R404.2.6 Fastening. Delete subsection in its entirety.
   38.   R404.6.1. Reinforcement. Add a new subsection to read as follows:
R404.6.1. Reinforcement. All trench foundations require a total of four #5
rebar. Two rebar to be located in the top third of the foundation wall and two
rebar to be located in the bottom third of the foundation wall.
   39.   R405.2. Wood Foundations. Delete subsection in its entirety.
   40.   R405.2.1. Base. Delete subsection in its entirety.
   41.   R405.2.2. Moisture Barrier. Delete subsection in its entirety.
   42.   R405.2.3. Drainage System. Delete subsection in its entirety.
   43.   R406.3. Damp Proofing for Wood Foundations. Delete subsection in its
entirety.
   44.   R406.3.1. Panel Joint Sealed. Delete subsection in its entirety.
   45.   R406.3.2. Below Grade Moisture Barrier. Delete subsection in its
entirety.
   46.   R406.3.3. Porous Fill. Delete subsection in its entirety.
   47.   R406.3.4. Backfill. Delete subsection in its entirety.
   48.   R407.1. Wood Column Protection. This section is deleted in its
entirety.
   49.   R502.14. Protection of Engineered Floor Systems. Add a new subsection
to read as follows:
R502.14. Protection of Engineered Floor Systems. Prefabricated wood I-joist and
open web floor truss systems supporting first floor construction shall be
protected from fire by unpenetrated 5/8 Type X, fire drywall or a sprinkler
system complying with NFPA 130.
   50.   R1001.6.1. Spark Arrestors. Add a new subsection to read as follows:
R1001.6.1. Spark Arrestors. Spark arrestors with a maximum of 1/2 inch wire
mesh shall be installed on all solid fuel burning fireplaces.
   51.   Chapter 25. Plumbing Administration. Delete chapter in its entirety,
and replace with the Illinois Plumbing Code, 77 Ill. Adm. Code 890, with
amendments.
   52.   Chapter 26. General Plumbing Requirements. Delete chapter in its
entirety, and replace with the Illinois Plumbing Code, 77 Ill. Adm. Code 890,
with amendments.
   53.   Chapter 27. Plumbing Fixtures. Delete chapter in its entirety, and
replace with the Illinois Plumbing Code, 77111. Adm. Code 890, with amendments.
   54.   Chapter 28. Water Heaters. Delete chapter in its entirety, and replace
with the Illinois Plumbing Code, 77 Ill. Adm. Code 890, with amendments.
   55.   Chapter 29. Water Supply and Distribution. Delete chapter in its
entirety, and replace with the Illinois Plumbing Code, 77 Ill. Adm. Code 890,
with amendments.
   56.   Chapter 30. Sanitary Drainage. Delete chapter in its entirety, and
replace with the Illinois Plumbing Code, 77 Ill. Adm. Code 890, with
amendments.
   57.   Chapter 31. Vents. Delete chapter in its entirety, and replace with
the Illinois Plumbing Code, 77 Ill. Adm. Code 890, with amendments.
   58.   Chapter 32. Traps. Delete chapter in its entirety, and replace with
the Illinois Plumbing Code, 77 Ill. Adm. Code 890, with amendments.
   59.   Chapter 33. Storm Drainage. Delete chapter in its entirety, and
replace with the Illinois Plumbing Code, 77 Ill. Adm. Code 890, with
amendments.
   60.   E3706.4.1. Split Breakers. Add a new subsection to read as follows:
E3706.4.1 . Split breakers. Use of split breakers shall be prohibited.
   61.   E3801.2. Allowable Wiring Methods. Amend Table E3801.2 to remove
certain wiring methods, and read as follows:
Armored cable                                      AC
Electric metallic tubing                           EMT
Flexible metal conduit                             FMC
Intermediate metal conduit                         IMC
Liquidtight flexible conduit                       LFC
Metal-clad cable                                   MC
Rigid metallic conduit                             RMC
Rigid polyvinyl chloride conduit (Type PVC)        RNC
Reinforced thermosetting resin conduit (Type RTRC) RTRC
Surface raceways                                   SR
 
   62.   E3902.1.1. Lighting. Add a new subsection to read as follows:
E3902.1.1. Lighting. Lighting receptacles located within the vertical wall or
ceiling of shower and tub enclosures shall be ground fault protected. All
bathrooms shall be provided with a minimum of one lighting outlet not connected
to the ground fault circuit.
   63.   E4001.16. Food waste disposals. Add a new subsection to read as
follows:
E4001.16. Food waste disposals. Disconnecting means for food waste disposals
shall be located inside the cabinet in which the disposal is located.
A.   Variations: The board of appeals is authorized to grant variations from
the provisions of this article only in situations where the property was
improved in compliance with all applicable codes and there is a subsequent
failure of a required system through no fault of the owner.
B.   Procedure: Applications shall be filed with the board of appeals on forms
designated by the board of appeals. The application shall be accompanied by
such plans or data, or both, as specified by the board of appeals, and shall
include a statement in writing by the applicant or adequate facts showing that
the proposed variation will conform to the standards set forth herein for
variations.
C.   Fee: A fee as established by the board of trustees shall be required for
filing an application for a variance.
D.   Hearing on Application: Upon receipt in proper form of the application and
statement referred to above, the board of appeals shall hold at least one
public hearing on the proposed variation. Notice of such a hearing shall be
given by posting the agenda of the meeting of the board of appeals at which the
variation will be considered on the village's website. However, the board of
appeals may continue the hearing from time to time without further notices
being given except by public announcement at the meeting and being placed in
the minutes of that meeting.
E.   Standards: A variation shall be granted only if the evidence in the
judgment of the board of appeals sustains each of the following:
a.   The plight of the owner was not created by the owner and is due to unique
circumstances causing hardship to the owner; and
b.   The alleged difficulty or hardship has not been created by any person
presently having an interest in the property or any person through whom the
applicant claims title;
c.   The granting of the variation will not be substantially detrimental to the
public welfare or injurious to other property or improvements in the
neighborhood in which the property is located; or
d.   The proposed variation will not otherwise endanger the public safety, or
substantially diminish or impair property values within the neighborhood.
F.   Decisions: All decisions of the board of appeals on any variation request
shall be put in writing and contain findings showing that the applicant has met
the standards set forth herein or state the reasons why the variation is
denied. The decision shall state the relief granted and may contain conditions
deemed appropriate to safeguard public health, safety and welfare.
(Ord. 2001-17, passed 9-17-2001; Am. Ord. 04-22, passed 6-21-2004; Am. Ord. 06-
43, passed 10-16-2006; Am. Ord. 25-16, passed 4-21-2025)
§ 151.010 ADDITIONS, INSERTIONS, DELETIONS, AND CHANGES TO THE INTERNATIONAL
MECHANICAL CODE—2021.
   The following sections and subsections of the 2021 International Mechanical
Code are hereby added, amended, revised, and changed as follows:
   1.   101.1. Title. Amend to read as follows.
Insert "the Village of East Dundee" for "[name of jurisdiction]".
   2.   304.3. Elevation of Ignition Source. Amend to read as follows.
304.3. Elevation of Ignition Source. Equipment and appliances having an
ignition source and located in hazardous locations and public garages, repair
garages, automotive service stations, and parking garages shall be elevated
such that the source of ignition is not less than 8 feet (2438 mm) above the
floor surface on which the equipment or appliance rests. Such equipment and
appliances shall not be installed in Group H occupancies or control areas where
open use, handling, or dispensing of combustible, flammable, or explosive
materials occurs. For the purpose of this section, rooms or spaces that are not
part of the living space of a dwelling unit and that communicate directly with
a private garage through openings shall be considered to be part of the private
garage.
   3.   304.5. Private Garages. Amend this subsection to delete the exception,
so it reads as follows:
304.5. Private Garages. Appliances located in private garages and carports
shall be installed with a minimum clearance of 6 feet (1829 mm) above the
floor.
(Ord. 2001-17, passed 9-17-2001; Am. Ord. 03-08, passed 6-2-2003; Am. Ord. 04-
22, passed 6-21-2004; Am. Ord. 06-43, passed 10-16-2006; Am. Ord. 25-16, passed
4-21-2025)
§ 151.011 ADDITIONS, INSERTIONS, DELETIONS, AND CHANGES TO THE NFPA 70 NATIONAL
ELECTRIC CODE—2020 EDITION.
   The following sections and subsections of the NFPA 70 National Electric
Code—2020 Edition are hereby added, amended, revised, and changed as follows:
   1.   Adoption of National Electrical Code. The standards and specifications,
rules and regulations of the 2020 edition of the National Fire Protection
Association (NFPA 70), as contained in the code known as the "National
Electrical Code of the Village of East Dundee" (hereinafter referred to as
"this Code") are hereby adopted by reference as the rules and regulations for
the installation, alteration and repair of electrical equipment, subject to the
additions, deletions, and modifications specifically set forth in this Code.
It shall be mandatory that all equipment, material, devices and appliances
covered by the provisions of this code shall be tested and listed by a standard
testing laboratory, of nationally accepted stature, which performs services
equal to or greater than those performed by the Underwriters Laboratories, Inc.
In those instances where it is impossible to receive approval, the Building
Department shall determine acceptability.
   2.   100. Definitions. Amend this Article to add the following definitions:
ELECTRICAL CONTRACTOR. Any person, firm or corporation engaged in the business
of installing or altering by contract, electrical equipment for the utilization
of electricity supplied for light, heat or power, not including apparatus,
conductors, or other equipment installed for or by public utilities including
common carriers which are under the jurisdiction of the Illinois Commerce
Commission for use in their operation as public utilities; but the term
ELECTRICAL CONTRACTOR does not include employees employed by any personal firm
or corporation to do or supervise the work.
ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT. Conductors and equipment installed for the utilization of
the electricity supplied for light, heat or power, but does not include radio
apparatus or equipment for wireless reception of sounds and signals and does
not include apparatus, conductors and other equipment installed for or by
public utilities, including common carriers, which are under the jurisdiction
of the Illinois Commerce Commission for use in their operation as public
utilities.
OWNER. Any person who is the owner-occupant of a single-family detached
residence where specific electrical work is to be done.
   3.   210.8(A). Dwelling Units. Add a new subsection to read as follows:
210.8(A): Dwelling Units. All 125-volt through 250-volt receptacles installed
in the following locations and supplied by a single-phase branch circuit rated
150 volts or less to ground shall have ground-fault circuit-interrupter
protection for personnel:
1)   Bathrooms
2)   Garages and also accessory buildings that have a floor located at or below
grade level not intended as habitable rooms and limited to storage areas, work
areas, and areas of similar use
3)   Outdoors
4)   Crawl spaces-at or below grade level
5)   Basements
6)   Kitchens
7)   Areas with signs and permanent provisions for food preparation, beverage
preparation, or cooking
8)   Sinks-where receptacles are installed within 1.8 m (6 ft) from the top
inside edge of the bowl of the sink
9)   Boathouses
10)   Bathtubs or shower stalls-where receptacles are installed within 1.8 m (6
ft) of the outside edge of the bathtub or shower stall
11)   Laundry areas
12)   Indoor damp and wet locations
13)   All lights located within the enclosure of a shower or tub.
   4.   320.104. Conductors. Add a new subsection to read as follows:
320.104. Conductors. Insulated conductors shall be of a type listed in Table
310/.4(1) or those identified for use in the is cable. In addition, the
conductors shall have an overall moisture-resistant and fire-retardant fibrous
covering. For Type ACT, a moisture-resistent fibrous covering shall be required
only on the individual conductors.
A.   AC Cable run from a switch to a ceiling mounted box, capable of ceiling
mounted fan installation, shall contain a minimum of 3 insulated conductors of
a type listed in Table 310.104 or those identified for use in this cable.
   5.   330.104. Conductors. Add a new subsection to read as follows:
330.104. Conductors. For undergrounded, grounded, and equipment grounding
conductors, the minimum conductor sizes shall be 14 WG copper, nickel, or
nickle-coated copper and 12 AWG aluminum or copper-clad aluminum.
For control and signal conductors, minimum conductor sizes shall be 18 AWG
copper, nickle, or nickel-coated copper, 14 AWG copper-clad aluminum, and 12
AWG aluminum.
A.   MC Cable run from a switch to a ceiling mounted box, capable of ceiling
mounted fan installation, shall contain a minimum of 3 insulated conductors of
a type listed in Table 310.104 or those identified for use in this cable.
   6.   Article 334. Nonmetallic-Sheathed Cable: Types NM and NMC. Delete
Article in its entirety and any additional references in the NFPA 70 National
Electric Code-2020 Edition.
   7.   Article 338. Service Entrance Cable: Types SE and USE. Delete Article
in its entirety and any additional references in the NFPA 70 National Electric
Code-2020 Edition.
   8.   Article 340. Underground Feeder and Branch-circuit Cable: Type UF.
Delete Article in its entirety and any additional references in the NFPA 70
National Electric Code-2020 Edition.
   9.   Article 362. Electrical Nonmetallic Tubing (ENT). Delete Article in its
entirety and any additional references in the NFPA 70 National Electric Code-
2020 Edition.
   10.   408.54. Maximum Number of Overcurrent Devices. Add a new subsection to
read as follows:
408.54. Maximum Number of Overcurrent Devices. A panel board shall be provided
with physical means to prevent the installation of more overcurrent devices
than that number for which the panelboard was designed, rated, and listed.
For the purposes of this section, a 2-pole circuit breaker or fusible switch
shall be considered two overcurrent devices; a 3-pole circuit breaker or
fusible switch shall be considered three overcurrent devices.
A.   Split Breakers. The use of split breakers used to increase the number of
available over current devices shall be prohibited.
   11.   Additional Regulations. The following additional standards and
specifications, rules and regulations herein set forth. In any instances where
the provisions of this subsection 151.011(11) conflict with the NFPA 70
National Electric Code-2020 Edition, as amended by this § 151.011(1)-(10), this
§ 151.011(11) shall supersede and take precedence over the conflicting
provisions.
A.   Electrical Inspector.
1.   The Electrical Inspector is responsible for enforcing the provisions of
the rules and regulations relating to the installation or alteration of all
electrical equipment as herein provided.
2.   The Electrical Inspector shall be under the supervision of the Building
Inspector or his or her designee.
B.   Electrical Committee. The Electrical Committee shall recommend safe and
practical standards and specifications for the installation or alteration of
electrical equipment in the village, designed to meet the necessities and
conditions in this particular locality; shall recommend reasonable rules and
regulations governing the issuance of permits; and shall recommend reasonable
fees to be paid for the inspection of all electrical equipment installed or
altered within the municipality; provided that, the standards, specifications,
rules, regulations and fees shall not become active until adopted by ordinance
duly passed by the Village Board. All permit fees shall be paid to the village
when approved by the Electrical Inspector.
C.   Permits required.
1.   It is unlawful to install or alter any electrical equipment in the village
without first obtaining a permit, as herein provided. Any person, firm or
corporation desiring to install or alter any electrical equipment shall apply
to the Building Department for the necessary electrical permit. Electrical
plans and specifications for proposed installation or alteration of multiple-
family dwellings consisting of three or more units and commercial or industrial
installations or alterations must be submitted to the Building Department for
approval and shall be sealed by a registered architect or registered
professional engineer.
2.   The reasonable valuation, estimated cost (labor and material) of the
improved value, shall be furnished before the electrical permit shall be
issued.
3.   The Electrical Inspector shall inspect all electrical equipment installed
or altered in the village and the work shall conform to the requirements of
this chapter.
4.   Permits for work performed under this code may be issued only to
registered electrical contractors or to the owner-occupant of single-family
detached residences.
5.   Electrical contractors shall furnish bona fide proof of their current
electrical contractors registration.
6.   Fees for electrical inspections and permits shall be as indicated in
Chapter 37 of the Village Code.
D.   Inspection and approval.
1.   Electrical installations or alterations shall not be concealed or covered
up before same has been inspected and approved by Electrical Inspector or by
his or her duly authorized agent. Any person, firm, corporation or contractor
who violates any portion of this section shall be charged with the duty of
uncovering or opening up for inspection any electrical installation or
alteration by whatever means necessary and shall also be subject to the
requirements and penalty of § 151.999. When the electrical installation or
alteration is ready for a rough-in inspection, it shall be the duty of the
person in charge of the installation or alteration to request the inspection.
The Building Department shall have eight regular working hours after the
notification to make the necessary inspection.
2.   When the temporary or permanent service is installed, it shall be the
responsibility of the person, firm or corporation installing the electrical
work to notify the Building Department and the local utility company. The
Building Department shall make an inspection of the work to assure compliance
with the requirements of this chapter and shall then notify the local utility
within a reasonable time.
3.   The Inspection Department shall be properly notified eight regular working
hours in advance for service, rough and final inspection. No inspection shall
be considered to be automatic. Owners doing their own work must be present for
the inspection. When the required inspections have been made and accepted, a
notice of approval will be posted on or in the building. Anyone failing to call
for inspections shall be subject to the penalties as prescribed herein.
4.   All assembly, business, education, factory, industrial, high hazard,
institutional, mercantile, multiple-family residential, storage and utility
occupancies using electricity for either lighting, heating and/or power shall
have installations subject to reinspection upon a new business occupancy. The
Building Department shall furnish the person, firm or corporation in charge of
the premises inspected, a written notice of the changes or alterations as may
be required. The changes shall be made within 30 days after receipt of the
written notice unless, in the opinion of the Electrical Inspector, the changes
should be made at once, at the end of which time, the Building Department shall
reinspect the changes or alterations required by the written notice.
E.   Registration of electrical contractors.
1.   It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to engage in the
business of installing electric conductors to be used for light, heat or power,
or to engage in the business as an electrical contractor before complying with
the rules and regulations as herein set forth.
2.   If the person, firm or corporation is registered in another city or
village as an electrical contractor and has paid the registration fee as
required by law to such city, or village located within the state, then the
electrical contractor shall not be required to register or pay a registration
fee for the period covered by his or her certificate to the village.
3.   Any person, firm or corporation desiring to engage in the business of an
electrical contractor must first make a written application and pay a non-
refundable examination fee of $100 to the Building Department. Each applicant
shall be required to pass an examination, as provided by the Electrical
Committee which shall require each applicant to answer a reasonable number of
questions, in writing, to indicate that he or she has sufficient knowledge and
technical training to install, alter, repair or maintain electrical equipment.
Following the successful passing of the examination, the Committee shall
transmit their approval to the Building Department who shall register the
applicant and issue a certificate of registration to the applicant.
4.   Fee: The applicant shall pay to the village an annual fee as provided for
in the village annual fee schedule, which shall expire on December 31 of the
year in which it was issued.
5.   Electrical contractor registrations may be reviewed and approved or
revoked for reasonable cause, at any time, by the Electrical Committee.
F.   Adoption of local utility company information and requirements for supply
of electric service. The provisions of the rules and regulations regarding the
installation, alteration and use of electrical equipment as last adopted by the
electrical supply company now supplying the village are hereby made a part of
this subchapter. A copy of the rules and regulations shall be on file in the
Building Department.
G.   Service capacity and equipment; residential installations.
1.   Single- and duplex-family dwellings.
a.   The minimum service capacity for each dwelling unit shall be a 100 amp
service with a minimum 20 branch circuit panel. Four spaces for branch circuits
shall be provided for future use. Split buss, aluminum conductors and tandem
breakers are prohibited unless approved by the Building Official.
b.   Service entrance conductors shall be continuous, without splice, from
service head to meter fitting and service disconnecting means. Duplex service
entrance conductors shall have a minimum capacity of two #1 and one #2 copper
conductors when one service riser is used, in an overhead installation. The
neutral shall be identified as white. All single-family and duplex dwellings
requiring separate rise installations shall have a minimum service capacity two
#2 and one #3 copper conductors.
c.   Service risers shall be rigid galvanized conduit (heavy wall), from
service head to inside disconnecting means. Minimum size conduit shall be two
and one-half inch for 100 amp and three inch for services larger than 100 amp,
per ComEd specifications. Rigid aluminum, PVC Schedule 40 and IMC conduit is
not permitted for service.
2.   Multiple-family dwellings.
a.   Requirements are the same as for single or duplex dwellings.
b.   Panels shall be installed in each dwelling unit. Each dwelling service
main breaker must be marked so it is easily identified as to which unit is
being served. Minimum raceway shall be one and one-quarter inch electrical
trade size. Maximum service disconnects shall comply with the 2020 National
Electric Code.
c.   The neutral must be white. Conductors shall be continuous, without splice,
from service disconnecting means to dwelling unit distribution panels.
d.   Each meter socket shall be identified as to which apartment unit it
serves.
3.   Mobile homes.
a.   The connection from the distribution panels in a mobile home to the power
source shall be made with a proper conduit (one and one-fourth inch heavy wall)
which has been approved by the village.
b.   In addition, each mobile home shall have an approved grounding system to
the shell and metal framework. Grounding requirements shall conform to division
(L).
H.   Service entrance equipment; residential underground.
1.   Single- and duplex-family dwellings. Service meter raceway to be a minimum
200 amp.
2.   Multiple-family dwellings.
a.   Requirements are the same as for single or duplex dwellings. Service
panels shall be installed in each dwelling unit. Each dwelling unit service
main breaker must be marked so it is easily identified. Minimum raceway shall
be one and one-fourth inch electrical trade size. Maximum service disconnects
shall comply with the 2020 National Electric Code.
b.   The neutral shall be identified in white.
I.      Service capacity and equipment; commercial, industrial and large
service installations.
1.   Single occupancy. When service installations are required by the local
utility to be installed indoors, service raceways shall enter the compartments
as directly as possible.
2.   Multiple occupancy. When service installations are required by the local
utility to be installed indoors, service raceways shall enter such compartments
as directly as possible. Full size service conductors or bus way shall be
extended to a main service distribution center. The distribution center shall
consist of:
a.   Service conductor gutter with appropriate individual main over current
disconnects and metering facilities;
b.   Distribution cabinets and panel containing appropriate main switch and
fuse or circuit breaker circuits, the load sides of which shall extend the
individual metering facilities adjacent to the distribution center; and
c.   Tap boxes that are weather tight and self-locking shall be accepted in
multiple meter installations.
3.   Fittings. There shall be no junction or outlet boxes in a service run,
except as noted in division (B)(3) above. Weather tight fittings shall be used
in service runs, from service head to meter cabinets. Rigid galvanized (heavy
wall) shall be used on all services from service head to inside disconnecting
means. Dissimilar metals shall not be used. Revision of services shall conform
to new service requirements.
4.   Pad mounted transformer. All underground conduit shall be four-inch PVC or
rigid galvanized pipe. In the case of PVC, a concrete envelope will be required
with voltages 480v and higher. One spare conduit will be installed on all
underground services.
J.   Grounding.
1.   Where the service is supplied from a pad mounted transformer, the
grounding grid for the transformer may be used as the supplementary electrode
provided the number of rods are sufficient for the service capacity.
2.   Grounding to building fire sprinkler systems is prohibited.
3.   The grounding electrode conductor shall be suitable for the location and
shall be effectively bonded to ground at each end.
K.   Outlet boxes.
1.   An outlet box shall be installed for all types of outlets. All outlet
boxes shall be metal and they shall provide, at least, the minimum free space
for the maximum number of wires indicated in the National Electrical Code.
Boxes shall not be less than one and one-half inches in depth. Boxes shall be
fitted with covers and/or plates so as to form a complete enclosure. Unused and
open knockouts shall be securely closed. Raceways shall not enter a box through
a knockout for a small size raceway.
2.   All boxes shall be fully accessible in a manner to permit inspection or
modification of wiring contained therein without removing any portion or
structure or finished surfaces.
3.   Front edges of boxes and covers shall be set as nearly flush with the
finished surfaces as possible, but shall not be more than one-eighth inch back
of finished surface.
4.   All outlet boxes shall be independently and solidly supported from the
structure. Raceways entering boxes shall not be construed as proper support,
nor shall the box be the support for the raceway.
5.   A four-inch square box shall be used with a suitable flush cover as outlet
demands. Should it be impossible, owing to construction of the building, a
single gem box with the depth not less than two and one-half inches may be
used, providing not more than one raceway enters. Ganging of gem boxes is
prohibited in new construction.
6.   A four-inch octagon box, minimum depth one and one-half inches may be used
in unfinished basement for lights or for garage lights, commercial or
industrial lighting when using a four-inch porcelain light receptacle or
swivel-type cover with rigid conduit stem to light bulb socket, providing that
not more than two knockouts are used.
7.   Back-to-back box nipples with locknuts shall be used between boxes.
L.   Fixtures and outlets required. The minimum number of outlets for
connection of permanent lighting fixtures and convenience receptacles in
residential buildings shall be as follows.
1.   A light shall be installed directly over every kitchen sink, bathroom
lavatory and utility sink in addition to the general lights in the room.
Stairways, halls, passageways, corridors, garages, patios and rooms accessible
by more than one entry or exit shall have a ceiling light or outlet controlled
by three-way or four-way switches, one lighting outlet for each 250 square feet
or fraction thereof in basements or cellars.
2.   Kitchen and dining area: A wall receptacle shall be installed at each
counter space 24 inches or wider, but distance between receptacles on single
counter space shall not be more than three feet. A receptacle shall be
installed in spaces provided for refrigerators, ranges and other permanently
installed appliances. All countertop receptacles within six feet of sink shall
be of a ground fault circuit interrupter type.
3.   Not less than one fixture or wall receptacle in each room shall be
controlled by a wall switch adjacent to entry doors.
4.   An outside light fixture controlled by an interior switch or by photo cell
switching when approved by the Building Inspector shall be installed at each
entrance and porch.
5.   Garages attached or detached shall have switch controlled interior
lighting. At least one receptacle shall be provided for each garage.
6.   Each clothes closet or storage area of six square feet or larger shall
have a ceiling light. Walk-in closets shall have a light controlled by a wall
switch.
7.   All new construction shall have at least one general lighting circuit for
each 300 square feet of area or fraction thereof, approved by the Building
Inspector.
8.   All detached structures requiring electrical service must be served by
underground conductors installed per division (Q) in an approved manner and
shall be suitably protected against physical damage.
M.   Conductors.
1.   The use of aluminum conductors is prohibited.
2.   All conductors shall be insulated and of a type approved for the purpose
for which they are used. (It is not hereby intended to prohibit use of bare
wire for bonding raceways or equipment to ground.) The use of uninsulated wire
for neutral conductors is prohibited.
3.   Conductors installed in raceways which are in concrete slabs or walls in
direct contact with earth, fill or are otherwise subject to excessive moisture,
shall have not less than type THWN, MTW and AWW insulation.
4.   Connections of conductors to terminal parts shall be mechanical electrical
secure without damaging the conductors and shall be made by means of pressure
conductors, including set screw type, or splices to flexible leads either
soldered, brazed or welded, except that Number 8 AWG or smaller conductors may
be connected by means of clamps or screws with terminal plates having upturned
lugs. Terminal for more than one conductor shall be so listed.
5.   Conductors shall be so spliced or jointed as to be mechanically and
electrically secure. Joints must be soldered with a fusible metal or alloy or
brazed or welded unless an approved splicing device is used. All splices and
joints and the free ends of conductors shall be covered with an insulation
equal to that on the conductors. AWG No. 12 and No. 14 wire splices must be
soldered. If the power supply wires to each individual fixture are cut, then
each separate free conductor (pigtail), a minimum length of six inches each,
shall be provided and such splices shall conform to this section.
6.   Mechanical connectors may be used to attach light fixture wires to the
free end of the power supply conductors (pigtails) or uncut power supply
conductors.
7.   The minimum conductor size for all commercial installations is #12.
N.   Underground service.
1.   Services must be installed underground as required by Chapter 155 of this
code of ordinances.
2.   The underground primary and secondary cable and the service cable are
covered by General Order 160, the Illinois Commerce Commission, and therefore
under their jurisdiction.
O.   Raceways or conduits.
1.   New work. All new interior installations or alterations shall be approved
metal raceways. All raceways exposed to the weather shall be in rigid heavy
wall conduit and approved type boxes and fittings. Flexible metal conduit shall
comply with Article 350 of the National Electrical Code. Exception: ½ inch
flexible steel conduit may be used where length does not exceed six feet,
conductors are limited to two number 12 A.W.G. and one ground. Rigid aluminum
conduit can only be used by special written permission from the Building
Department. Dissimilar metals shall not be used.
2.   Old work.
a.   New installations of one or more concealed extensions and/or additional
outlets or open construction due to remodeling or repair in single- or two-
family dwellings shall be in rigid conduit, electrical metallic tubing or
flexible metal conduit and shall be bonded to the ground. One or more concealed
extensions shall be minimum one-half inch electrical trade size raceway.
b.   In basements, exposed extensions or additional outlets shall be in rigid
conduit or electrical metallic tubing. Exposed flexible extensions from
basement floor to upper floor shall not exceed 18 inches in length. Existing
and new installations must comply with the applicable section, sections or
parts of this code. Any flexible conduit shall have a grounding conductor
installed.
3.   Raceways in concrete. All raceways installed in a concrete base or slab
shall be rigid galvanized heavy wall conduit, electrical metallic tubing, PVC
Schedule 40 or approved floor duct. Any permanently exposed risers emerging
from the concrete base or slab shall be rigid galvanized heavy wall conduit.
All raceway connection or fittings installed in or under concrete base, slab or
underground shall be PVC Schedule 40. Rigid steel or electrical metallic tubing
shall not be used underground, in or underneath concrete bases or slabs in
contact with the earth or fill.
4.   Raceway fittings. All raceway fittings, locknuts, bushings, couplings or
connectors shall provide secure mechanical and electrical joints.
5.   Bushings. Where a raceway enters a box or other fitting, an insulating
bushing should be used to protect the wires from abrasion unless the design of
the box or fitting is such as to afford equivalent protection. For electrical
trade size one inch or larger or for installations of more than 150 volts to
ground, insulating bushings shall be used or approved equal where raceways
enter enclosures.
P.   Signs and border lighting.
1.   All signs must bear the approval stamp of the Underwriters Laboratories.
2.   Sign and border lighting shall be wired with No. 12 wire and a maximum of
1,500 watts per circuit will be permitted. Sign lighting supply shall be taken
only from the points on the wiring system for which correct fusing can be
provided.
3.   All outdoor electrical signs shall be controlled by a disconnect installed
on or near the outside of the sign and shall be accessible.
4.   On all neon signs, the high voltage transformer and high voltage equipment
shall be installed in approved metal boxes and all metal parts shall be
grounded to the conduit.
5.   All wiring for permanent free standing electrical signs and billboards
shall be underground installed as per division (Q). All exposed wiring shall be
encased in rigid galvanized or PVC Schedule 40 conduit.
6.   Illuminated temporary or portable signs shall be connected to a ground
fault protected interrupter type of receptacle and shall not be subject to
mechanical injury.
Q.   Wiring for carnivals and/or festivals.
1.   All electrical work of temporary nature must meet both this code and
National Electrical Codes (NEC).
2.   Electrical generators must be so located that the grounding electrode can
be driven in the earth that is not covered with concrete, blacktop or any other
material that will prevent moisture from entering the earth.
3.   Grounding electrode and grounding conductors must be sized to meet NEC
Article 250.
4.   All grounding shall be carried by a grounding conductor from the power
source to each appliance or device using electrical current.
5.   The grounding conductor shall be green in color. Exception: other color
conductors may be used, providing the ends are identified with either green
tape or green paint.
6.   A driving ground electrode will not be permitted on any device or
appliance using electric current.
7.   Each device or appliance requiring electric current must have a disconnect
switch with proper size wire and protective devices.
8.   All junctions must be made in the "Minnesota" type boxes. The cover must
be locked.
9.   An electrical permit and inspection will be required before the carnival
or festival can be opened.
R.   Conflicts. In all instances where the provisions of this code, adopted in
this subchapter, conflict with specific provisions of the Building, Plumbing,
Heating or Fire Prevention Codes of the village, either as presently adopted or
to be adopted or amended in the future, the specific provisions of these
individual codes shall supersede and take precedence over the conflicting
provisions in this code.
(Am. Ord. 2001-17, passed 9-17-2001; Am. Ord. 17-54, passed 11-20-2017; Am.
Ord. 19-25, passed 7-8-2019; Am. Ord. 25-16, passed 4-21-2025)
§ 151.012 ADDITIONS, INSERTIONS, DELETIONS, AND CHANGES TO THE 2021 ILLINOIS
ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE 20 ILCS 3125/15.
   The following sections and subsections of the 2021 Illinois Energy
Conservation Code, ILCS Ch. 20, Act 3125, § 15, are hereby added, amended,
revised, and changed as follows:
   1.   C101.1. Title. Amend to read as follows:
C101.1Title. This code shall be known as the "Illinois Energy Conservation Code
of the Village of East Dundee" (hereinafter referred to as "this Code").
(Ord. 25-16, passed 4-21-2025)
§ 151.013 ADDITIONS, INSERTIONS, DELETIONS, AND CHANGES TO THE INTERNATIONAL
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE—2021.
   1.   101.1. Title. Amend to read as follows.
Insert "the Village of East Dundee" for "[name of jurisdiction]".
   2.   304.14. Insect Screens. Amend to read as follows.
304.14. Insect Screens. During the period from May 15th to September 15th,
every door, window, and other outside opening required for ventilation of
habitable rooms, food preparation areas, food service areas, or any areas where
products to be included or utilized in food for human consumption are
processed, manufactured, packaged, or stored shall be supplied with approved
tightly fitting screens of not less than 16 mesh per inch (16 mesh per 25 mm)
and every swinging door shall have a self-closing device in good working order.
   3.   602.3. Heat Supply. Amend to read as follows.
602.3. Heat Supply. Every owner and operator of any building who rents, leases,
or lets one or more dwelling unit, rooming unit dormitory, or guestroom on
terms, either expressed or implied, to furnish heat to the occupants thereof
shall supply heat during the period from September 15th to June 15th to
maintain a temperature of not less than 68°F (18°C) during the period the
spaces are occupied.
   4.   602.4. Occupiable Work Spaces. Amend to read as follows.
602.4. Occupiable Work Spaces. Indoor occupiable work spaces shall be supplied
with heat during the period from September 15th to June 15th to maintain a
temperature of not less than 65°F (18°C) during the period the spaces are
occupied.
Exceptions:
1.   Processing, storage and operation areas that require cooling or special
temperature conditions.
2.   Areas in which persons are primarily engaged in vigorous physical
activities.
(Ord. 2001-17, passed 9-17-2001; Am. Ord. 03-28, passed 12-1-2003; Am. Ord. 04-
22, passed 6-21-2004; Am. Ord. 06-43, passed 10-16-2006; Am. Ord. 25-16, passed
4-21-2025)
§ 151.014 ADDITION, INSERTIONS, DELETIONS AND CHANGES TO THE ILLINOIS PLUMBING
CODE, 77 ILL. ADM. CODE 890.
   The following sections and subsections of the Illinois Plumbing Code, 77
Ill. Adm. Code 890, are hereby added, amended, revised, and changed as follows:
   1.   § 890. Appendix A: Plumbing Materials, Equipment, Use Restrictions and
Applicable Standards, Table A: Approved Materials and Standards. Amend Table A
to remove certain materials and to read as follows:
 
Section 890. TABLE A Approved Materials and Standards
Approved Materials for Water Service Pipe
2)  Brass Pipe                 ASTM B 43-2009
    Cast Iron (ductile iron)   ASTM A 377-2008e1
3)  Water Pipe                 CSA 870-2012
                               AWWA C151-2009
5)  Copper/Copper Alloy Pipe   ASTM B 42-2010
                               ASTM B 302-2012
6)  Copper/Copper Alloy Tubing ASTM B 88-2009
13) Stainless Steel Pipe       ASTM A 312/A 312M-2012a ASTM A 403/A 403M-2012
                               ASTM A 511/A 511M-2012
Agency Notes:
1   Solvent cement must be handled in accordance with ASTM F 402-1988.
2   Water service pipe must meet the appropriate NSF standard for potable
water.
3   Type K or L copper may be installed underground.
4   Dimension Ratio (DR) 17 or less.
5   Dimension Ratio (DR) 13.5 or less.
6   ASME 8.1.20.1-1983.
Approved Materials for Water Distribution Pipe
Approved Materials for Water Distribution Pipe
1)  Brass Pipe                 ASTM B 43-2009
                               ASTM B 42-2010
3)  Copper/Copper Alloy Pipe   ASTM B 302-2012
                               AWWA C606-2011
4)  Copper/Copper Alloy Tubing ASTM B 88-2009
6)  Galvanized Steel Pipe      ASTM A 53-2012
                               AWWA C606-2011
                               ASTM A 312/A 312M-2012
10) Stainless Steel Pipe       ASTM A 403/A 403M-2012
                               ASTM A 511/A 511M-2012
11) Welded Copper Water Tube   ASTM B 447-2012a WK, WL and WM
12) Solder                     ASTM B 32-2008"
Agency Notes:
1   Solvent cement must be handled in accordance with ASTM F 402-1988.
2   Water distribution pipe must meet the appropriate NSF standard for
potable water. Plastic shall be rated at 160 psi at 73.4 degrees Fahrenheit.
3   Use for cold or tempered water only.
4   ASME B.1.20.1-1983.
5   Safety Color.
 
(Ord. 25-16, passed 4-21-2025)
§ 151.015 ADDITIONS, INSERTIONS, DELETIONS, AND CHANGES TO THE INTERNATIONAL
EXISTING BUILDING CODE—2021.
   The following sections and subsections of the International Existing
Building Code are hereby added, amended, revised, and changed as follows:
   1.   101.1. Title. Amend to read as follows:
Insert "the Village of East Dundee" for "[name of jurisdiction]".
   2.   103. Code Compliance Agency. Delete section in its entirety.
   3.   105.2. Work Exempt from Permit. Amend to read as follows:
Exemptions from permit requirements of this code shall not be deemed to grant
authorization for any work to be done in any manner in violation of the
provisions of this code or any other laws or ordinances of this jurisdiction.
Permits shall not be required for the following:
Building:
1.   Painting, papering, tiling, carpeting, cabinets, counter tops, and similar
finish work.
2.   Temporary motion picture, television, and theater stage sets and scenery.
3.   Shade cloth structures constructed for nursery agricultural purposes, and
not including service systems.
4.   Window awnings supported by an exterior wall of Group R-3 or Group U
occupancies
5.   Nonfixed and movable cases, counters and partitions not over 5 feet 9
inches (1753 mm) in height.
Electrical:
1.   Repairs and maintenance: Minor repair work, including the replacement of
lamps or connection of approved portable electrical equipment or approved
permanently installed receptacles.
2.   Radio and television transmitting stations: The provisions of this code
shall not apply to electrical equipment used for radio and television
transmissions, but do apply to equipment an wiring for power supply, the
installation of towers and antennas.
3.   Temporary testing systems: A permit shall not be required for the
installation of any temporary system required for the testing or servicing of
electrical equipment or apparatus.
Gas:
1.   Portable heating appliance.
2.   Replacement of any minor part that does not alter approval of equipment or
makes such equipment unsafe.
Mechanical:
1.   Portable heating appliance.
2.   Portable ventilation equipment.
3.   Portable cooling unit.
4.   Steam, hot or chilled water piping within any heating or cooling equipment
regulated by this code.
5.   Replacement of any part that does not alter its approval or make it
unsafe.
6.   Portable evaporative cooler.
7.   Self-contained refrigeration system containing 10 pounds (4.54 kg) or less
of refrigerant and actuated by motors of 1 horsepower (746 W) or less.
Plumbing:
6.   The stopping of leaks in drains, water, soil, waste or vent pipe; provided
however, that if any concealed trap, drainpipe, water, soil, waste or vent pipe
becomes defective and it becomes necessary to remove and replace the same with
new material, such work shall be considered as new work, and a permit shall be
obtained and inspection made as provided in this code.
7.   The clearing of stoppages or the repairing of leaks in pipes, valves or
fixtures, and the removal and reinstallation of water closets, provided that
such repairs do not involve or require the replacement or rearrangement of
valves, pipes, or fixtures.
   4.   302.2. Additional codes. Amend to read as follows:
Alterations, repairs, additions and changes of occupancy to, or relocation of,
existing buildings and structures shall comply with the provisions for
alterations, repairs, additions and changes of occupancy or relocation,
respectively, in this code and the State of Illinois Energy Conservation Code,
International Fire Code, International Fuel Gas Code, International Mechanical
Code, State of Illinois Plumbing Code, International Property Maintenance Code,
International Residential Code, and NFPA 70. Here provision of the other codes
conflict with provisions of this code, the provisions of this code shall take
precedence.
   5.   305. Accessibility for Existing Buildings. Delete section in its
entirety.
   6.   408. Plumbing. Delete section in its entirety.
   7.   708.1. Minimum requirements. Amend to read as follows:
Level 1 alterations to existing buildings or structures shall comply with the
requirements of the Illinois Energy Conservation Code.
   8.   803. Fire Protection. Delete section in its entirety.
   9.   809.1. Minimum requirements. Amend to read as follows:
Level 2 alterations to existing buildings or structures shall comply with the
requirements of the Illinois Energy Conservation Code.
   10.   904. Fire Protection. Delete section in its entirety.
   11.   907.1. Minimum requirements. Amend to read as follows:
Level 3 alterations to existing buildings or structures shall comply with the
requirements of the Illinois Energy Conservation Code.
   12.   1009. Plumbing. Delete section in its entirety.
   13.   1104.1. Minimum requirements. Amend to read as follows:
Additions to existing buildings or structures shall comply with the
requirements of the Illinois Energy Conservation Code.
(Ord. 25-16, passed 4-21-2025)
§ 151.016 ADDITIONS, INSERTIONS, DELETIONS, AND CHANGES TO THE INTERNATIONAL
FUEL GAS CODE —2021.
   The following sections and subsections of the International Fuel Gas Code,
2021 are hereby added, amended, revised, and changed as follows:
   1.   101.1. Title. Amend to read as follows:
Insert "the Village of East Dundee" for "[name of jurisdiction]".
   2.   113. Means of Appeal. Delete section in its entirety.
   3.   115.4. Violation Penalties. Amend to read as follows:
115.4. Violation Penalties. Any person who shall violate a provision of this
Code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall
erect, install, alter, repair mechanical work in violation of the approved
construction documents or directive of the Code Official or of a permit or
certificate issued under the provisions of this Code shall be subject to a fine
as prescribed by § 151.999 of the village Code of Ordinances. Each day that a
violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate
offense and shall be subject to additional fines.
   4.   116.2. Issuance. Amend to change title and read as follows:
116.2. Stop Work Order. The Stop Work Order shall be in writing and shall be
posted in a conspicuous place visible from the street. Upon issuance of a Stop
Work Order, all work shall immediately cease. The Stop Work Order shall state
the reason for the order and the conditions under which the cited work will be
permitted to resume.
   5.   403.4.5. Corrugated Stainless Steel Tubing. Amend to read as follows:
403.4.5. Corrugated Stainless Steel Tubing. Corrugated stainless steel tubing
is prohibited.
(Ord. 04-22, passed 6-21-2004; Am. Ord. 06-43, passed 10-16-2006; Am. Ord. 25-
16, passed 4-21-2025)
§ 151.017 ADDITIONS, INSERTIONS, DELETIONS, AND CHANGES TO THE INTERNATIONAL
SOLAR ENERGY PROVISIONS—2018.
   The following sections and subsections of the International Solar Energy
Provisions, 2018 are hereby added, amended, revised, and changed as follows:
   1.   RS103.1.1. (R104.9.1) Used materials and equipment. Delete subsection
in its entirety.
   2.   RS105.1 (R106.1). Submittal documents. Amend to additional text, and
read as follows.
RS105.1 (R106.1). Submittal documents. Submittal documents consisting of
construction documents, and other data shall be submitted in two or more sets
with each application for a permit. The construction documents shall be
prepared by a registered design professional where required by the statutes of
the jurisdiction in which the project is to be constructed. Where special
conditions exist, the building official is authorized to require additional
construction documents to be prepared by a registered design professional. The
Solar System construction documents shall be prepared and sealed by a currently
licensed Illinois Structural Engineer for roof structural to accept the loading
of a rooftop Solar System. A currently licensed Illinois Professional Engineer
shall provide sealed Electrical Calculations for the Solar System.
Exception: The building official is authorized to waive the submission of
construction documents and the other data not required to be prepared by a
registered design professional if it is found that the nature of the work
applied for is such that reviewing of construction documents is not necessary
to obtain compliance with this code.
(Ord. 25-16, passed 4-21-2025)
§ 151.018 ADDITIONS, INSERTIONS, DELETIONS, AND CHANGES TO THE INTERNATIONAL
SWIMMING AND SPA CODE—2021.
   The following sections and subsections of the International Swimming and Spa
Code, 2021 are hereby added, amended, revised, and changed as follows:
   1.   101.1. Title. Amend to read as follows.
Insert "the Village of East Dundee" for "[name of jurisdiction]".
   2.   102.7.2. Illinois State Plumbing Code. Add a new subsection to read as
follows:
102.7.2. Illinois State Plumbing Code. Whenever a reference is made to the
International Plumbing Code or Chapter 29 of this code, such reference shall be
deemed to refer to the applicable section of the Illinois State Plumbing Code,
as adopted by the Village of East Dundee.
   3.   301.1.4. Accessibility. Delete the language in this subsection in its
entirety and replace it with the following:
301.1.4. Accessibility. All pools and spas must meet the requirements of the
Illinois Accessibility Code.
(Ord. 25-16, passed 4-21-2025)
§ 151.019 [RESERVED]
§ 151.020 BOARD OF APPEALS UNDER INTERNATIONAL UNIFORM BUILDING CODES.
   (A)   Established. There is hereby established a commission which shall be
known as the East Dundee Building Code Board of Appeals. Whenever the word
Board of Appeals is used in this chapter, it shall mean and refer to the East
Dundee Building Code Board of Appeals. It is the intent of this section to
create the Board of Appeals set forth in Section 112 of the 2000 International
Building Code adopted by the village and to provide procedural implementation
to Sections 112.1, 112.2 and 112.3 and adopt the limitations of Section 112.2
of the 2000 International Building Code.
   (B)   Membership; organization; appointments; terms.
      (1)   The Board of Appeals shall consist of three voting members
appointed to the Board of Appeals by the Village President, with the consent of
the Village Board of Trustees. Each member shall have the following
qualifications or substantially similar qualifications: as a registered
structural or civil engineer experienced in building construction; as a
licensed architect experienced in building construction; as a general
contractor experienced in commercial and/or industrial construction; or as a
general contractor experienced in residential construction. Each appointed
member shall reside within ten miles of the corporate limits of the village or
shall have their principal employment within the village. Each member so
appointed shall serve for three years and may be reappointed by the President.
Each member shall, upon appointment, take and subscribe an oath that they will
faithfully and honestly perform the duties and functions of the office as set
forth in this chapter to the best of their ability. A vacancy occurring in the
Board of Appeals shall be filled by appointment to serve for the unexpired
term.
      (2)   The Board of Appeals shall meet at least annually during the month
of March and shall elect one of its members as chairman for a term of one year
subject to reelection.
      (3)   The Building Official or his or her designee, shall serve as an ex
officio member of the Board of Appeals with no voting rights.
   (C)   Administration.
      (1)   The Board of Appeals shall adopt rules governing its proceedings
and the exercise of the powers and duties as established by this chapter
provided that such rules shall not be in conflict with any provisions of this
chapter and upon approval by the Village Board.
      (2)   A quorum of two members shall be required for any action by the
Board of Appeals other than adjournment of a meeting.
      (3)   The Building Official, or his or her designee, shall attend all
meetings of the Board of Appeals and shall provide such assistance as may be
required or requested by the Board of Appeals, and shall maintain an accurate
record of all proceedings.
   (D)   Appeals.
      (1)   The owner of a building or structure or any other interested person
may appeal from a decision of the Building Official regarding the application
or interpretation of the 2000 International Building Code as it may be amended
from time to time. Application for appeal may be made when it is claimed that
the true intent of any code or ordinance or the rules legally adopted
thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, that the provisions of this code
do not fully apply, or an equally good or better form of construction or
installation can be used.
      (2)   The application shall be filed with the Building Department
accompanied with a fee of $25 and shall include the following information:
         (a)   The name, address and telephone number of the applicant;
         (b)   A copy of the ordinance upon which a ruling is sought;
         (c)   The names of the village department, officers, or employees
whose statements and decisions are being appealed;
         (d)   The location of the site for which the ruling is requested;
         (e)   A short, concise statement of the question to be resolved, and
the applicant’s position on the question; and
         (f)   If a product or material is sought to be substituted, the
supporting information demonstrating that the substitute is equal or superior
in design and quality.
   (E)   Processing of applications; hearing.
      (1)   Upon receipt of a properly filed application, the Building Official
shall forward copies of the application to the members of the Board of Appeals.
      (2)   Upon receipt of the application, the chairman of the Board of
Appeals shall set the time and place of said hearing as soon as practicable.
      (3)   All hearings shall be public and the appellant, his or her
representative, the official of the jurisdiction and any other person whose
interests may be affected by the matter on appeal, shall be given an
opportunity to present relevant evidence.
      (4)   A member of the Board of Appeals shall not pass on any question in
which he or she is engaged as contractor or material dealer, or in the
preparation of plans or specifications, or in which he or she has any personal
interest, direct or indirect.
   (F)   Decision of Board of Appeals. The Board of Appeals shall, within 15
days after the close of the hearing on any appeal, make a written decision on
the appeal. The Board of Appeals shall affirm, or reverse the decision of an
inspector or representative of the Department of Code Administration and
Development Services by a concurring vote of a majority of its members. A copy
of the decision of the Board of Appeals shall be forwarded to the applicant.
Appeals of the decision of the Board of Appeals may be taken to the Village
Board.
   (G)   Amendment of uniform building codes. All appeals taken or permitted
under the codes adopted pursuant to §
151.002 shall be made under the provisions of this section. To the extent there
are conflicts between the provisions of any such code and this section, the
provisions of this section shall control and prevail.
(Ord. 04-29, passed 8-2-2004)
§ 151.021 PERMIT FEES.
   (A)   Fees. The fees for activities and services performed by the department
carrying out its responsibilities under this Code shall be indicated in
Chapter 37 of the village Code of Ordinances.
   (B)   Fee refunds. The Building Official shall authorize the refunding of
fees as follows:
      (1)   The full amount of any fee paid hereunder which was erroneously
paid or collected.
      (2)   Not more than 75%, excluding any and all costs incurred by the
village of the permit fee paid when no work has been done under a permit issued
in accordance with this Code.
      (3)   Not more than 75% of the plan review fee paid when an application
for a permit for which a plan review tee has been paid and is withdrawn or
cancelled before any plan review effort has been expended.
      (4)   No fee shall be refunded where the permit has lapsed as specified
elsewhere in the Code.
(Ord. 25-16, passed 4-21-2025)
ADDITIONAL VILLAGE REGULATIONS
§ 151.025 CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE OF ANTENNAE AND SUPPORTING TOWERS.
   (A)   Definitions. The following words and terms, when used in this Section,
shall have the following meanings unless the context clearly indicates
otherwise:
      ANTENNA. Any structure or device used for the purpose of collecting or
transmitting electromagnetic waves, including but not limited to directional
antennas, such as panels, microwave dishes, and satellite dishes, and omni-
directional antennas, such as whip antennas.
      TOWER.  Any ground or roof mounted pole, spire, structure; or combination
thereof taller than fifteen feet (15'), including supporting lines, cables,
wires, braces, and masts, intended primarily for the purpose of mounting an
antenna, meteorological device, or similar apparatus above grade.
   (B)   Permits.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to erect,
construct in place, place or re-erect, replace, or repair any tower without
first making application to the Building and Inspection Division and securing a
permit therefor as hereinafter provided.
      (2)   The applicant shall provide at the time of application sufficient
information to indicate that construction, installation, and maintenance of the
antenna and tower will not create a safety hazard or damage to the property of
other persons.
      (3)   Permits are not required for:
         (a)   Adjustment or replacement of the elements of an antenna array
affixed to a tower or antenna, provided that replacement does not reduce the
safety factor.
         (b)   Antennas and/or towers erected temporarily for test purposes,
for emergency communication, or for broadcast remote pick-up operations,
provided that all requirements of subsection (d) are met, with the exception of
(d)(3)(C) which is waived. Temporary antennas shall be removed within 72 hours
following installation.
         (c)   Fee. The fee to be paid is that prescribed under Building Permit
Fees, Village Annual Fee Schedule.
         (d)   Construction requirements. All antennas and towers erected,
constructed, or within the Village, and all wiring therefore, shall comply with
the following requirements:
            1.   All applicable provisions of this Code.
            2.   Towers shall be certified by a qualified and licensed
professional engineer to conform to the latest structural standards and wind
loading requirements of the Uniform Building Code and the Electronics Industry
Association.
            3.   With the exception of necessary electric and telephone service
and connection lines approved by the Issuing Authority, no part of any antenna
or tower nor any lines, cable, equipment or wires or braces in connection with
either shall at any time extend across or over any part of the right-of way,
public street, highway, sidewalk, or property line.
            4.   Towers and associated antennas shall be designed to conform
with accepted electrical engineering methods and practices and to comply with
the provisions of the National Electrical Code.
            5.   All signal and remote control conductors of low energy
extending substantially horizontally above the ground between a tower or
antenna and a structure, or between towers, shall be at least eight feet above
the ground at all points, unless buried underground.
            6.   Every tower affixed to the ground shall be protected to
discourage climbing of the tower by unauthorized persons.
            7.   All towers shall be constructed to conform with the
requirements of the occupational Safety and Health Administration.
            8.   Antennas and towers shall not be erected in any protected
residential parcel as defined in §
157.092 in violation of the following restrictions:
               a.   Notwithstanding the provisions of §§
157.165 et seq. the required setback for antennas and towers not rigidly
attached to a building shall be equal to the height of the antenna and tower.
Those antennas and towers rigidly attached to a building, and whose base is on
the ground, may exceed this required setback by the amount equal to the
distance from the point of attachment to the ground.
               b.   No tower shall be in excess of a height equal to the
distance from the base of the antenna and tower to the nearest overhead
electrical power line which serves more than one dwelling or place of business,
less five feet.
               c.   Metal towers shall be constructed of, or treated with,
corrosive resistant material. Wood poles shall be impregnated with rot
resistant substances.
            9.   All towers erected within the city must conform to the
applicable performance standards in §§
157.165 et seq.
         (e)   Existing antennas and towers. Antennas and towers in residential
districts and in existence as of February 3, 1998, which do not conform to or
comply with this section are subject to the following provisions:
            1.   Towers may continue in use for the purpose now used and as now
existing but may not be replaced or structurally altered without complying in
all respects with this section.
            2.   If such towers are hereafter damaged or destroyed due to any
reason or cause whatsoever, the tower may be repaired and restored to its
former use, location and physical dimensions upon obtaining a building permit
therefor, but without otherwise complying with this section, provided, however,
that if the cost of repairing the tower to the former use, physical dimensions,
and location would be 10% or more of the cost of a new tower of like kind and
quality, then the tower may not be repaired or restored except in full
compliance with this section.
         (f)   Lights and other attachments. No antenna or tower in any
protected residential parcel as defined in §
157.092 shall have affixed or attached to it in any way except during time of
repair or installation any lights, reflectors, flashers, or other illuminating
device, except as required by the Federal Aviation Agency or the Federal
Communications Commission nor shall any tower have constructed
thereon or attached thereto, in any way, any platform, catwalk, crow’s nest, or
like structure, except during periods of construction, or repair.
         (g)   Number of towers and antennas. Only one tower shall exist at any
one time on any one protected residential parcel as defined in §
157.092.
         (h)   Inspections.
            1.   All towers may be inspected at least once each year by an
official of the Building Department to determine compliance with original
construction standards. Deviation from original construction for which a permit
is obtained constitutes a violation of this section.
            2.   Notice of violations will be sent by registered mail to the
owner and he will have 30 days from the date the notification is issued to make
repairs. The owner will notify the Building and Inspection Division that the
repairs have been made, and as soon as possible thereafter, another inspection
will be made and the owner notified of the results.
         (i)   Interpretation. It is not the intention of this section to
interfere with, abrogate, or annul any covenant or other agreement between
parties, provided, however, where this section imposes a greater restriction
upon the use or premises for antennas or towers than are imposed or required by
other ordinances, rules, regulations, or permits, or by covenants or
agreements, the provisions of this section shall govern.
(Ord. 2001-17, passed 9-17-2001; Am. Ord. 04-22, passed 6-21-2004)
§ 151.026 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION HOURS OF OPERATION.
   Construction or alteration operations shall not be carried on prior to
sunrise or after sunset or before 7:00 AM or after 8:00 PM Monday through
Saturday and before 8:00 AM and after 8:00 PM on Sunday if accompanied by loud
or annoying noises unless provided in writing by the building official. SEE
NUISANCES, CHP 12.11 NOISE, ORD 00-29, 7AM-8PM M-Sa, 8AM-8PM Sun.
(Ord. 2001-17, passed 9-17-2001; Am. Ord. 04-22, passed 6-21-2004)
§ 151.027 SPECIFICATIONS FOR OUTSIDE DINING AREA REQUIRES A LICENSE.
   (A)   Outside dining areas are a privilege provided pursuant to a license.
Said license may be granted by the Village Board upon recommendation from the
Liquor Commission. If no alcohol is to be served, the license may be granted by
the Village Board in its sole and exclusive discretion at their regular board
meeting or any special board meeting. Outside dining areas permitted in this
section are defined as those areas on private property. The issuance of this
license does not waive any other ordinance requirements. The intent is to
provide outside dining areas that are beneficial to patrons, residents, and
businesses in East Dundee, as determined by:
      (1)   The outside dining area shall be enclosed by a minimum three-foot
high wall, fence, or structure designed to be decorative and to prevent
unauthorized entry. The maximum height of such fence or wall shall be eight
feet.
      (2)   At least five feet of public right-of-way must be provided and
maintained at all times for pedestrian traffic.
      (3)   At least ten feet of public right-of-way traffic must be provided
between the outdoor dining area and vehicular traffic.
      (4)   The outside dining area shall have ingress and egress for emergency
purposes and for handicap accessibility.
      (5)   The outside dining area shall not have a covered roof, although
umbrellas, awnings, screening, and the like may be allowed, and a limited roof
structure may be permitted over any service bar.
      (6)   No signs shall be attached to any furniture, umbrellas, awnings, or
other structure related to the operation of the outdoor dining area.
      (7)   No permanent fixtures are to be installed and only those fixtures
authorized by the permit and shown in the diagram may be stored in the public
right-of-way when the outdoor dining area is not in operation. Should the
licensee not utilize the sidewalk as authorized for a period of 48 hours or
more, all the tables and materials must be removed.
      (8)   A service bar or service window for the service of alcoholic
beverages may be permitted in the outside dining area. Permission for the sale
of alcoholic beverages must be secured from the Liquor Commission prior to
issuance of an Outdoor Dining/Sidewalk Café Permit.
      (9)   Live entertainment shall be governed by the rules set forth in this
chapter.
      (10)   Outside meal seating will be permitted; however, no alcohol shall
be served or consumed in the outside seating area no later than 12:00 a.m.
Sunday through Thursday, and 1:00 a.m. Friday and Saturday.
      (11)   The outside dining area seating shall not be used in division (A)
above for calculating the required number of seats for this liquor license
classification.
      (12)   Seating for the outdoor dining area is to be restricted to the
right-of-way approved by the village.
      (13)   The outside dining area seating capacity when combined with the
indoor seating capacity shall meet the requirements of the State Plumbing Code
and village plumbing ordinances with regard to restroom facilities.
      (14)   Persons issued a permit for an outdoor dining area/sidewalk café
shall maintain the sidewalk area in a clean and safe condition. The permit
holder shall clean said area at the end of each business day, so as not to have
any food or drink leftovers remaining. The permit holder shall wash daily the
sidewalk area approved by the village for the outdoor dining area/sidewalk café
removing any food or drink residue.
      (15)   If the outdoor dining area interferes with a public event planned
on the public right-of-way, the public event shall take precedence. The village
will endeavor to notify the licensee 30 days in advance of the scheduled event.
      (16)   Such other requirements as may reasonably be imposed by the Liquor
Commission taking into account the unique circumstances of the licensee’s
premises and location.
   (B)   Every applicant for a permit to maintain, operate or conduct an
outdoor seating area shall file an application with the Village Clerk upon a
form provided by the Village Clerk and pay a filing fee as set forth in the
Village Annual Fee Schedule, which shall not be refundable.
   (C)   Application/policy requirements.
      (1)   Permits for operation of an outdoor dining area will be issued for
operation between May 1 and November 1.
      (2)   The application for a permit to operate an outdoor dining area must
include the following:
         (a)   A certificate of insurance in the amount of $1,000,000 naming
the Village of East Dundee as an additional insured, which must be renewed each
year the outdoor dining area is in operation.
         (b)   A signed hold harmless agreement.
         (c)   A diagram of the proposed layout of the outdoor dining area,
including sizes of fixtures and their location. A layout is to be submitted for
approval should the layout change in any way from the layout originally
approved by the village. The village may reduce the requested number of tables
to provide for safe pedestrian passage.
         (d)   A formal letter requesting permission including information such
as dates and right-of-way requested is required for first-time applicants.
   (D)   The permit is not transferable in any manner.
   (E)   Periodic inspections and response to complaints will be conducted by
the Building Official.
   (F)   Any violation of the requirements set forth herein will result in the
following:
      (1)   First notice of violation will result in a written notice of
correction.
      (2)   Second notice of violation will result in a suspension of the
permit for a two week period.
      (3)   Third notice of violation will result in revocation of the permit
for the remainder of the calendar year.
   (G)   All licenses issued in accordance with this section shall be governed
by the General Licensing Provisions as contained within Title XI, Business
Regulations, Chapter 110, of the Village Code.
(Ord. 2001-17, passed 9-17-2001; Am. Ord. 04-22, passed 6-21-2004; Am. Ord. 06-
17, passed 6-5-2006; Am. Ord. 06-33, passed 8-21-2006; Am. Ord. 16-13, passed
4-25-2016)
§ 151.028 VACANT BUILDINGS.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish measures to abate
the public nuisances, health and safety hazards, and other harmful effects that
arise from vacant buildings in the village.
   (B)   Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following words and/or
phrases shall apply.
      (1)   VACANT BUILDING. Any building or structure that is unoccupied by a
person or occupied by unauthorized persons for more than 30 days, excepting any
permitted warehouse, garage, vacation property, or building or structure used
only on a seasonal basis. It includes any building condemned or does not have a
valid certificate of occupancy or certificate of compliance from the village.
   (C)   Obligations of vacant building owner.
      (1)   Registration. All owners of vacant buildings shall register with
the Building Department on a form provided, their name, telephone number, email
address, address(es) of all vacant structures owned, drivers license or state
identification number, and date of birth.
      (2)   Transfer. Upon the transfer of ownership, the information required
above shall be provided within 14 days of the change of ownership.
      (3)   Compliance with East Dundee Municipal Code. The designation of the
individual in this section is prima facie evidence of control of the building
to be named as a defendant in any legal action to enforce compliance with the
applicable provisions of the East Dundee Municipal Code, including those
relating to the building maintenance and fire prevention.
      (4)   Each vacant building must be registered separately.
   (D)   Registration fee. For each vacant building, the village shall collect
a fee determined by the village as stated in the fee schedule dollars.
   (E)   Renewal of registration. As long as the building remains vacant, the
registration shall be renewed on an annual basis, the fee for the renewal is
equal to the fee contained in division (D) of this section.
   (F)   Inspection. Each vacant building registered herein shall be inspected
periodically, but not less than annually. The building owner shall, at the
owner’s expense, submit the inspection report to the Building Department. The
report shall be prepared by a duly licensed inspection company or individual
and will provide information as follows:
      (1)   Building openings. Doors, windows, areaways, and other openings
shall be weather-tight and secured against entry by birds, vermin and
trespassers. Missing or broken doors, windows, or other openings shall be
secured.
      (2)   Roofs. The roof and flashings shall be sound and tight, not admit
moisture, or have defects which might admit moisture, rain or roof drainage.
      (3)   Drainage. The building storm drainage system shall be functional
and allow discharge in an appropriate manner.
      (4)   Building structure. The building shall be maintained in good repair
and be structurally sound. Structure members shall be free of deterioration and
capable of safely bearing imposed dead and live loads.
      (5)   Foundation walls. Shall be maintained structurally sound and in a
sanitary condition so as not to pose a threat to public health and safety,
shall be capable of supporting the load which normal use may cause to be placed
thereon, and be free from other cracks and breaks, and free from leaks.
      (6)   Exterior. The property must comply with Appendix A- International
Property Maintenance Code adopted by the village.
   (G)   Penalty and enforcement. A violation of this section shall be a civil
matter which may be enforced in Circuit Court, or pursuant to any
administrative adjudication procedure established by the village. The penalty
for violation of this section shall be in accordance with §
151.999.
   (H)   Other laws. This section is in addition to all other ordinances of the
village and all applicable laws of the state.
(Ord. 08-21, passed 5-5-2008) Penalty, see §
151.999
§ 151.999 PENALTY.
   Unless otherwise provided herein, any person who violates, disobeys, omits,
neglects or refuses to comply with or who resists the enforcement of any of the
provisions of this Building Code, including provisions adopted by reference, or
who refuses to remedy a violation of any such provision or to remedy a hazard
of fire, explosion, collapse, contagion or spread of infectious disease found
to exist and duly ordered eliminated, shall be fined not less than $25 nor more
than $750, exclusive of court costs and administrative fees established by
statute and the costs of prosecution for each offense, and each day upon which
such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
CHAPTER 152: FLOOD PLAIN REGULATIONS
Section
   
152.01   Purpose
   
152.02   Definitions
   
152.03   Enforcement official; duties
   
152.04   How to use regulations
   
152.05   Base flood elevation
   
152.06   Occupation and use
   
152.07   Applicable permitting requirements
   
152.08   Other development requirements
   
152.09   Variances
   
152.10   Disclaimer of liability
   
152.11   Abrogation and greater restrictions
 
   
152.99   Penalty
§ 152.01 PURPOSE.
   (A)   This chapter is enacted pursuant to the police powers granted to the
village by state statutes. The purpose of this chapter is to maintain the
village’s eligibility in the National Flood Insurance Program; to minimize
potential losses due to periodic flooding including loss of life, loss of
property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental
services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief and
impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health,
safety and general welfare; and to preserve and enhance the quality of surface
waters, conserve economic and natural values and provided for the wise
utilization of water and related land resources.
   (B)   This chapter is adopted in order to accomplish the following purposes:
      (1)   To meet the requirements of the Rivers, Lakes, and Streams Act,
ILCS Chapter 615, Act 5, as amended;
      (2)   To assure that new development does not increase the flood or
drainage hazards to others or creating unstable conditions susceptible to
erosion;
      (3)   To protect new buildings and major improvements to buildings from
flood damage;
      (4)   To protect human life and health from the hazards of flooding;
      (5)   To lessen the burden on the taxpayer for flood control projects,
repairs to flood-damaged public facilities and utilities and flood rescue and
relief operations;
      (6)   To make federally subsidized flood insurance available for property
in the village by fulfilling the requirements of the National Flood Insurance
Program;
      (7)   To comply with the rules and regulations of the National Flood
Insurance Program codified as 44 CFR 59 through 79, as amended;
      (8)   To protect, conserve and promote the orderly development of land
and water resources;
      (9)   To preserve the natural hydrologic and hydraulic functions of
watercourses and flood plains and to protect water quality and aquatic
habitats; and
      (10)   To preserve the natural characteristics of strewn corridors in
order to moderate flood and stormwater impacts, improve water duality, reduce
soil erosion, protect aquatic and riparian habitat, provide recreational
opportunities, provide aesthetic benefits and enhance community aid economic
development.
(1981 Code, § 30.01) (Ord. 90-5, passed - -)
§ 152.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACT. An “Act in Relation to the Regulation of the Rivers, Lakes and Streams
of the State of Illinois.”
   APPLICANT. Any person, firm, corporation or agency which submits an
application.
   APPROPRIATE USE. Only uses of the regulatory floodway that are permissible
and will be considered for permit issuance. The only uses that will be allowed
are as specified in §
152.06(C).
   BASE FLOOD. The flood having a one-percent probability of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year. The BASE FLOOD is also known as the 100-YEAR
FREQUENCY FLOOD EVENT. Application of the base flood elevation at any location
is as defined in §
152.05.
   BUILDING. A structure that is principally above ground and is enclosed by
walls and a roof. The term includes a gas or liquid storage tank, a
manufactured home or a prefabricated building. The term also includes
recreational vehicles and travel trailers to be installed on a site for more
than 180 days.
   CHANNEL. Any river, strewn, creek, brook, branch, natural or artificial
depression, ponded area, flowage, slough, ditch, conduit, culvert, gully,
ravine, wash or natural or man-made drainage way, which has a definite bed and
banks or shoreline, in or into which surface or groundwater flows, either
perennially or intermittently.
   CHANNEL MODIFICATION. Alteration of a channel by changing the physical
dimensions or materials of its bed or banks. CHANNEL MODIFICATION includes
damming, riprapping or other armoring, widening, deepening, straightening,
relocating, lining and significant removal of bottom or woody vegetation.
CHANNEL MODIFICATION does not include the clearing of dead or dying vegetation,
debris or trash from the channel. CHANNELIZATION is a severe form of channel
modification involving a typically involving relocation of the existing channel
(such as straightening).
   COMPENSATORY STORAGE. An artificially excavated, hydraulically equivalent
volume of storage within the SFHA used to balance the loss of natural flood
storage capacity when artificial fill or structures are placed within the flood
plain. The uncompensated loss of natural flood plain storage can increase off-
site floodwater elevations and flows.
   CONDITIONAL APPROVAL OF A REGULATORY FLOODWAY MAP CHANGE.  Preconstruction
approval by DWR and the Federal Emergency Management Agency of a proposed
change to the floodway map. This preconstruction approval pursuant to this
part, gives assurances to the property owner that once an appropriate use is
constructed according to permitted plans, the floodway map can be changed, as
previously agreed, upon review and acceptance of as-built plans.
   CONDITIONAL LETTER OF MAP REVISION or CLOMR. A letter which indicates that
the Federal Emergency Management Agency will revise base flood elevations,
flood insurance rate zones, flood boundaries or floodway as shown on an
effective flood hazard boundary map or flood insurance rate map, once the as-
built plans are submitted and approved.
   CONTROL STRUCTURE. A structure designed to control the rate of flow that
passes through the structure, given a specific upstream and downstream water
surface elevation.
   DAM. All obstructions, wall embankments or barriers, together with their
abutments and appurtenant works, if any, constructed for the purpose of storing
or diverting water or creating a pool. Underground water storage tanks are not
included.
   DEVELOPMENT. Any man-made change to real estate, including:
      (1)   Construction, reconstruction, repair or placement of a building or
any addition to a building;
      (2)   Installing a manufactured home on a site, preparing a site for a
manufactured home or installing a travel trailer on a site for more than 180
days;
      (3)   Drilling, mining, installing utilities, construction of roads,
bridges or similar projects;
      (4)   Demolition of a structure or redevelopment of a site; and
      (5)   Clearing of land as an adjunct of construction.
   FLOOD PLAIN.
      (1)   The land typically adjacent to a body of water with ground surface
elevations at or below the base flood or the 100-year frequency flood
elevation. FLOOD PLAINS may also include detached Special Flood Hazard Areas,
ponding areas, etc. The FLOOD PLAIN is also known as the SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD
AREA or SFHA. The FLOOD PLAINS are those lands within the jurisdiction of the
village that are subject to inundation by the base flood or 100-year frequency
flood. The SFHAs of the village are generally identified as such on the Kane
County and Cook County Countywide Flood Insurance Rate Maps prepared by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency are generally identified as such on the
following map number 17089C panels 0156, 0157, and 0159 dated December 20,
2002, and panel 0180 dated November 16, 2006.
      (2)   The SFHAs of those parts of unincorporated Kane and Cook Counties
that are within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the village or that may be
annexed into the village are generally identified as such on the Flood
Insurance Rate Maps prepared for Kane County dated December 20, 2002 and
November 16, 2006, and Cook County dated December 20, 2002 and November 16,
2006 by the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
   FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION or FPE. The elevation of the base flood or 100-
year frequency flood, plus one foot of freeboard at any given location in the
SFHA.
   FLOODPROOFING. Any combination of structural and non-structural changes or
adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate
or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their
contents.
   FLOODPROOFING CERTIFICATE. A form published by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency that is used to certify that a building has been designed and
constructed to be structurally dry floodproofed to the flood protection
elevation.
   FREEBOARD. An increment of elevation added to the base flood elevation to
provide a factor of safety for uncertainties in calculations, unknown localized
conditions, wave actions and unpredictable effects such as those caused by ice
or debris jams.
   HYDROLOGIC AND HYDRAULIC CALCULATIONS. Engineering analysis which determine
expected flood flows and flood elevations based on land characteristics and
rainfall events.
   LETTER OF MAP AMENDMENT or LOMA. Official determination by FEMA that a
specific structure is not in a 100-year flood zone; amends the effective flood
hazard boundary map or FIRM.
   LETTER OF MAP REVISION or LOMR. Letter that revises base flood or 100-year
frequency flood elevations, flood insurance rate zones, flood boundaries or
floodways as shown on an effective FHBM or FIRM.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which
is built on a permanent chassis and is designated for use with our without a
permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term
MANUFACTURED HOMES also includes park trailers, travel trailers and other
similar vehicles placed on site for more than 180 consecutive days.
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A parcel or contiguous parcels of
land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
   MITIGATION. Measures necessary to minimize the negative effects which flood
plain development activities might have on the public health, safety and
welfare. Examples of MITIGATION include compensatory storage, soil erosion and
sedimentation control and channel restoration.
   NGVD. National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929. Reference surface set by the
National Geodetic Survey deducted from a continental adjustment of all existing
adjustments in 1929.
   NATURAL. When used in reference to channels, those channels formed by the
existing surface topography of the earth prior to changes made by humans. A
natural stream tends to follow a meandering path; its flood plain is not
constrained by levees; the area near the bank has not been cleared, mowed or
cultivated; the stream flows over soil and geologic materials typical of the
area with no substantial alteration of the course or cross-section of the
stream caused by filling or excavating. A modified channel may regain some
natural characteristics over time as the channel meanders and vegetation is re-
established. Similarly, a modified channel may be restored to more natural
conditions by humans through regrading and re-vegetation.
   ORDINARY HIGH WATER MARK or OHWM. The point on the bank or shore up to which
the presence and action of surface water is so continuous so as to leave a
distinctive mark such as by erosion, destruction or prevention of terrestrial
vegetation, predominance of aquatic vegetation or other easily recognized
characteristics.
   PUBLIC FLOOD CONTROL PROJECT. A flood control project which will be operated
and maintained by a public agency to reduce flood damages to existing buildings
and structures which includes a hydrologic and hydraulic study of the existing
and proposed conditions of the watershed. Nothing in this definition shall
preclude the design, engineering, construction or financing, in whole or in
part, of a flood control project by persons or parties who are not public
agencies.
   PUBLICLY NAVIGABLE WATERS. All streams and lakes capable of being navigated
by watercraft.
   REGISTERED LAND SURVEYOR. A land surveyor registered in the state under the
Illinois Land Surveyors Act.
   REGISTERED PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER. An engineer registered in the state under
the Illinois Professional Engineering Act.
   REGULATORY FLOODWAY.
      (1)   The channel, including on-stream lakes, and that portion of the
flood plain adjacent to a stream or watercourse as designated by IDNR-DWR,
which is needed to store and convey the existing and anticipated future 100-
year frequency flood discharge with no more than an 0.1 foot increase in stage
due to the loss of flood conveyance or storage, and no more than a 10% increase
in velocities. The REGULATORY FLOODWAYS are designated for the Fox River in the
Flood Insurance Study (FIS) maps dated December 20, 2002 and November 16, 2006
with corresponding profiles in the FIS prepared by FEMA.
      (2)   The REGULATORY FLOODWAYS for those parts of unincorporated Kane and
Cook Counties that are within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the village
that may be annexed into the village are designated on the flood boundary and
floodway map prepared by FEMA for Kane County dated December 20, 2002 and
November 16, 2006, and Cook County dated December 20, 2002 and November 16,
2006. To locate the regulatory floodway boundary on any site, the regulatory
floodway boundary should be scaled off the regulatory floodway map and located
on a site plan, using reference marks common to both maps. Where interpretation
is needed to determine the exact location of the regulatory floodway boundary,
the DWR should be contacted for the interpretation.
   REPAIR, REMODELING or MAINTENANCE. Development activities which do not
result in any increases in the outside dimensions of a building or any changes
to the dimensions of a structure.
   RETENTION/DETENTION FACILITY. A retention facility stores stormwater runoff
without a gravity release. A DETENTION FACILITY provides for storage of
stormwater runoff and controlled release of this runoff during and after a
flood or storm.
   RIVERINE SFHA.
      (1)   Any SFHA subject to flooding from a river, creek, intermittent
stream, ditch on stream lake or any other identified channel.
      (2)   This term does not include areas subject to flooding from lakes,
podding areas, areas of sheet flow or other areas not subject to overbank
flooding.
   RUNOFF. The water derived from melting snow or rain falling on the land
surface, flowing over the surface of the ground or collected in channels or
conduits.
   SEDIMENTATION. The processes that deposit soils, debris and other materials
either on other ground surfaces or in bodies of water or watercourses.
   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA or SFHA. Any base flood area subject to flooding
from a river, creek, intermittent stream, ditch or any other identified channel
or podding and shown on a flood hazard boundary map or flood insurance rate map
as Zone A, AO, A1-30, AE, A99, AH, VO, V30, VE, V, M or E.
   STRUCTURE. The results of a man-made change to the land constructed on or
below the ground, including the construction, reconstruction or placement of a
building or any addition to a building; installing a manufactured home on a
site; preparing a site for a manufactured home or installing a travel trailer
on a site for more than 180 days.
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT.
      (1)   Any repair, reconstruction or improvement of a structure, the cost
of which equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure either:
         (a)   Before the improvement or repair is started; or
         (b)   If the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before
the damage occurred.
      (2)   For the purposes of this definition, SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT is
considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or
other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the structure.
      (3)   The term does not, however, include either:
         (a)   Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with
existing state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which
are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
         (b)   Any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of
Historic Places or a State Inventory of Historic Places.
   TRANSITION SECTION. Reaches of the stream or floodway where water flows from
a narrow cross-section to a wide cross-section or vice versa.
(1981 Code, § 30.02) (Ord. 90-5, passed - -; Am. Ord. 06-53, passed 11-6-2006)
§ 152.03 ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL; DUTIES.
   The Building Inspector shall be responsible for the general administration
and enforcement of this chapter which shall include the following.
   (A)   Determining the flood plain designation. Check all new development
sites to determine whether they are in a SFHA. If they are in a SFHA, determine
whether they are in a floodway, flood fringe or in a flood plain on which a
detailed study has not been conducted which drains more than one square mile.
   (B)   Professional engineer review. If the development site is within a
floodway or in a flood plain on which a detailed study has not been conducted
which drains more than one square mile, then the permit shall be referred to a
registered professional engineer (P.E.) under the employ or contract of the
village for review to ensure that the development meets the requirements of §
152.06(B). In the case of an appropriate use, the P.E. shall state in writing
that the development meets the requirements of §
152.06(B).
   (C)   Dam safety requirements. Ensure that an DWR Dam Safety permit has been
issued or a letter indicating no dam safety permit is required, if the proposed
development activity includes construction of a dam, as defined in §
152.02. Regulated dams may include weirs, restrictive culverts or impoundment
structures.
   (D)   Other permit requirements. Ensure that any and all required federal,
state and local permits are received prior to the issuance of a flood plain
development permit.
   (E)   Plan review and permit issuance. Ensure that all development
activities within the SFHAs of the jurisdiction of the village meet the
requirements of this chapter and issue a flood plain development permit in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter and other regulations of the
community when the development meets the conditions of this chapter.
   (F)   Inspection review. Inspect all development projects before, during and
after construction to assure proper elevation of the structure and to ensure
they comply with the provisions of this chapter.
   (G)   Elevation and flood proofing certificates. Maintain, in the permit
files, an elevation certificate certifying the elevation of the lowest floor,
including basement, of a residential or non-residential building or the
elevation to which a non-residential building has been floodproofed, using a
floodproofing certificate, for all buildings subject to §
152.07 for public inspection and provide copies of same.
   (H)   Records for public inspection. Maintain, for public inspection, and
furnish, upon request, base flood data, SPHA and regulatory floodway maps,
copies of federal or state permit documents, variance documentation,
conditional letter of map revision, letter of map revision, letter of map
amendment and “as-built” elevation and floodproofing or elevation and flood
proofing certificates for all buildings constructed subject to this chapter.
   (I)   State permits. Ensure that construction authorization has been granted
by the Illinois Department of Water Resources, for all development projects
subject to §
152.06(B) and (C) unless enforcement responsibility has been delegated to the
village. Upon acceptance of this chapter by DWR and FEMA, responsibility is
hereby delegated to the village, as per ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5, for
construction in the regulatory floodway and flood plain when floodways have not
been defined in §
152.06(B) and (C). However, the following review approvals are not delegated to
the village and shall require review or permits from DWR:
      (1)   Organizations which are exempt from this chapter, as per the
Illinois Compiled Statutes;
      (2)   Department of Transportation projects, dams or impoundment
structures, as defined in §
152.02, and all other state, federal or local unit of government projects,
including projects of the village and county, except for those projects meeting
the requirements of §
152.06(B);
      (3)   An engineer’s determination that an existing bridge or culvert
crossing is not a source of flood damage and the analysis indicating the
proposed flood profile, per §
152.06(B);
      (4)   An engineer’s analysis of the flood profile due to §
152.06(B);
      (5)   Alternative transition sections and hydraulically equivalent
compensatory storage as indicated in §
152.06(B);
      (6)   Permit issuance of structures within or over publicly navigable
rivers, lakes and streams;
      (7)   Any changes in the base flood elevation or floodway locations; and
      (8)   Base flood elevation determinations where none now exist.
   (J)   Cooperation with other agencies. Cooperate with state and federal
flood plain management agencies to improve base flood or 100-year frequency
flood and floodway data and to improve the administration of this chapter.
Submit data to DWR and the Federal Emergency Management Agency for proposed
revisions of a regulatory map. Submit reports as required for the National
Flood Insurance Program. Notify the Federal Emergency Management Agency of any
proposed amendments to this chapter.
   (K)   Promulgate regulations. Promulgate rules and regulations as necessary
to administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter, subject however to
the review and approval of DWR and FEMA for any ordinance changes.
(1981 Code, § 30.04) (Ord. 90-5, passed - -)
§ 152.04 HOW TO USE REGULATIONS.
   (A)   The Building Inspector shall be responsible for fulfilling all of the
duties listed in §
152.03.
   (B)   To fulfill those duties, the Building Inspector first should use the
criteria listed in §
152.05 to determine whether the development site is located within a flood
plain. Once it has been determined that a site is located within a flood plain,
the Building Inspector must determine whether the development site is within a
flood fringe, a regulatory floodway or within a SFHA or flood plain on which no
floodway has been identified. If the site is within a flood fringe, the
Building Inspector shall require that the minimum requirements of §
152.06(A) be met. If the site is within a floodway, the Village Engineer and
Building Inspector shall require that the minimum requirements of §
152.06(B) be met. If the site is located within a SFHA or flood plain for which
no detailed study has been completed and approved, the Village Engineer and
Building Inspector shall require that the minimum requirements of §
152.06(C) be met.
   (C)   In addition, the general requirements of §
152.07 shall be met for all developments meeting the requirements of §
152.06. The Village Engineer and Building Inspector shall assure that all
subdivision proposals shall meet the requirements of §
152.08.
   (D)   If a variance is to be granted for a proposal, the Village Engineer
and Building Inspector shall review the requirements of §
152.09 to make sure they are met. In addition, the Building Inspector shall
complete all notification requirements.
   (E)   In order to assure that property owners obtain permits as required in
this chapter, the Building Inspector may take any and all actions as outlined
in §
152.99.
   (F)   The fees for soil erosion permits shall be as adopted in the annual
fee schedule.
(1981 Code, § 30.03) (Ord. 90-5, passed - -; Am. Ord. 13-37, passed 9-16-2013)
§ 152.05 BASE FLOOD ELEVATION.
   (A)   This chapter’s protection standard is based on the flood insurance
study for the village.
   (B)   If a base flood elevation or 100-year frequency flood elevation is not
available for a particular site, then the protection standard shall be
according to the best existing data available in the State Water Survey’s Flood
Plain Information Repository.
   (C)   When a party disagrees with the best available data, he or she may
finance the detailed engineering study needed to replace existing data with
better data and submit it to DWR and FEMA.
      (1)   The base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for the SFHAs
of Fox River shall be delineated on the 100-year flood profiles in the
Countywide Flood Insurance Study for Kane County prepared by FEMA and dated
November 16, 2006 and such amendments to such study and maps as may be prepared
from time to time.
      (2)   The base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for the SFHAs
of those parts of unincorporated Kane and Cook Counties that are within the
extraterritorial jurisdiction of the village that may be annexed into the
village shall be delineated on the 100-year flood profiles in the Countywide
Flood Insurance Study for Kane and Cook Counties prepared by FEMA for Kane
County dated December 20, 2002 and November 16, 2006, and Cook County dated
December 20, 2002 and November 16, 2006 and such amendments to such study and
maps as may be prepared from time to time.
      (3)   The base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation f or each SFHA
delineated as an “AH Zone” or “AO Zone” shall be that elevation or depth
delineated on the flood insurance rate map of the village.
      (4)   The base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for each of
the remaining SFHAs delineated as an “A Zone” on the flood insurance rate map
of the village shall be according to the best existing data available to the
Illinois State Water Survey Flood Plain Information Repository. When no base
flood elevation or 100-year frequency flood elevation exists, the base flood or
100-year frequency flood elevation for a riverine SFHA shall be determined from
a backwater model, such as HEC-II, WSP-2 or a dynamic model, such as HIP. The
flood flows used in the hydraulic models shall be obtained from a hydrologic
model, such as HEC-I, TR-20, HIP or by techniques presented in various
publications prepared by the United States Geological Survey for estimating
peak flood discharges. Flood flows should be based on anticipated future land
use conditions in the watershed, as determined from adopted local and regional
land use plans, along any watercourses draining more than one square mile.
Along any watercourses draining more than one square mile, the above analyses
shall be submitted to DWR for approval; once approved, it must be submitted to
the State Water Survey Flood Plain Information Repository for filing. For a
non-riverine SFHA, the base flood elevation shall be the historic flood of
record, plus three feet, unless calculated by a detailed engineering study and
approved by the Illinois State Water Survey.
(1981 Code, § 30.05) (Ord. 90-5, passed - -; Am. Ord. 06-53, passed 11-6-2006)
§ 152.06 OCCUPATION AND USE.
   (A)   (1)   Development in and/or filling of the flood fringe will be
permitted if protection is provided against the base flood or 100-year
frequency flood by proper elevation and compensatory storage and other
provisions of this chapter are met. No use will be permitted which adversely
affects the capacity of drainage facilities or systems.
      (2)   Developments located within the flood fringe shall meet the
requirements of this section, along with the requirements of §
152.07.
         (a)   No person, firm, corporation or governmental body not exempted
by state law shall commerce any development in the SFHA without first obtaining
a development permit from the Building Official.
         (b)   Application for a development permit shall be made on a form
provided by the village. The application shall be accompanied by drawings of
the site, drawn to scale, showing property line dimensions and legal
description for the property and sealed by a licensed engineer, architect or
land surveyor; existing grade elevations in M - S.L. 1929 adj. datum or
N.G.V.D. and all changes in grade resulting from excavation or filling; the
location and dimensions of all buildings and additions to buildings. For all
proposed buildings, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement, and
lowest adjacent grade shall be shown on the submitted plans and the development
will be subject to the requirements of §
152.07.
         (c)   Upon receipt of any development permit application, the Building
Official shall compare the elevation of the site to the base flood or 100-year
frequency flood elevation. Any development located on land that can be shown to
have been higher than the base flood elevation as of the date of the site’s
first flood insurance rate map identification is not located in the SFHA and,
therefore, not subject to the requirements of this chapter. The Building
official shall maintain documentation of the existing ground elevation at the
development site and certification that this ground elevation existed prior to
the date of the site’s first flood insurance rate map identification.
         (d)   A soil erosion and sedimentation control plan for disturbed
areas shall be submitted.
            1.   This plan shall include a description of the sequence of
grading activities and the temporary sediment and erosion control measures to
be implemented to mitigate their effects.
            2.   This plan shall also include a description of final
stablization and revegetation measures and the identification of a responsible
party to ensure post construction maintenance.
         (e)   The Building Official shall be responsible for obtaining from
the applicant, copies of all other local, state and federal permits, approvals
or permit-not-required letters that may be required for this type of
development activity. The Building Official shall not issue a permit unless all
other local, state and federal permits have been obtained.
         (f)   No development in the flood fringe shall create a threat to
public health and safety.
         (g)   If fill is being used to elevate the site above the base flood
or 100-year frequency flood elevation, the applicant shall submit sufficient
data and obtain a letter of map revision (LOMR) from FEMA for the purpose of
removing the site from the flood plain.
         (h)   Whenever any portion of a flood plain is authorized for use, the
volume of space which will be occupied by the authorized fill or structure
below the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation shall be compensated
for and balanced by a hydraulically equivalent volume of excavation taken from
below the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation. The excavation
volume shall be at least equal to one and one-half times the volume of storage
lost due to the fill or structure. In the case of streams and watercourses, the
excavation shall be made opposite or adjacent to the areas so filled or
occupied. All flood plain storage lost below the existing ten-year flood
elevation shall be replaced below the proposed ten-year flood elevation. All
flood plain storage lost above the existing ten-year flood elevation shall be
replaced above the proposed ten-year flood elevation. All such excavation shall
be constructed to drain freely and openly to the watercourse.
(1981 Code, § 30.06)
   (B)   (1)   This section applies to proposed development, redevelopment,
site modification or building modification within a regulatory floodway. The
regulatory floodway for the Fox River shall be delineated on the regulatory
floodway maps designated by DWR according and referenced in §
152.02; only those uses and structures will be permitted which meet the
criteria in this section. All floodway modifications shall be the minimum
necessary to accomplish the purpose of the project.
      (2)   The development shall also meet the requirements of §
152.07.
         (a)   No person, firm, corporation or governmental body not exempted
by state law shall commence any development in a floodway without first
obtaining a development permit from the Building Inspector.
         (b)   Application for a development permit shall be made on a form
provided by the village. The application shall include the following
information:
            1.   Name and address of applicant;
            2.   Site location, including legal description, of the property,
drawn to scale, on the regulatory floodway map, indicating whether it is
proposed to be in an incorporated or unincorporated area;
            3.   Name of stream or body of water affected;
            4.   Description of proposed activity;
            5.   Statement of purpose of proposed activity;
            6.   Anticipated dates of initiation and completion of activity;
            7.   Name and mailing address of the owner of the subject property
if different from the applicant;
            8.   Signature of applicant or the applicant’s agent;
            9.   If the applicant is a corporation, the President or other
authorized officer shall sign the application form;
            10.   If the applicant is a partnership, each partner shall sign
the application form;
            11.   If the applicant is a land trust, the trust officer shall
sign the name of the trustee by him or her as trust officer; (A disclosure
affidavit shall be filed with the application, identifying each beneficiary of
the trust by name and address and defining the respective interests therein.)
            12.   Plans of the proposed activity shall be provided which
include, as a minimum:
               a.   A vicinity map showing the site of the activity, name of
the waterway, boundary lines, names of roads in the vicinity of the site,
graphic or numerical scale and north arrow;
               b.   A plan view of the project and engineering study reach
showing existing and proposed conditions including principal dimensions of the
structure or work, elevations in mean sea level (1929 adjustment) datum or
N.G.V.D., adjacent property lines and ownership, drainage and flood control
easements, location of any channels and any existing or future access roads,
distance between proposed activity and navigation channel when the proposed
construction is near a commercially navigable body of water, regulatory
floodway limit, flood plain limit, specifications and dimensions of any
proposed channel modifications, location and orientation of cross-sections
north arrow and a graphic or numerical scale;
               c.   Cross-section view of the project and engineering study
reach showing existing and proposed conditions including principal dimensions
of the work as shown in plan view, existing and proposed elevations, normal
water elevation, ten-year frequency flood elevation, 100-year frequency flood
elevation and graphic or numerical scales, horizontal and vertical;
               d.   A soil erosion and sedimentation control plan for disturbed
areas; and (This plan shall include a description of the sequence of grading
activities and the temporary sediment and erosion control measures to be
implemented to mitigate their effects. This plan shall also include a
description of final stabilization and revegetation measures and the
identification of a responsible party to ensure post-construction maintenance.)
               e.   A copy of the regulatory floodway map, marked to reflect
any proposed change in the regulatory floodway location.
            13.   Any and all other local, state and federal permits or
approval letters that may be required for this type of development;
            14.   Engineering calculations and supporting data shall be
submitted showing that the proposed work will meet the permit criteria of this
division (B);
            15.   If the regulatory floodway delineation, base flood or 100-
year frequency flood elevation will change due to the proposed project, the
application will not be considered complete until DWR has indicated conditional
approval of the regulatory floodway map change; (No structures may be built
until a letter of map revision has been approved by FEMA.)
            16.   The application for a structure shall be accompanied by
drawings of the site, drawn to scale showing property line dimensions and
existing ground elevations and all changes in grade resulting from any proposed
excavation or filling and flood plain and floodway limits; sealed by a
registered professional engineer, licensed architect or registered land
surveyor; the location and dimensions of all buildings and additions to
buildings; and the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement, of all
proposed buildings subject to the requirements of §
152.07;
            17.   If the proposed project involves a channel modification, the
applicant shall submit the following information:
               a.   A discussion of the purpose of and need for the proposed
work;
               b.   A discussion of the feasibility of using alternative
locations or methods to accomplish the purpose of the proposed work;
               c.   An analysis of the extent and permanence of the impacts the
project would have on the physical and biological conditions of the body of
water affected;
               d.   An analysis of the extent and permanence of the impacts
each feasible alternative identified herein would have on the physical and
biological conditions of the body of water affected; and
               e.   An analysis of the impacts of the proposed project,
considering cumulative effects on the physical and biological conditions of the
body of water affected.
         (c)   The Building Inspector shall be responsible for obtaining from
the applicant copies of all other local, state and federal permits and
approvals that may be required for this type of activity. The Building
Inspector shall not issue the development permit unless all required federal
and state permits have been obtained. A registered professional engineer, under
the employ or contract of the village shall review and approve applications
reviewed under this section.
         (d)   The only development in a floodway which will be allowed are
appropriate uses, which will not cause a rise in the base flood elevation, and
which will not create a damaging or potentially damaging increase in flood
heights or velocity or be a threat to public health and safety and welfare or
impair the natural hydrologic and hydraulic functions of the floodway or
channel or permanently impair existing water quality or aquatic habitat.
Construction impacts shall be minimized by appropriate mitigation methods as
called for in this chapter. Only those appropriate uses listed in applicable
Illinois Administrative Code regulations will be allowed. Appropriate uses do
not include the construction or placement of any new structures, fill, building
additions, buildings on stilts, excavation or channel modifications done to
accommodate otherwise non-appropriate uses in the floodway, fencing, including
landscaping or planting designed to act as a fence, and storage of materials,
except as specifically defined above as an appropriate use. The approved
appropriate uses are as follows:
            1.   Flood control structures, dikes, dams and other public works
or private improvements relating to the control of drainage, flooding, erosion
or water quality or habitat for fish and wildlife;
            2.   Structures or facilities relating to the use of, or requiring
access to, the water or shoreline, such as pumping and treatment facilities and
facilities and improvements related to recreational boating, commercial
shipping and other functionally water dependent uses;
            3.   Storm and sanitary sewer out falls;
            4.   Underground and overhead utilities;
            5.   Recreational facilities such as playing fields and trail
systems including any related fencing (at least 50% open when viewed from any
one direction) built parallel to the direction of flood flows and including
open air pavilions;
            6.   Detached garages, storage sheds or other non-habitable
accessory structures without toilet facilities to existing buildings that will
not block flood flows, nor reduce floodway storage;
            7.   Bridges, culverts, roadways, sidewalks, railways, runways and
taxiways and any modification thereto;
            8.   Parking lots and any modifications thereto (where depth of
flooding at the 100-year frequency flood event will not exceed 1.01) and
aircraft parking aprons built at or below ground elevation;
            9.   Regulatory floodway regrading, without fill, to create a
positive non-erosive slope toward a watercourse;
            10.   Floodproofing activities to protect previously existing
lawful structures including the construction of water tight window wells,
elevating structures or construction of floodwalls around residential,
commercial or industrial principal structures where the outside toe of the
floodwall shall be no more than ten feet away from the exterior wall of the
existing structure, and, which are not considered substantial improvements to
the structure;
            11.   In the case of damaged or replacement buildings,
reconstruction or repairs made to a building that are valued at less than 50%
of the market value of the building before it was damaged or replaced and which
do not increase the outside dimensions of the building; and
            12.   Additions to existing buildings above the BFE that do not
increase the buildings footprint and are valued at less than 50% of the market
value of the building.
         (e)   Within the regulatory floodway as identified on the regulatory
floodway maps designated by DWR, the construction of an appropriate use, will
be considered permissible; provided that, the proposed project meets the
following engineering and mitigation criteria and is so stated, in writing,
with supporting plans, calculations and data by a registered professional
engineer and provided that any structure meets the protection requirements of §
152.07:
            1.   For appropriate uses other than bridge or culvert crossings,
on-stream structures or dams, all effective regulatory floodway conveyance lost
due to the project will be replaced for all flood events up to and including
100-year frequency flood. In calculating effective regulatory floodway
conveyance, the following factors shall be taken into consideration:
               a.   Regulatory floodway conveyance:
2/3
“K”     1.486 AR
n
                  i.   n is Manning’s Toughness factor;
                  ii.   A is the effective area of the cross-section; and
                  iii.   R is the ratio of the area to the wetted perimeter.
               b.   The same Manning’s “n” value shall be used for both
existing and proposed conditions unless a recorded maintenance agreement with a
federal, state or local unit of government can assure the proposed conditions
will be maintained or the land cover is changing from a vegetative to a non-
vegetative land cover.
               c.   Transition sections shall be provided and used in
calculations of effective regulatory floodway conveyance. The following
expansion and contraction ratios shall be used unless an applicant’s engineer
can prove to DWR through engineering calculations or model tests that more
abrupt transitions may be used with the same efficiency:
                  i.   When water is flowing from a narrow section to a wider
section, the water should be assumed to expand no faster than at a rate of one
foot horizontal for every four feet of the flooded stream’s length.
                  ii.   When water is flowing from a wide section to a narrow
section, the water should be assumed to contract no faster than at a rate of
one foot horizontal for every one foot of the flooded stream’s length.
                  iii.   When expanding or contracting flows in a vertical
direction, a minimum of one foot vertical transition for every ten feet of
stream length shall be used.
                  iv.   Transition sections shall be provided between cross-
sections with rapid expansions and contractions and when meeting the regulatory
floodway delineation on adjacent properties.
                  v.   All cross-sections used in the calculations shall be
located perpendicular to flood flows.
            2.   Compensatory storage shall be provided for any regulatory
floodway storage lost due to the proposed work from the volume of fill or
structures placed and the impact of any related flood control projects.
Compensatory storage for fill or structures shall be at least equal to one and
one-half times the volume of flood plain storage lost. Artificially created
storage lost due to a reduction in head loss behind a bridge shall not be
required to be replaced. The compensatory regulatory floodway storage shall be
placed between the proposed normal water elevation and the proposed 100-year
flood elevation. All regulatory floodway storage lost below the existing ten-
year flood elevation shall be replaced below the proposed ten-year flood
elevation. All regulatory floodway storage lost above the existing ten-year
flood elevation shall be replaced above the proposed ten-year flood elevation.
All such excavation shall be constructed to drain freely and openly to the
watercourse. If the compensatory storage will not be placed at the location of
the proposed construction, the applicant’s engineer shall demonstrate to DWR
through a determination of flood discharges and water surface elevations that
the compensatory storage is hydraulically equivalent. Finally, there shall be
no reduction in floodway surface area as a result of a floodway modification
unless the modification is necessary to reduce flooding at existing structure.
            3.   For all appropriate uses, except bridges or culverts or oil
stream structures, the proposed work will not result in an increase in the
average channel or regulatory floodway velocities or stage for all flood events
up to and including the 100-year frequency event. However, in the case of
bridges or culverts or oil stream structures built for the purpose of backing
up water in the stream during normal or flood flows, velocities may be
increased at the structure site if soil erosion and sedimentation will be
avoided by the use of rip-rap or other design measures.
            4.   The proposed structure shall not result in an increase of
upstream flood stages greater than 0.1 foot when compared to the existing
conditions for all flood events up to and including the 100-year frequency
event; or the un-stream flood stage increases will be contained within the
channel banks (or within existing vertical extensions of the channel banks)
such as within the design protection grade of existing levees or flood walls or
within recorded flood easements. If the flood stage is greater than 0.1 feet,
the developer must contact DWR, Dam Safety Section, for a dam safety permit or
waiver.
               a.   The engineering analysis of upstream flood stages must be
calculated using the flood study flows and corresponding flood elevations for
all water conditions for the flood study specified in §
152.05. Culverts must be analyzed using the U.S. DOT, FHWA Hydraulic Chart for
the Selection of Highway Culverts. Bridges must be analyzed using the U.S. DOT/
Federal Highway Administration Hydraulics of Bridge Waterways calculation
procedures.
               b.   Lost floodway storage must be compensated for per this
division (B).
               c.   Velocity increases must be mitigated per this division (B).
               d.   If the crossing is proposed over a public water that is
used for recreational or commercial navigation, a Department of Transportation
permit must be received.
               e.   The hydraulic analysis for the backwater caused by the
bridge showing the existing condition and proposed regulatory profile must be
submitted to DWR for concurrence that a CLOMR is not required by this division
(B).
               f.   All excavations for the construction of the crossing shall
be designed per this division (B).
            5.   a.   The bridge or culvert and roadway approach reconstruction
or modification shall be constructed with no more than 0.1 foot increase in
backwater over the existing flood profile for all flood frequencies up to and
including the 100-year event, if the existing structure is not a source of
flood damage.
               b.   If the existing bridge or culvert and roadway approach is a
source of flood damage to buildings or structures in the upstream flood plain,
the applicant’s engineer shall evaluate the feasibility of redesigning the
structure to reduce the existing backwater, taking into consideration the
effects on flood stages on upstream and downstream properties.
               c.   The determination as to whether or not the existing
crossing is a source of flood damage and should be redesigned must be prepared
in accordance with applicable Illinois Administrative Code regulations and
submitted to the Division for review and concurrence before a permit is issued.
            6.   Any increase in upstream flood stages greater than zero foot
when compared to the existing conditions, for all flood events up to and
including the 100-year frequency event shall be contained within the channel
banks or within existing vertical extensions of the channel banks such as
within the design protection grade of existing levees or flood walls or within
recorded flood easements. A permit or letter indicating a permit is not
required must be obtained from DWR, Dam Safety Section, for a dam safety permit
or waiver for any structure built for the purpose of backing up water in the
stream during normal or flood flow. All dams and impoundment structures, as
defined § 152.02, shall meet the permitting requirements of applicable Illinois
Administrative Code regulations. If the proposed activity involves a
modification of the channel or floodway to accommodate an impoundment, it shall
be demonstrated that:
               a.   The impoundment is determined to be in the public interest
by providing flood control, public recreation or regional stormwater detention;
               b.   The impoundment will not prevent the migration of
indigenous fish species, which require access to upstream areas as part of
their life cycle, such as for spawning;
               c.   The impoundment will not cause or contribute to degraded
water quality or habitat conditions; (Impoundment design should include gradual
bank slopes, appropriate bank stabilization measures and a pre-sedimentation
basin.)
               d.   A non-point source control plan has been implemented in the
upstream watershed to control the effects of sediment runoff as well as
minimize the input of nutrients, oil and grease, metals and other pollutants;
and (If there is more than one municipality in the upstream watershed, the
municipality in which the impoundment is constructed should coordinate with
upstream municipalities to ensure comprehensive watershed control.)
               e.   The project otherwise complies with the requirements of
this division (B).
            7.   If construction is required beyond the outside dimensions of
the existing building, the outside perimeter of the floodproofing construction
shall be placed no further than ten feet from the outside of the building.
Compensation of lost storage and conveyance will not be required for
floodproofing activities.
            8.   When excavation is proposed in the design of bridges and
culvert openings, including the modifications to and replacement of existing
bridge and culvert structures, or to compensate for lost conveyance for other
appropriate uses, transition sections shall be provided for the excavation. The
following expansion and contraction ratios shall be used unless an applicant’s
engineer can prove to DWR through engineering calculations or model tests that
more abrupt transitions may be used with the same efficiency:
               a.   When water is flowing from a narrow section to a wider
section, the water should be assumed to expand no faster than at a rate of one
foot horizontal for every four feet of the flooded stream’s length;
               b.   When water is flowing from a wide section to a narrow
section, the water should be assumed to contract no faster than at a rate of
one foot horizontal for every one foot of the flooded stream’s length;
               c.   When expanding or contracting flows in a vertical
direction, a minimum of one foot vertical transition for every ten feet of
stream length shall be used; and
               d.   Erosion /scour protection shall be provided inland upstream
and downstream of the transition sections.
            9.   If the proposed activity involves a channel modification, it
shall be demonstrated that:
               a.   There are not practicable alternatives to the activity
which would accomplish its purpose with less impact to the natural conditions
of the body of water affected; (Possible alternatives include levees, bank
stabilization, flood proofing of existing structures, removal of structures
from the flood plain, clearing the channel, high flow channel or the
establishment of a stream side buffer strip or green belt. Channel modification
is acceptable if the purpose is to restore natural conditions and improve water
quality and fish and wildlife habitat.)
               b.   Water quality, habitat and other natural functions would be
significantly improved by the modification and no significant habitat area may
be destroyed or the impacts are offset by the replacement of an equivalent
degree of natural resources values;
               c.   The activity has been planned and designed and will be
constructed in a way which will minimize its adverse impacts on the natural
conditions of the body of water affected, consistent with the following
criteria.
                  i.   The physical characteristics of the modified channel
shall match as closely as possible those of the existing channel in length,
cross-section slope and sinuosity. If the existing channel has been previously
modified, restoration of more natural physical conditions should be
incorporated into channel modification design, where practical.
                  ii.   Hydraulically effective transitions shall be provided
at both the upstream and downstream ends of the project, designed such that
they will prevent erosion.
                  iii.   One-sided construction of a channel shall be used when
feasible. Removal of stream side, riparian vegetation should be limited to one
side of the channel, where possible, to preserve the shading and stablization
effects of the vegetation.
                  iv.   Clearing of vegetation shall be limited to that which
is essential for construction of the channel.
                  v.   Channel banks shall be constructed with a side slope no
steeper than three to one horizontal to vertical, wherever practicable. Natural
vegetation and gradual side slopes are the preferred methods for bank
stabilization. Where high velocities or sharp bends necessitate the use of
alternative stablization measures, natural rock or rip rap are preferred
materials. Artificial materials such as concrete, gabions or construction
rubble should be avoided unless there are not practicable alternatives.
                  vi.   All disturbed areas associated with the modification
shall be seeded or otherwise stabilized as soon as possible upon completion of
construction. Erosion blanket or an equivalent material shall be required to
stabilize disturbed channel banks prior to establishment of the vegetative
cover.
                  vii.   If the existing channel contains considerable bottom
diversity such as deep pools, riffles and other similar features, such features
shall be provided in the new channel. Spawning and testing areas and flow
characteristics compatible with fish habitat shall also be established where
appropriate.
                  viii.   A sediment basin shall be installed at the downstream
end of the modification to reduce sedimentation and degradation of downstream
water quality.
                  ix.   New or relocated channels should be built in the dry
season and all items of construction, including vegetation, should be completed
prior to diversion of water into the new channel.
                  x.   There shall be no increases in stage or velocity as the
channel enters or leaves the project site for any frequency flood unless
necessitated by a public flood control project or unless such an increase is
justified as part of a habitat improvement or erosion control project.
                  xi.   Unless the modification is for a public flood control
project, there shall be no reduction in the volume of floodwater storage
outside the floodway as a result of the modification.
                  xii.   The project otherwise complies with the requirements
of this division (B).
            10.   For all activities located in a floodway, a seeding and
stabilization plan shall be submitted by the applicant.
            11.   For all activities in the floodway, including grading,
filling and excavation, in which there is potential for erosion of exposed
soil, soil erosion and sedimentation control measures shall be employed
consistent with the following criteria:
               a.   The construction area shall be minimized to preserve the
maximum vegetation possible. Construction shall be scheduled to minimize the
time soil is exposed and unprotected. In no case shall the existing natural
vegetation be destroyed, removed or disturbed more than 15 days prior to the
initiation of improvements.
               b.   Temporary and/or permanent soil stabilization shall be
applied to eroded areas as soon as possible. As a minimum, soil stabilization
shall be provided within 15 days after final grade is reached on any portion of
the site and within 15 days to denuded areas which may not be at final grade,
but will remain undisturbed for longer than 60 days.
               c.   Sedimentation control measures shall be installed before
any significant grading or filling is initiated on the site to prevent the
movement of eroded sediments off site or into the channel. Potential sediment
control devices include filter, fences, straw bale fences, check dams,
diversion ditches and sediment basins.
               d.   A vegetated buffer strip of at least 25 feet in width shall
be preserved and/or re-established, where possible, along existing channels.
Construction vehicle use of channels shall be minimized. Temporary stream
crossings shall be constructed, where necessary, to minimize erosion. Necessary
construction in or along channels shall be re-stabilized immediately.
               e.   Soil erosion and sedimentation control measures shall be
designed and implemented consistent with “Procedures and Standards for Urban
Soil Erosion and Sedimentation, Control in Illinois,” (1988) also known as the
“Green Book” and “Standards and Specifications for Soil Erosion and Sediment
Control,” (IEPA, 1987).
            12.   For public flood control projects, the permitting
requirements of this section will be considered met if the applicant can
demonstrate to DWR through hydraulic and hydrologic calculations that the
proposed project will not singularly or cumulatively result in increased flood
heights outside the project right-of-way or easements for all flood events up
to and including the 100-year frequency event.
            13.   a.   The flood profiles, flows and floodway data in the
regulatory floodway study, referenced in §
152.05, must be used for analysis of the base conditions. If the study data
appears to be in error or conditions have changed, DWR shall be contacted for
approval and concurrence on the appropriate base conditions data to use.
               b.   If the 100-year regulatory floodway elevation at the site
of the proposed construction is affected by backwater from a downstream
receiving stream with a larger drainage area, the proposed construction shall
be shown to meet with requirements of this section for the 100-year frequency
flood elevations of the regulatory floodway conditions and conditions with the
receiving stream at normal water elevations.
               c.   If the applicant learns from DWR, local governments or a
private owner that a downstream restrictive bridge or culvert is scheduled to
be removed, reconstructed, modified or a regional flood control project is
scheduled to be built, removed, constructed or modified within the next five
years, the proposed construction shall be analyzed and shown to meet the
requirements of this section for both the existing conditions and the expected
flood profile conditions when the bridge, culvert or flood control project is
built.
            14.   If the appropriate use would result in a change in the
regulatory floodway location or the 100-year frequency flood elevation, the
applicant shall submit to DWR and to FEMA all the information calculations and
documents necessary to be issued a conditional regulatory floodway change
before a permit is issued. However, the final regulatory floodway map will not
be changed by DWR until as-built plans or record drawings are submitted and
accepted by FEMA and DWR. In the case of non-government projects, the
municipality in incorporated areas and the county in unincorporated areas shall
concur with the proposed conditional regulatory floodway map revision before
DWR approval can be given. No filling, grading, dredging or excavating shall
take place until a conditional approval is issued. No further development
activities shall take place until a final LOMR is issued by FEMA and DWR.
            15.   All engineering analyses shall be performed by or under the
supervision of a registered professional engineer.
            16.   For all activities in the floodway involving construction
within 25 feet of the channel, the following criteria shall be met:
               a.   A natural vegetation buffer strip shall be preserved within
at least 25 feet of the ordinary high water mask of the channel.
               b.   Where it is impossible to protect this buffer strip during
the construction of an appropriate use, a vegetated buffer strip shall be
established upon completion of construction.
               c.   The use of native riparian vegetation is preferred in the
buffer strip. Access through this buffer strip shall be provided, when
necessary, for stream maintenance purposes.
               d.   After receipt of conditional approval of the regulatory
floodway change and issuance of a permit and a conditional letter of map
revision, construction as necessary to change the regulatory floodway
designation may proceed, but no buildings or structures or other construction
that is not an appropriate use may be placed in that area until the regulatory
floodway map is changed and a final letter of map revision is received. The
regulatory floodway map will be revised upon acceptance and concurrence by DWR
and FEMA of the “as-built” plans.
         (f)   For those projects listed below located in a regulatory
floodway, the following criteria shall be submitted to DWR for their review and
concurrence prior to the issuance of a permit:
            1.   DWR will review an engineer’s analysis of the flood profile
due to a proposed bridge pursuant to this division (B).
            2.   DWR will review an engineer’s determination that an existing
bridge or culvert crossing is not a source of flood damage and the analysis
indicating the proposed flood profile, pursuant to this division (B).
            3.   The DWR will review alternative transition sections and
hydraulically equivalent storage pursuant to this division (B).
            4.   The DWR will review and approve prior to the start of
construction any Department projects, dams and all other state, federal or
local units of government projects, including projects of the municipality or
county.
         (g)   In addition to the other requirements of this chapter, a
development permit for a site located in a floodway shall not be issued unless
the applicant first obtains a permit or written documentation that a permit is
not required from DWR, issued pursuant to state statutes. No permit from DWR
shall be required if the Division has delegated this responsibility to the
village.
         (h)   Any work involving the construction, modification or removal of
a dam, per applicable Illinois Administrative Code regulations, shall obtain an
Illinois Division of Water Resources dam safety permit prior to the start of
construction of a dam. If the Building inspector finds a dam that does not have
a DWR permit, the Building Inspector shall immediately notify the Dam Safety
Section of the Division of Water Resources. If the Building Inspector finds a
dam which is believed to be in unsafe condition, the Building Inspector shall
immediately notify the owner of the dam, DWR, Dam Safety Section, in
Springfield and the Illinois Emergency Services and Disaster Agency (ESDA).
         (i)   The following activities may be permitted without a registered
professional engineer’s review. The activities shall still meet the other
requirements of this chapter, including the mitigation requirements.
            1.   Underground and overhead utilities that:
               a.   Do not result in any increase in existing ground
elevations;
               b.   Do not require the placement of above ground structures in
the floodway;
               c.   In the case of underground stream crossings, the top of the
pipe or encasement is buried a minimum of three feet below the existing stream
bed; and
               d.   In the case of overhead utilities, no supporting towers are
placed in the watercourse and are designed in a fashion as not to catch debris.
            2.   Storm and sanitary sewer outfalls that:
               a.   Do not extend riverward or lakeward of the existing
adjacent natural bank slope;
               b.   Do not result in an increase in ground elevation; and
               c.   Are designed so as not to cause stream erosion at the
outfall location.
            3.   Construction of sidewalks, athletic fields, excluding fences,
properly anchored
playground equipment and patios at grade;
            4.   Construction of shoreline and stream bank protection that:
               a.   Does not exceed 1,000 feet in length;
               b.   Materials are not placed higher than the existing top of
bank;
               c.   Materials are placed so as not to reduce the cross-
sectional areas of the stream channel or bank of the lake; and
               d.   Vegetative stabilization and gradual side slopes are the
preferred mitigation methods for existing erosion problems. Where high channel
velocities, sharp bends or wave action necessitate the use of alternative
stabilization measures, natural rock or rip-rap are preferred materials.
Artificial materials such as concrete, construction rubble and gabions should
be avoided unless there are no practicable alternatives.
            5.   Temporary stream crossings in which:
               a.   The approach road will be one and one-half feet or less
above natural grade;
               b.   The crossing will allow stream flow to pass without backing
up the water above the steam bank vegetation line or above, any drainage tile
or outfall invert;
               c.   The top of the roadway fill in the channel will be at least
two feet below the top of the lowest bank; (Any fill in the channel shall be
non-erosive material, such as riprap or gravel.)
               d.   All disturbed steam banks will be seeded or otherwise
stabilized as soon as possible upon installation and again upon removal of
construction; and
               e.   The access road and temporary crossings will be removed
within one year after authorization.
(1981 Code, § 30.07)
   (C)   (1)   In SFHA or flood plains, where no floodways have been identified
and no base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevations have been established
by FEMA, and draining more than a square mile, no development shall be
permitted unless the cumulative effect of the proposals, when combined with all
other existing and anticipated uses and structures, shall not significantly
impede or increase the flow and passage of the floodwaters nor significantly
increase the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation.
      (2)   No person firm, corporation or governmental body, not exempted by
state law, shall commerce any development in a SFHA or flood plain without
first obtaining a development permit from the Building Inspector.
      (3)   Application for a development permit shall be made on a form
provided by the Building Inspector. The application shall be accompanied by
drawings of the site, drawn to scale showing property line dimensions and
existing grade elevations and all changes in grade resulting from excavation or
filling, sealed by a licensed engineer, architect or surveyor; the location and
dimensions of all buildings and additions to buildings; and the elevator at the
lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed buildings subject to the
requirements of §
152.07.
      (4)   The application for a development permit shall also include the
following information:
         (a)   A detailed description of the proposed activity, its purpose and
intended use;
         (b)   Site location, including legal description, of the property,
drawn to scale, on the regulatory floodway maps, indicating whether it is
proposed to be in an incorporated or unincorporated area;
         (c)   Anticipated dates of initiation and completion of activity; and
         (d)   Plans of the proposed activity shall be provided which include
as a minimum:
            1.   A vicinity map showing the site of the activity, name of the
waterway, boundary lines, names of roads in the vicinity of the site, graphic
or numerical scale and north arrow;
            2.   A plan view of the project and engineering study reach showing
existing and proposed conditions including principal dimensions of the
structure or work, elevations in mean sea level (1929 adjustment) datum or
N.G.V.D, adjacent property lines and ownership, drainage and flood control
easements, distance between proposed activity and navigation channel (when the
proposed construction is near a commercially navigable body of water), flood
plain limit, location and orientation of cross-sections, north arrow and a
graphical or numerical scale;
            3.   Cross-section views of the project and engineering study reach
showing existing and proposed conditions, including principal dimensions of the
work as shown in plan view, existing and proposed elevations, normal water
elevation, ten-year frequency flood elevation, 100-year frequency flood
elevation and graphical or numerical scales (horizontal and vertical);
            4.   A soil erosion and sedimentation control plan for disturbed
areas; (This plan shall include a description of the sequence of grading
activities and the temporary sediment and erosion control measures to be
implemented to mitigate their effects. This plan shall also include a
description of final stabilization and re-vegetation measures and the
identification of a responsible party to ensure post-construction maintenance.)
            5.   Engineering calculations and supporting data shall be
submitted showing that the proposed work will meet criteria hereof;
            6.   Any and all local, state and federal permits or approvals that
may be required for this type of development;
            7.   Based on the best available existing data according to the
Illinois State Water Survey’s Flood Plain Information Repository, the Building
Inspector shall compare the elevation of the site to the base flood or 100-year
frequency flood elevation; (Should no elevation information exist for the site,
the developer’s engineer shall calculate the elevation according to §
152.05. Any development located on land that call be shown to have been higher
than the base flood elevation as of the sites first flood insurance rate map
identification is not in the SFHA and, therefore, not subject to the
requirements of this chapter. The Building Official shall maintain
documentation of the existing ground elevation at the development site and
certification that this ground elevation existed prior to the date of the
site’s first flood insurance rate map identification.)
            8.   The Building Inspector shall be responsible for obtaining from
the applicant copies of all other local, state and federal permits, approvals
or permit-not-required letters that may be required for this type of activity;
(The Building Inspector shall not issue the development permit unless all
required local, state and federal permits have been obtained.)
            9.   No development in the SFHA, where a floodway has not been
determined shall create a damaging or potentially increase in flood heights or
velocity or threat to public health, safety and welfare or impair the natural
hydrologic and hydraulic functions of the floodway or channel, or impair
existing water quality or aquatic habitat; (Construction impacts shall be
minimized by appropriate mitigation methods as called for in this chapter.)
            10.   Within all riverine SFHAs where the floodway has not been
determined, the following standards shall apply:
               a.   The developer shall have a registered professional engineer
state, in writing, and show through supporting plans, calculations and data
that the project meets the engineering requirements of division (B) above for
the entire flood plain as calculated under the provisions of §
152.05. As an alternative, the developer should have an engineering study
performed to determine a floodway and submit that engineering study to DWR for
acceptance as a regulatory floodway. Upon acceptance of their floodway by the
Department, the developer shall then demonstrate that the project meets the
requirements of division (B) above for the regulatory floodway. The floodway
shall be defined according to the definition in §
152.02.
               b.   A development permit shall not be issued unless the
applicant first obtains a permit from DWR or written documentation that a
permit is not required from DWR.
               c.   No permit from DWR shall be required if the Division has
delegated permit responsibility to the village per applicable Illinois
Administrative Code regulations for regulatory floodways, per DWR statewide
permit entitled “Construction in Flood Plains with No Designated Floodways in
Northeastern Illinois.”
               d.   Any work involving the construction, modification or
removal of a dam or an on-stream structure to impound water, as defined in §
152.02, shall obtain an Illinois Division of Water Resources dam safety permit
or letter indicating a permit is not required prior to the start of
construction of a dam. If the Building Inspector finds a dam that does not have
a DWR permit, the Building Inspector shall immediately notify the Dam Safety
Section of the Division of Water Resources. If the Building Inspector finds a
dam which is believed to be in unsafe condition, the Building Inspector shall
immediately notify the owner of the dam and the Illinois Emergency Services and
Disaster Agency (ESDA) and the DWR, Dam Safety Section in Springfield.
               e.   The following activities may be permitted without a
registered professional engineer’s review or calculation of a base flood
elevation and regulatory floodway. The activities shall still meet the other
requirements of this chapter:
                  i.   Underground and overhead utilities that:
                     A.   Do not result in any increase in existing ground
elevations;
                     B.   Do not require above ground structures in the
floodway;
                     C.   In the case of underground stream crossings, the top
of the pipe or encasement is buried a minimum of three feet below the existing
stream bed; and
                     D.   In the case of overhead utilities, supporting towers
are not placed in the watercourse and are designed in such a fashion as not to
catch debris.
                  ii.   Storm and sanitary sewer outfalls that:
                     A.   Do not extend riverward or lakeward of the existing
adjacent natural bank slope;
                     B.   Do not result in an increase in ground elevation; and
                     C.   Are designed so as not to cause stream erosion at the
outfall location.
                  iii.   Construction of shoreline and streambed protection
that:
                     A.   Does not exceed 1,000 feet in length or two cubic
yards per lineal foot of steambed;
                     B.   Materials are not placed higher than the existing top
of bank;
                     C.   Materials are placed so as not to reduce the cross-
sectional area of the stream channel by more than 10%; and
                     D.   Vegetative stabilization and gradual side slopes are
the preferred mitigation methods for existing erosion problems. Where high
channel velocities, sharp bends or wave action necessitate alternative
stabilization measures, natural rock or rip-rap are preferred materials.
Artificial materials such as concrete, construction rubble and gabions should
be avoided unless there are no practicable alternatives.
                  iv.   Temporary stream crossing in which:
                     A.   The approach roads will be one-half foot or less
above natural grade;
                     B.   The crossing will allow stream flow to pass without
backing up the water above the stream bank vegetation line or above any
drainage tile or outfall invert;
                     C.   The top of the roadway fill in the channel will be at
least two feet below the top of the lowest batik; (Any fill in the channel
shall be nonerosive material, such as rip-rap or gravel.)
                     D.   All disturbed stream banks will be seeded or
otherwise stabilized as soon as possible upon installation and again upon
removal of construction; and
                     E.   The access road and temporary crossings will be
removed within one year after authorization.
                  v.   The construction of light poles, sign posts and similar
structures;
                  vi.   The construction of sidewalks, driveways, athletic
fields (excluding fences) patios and similar surfaces which are built at grade;
                  vii.   The construction of properly anchored, unwalled open
structures such as playground equipment, pavilions and carports built at or
below existing grade that would not obstruct the flow of flood waters;
                  viii.   The placement of properly anchored buildings not
exceeding 70 square feet in size, nor ten feet in any dimension (such as animal
shelters and tool sheds);
                  xi.   The construction of additions to existing buildings
which do not increase the first floor area by more than 20%, which are located
on the upstream or downstream side of the existing building and which do not
extend beyond the sides of the existing building that are parallel to the flow
of flood waters; and
                  x.   Minor maintenance dredging of a stream channel where:
                     A.   The affected length of stream is less than 1,000
feet;
                     B.   The work is confined to re-establishing flows in
natural stream channels; or
                     C.   The cross-sectional area of the dredged channel
conforms to that of the natural channel upstream and downstream of the site.
               f.   The flood carrying capacity within any altered or relocated
watercourse shall be maintained.
            11.   Whenever any portion of a flood plain is authorized for use,
the volume of space which will be occupied by the authorized fill or structure
below the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation shall be compensated
for and balanced by a hydraulically equivalent volume of excavation taken from
below the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation. The excavation
volume shall be at least equal to one and one-half times the volume of storage
lost due to the fill or structure. In the case of streams and watercourses, the
excavation shall be made opposite or adjacent to the areas so filled or
occupied. All flood plain storage lost below the existing ten-year flood
elevation shall be replaced below the proposed ten-year flood elevation. All
flood plain storage lost above the existing ten-year flood elevation shall be
replaced above the proposed ten-year flood elevation. All excavations shall be
constructed to drain freely and openly to the watercourse.
(1981 Code, § 30.08) (Ord. 90-5, passed - -)
Penalty, see § 152.99
§ 152.07 APPLICABLE PERMITTING REQUIREMENTS.
   In addition to the requirements found in § 152.06 for development in flood
fringes, regulatory floodways and SFHA or flood plains where no floodways have
been identified (Zones A, AO, AH, AE, Al-A30, A99, VO, V1-30, VE, V, ME or E),
the following requirements shall be met:
   (A)   Public health standards;
   (B)   No development in the SFHA shall include locating or storing
chemicals, explosives, buoyant materials, animal wastes, fertilizers, flammable
liquids, pollutants or other hazardous or toxic materials below the FPE;
   (C)   New and replacement water supply systems, wells, sanitary sewer lines
and on-site waste disposal systems may be permitted providing all manholes or
other above ground openings located below the FPE are watertight;
   (D)   Carrying capacity and notification; (For all projects involving
channel modification, fill or stream maintenance, including levees, the flood
carrying capacity of the watercourse shall be maintained. In addition, the
village shall notify adjacent communities, in writing, 30 days prior to the
issuance of a permit for the alteration or relocation of the watercourse.)
   (E)   All buildings located within a 100-year flood plain also known as a
SFHA shall be protected from flood damage below the flood protection elevation.
However, existing buildings located within a regulatory floodway shall also
meet the more restrictive appropriate use standards included in § 152.06(B).
This building protection requirement applies to the following situations:
      (1)   Construction or placement of a new building;
      (2)   Structural alteration to an existing building that increase the
floor area by more than 20% or the market value by more than 50%;
      (3)   Installing a manufactured home on a new site or a new manufactured
home on an existing site. This building protection requirement does not apply
to returning a manufactured home to the same site it lawfully occupied before
it was removed to avoid flood damage;
      (4)   Installing a travel trailer on a site for more than 180 days; and
      (5)   This building protection requirement may be met by one of the
methods provided for.
   (F)   A residential or non-residential building, when allowed, may be
constructed on permanent land fill in accordance with the following:
      (1)   The lowest floor, including basement, shall be at or above the
flood protection elevation.
      (2)   The fill shall be placed in layers no greater than one foot deep
before compaction and should extend at least ten feet beyond the foundation of
the building before sloping below the flood protection elevation. The top of
the fill shall be above the flood protection elevation. However, the ten-foot
minimum may be waived if a structural engineer certifies an alternative method
to protect the building from damages due to hydrostatic pressures. The fill
shall be protected against erosion and scour. The fill shall not adversely
effect the flow or surface drainage from or onto neighboring properties.
   (G)   A residential or non-residential building may be elevated in
accordance with the following:
      (1)   The building or improvements shall be elevated on crawl space,
walls, stilts, piles or other foundation that is permanently open to flood
waters and not subject to damage by hydrostatic pressures of the base flood or
100-year frequency flood. The permanent openings shall be no more than one foot
above grade, and consists of a minimum of two openings. The openings must have
a total net area of not less than one square inch for every one square foot of
enclosed area subject to flooding below the base flood elevation.
      (2)   The foundation and supporting members shall be anchored and aligned
in relation to flood flows and adjoining structures so as to minimize exposure
to known hydrodyamic forces such as current, waves, ice and floating debris.
      (3)   All areas below the flood protection elevation shall be constructed
of materials resistant to flood damage. The lowest floor, including the
basement, and all electrical, heating, ventilating, plumbing and air
conditioning equipment and utility meters shall be located at or above the
flood protection elevation. Water and sewer pipes, electrical and telephone
lines, submersible pumps and other waterproofed service facilities may be
located below the flood protection elevation.
      (4)   No area below the flood protection elevation shall be used for
storage of items or materials.
      (5)   Manufactured homes and travel trailers to be installed on a site
for more than 180 days shall be elevated at or above the flood protection
elevation and anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement by
being tied down in accordance with the rules and regulations for the Illinois
Mobile Home Tie-Down Act issued pursuant to 77 Ill. Adm. Code 870.
   (H)   Only a non-residential building may be structurally dry floodproofed,
in lieu of elevation; provided that, a registered professional engineer shall
certify that the building has been structurally dry floodproofed below the
flood protection elevation, the structure and attendant utility facilities are
watertight and capable of resisting the affects of the base flood or 100-year
frequency food; and (The building design shall take into account flood
velocities, duration, rate of rise, hydrostatic and hydrodyamic forces, the
effects of buoyancy and impacts from debris or ice. Floodproofing measures
shall be operable without human intervention and without an outside source of
electricity, Levees, berms, floodwalls and similar works are not considered
floodproofing for the purpose of this division.)
   (I)   Non-conforming structures located in a regulatory floodway may remain
in use, but may not be enlarged, replaced or structurally altered. A non-
conforming structure damaged by flood, fire, wind or other natural or man-made
disaster may be restored unless the damage exceeds 50% of its market value
before it was damaged, in which case it shall conform to this chapter.
(1981 Code, § 30.09) (Ord. 90-5, passed - -)
§ 152.08 OTHER DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS.
   The Village Board shall take into account flood hazards, to the extent that
they are known, in all official actions related to land management, use and
development.
   (A)   New subdivisions, manufactured home parks, travel trailer parks,
annexation agreements, planned unit developments (PUDs) within the SFHA shall
be reviewed to assure that the proposed developments are consistent with §
152.06 and the need to minimize flood damage. Plats or plans for new
subdivisions, manufactured home parks and planned unit developments shall
include a signed statement by a registered professional engineer that the plat
or plan accounts for changes in the drainage of surface waters in accordance
with the Plat Act.
   (B)   Proposals for new subdivisions, manufactured home parks, travel
trailer parks, planned unit developments and additions to manufactured home
parks and subdivisions shall include base flood or 100-year frequency flood
elevation data and floodway delineations. Where this information is not
available from an existing study filed with the Illinois State Water Survey,
the applicant’s engineer shall be responsible for calculating the base flood or
100-year frequency flood elevation, per §
152.05, and the floodway delineation, per the definition in §
152.02, and submitting it to the state water survey for review and approval as
best available regulatory data.
   (C)   Streets, blocks, lots, parks and other public grounds shall be located
and laid out in a manner as to preserve and utilize natural streams and
channels. Wherever possible, the flood plains shall be included within parks or
other public grounds.
   (D)   The Village Board shall not approve any PUD or plat of subdivision
located outside the corporate limits unless the agreement or plat is in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
(1981 Code, § 30.10) (Ord. 90-5, passed - -)
§ 152.09 VARIANCES.
   (A)   No variances shall be granted to any development located in a
regulatory floodway, as defined in §
152.02.
   (B)   However, when a development proposal is located outside of a
regulatory floodway and whenever the standards of this chapter place undue
hardship on a specific development proposal, the applicant may apply to the
Zoning Board of Appeals for a variance.
   (C)   The Zoning Board of Appeals shall review the applicant’s request for a
variance and shall submit its recommendation to the Village Board.
      (1)   No variance shall be granted unless the applicant demonstrates
that:
         (a)   The development activity cannot be located outside the SFHA;
         (b)   An exceptional hardship would result if the variance were not
granted;
         (c)   The relief requested is the minimum necessary;
         (d)   There will be no additional threat to public health, safety or
creation of a nuisance;
         (e)   There will be no additional public expense for flood protection,
rescue or relief operations, policing or repairs to roads, utilities or other
public facilities;
         (f)   The provisions of §
152.06(A) and (C) shall still be met;
         (g)   The activity is not in a regulatory floodway;
         (h)   The applicant’s circumstances are unique and do not represent a
general problem; and
         (i)   The granting of the variance will not alter the essential
character of the area involved including existing stream uses.
      (2)   The Zoning Board of Appeals shall notify an applicant, in writing,
that a variance from the requirements of §
152.07 that would lessen the degree of protection to a building will:
         (a)   Result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to
amounts as high as $25 for $100 of insurance coverage;
         (b)   Increase the risks to life and property; and
         (c)   Require that the applicant proceed with knowledge of these risks
and that he or she will acknowledge, in writing, the assumption that he or she
assumes the risk and liability.
      (3)   Variances requested in connection with the restoration of a site or
building listed on the National Register of Historic Places or documented as
worthy of preservation by the Illinois Historic Preservation Agency may be
granted using criteria more permissive than the requirements of divisions (C)
(1) and (2) above.
(1981 Code, § 30.11) (Ord. 90-5, passed - -)
§ 152.10 DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on available information
derived from engineering and scientific methods of study. Larger floods may
occur or flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This
chapter does not imply that development either inside or outside of the SFHA
will be free from flooding or damage. This chapter does not create liability on
the part of the village or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damage
that results from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision made
lawfully thereunder.
(1981 Code, § 30.12) (Ord. 90-5, passed - -)
§ 152.11 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
   This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing
easements, covenants or deed restrictions. Where this chapter and other
ordinances, easements, covenants or deed restrictions conflict or overlap,
whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. This chapter
is intended to repeal the original ordinance or resolution which was adopted to
meet the National Flood Insurance Program regulations, but is not intended to
repeal the resolution which the village passed in order to establish initial
eligibility for the program.
(1981 Code, § 30.14) (Ord. 90-5, passed - -)
§ 152.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Failure to comply with the requirements of a permit or conditions of a
variance resolution shall be deemed to be a violation of this chapter.
   (B)   Upon due investigation, the Village Attorney may determine that a
violation of the minimum standards of this chapter exist.
   (C)   The Village Attorney shall identify the owner, in writing, of the
violation.
   (D)   (1)   If the owner fails, after ten days notice, to correct the
violation.
         (a)   The village may make application to the circuit court for an
injunction requiring conformance with this chapter or make other order as the
court deems necessary to secure compliance with this chapter.
         (b)   Any person who violates this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be fined not less than $50 or more than $1,000 for each offense.
         (c)   A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day
during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
         (d)   The village may record a notice of violation on the title to the
property.
      (2)   The Village Attorney shall inform the owner that any such violation
is considered a willful act to increase flood damages, and therefore, may cause
coverage by a standard flood insurance policy to be suspended.
      (3)   Nothing herein shall prevent the village from taking other lawful
action to prevent or remedy any violations. All costs connected therewith shall
accrue to the person or persons responsible.
(1981 Code, § 30.13) (Ord. 90-5, passed - -)
CHAPTER 153: HISTORICAL DISTRICT
Section
General Provisions
   
153.01   Purpose
   
153.02   Definitions
   
153.03   District establishment
Historic Commission
   
153.15   [Reserved]
   
153.16   Procedures
   
153.17   Jurisdiction and powers
Certificate of Appropriateness
   
153.35   Certificate required
   
153.36   Ordinary repairs exempt
   
153.37   Criteria and standards
   
153.38   Application
   
153.39   Action on application
   
153.40   Appeal from determination of Commission
   
153.41   Maintenance and repair of properties in district
 
   
153.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Building Department, see §
32.02
   Departments, Commissions and Other Organizations, see
Chapter 32
   Subdivisions, see
Chapter 155
   Village Planning, see §§ 150 et seq.
   Zoning, see
Chapter 157
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 153.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to promote the educational, cultural,
economic and general welfare of the community by:
   (A)   Protecting, enhancing and perpetuating the distinctive visual
characteristics of the East Dundee Historic District, which represent and
reflect elements of the village’s cultural, social, economic, political and
architectural history;
   (B)   Retaining and enhancing those properties which contribute to the
character of the Historic District and encouraging their adoption for current
use;
   (C)   Assuring that alterations of existing structures are compatible with
the character of the Historic District;
   (D)   Assuring that new construction and subdivision of lots in the Historic
District are compatible with the character of the Historic District;
   (E)   Safeguarding the village’s historic, aesthetic, architectural,
cultural and community heritage as embodied in the Historic District;
   (F)   Stabilizing and improving property values in the Historic District;
   (G)   Fostering civic pride in the beauty and noble accomplishments of the
past as represented in the Historic District;
   (H)   Protecting and enhancing the village’s attractiveness to tourists and
visitors and supporting the business and industry thereby provided;
   (I)   Strengthening the economy of the village; and
   (J)   Promoting the use of the East Dundee Historic District for the
education, pleasure and welfare of the residents of the village.
(1981 Code, § 39.01)
§ 153.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALTERATION. Any change in size, shape, occupancy or use of a building or
structure other than a change of use pursuant to Chapter 157 of this code of
ordinances.
   BOARD. The Board of Trustees of the Village of East Dundee.
   BUILDING INSPECTOR. The officer or other designated authority charged with
the administration and enforcement of the Building Code and ordinances of the
village or his or her duly authorized representative.
   CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS. A certificate from East Dundee Historic
District Commission authorizing plans to construct, alter, extend, repair or
remove any buildings or structure within its jurisdiction, as defined by §
153.03.
   COMMISSION. The East Dundee Historic District Commission.
   CONSTRUCTION. The erection, demolition, alteration, repair or renovation of
any structure.
   DISTRICT. The East Dundee Historic District.
   MUNICIPAL CODE. The Municipal Code of the Village of East Dundee, of 1972,
as amended.
   REPAIR. The replacement of existing work with the same kinds of materials
for the purpose of its maintenance, but not including additional work that
would effect facilities or a vital element such as an elevator, plumbing, gas
piping, wiring, ventilation or heating installation or any work that would be
in violation of the Building Code or ordinance governing building construction
of the municipal code.
   STRUCTURE. Anything existing, constructed or erected, the use of which
requires more or less permanent location on the ground.
   USE. The purpose of activity for which the land, or building thereon is
designed, arranged or intended or for which it is occupied or maintained.
   VILLAGE. The Village of East Dundee, Illinois.
(1981 Code, § 39.01)
§ 153.03 DISTRICT ESTABLISHMENT.
   (A)   Historic District established. The locations and boundaries of the
District shall be as illustrated on the official map of the East Dundee
Historic District, incorporated as part of this chapter and which is described
as follows:
   Beginning at the point of intersection of the centerline of Barrington
Avenue with the center line of Fourth Street; thence northerly along the center
line of Fourth Street; 305 feet to a point in the northeasterly extension of
the northwesterly line of Block 4 of Edward’s Addition to East Dundee; thence
southwesterly along the northeasterly extension of and the northwesterly line
of Block 4 aforesaid 27 feet to the southwest corner of Lot 2, in Block 20 of
Lakewood Lodge Estates subdivision; thence northerly along the westerly line of
the Block 20 and its northerly extension 400 feet; thence westerly along a line
perpendicular to the last described line at the last described point to a point
in the easterly line of Block 4 of Alfred Edward’s Subdivision; thence
southeasterly along the easterly line of Block 4 and of Block 5 of Alfred
Edward’s Subdivision and the southeasterly extension of the easterly lines to
the center line of Barrington Avenue; thence westerly along the center line of
Barrington Avenue to the point of intersection with the northerly extension of
the east line of the west 45 feet of Lots 8 through 11, inclusive, in Block 8
of Edward’s Addition to East Dundee, thence southerly along the east line of
the west 45 feet of Lots 8 through 11, inclusive and its northerly extension
130 feet to a point in the north line of Lot 7 in Block 8 of Edward’s Addition
to East Dundee; thence westerly along the north line of Lot 7 to the northwest
corner thereof; thence southerly along the west line of Lot 7, Lot 6 and Lot 5
in Block 8 aforesaid 75 feet to the southwest corner of Lot 5; thence easterly
along the south line of Lot 5, in Block 8 of Edward’s Addition to East Dundee
and its easterly extension 155 feet to the center line of Third Street; thence
southerly along the center line of Third Street to the point of intersection
with the north line of Block 3; in the Original Town of East Dundee; thence
westerly along the north line of Block 3 to the northwest corner of Lot 4, in
Block 3 aforesaid; thence southerly 120 feet along the west line of Lot 4 to
the southwest corner thereof; thence southwesterly along the south line of Lot
5, in Block 3, in the Original Town of East Dundee and its westerly extension
to the center line of the Fox River; thence southeasterly and southerly along
the center line of the Fox River to the point of intersection with the south
line of Lots 6 through 10; inclusive, in Block 9, in the Original Town of East
Dundee extended westerly; thence easterly along the westerly extension of and
the south line of Lots 6 through 10; inclusive to a point in the east line of
Block 9 aforesaid; thence northeasterly along a line to the southwest corner of
Lot 5, in Block 8, in the Original Town of East Dundee; thence easterly along
the south line of Lots 1 through 5, inclusive, in Block 8 and along the
easterly extension thereof 360 feet to the center line of Van Buren Street;
thence northerly along the center line of Van Buren Street to the point of
intersection with the easterly extension of the north line of Lots 6 through
10; inclusive, in Block 5, in the Original Town of East Dundee; thence westerly
along the easterly extension of and the north line of Lots 6 through 10;
inclusive, in Block 5 aforesaid 261 feet to the point of intersection with the
east line of west half of Lot 4, in Block 5; thence north along the east line
of the west half of Lot 4, in Block 5 in the Original Town of East Dundee 120
feet to the northeast corner of the west half of Lot 4 aforesaid; thence
northeasterly to the southeast comer of Lot 7 in Block 2, in the Original Town
of East Dundee; thence northerly 120 feet along the east line of Lot 7 to the
northeast comer thereof; thence easterly along the south line of Lot 3, in
Block 2 aforesaid 66 feet to the southeast corner thereof; thence northerly 120
feet along the east line of Lot 3 to the northeast corner thereof; thence
westerly along the intersection with the southerly extension of the center line
of Fourth Street; thence northerly along the southerly extension of and the
center line of Fourth Street; thence northerly along the southerly extension of
and the center line of Fourth Street 690 feet to the point of beginning, all in
the Village of East Dundee, Kane County, Illinois.
   (B)   Addition to the Historic District. In addition to the area designated
herein, additional areas may be included within the East Dundee Historic
District.
      (1)   Petition for inclusion. Request for inclusion within the East
Dundee Historic District may be made by any property owner by filing a petition
to join the District with the Commission and shall contain such information as
deemed proper by the Commission. After considering the petition at a public
hearing, the Commission may accept or reject the petition, based on the
historic and architectural significance of the property. The Commission shall
file their notice of decision with the Village Clerk and Building Inspector
and, if accepted, a proper amendment shall be made to the Historic District
map.
      (2)   Automatic inclusion of block face. Whenever at least 60% of the
property owners on a block face petitioned and have been accepted into the
District, then the entire block face shall be included within the District.
(1981 Code, § 39.02)
HISTORIC COMMISSION
§ 153.15 [RESERVED]
§ 153.16 PROCEDURES.
   The Commission shall adopt procedural rules and regulations for its own
governance, not inconsistent with the provisions of this subchapter or any
other ordinance of the village. The Commission shall appoint a Vice-Chairperson
and Secretary from among its members. Meetings of the Commission shall be open
to the public and shall be held at the call of the Chairperson or any two
members within 35 days after receipt by the Commission of any application for a
certificate of appropriateness and at such other times as the Commission shall
determine. Public notice by posting shall be given of all meetings and
hearings. The Commission shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the
action of the Commission upon each question, and shall keep records of its
proceedings and other official actions taken by it, all of which shall be a
public record maintained by the Village Clerk. All actions of the Commission
shall be by motion in accordance with “Roberts Rules of Order.”
(1981 Code, § 39.03) (Am. Ord. 96-07, passed 2-19-1996)
§ 153.17 JURISDICTION AND POWERS.
   (A)   The Commission’s jurisdiction shall be limited to the East Dundee
Historic District. The Commission shall have jurisdiction to act on petitions
for inclusion within the District in accordance with the provisions set forth
in this chapter. In addition to adopting procedural rules and regulations for
its own governance, the Commission shall consider applications for certificates
of appropriateness and issue or deny the certificates.
   (B)   The Commission may also administer, on behalf of the village, any
properties or easements or other interests in real property, which the village
may have or may accept as gifts or otherwise, upon designation of the
Commission by the Board as the Administrator thereof.
   (C)   The Commission shall work for the continuing education of the citizens
of the village with respect to the historic and architectural heritage of the
village.
   (D)   (1)   The Commission shall evaluate the effect of any application for
a zoning amendment, variation or special use in the District, considering the
purposes of this chapter.
      (2)   The applications submitted to the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be
forwarded to the Commission, which, in its discretion, may present evidence at
the public hearing on the proposed zoning amendment, variation or special use
either in support or in opposition or it may recommend modification there to.
   (E)   The Village President, Village Administrator and the Building
Inspector shall evaluate the effects of any applications for a sign permit
within the District, pursuant to appropriate provisions of
Chapter 156 of this code of ordinances, considering the purposes of this
chapter. A copy of every application submitted to the Building Inspector shall
be immediately forwarded by the Building Inspector to the Village President and
Village Administrator, which in their discretion, may recommend changes in the
design, size or other features of the sign to assure its compatibility with the
visual integrity and historic or architectural character of the District. The
recommendations shall be considered by the Building Inspector in the normal
process of issuing a sign permit.
   (F)   Subject to an appropriation by the Board of Trustees of the village,
the Commission may employ clerical and technical assistants or consultants and
incur other expenses appropriate to carrying out its work and may accept and
expend sums appropriate for such purposes.
(1981 Code, § 39.03) (Am. Ord. 22-01, passed 1-24-2022)
CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS
§ 153.35 CERTIFICATE REQUIRED.
   (A)   A certificate of appropriateness issued by the Commission, shall be
required before the construction or demolition, or moving of any building or
structure or part thereof within the District that is or will be visible from a
public way. A certificate of appropriateness issued by the Commission for an
extension, alteration or repair which does not constitute a construction or
demolition shall be required whenever the Building Inspector, within his or her
discretion, determines that a building or structure will be altered, extended
or repaired in a manner as to produce a major change in exterior appearance of
the building or structure.
   (B)   A major change includes, but is not limited to the enclosure, addition
or removal of a porch; the alternation of a roof line; the addition of a
dormer, canopy or room; the addition of siding; the removal or addition of
decorative trim; and any significant alternation, extension or repair which
would result in either excessive similarity or dissimilarity of design in
relation to any other building or structure or for which a permit has been
issued within a distance of 1,000 feet of the proposed alternation, extension
or repair which would result in inappropriateness of design and building
materials in relation to the aesthetic, architectural or historic character of
any other building or structure in the District.
(1981 Code, § 39.04)
§ 153.36 ORDINARY REPAIRS EXEMPT.
   Ordinary maintenance and repairs to buildings or structures pursuant to
appropriate provisions of the Building Code may be made without application for
a certificate of appropriateness or other notice to the Commission.
(1981 Code, § 39.04)
§ 153.37 CRITERIA AND STANDARDS.
   (A)   In making a determination whether to issue or deny a certificate of
appropriateness, the Commission shall consider, among other things, the purpose
of this chapter and the effect if the issuance upon the historic, aesthetic or
architectural values, characteristics and significance of the District or any
building or structure within the District. The criteria to be used by the
Commission in making its determination shall include, but are not limited to
architectural style of the proposed construction, alteration, extension or
repair with the prevalent architectural style or styles within the District;
the compatibility of the general design, arrangement, texture or material of
the construction, alteration, extension or repair with the historic aesthetic
or architectural values, characteristics and significance of the District or
any building or structure within the District; and the relationship of the
location of the construction, alteration, extension or repair to the streets
and structures within the District.
   (B)   The Commission shall adopt detailed architectural standards for its
use in making a determination pursuant to the above criteria. For any building
or structure undergoing construction, alteration, extension or repair within
the District, these architectural standards should include, but are not limited
to the following elements:
      (1)   The appropriate height;
      (2)   The proper proportions of the front facade;
      (3)   The proper proportions of windows, doors or other openings;
      (4)   The appropriate bulk and density;
      (5)   The appropriate textures, materials and shapes for roofs;
      (6)   The appropriate landscaping and proper location and design of
accessory buildings, structures and uses;
      (7)   The appropriate directional expression of front elevations and
general scale of any building and structure;
      (8)   Other appropriate standards for architectural details; and
      (9)   Methods to evaluate the economic reasonableness of any criteria of
standard utilized by the commission in making a determination to issue or deny
a certificate of appropriateness.
   (C)   If an applicant shows that failure to issue a certificate of
appropriateness will cause an imminent threat to life or property, the
certificate shall be issued.
(1981 Code, § 39.04)
§ 153.38 APPLICATION.
   (A)   An application for a certificate of appropriateness shall be made at
the Village Hall on forms to be provided by the Building Inspector. Each
application shall be accompanied by such plans and specifications as required
by
Chapter 151 of this code of ordinances. No fee shall be required for
application for a certificate of appropriateness. The Building Inspector,
within five working days, shall submit copies of all applications to the
Commission.
   (B)   No application for a construction or demolition permit within the
District shall be approved by the Building Inspector unless a certificate of
appropriateness has been issued for the same work.
   (C)   (1)   During the course of their review, the Commission may submit the
certificate of appropriateness to the Village Engineer, Village Attorney and/or
other technical consultant in order to obtain assistance for the proper review
of the plan.
      (2)   The applicant shall be notified that technical assistance has been
sought in accordance with these regulations.
      (3)   The Village Engineer, Village Planner, Village Attorney and/or
other technical consultant shall submit their itemized bill for services to the
village which shall transmit a bill to the applicant. The bill for service
shall be set by the village at a rate normally charged for professional
services and shall include all travel and other expenses normally charged to
the village.
      (4)   The applicant shall pay the village for the services rendered
within ten days after the submission of the bill from the village.
(1981 Code, § 39.04) (Am. Ord. 96-07, passed 2-21-1996)
§ 153.39 ACTION ON APPLICATION.
   (A)   Within 35 days after receipt of the application for a certificate of
appropriateness, the Commission shall meet and shall either issue the
certificate or disapprove the application. The Commission shall inform
applicants of the date and time of the meeting when their applications will be
considered. Applicants shall attend the meeting to discuss their proposal. Upon
approval of an application, the certificate of appropriateness shall be dated
and signed by the Commission Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson, Secretary or such
other person designated by the Commission to sign certificates on its behalf.
Copies of the certificate shall be forwarded to the applicant, the Village
Clerk and the Building Inspector. As an ex officio member of the Commission,
the Building Inspector shall advise the Commission in its review of every
application of likely modifications to the plans and specifications that may be
made in the course of the plan review procedures required by
Chapter 151 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   If the applicant for a certificate of appropriateness makes an
application for a building permit prior to the date of issuance of the
certificate of appropriateness, the issuance date of the certificate shall be
utilized as of the date of application for the building permit. Any certificate
of appropriateness issued by the Commission shall become invalid of the
building permit issued for the same work becomes invalid under the appropriate
sections of
Chapter 151 of this code of ordinances.
   (C)   Failure on the part of the Commission to act within 35 days of receipt
of an application for a certificate of appropriateness shall constitute
approval of the application.
   (D)   Upon disapproval of an application, the Commission shall notify the
applicant, in writing, of the disapproval and shall recommend changes in the
application with the respect to the criteria and standards set forth herein,
which is made, would make the application acceptable to the Commission. Within
15 days of receipt of the notification of disapproval, the applicant must
either file a written modification of his or her application in conformity with
the Commission’s recommended changes or request, in writing, that the
Commission schedule a public hearing on his or her application.
   (E)   Within 35 days of the receipt of a written modification or request for
pubic hearing, the Commission must either issue the certificate of
appropriateness or hold a public hearing.
      (1)   Notice of the hearing shall be given to the applicant, the Village
Attorney and the President and Board of Trustees of the village and to the
public by announcement in a newspaper of general circulation and to any
interested parties who shall file with the Village Clerk a request to receive
the notices.
      (2)   The Chairperson shall conduct the hearing and the Commission shall
receive oral and written testimony from all interested parties. The applicant
or any other interested party may be represented by counsel. The Commission and
applicant shall have the right to introduce evidence and cross-examine
witnesses. The Commission shall vote, announce its decision, in writing, and
file the determination with the Village Clerk and the Building Inspector within
15 working days after the conclusion of the public hearing unless the time is
extended by mutual agreement between the Commission.
      (3)   The factors to be considered and standards for the issuance or
denial of a certificate of appropriateness upon public hearing shall be those
set forth herein.
      (4)   The applicant for a public hearing shall include with the written
notification a fee payable to the village as set forth in the village’s annual
fee schedule.
(1981 Code, § 39.04) (Am. Ord. 92-9, passed 9-21-1992; Am. Ord. 96-07, passed
2-21-1996)
§ 153.40 APPEAL FROM DETERMINATION OF COMMISSION.
   An applicant aggrieved by a decision of the Commission may, within 20 days
after the filing by the Commission of the notice of the decision with the
Village Clerk, appeal the decision of the Commission to the Board of Trustees
whose decision in this matter shall be final subject only to judicial review as
provided by general law. The Village Board shall consider the appeal at the
first regular meeting held more than five days from the filing of the appeal
with the Village Clerk.
(1981 Code, § 39.04)
§ 153.41 MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR OF PROPERTIES IN DISTRICT.
   (A)   All buildings, structures, real estate or improvement thereon within
the area officially described as the District, whether owned or controlled
privately or by any public body, shall receive reasonable care, maintenance and
upkeep appropriate for the preservation, protection, perpetuation or use in
conformity with the purposes of this chapter and
Chapter 151 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Neither the owner of, nor the person in charge of, a building,
structure, real estate or improvement thereon, within the area officially
described as the District, shall permit the structure to fall into a state of
disrepair, which may result in the deterioration of any exterior appurtenance
or architectural feature so as to produce or tend to produce or tend to produce
in the judgement of the Historic Commission, a detrimental effect upon the
character of the District as a whole, or the life and character of the
structure in question, including, but not limited to:
      (1)   The deterioration of exterior walls or other vertical supports;
      (2)   The deterioration of roofs or other horizontal members;
      (3)   The deterioration of exterior chimneys;
      (4)   The deterioration or crumbling of exterior walls, roofs and
foundations, including broken windows and doors;
      (5)   The ineffective waterproofing of exterior walls, roofs and
foundations, including broken windows and doors; and
      (6)   The deterioration of any feature so as to create or permit the
creation of any hazardous or unsafe condition or conditions.
(1981 Code, § 39.04)
§ 153.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who fails to perform any act required within 30 days of
written notice of the failure or performs any act prohibited herein shall be
fined, upon conviction, not less than $250, nor more than $750, exclusive of
court costs and administrative fees established by statute, and the costs of
prosecution for each offense. Each day a violation shall constitute a separate
violation and separate offense.
   (B)   In addition to the penalty provided above, the village may bring an
appropriate action in the Circuit Court to enjoin any action by any person in
violation of this chapter and to restore any property to its condition prior to
the unauthorized action.
(1981 Code, § 39.04) (Am. Ord. 92-3, passed 3-18-1992; Am. Ord. 92-9, passed 9-
21-1992; Am. Ord. 96-07, passed 2-21-1996)
CHAPTER 154: STORMWATER CONTROL AND DETENTION REGULATIONS
Section
   
154.01   Regulations adopted
   
154.02   Amendments to the Kane County Stormwater Management ordinance
   
154.03   Violations
   
154.04   Administration
   
154.05   Qualified Review Specialist
   
154.06   Qualified Wetland Review Specialist
   
154.07   Permit fees, variances, and fee in lieu of schedule
   
154.08   Performance security
   
154.09   Exempt developments
   
154.10   Oversight Committee
 
   
154.99   Penalty
   
Appendix A   Exempt subdivisions
Cross-reference:
   Groundwater Protection, see
Chapter 58
§ 154.01 REGULATIONS ADOPTED.
   The regulations of the Kane County Stormwater Management Ordinance, as
amended from time to time, are hereby adopted by reference as the Village of
East Dundee, Storm Water Ordinance (hereafter the “Stormwater Management
Ordinance”).
(Ord. 05-10, passed 2-21-2005; Am. Ord. 19-22, passed 6-3-2019)
§ 154.02 AMENDMENTS TO THE KANE COUNTY STORMWATER MANAGEMENT ORDINANCE.
   (A)   Article IV Chapter 9-83 (C) of the Stormwater Management Ordinance
shall be deleted in its entirety and replaced as follows:
   “The minor stormwater systems shall be sized to convey the runoff from the
tributary watershed under fully developed conditions for the 10 year storm
event. Street inlet capacity shall be provided such that the depth of ponding
does not exceed 6 inches nor the width of ponding exceed 8 feet from the face
of curb.”
   (B)   Article IV Chapter 9-84 (J) of the Stormwater Management Ordinance
shall be deleted in its entirety and replaced as follows:
   “Parking lots may be utilized to provide supplementary site runoff storage
volume. The maximum stormwater ponding in any parking area shall not exceed six
inches in depth and shall not remain flooded for more than four hours. Parking
lots shall be used only as supplementary storage for storms exceeding the ten-
year recurrence interval. They shall be located such that the parking lot is a
minimum of two feet above the bottom of the primary detention basin.”
(Am. Ord. 19-22, passed 6-3-2019)
§ 154.03 VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects, refuses to comply
with, or resists the enforcement of any provision of this chapter (ordinance
violation) or any requirement of condition in any permit issued pursuant to
this chapter (permit violation) and, in the case of a permit violation, fails
to correct such violation, omission, or neglect, or cease such disobedience,
refusal, or resistence after notice and reinspection as provided in the Storm
Water Ordinance shall be guilty of an offense under this chapter.
   (B)   Whenever the Administrator or Director determines that such a permit
violation exists, he or she shall serve notice of the violation in the manner
prescribed in § 1006 of the Storm Water Ordinance to the permitee. Such notice
shall state the nature of the violation and fix a date not less than ten days
after the date of the notice when the site will be reinspected.
(Ord. 05-10, passed 2-21-2005) Penalty, see § 154.99
§ 154.04 ADMINISTRATION.
   The Village Administrator and/or his or her designee is designated to
administer and enforce this chapter.
(Ord. 05-10, passed 2-21-2005)
§ 154.05 QUALIFIED REVIEW SPECIALIST.
   The Village Engineer is designated as the Qualified Review Specialist.
(Ord. 05-10, passed 2-21-2005)
§ 154.06 QUALIFIED WETLAND REVIEW SPECIALIST.
   Encap, Inc., of DeKalb, Illinois, is designated the village's Qualified
Wetland Review Specialist.
(Ord. 05-10, passed 2-21-2005)
§ 154.07 PERMIT FEES, VARIANCES, AND FEE IN LIEU OF SCHEDULE.
   In addition to any other fee or payment required by any other ordinance of
the village, the following fees are established pursuant to the Storm Water
Ordinance:
   (A)   Permit fee: $250 as may be amended from time to time by the village's
fee schedule.
   (B)   Variance fee: $200 as may be amended from time to time by the
villages's fee schedule.
   (C)   Fee in lieu of schedule: See § 1300 of the Storm Water Ordinance.
(Ord. 05-10, passed 2-21-2005)
§ 154.08 PERFORMANCE SECURITY.
   The performance security shall be the greater of the requirements found in
Article VIII Chapter 9-203 of the Kane County Stormwater Management Ordinance
and § 155.095 of the Village’s Subdivision Ordinance.
(Ord. 05-10, passed 2-21-2005; Am. Ord. 19-22, passed 6-3-2019)
§ 154.09 EXEMPT DEVELOPMENTS.
   The subdivision(s) listed in Appendix A of this chapter, the final plats of
which have previously been approved and/or which are subject to executed
annexation agreements (all occurring prior to January 1, 2001) containing
contractual standards concerning storm water management are exempt from any
increased standards set forth in this chapter.
(Ord. 05-10, passed 2-21-2005)
§ 154.10 OVERSIGHT COMMITTEE.
   The President and Board of Trustees of the village shall be the Oversight
Committee.
(Ord. 05-10, passed 2-21-2005)
§ 154.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person found guilty of a violation under this chapter shall pay a
civil fine in an amount not less than $25 and not more than $750. Each calendar
day during which such violation continues to exist shall constitute a separate
offense.
   (B)   In addition to any fine imposed under this section, the Administrator
or the Director may revoke any storm water management permit issued to such
person.
   (C)   In addition to any fine imposed or permit revocation undertaken
pursuant to this section, the Administrator or the Director may issue an order
requiring the suspension of any further work on the site. Such "Stop Work
Order" shall be in writing, shall indicate the reason for its issuance, and
shall specify the action, if any, required to be taken in order to resume work.
One copy of the "Stop Work Order" shall be posted on the site in a conspicuous
place and one copy shall be served in the manner prescribed in § 1006 of the
Storm Water Ordinance upon the permitee, if any, or if none, upon the person in
whose name the site was last assessed for taxes as disclosed by the records of
the Supervisor of Assessments.
   (D)   In the enforcement of this chapter, the village, at the request of the
Administrator or the Director, may bring any action, legal or equitable,
including an action for injunctive relief, as is deemed necessary.
(Ord. 05-10, passed 2-21-2005)
APPENDIX A: EXEMPT SUBDIVISIONS
Exemptions
   1.   Prairie Lake Industrial Park
1. PRAIRIE LAKE INDUSTRIAL PARK.
   This is a 19-unit lot (80 acre) industrial park subdivision. The existing
detention basin has been approved. The storm water management plan has been
fully approved and is almost completely implemented.
(Ord. 05-10, passed 2-21-2005)
CHAPTER 155: SUBDIVISIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
155.001   Title
   
155.002   Purposes
   
155.003   Definitions
   
155.004   Scope
   
155.005   Interpretation
   
155.006   Variations
   
155.007   Meetings
   
155.008   Building permit
   
155.009   Occupancy permit
Subdivision Procedure
   
155.025   Concept plan; pre-application conference
   
155.026   Preliminary plan
   
155.027   Installation of survey monuments
   
155.028   Final engineering and specifications for required improvements
   
155.029   Final plat
   
155.030   Plat forms
   
155.031   Filing of materials
Design Standards
   
155.045   Street layout and design
   
155.046   Lot standards
   
155.047   Easements
   
155.048   Sidewalks
   
155.049   Landscaping
   
155.050   Street lighting
   
155.051   Street signs
   
155.052   Storm sewer system
   
155.053   Pathways
   
155.054   Sanitary sewers
   
155.055   Water system design criteria
   
155.056   Development activity adjacent to water
Dedication of Lands
   
155.070   Criteria for requiring school site dedication
   
155.071   Criteria for requiring park and recreation land dedication
   
155.072   Criteria for requiring a contribution in lieu of park and school
sites
   
155.073   Dwelling unit population formula
   
155.074   Reservation of additional land
   
155.075   Combining with adjoining land
   
155.076   Topography and grading
   
155.077   Improved sites
   
155.078   Titles of sites
   
155.079   Dedication or contribution as condition of annexation
Required Improvements
   
155.095   Assurance for completion of required improvements
   
155.096   Installations
   
155.097   Inspection
   
155.098   Assurance for maintenance
   
155.099   Acceptance
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 155.001 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known and may be cited and referred to as the
“Subdivision Chapter for the village” and may be cited to herein as “this
chapter.”
(1981 Code, § 22.101) (Ord. 88-15, passed 11-7-1988)
§ 155.002 PURPOSES.
   The following regulations are adopted:
   (A)   For the purpose of promoting and protecting the public health, safety
and general welfare; to provide for a permanently wholesome community
environment; to conserve, protect and enhance property and property values; and
to secure the most efficient use of land;
   (B)   To provide for orderly growth and development; to prevent scattered
development beyond existing public utilities and facilities; and to facilitate
the adequate but economical provision of public improvements;
   (C)   To limit and control the pollution of the environment; to safeguard
the public against flood damage; and to preserve and enhance historical sites
and natural features;
   (D)   To prescribe reasonable rules and regulations governing the
subdivision and platting of land; the preparation of plats; the location, width
and course of streets and highways; the installation of utilities, street
pavements and other essential improvements; and the provision of necessary
public grounds for schools, parks, playgrounds and other public open space; and
   (E)   To establish procedures for the submission, approval and recording of
plats; to facilitate cooperation among the Villages of Carpentersville, East
Dundee, Sleepy Hollow and West Dundee in reviewing development plans; and to
provide the means for enforcement and to provide penalties for violations.
(1981 Code, § 22.102) (Ord. 88-15, passed 11-7-1988)
§ 155.003 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALLEY. Strip of land along the side of or in the rear of lots intended to
provide secondary access to and from streets and lots and shall not be
designated for general travel.
   BLOCK. A tract of land bounded by streets, or by a combination of streets
and public parks, cemeteries, railroad right-of-way, shore lines of waterways
or corporate boundary lines of the village.
   BOARD OF TRUSTEES. The President and Board of Trustees of the Village of
East Dundee, Kane County, Illinois.
   BUILDING SETBACK LINE. A line, generally parallel with and measured from the
lot line, establishing the required distance between the lot line and the
permitted structure or building area.
   EASEMENT. A grant by a property owner for the use of a strip of land by the
general public, a corporation or certain person or persons for a specific
purpose or purposes.
   LOT. A portion or basic unit of a subdivision or other parcel of land
fronting on a public street and intended to be the unit by which the land would
be individually developed and transferred.
   OFFICIAL MAP. A map adopted by the Board of Trustees, as provided by law,
showing the streets, highways, parks and drainage systems theretofore laid out,
and any amendments and additions thereto resulting from annexation, approval
and recording of new subdivision plats.
   OFFICIAL PLAN. The comprehensive plan adopted by the Board of Trustees,
including all changes and amendments thereto duly adopted, as provided by law.
   OWNER. The individual, firm, association, syndicate, copartnership,
corporation or trust or any other legal entity having sufficient proprietary
interest in the land sought to be subdivided for purposes of commencing and
maintaining proceedings to subdivide the land as provided by law.
   PATHWAY. A strip of land dedicated or reserved for the purpose of providing
pedestrian and bicycle access to neighboring areas.
   PLAN, CONCEPT. A general map or drawing on which the subdivider’s schematic
design for the subdivision of land is presented for discussion purposes prior
to the expenditure of funds for preparing the preliminary plan.
   PLAT, FINAL. An accurate map, drawing or chart on which the subdivider’s
plan for the subdivision of land is presented and which he or she submits for
final approval and intends to record in final form.
   PLAT, PRELIMINARY. A detailed map, drawing or chart on which the
subdivider’s design for the subdivision of land is presented and which he or
she submits in form for review and approval, but not for recording.
   PROTECTIVE COVENANT. Recorded conditions entered into between public and/or
private parties and constituting a restriction on the use of all or some
private property within a subdivision or development for the mutual benefit of
successor property owners and to provide protection against undesirable aspects
of developments which would tend to impair the stability of values.
   ROADWAY or PAVEMENT. The paved area existing on the street right-of-way,
exclusive of sidewalks, driveways or related uses and its width measured from
back of curb to back of curb.
   STREET. The street right-of-way or easement, whether public or private, and
shall not be considered as the area of the paving or other improvement on the
street right-of-way unless the paving and improvement coincides with the
boundaries of the right-of-way.
      (1)   STREET, PUBLIC. A street located within a dedicated right-of-way
for the purpose of providing vehicular access.
      (2)   STREET, PRIVATE. A street located on private property for the
purpose of providing vehicular access to that property.
      (3)   STREET TYPES.
         (a)   COLLECTOR OR SECONDARY STREET. A street which carries traffic
from minor streets to the primary street system, including the principal
entrance and circulation streets of residential areas and having direct access
to abutting properties permitted (not permitted).
         (b)   CUL-DE-SAC. A street having one open end and being permanently
terminated by a vehicle turn-around at the other end.
         (c)   MARGINAL ACCESS OR FRONTAGE STREET. A minor street which is
parallel with and adjacent to primary streets and highways and which provides
access to abutting properties and protection from fast, through-moving traffic
on primary streets.
         (d)   MINOR OR LOCAL STREET. A street with limited continuity and used
primarily as access to abutting properties.
         (e)   PRIMARY OR MAJOR STREET. A street of considerable continuity
which serves or is intended to serve as a major traffic artery connecting large
areas.
   STREET WIDTH. The shortest distance between the property lines abutting both
sides of a street right-of-way.
   SUBDIVIDER. The owners or any other person, firm or corporation authorized
by the owner, undertaking proceedings under the provisions of this chapter for
the purpose of subdividing land. The terms APPLICANT, DEVELOPER and SUBDIVIDER
are interchangeable.
   SUBDIVISION.
      (1)   The division of land into two or more parts or any division of land
which involves new streets or easements of access. The term includes re-
subdivision and, when appropriate, the context shall relate to the process of
subdividing or to the land subdivided.
      (2)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, any division of land into no more
than two parts meeting the following criteria shall not be considered a
subdivision for purposes of this chapter:
         (a)   The division is immediately followed by the sale or exchange of
part of the parcel so divided to an owner of adjoining and contiguous land; and
         (b)   The parcel so conveyed shall not exceed, in area, the lesser of
20% of the original area of the parcel before any division or one acre.
   VILLAGE. The Village of East Dundee, Illinois.
   VILLAGE ATTORNEY. The person or firm charged with the responsibility of
providing legal counsel regarding municipal matters.
   VILLAGE ENGINEER. The person or firm charged with the responsibility of
municipal engineering matters.
   VILLAGE PLANNER. The person or firm charged with the responsibility of
municipal planning matters.
(1981 Code, § 22.103) (Ord. 88-15, passed 11-7-1988; Am. Ord. 85-19, passed 12-
2-1985)
§ 155.004 SCOPE.
   (A)   Whenever any subdivision or re-subdivision of land shall hereafter be
laid out within the incorporated limits of the village or within territory not
more than one and one-half miles beyond the incorporated boundary of the
village, and not within the corporate limits or planning jurisdiction
boundaries of another municipality, the subdivider thereof or his or her agent
shall submit subdivision plans to the village. The plans, proposed improvements
and all procedures relating thereto shall, in all respects, be in full
compliance with the regulations in this chapter.
   (B)   Until the plan or plans of the subdivision, streets or improvements
have been certified to and approved by the Board of Trustees:
      (1)   No land shall be subdivided or filed for record, nor any street
laid out, nor any improvement made to the natural land;
      (2)   No lot, tract or parcel of land within the proposed subdivision
shall be offered for sale, nor shall any sale, or option be made or given; and/
or
      (3)   No improvements, such as sidewalks, water supply, stormwater
drainage, sanitary sewerage facilities, gas and electric service, street
lighting or grading or surfacing of streets, shall hereafter be made by any
owner or owners or his, her or their agent.
   (C)   All plans of the subdivision, streets or improvements and all
offerings or dedications of land to the village for use as streets, highways,
alleys, paths, schools, parks or other public uses shall be referred to the
Village Administrator, the Village Engineer, and the Director of Public Works,
who are hereby designated as the Village Plan Council, for review and
recommendation before being accepted by the Board of Trustees.
   (D)   Where a tract of land proposed for subdivision is part of a larger,
logical subdivision unit in relation to the village as a whole, the Plan
Council may, before recommending approval, cause the subdivider to prepare a
plan for the entire area or neighborhood, as an aid in judging the proposed
plat.
(1981 Code, § 22.104) (Ord. 88-15, passed 11-7-1988; Am. Ord. 14-28, passed 9-
15-2014)
§ 155.005 INTERPRETATION.
   (A)   An interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter
shall be held to the minimum requirements.
   (B)   Where the conditions imposed by any provision of this chapter upon the
use of land are either more restrictive or less restrictive, the comparable
conditions imposed by any other provision of this chapter or of any other law,
ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation of any kind, the regulations which
are more restrictive or which impose higher standards or requirements shall
govern.
   (C)   This chapter is not intended to abrogate any easement, covenant or any
other private agreement; provided that, where the regulations of this chapter
are more restrictive or impose higher standards or requirements than the
easements, covenants or other private agreements, the requirements of this
chapter shall govern.
   (D)   No subdivision of land which was not lawfully existing at the time of
the adoption of this chapter, and to the extent that the subdivision of land is
in conflict in any manner with the requirements of this chapter, the
subdivision of land remains unlawful hereunder.
(1981 Code, § 22.105) (Ord. 88-15, passed 11-7-1988)
§ 155.006 VARIATIONS.
   In cases where there are particular difficulties or peculiar hardships in
carrying out the literal provisions of this chapter, the procedures of §
157.207 shall be followed.
(1981 Code, § 22.106) (Ord. 88-15, passed 11-7-1988; Am. Ord. 14-28, passed 9-
15-2014)
§ 155.007 MEETINGS.
   (A)   All plans, plats and other material submitted as required herein shall
be considered at regularly scheduled meetings of the Village Board.
   (B)   Additional meetings and/or work sessions may be held, if requested by
the subdivider and approved by the Village Board; provided that:
      (1)   The meetings and/or work sessions are publicly announced.
      (2)   The subdivider shall pay a fee to the village for the meeting or
work session. The fee shall be established from time to time by the Village
Board in the annual fee schedule.
      (3)   The subdivider shall reimburse the village for the cost of the
Village Engineer, Village Planner and/or Village Attorney to prepare
information for and to attend the meetings and/or work sessions.
(1981 Code, § 22.107) (Ord. 88-15, passed 11-7-1988; Am. Ord. 14-28, passed 9-
15-2014)
§ 155.008 BUILDING PERMIT.
   No building permit shall be issued by any governing official for the
construction of any building or structure on any land or lot within a
subdivision, as defined herein, which has been approved for platting or re-
platting, until the final plat has been recorded and until the required
improvements have been installed or are being installed to the satisfaction of
the Board of Trustees.
(1981 Code, § 22.108) (Ord. 88-15, passed 11-7-1988)
§ 155.009 OCCUPANCY PERMIT.
   No occupancy permit shall be granted by any governing official for the use
of any structure within any subdivision approved for platting or re-platting
until required utility facilities have been installed and made ready to service
the property and that all other required improvements have been constructed or
are in the course of construction and are suitable for use.
(1981 Code, § 22.109) (Ord. 88-15, passed 11-7-1988)
SUBDIVISIONS PROCEDURE
§ 155.025 CONCEPT PLAN; PRE-APPLICATION CONFERENCE.
   (A)   Initial inquiry. The decision to proceed with a concept plan and pre-
application conference is left to the developer. Prior to filing an application
for approval of the preliminary plan, the subdivider shall secure from the
village the following material:
      (1)   Summary of the development review procedure;
      (2)   Concept plans and preliminary plan and final plan checklists;
      (3)   One-page concert information form;
      (4)   Application for preliminary approval;
      (5)   Application for final plat approval; and
      (6)   Related ordinances.
   (B)   Concept submittals.
      (1)   The applicant shall complete and submit to the village 20 copies of
the concept information form accompanied by the following material:
         (a)   Location map, drawn at a scale of not smaller than 1,000 feet to
the inch, showing the existing community facilities within one mile of the
proposed subdivision; including the name and location of main traffic arteries,
public transportation lines, sewage and utility lines, water mains and drainage
patterns, shopping areas, elementary and high schools, parks and playgrounds,
fire stations, principal places of employment, other community features such as
railroad stations, airports, hospitals and churches, scale north arrow and
date; and (The location of all land owned or under option by the subdivider
shall be shown on the map.)
         (b)   Concept plan, showing, in simple sketch form, on topographic
survey, the boundaries of the plat and the existing conditions on and within
200 feet of the site; include existing natural features such as wooded areas,
low areas subject to flooding, drainage patterns, bodies of water and other
significant features such as unique vegetation, geological conditions and
wildlife habitats; include man-made features such as buildings, barns, bridges,
historical sites, underground utilities, rights-of-way, easements, other
structures and the present zoning or planned use according to the official
plan; include, preferably on an acetate or Mylar overlay, the proposed land
uses, points of access, drainage pattern, stormwater retention and detention
areas, open space, public sites, title of subdivision, scale, north arrow and
date.
      (2)   This step does not require formal application or fee. The Plan
Council or its representative shall examine the submittals in order to
determine their adequacy for presentation and discussion at a concept
conference, as described herein.
   (C)   Concept conference.
      (1)   A conference may be held with the subdivider, the Plan Council and
other local government officials no sooner than five days after receipt by the
village of submittals in order to:
         (a)   Discuss the site in relation to the surrounding area;
         (b)   Discuss the existing conditions on and adjacent to the site;
         (c)   Mutually identify potential problems of the proposed subdivision
in relation to the existing conditions of the area, the official map and
official plan, zoning ordinance and other local goals, objectives, objectives,
ordinances and plans; and
         (d)   Inform the subdivider of the procedure for subdividing land and
of the filing and review fees and bonding requirements.
      (2)   The subdivider may request additional concept meetings with the
Plan Council and other local government officials in order to continue the
discussions. The meetings are for the purpose of providing information only and
the subdivider has the burden of assessing the effect of the information on the
proposed subdivision. No formal action shall be taken by the Plan Council at
the completion of the concept meetings. The decision to proceed or abandon the
proposed subdivision rests solely with the subdivider.
(1981 Code, § 22.201) (Ord. 88-15, passed 11-7-1988; Am. Ord. 14-28, passed 9-
15-2014)
§ 155.026 PRELIMINARY PLAN.
   (A)   Preparation.
      (1)   Subsequent to and in accordance with the information provided
during the concept conference, the subdivider shall prepare a preliminary plan
of subdivision. The preliminary plan shall comply with the provisions of §§
155.045 through
155.056 and shall be drawn at a scale of 100 feet to the inch or 50 feet to the
inch, if the area of subdivision is less than 40 acres.
      (2)   It shall contain the following information:
         (a)   Generally:
            1.   Name of the proposed subdivision, which shall not duplicate
the name of any plat heretofore recorded in Kane County;
            2.   Legal description of land proposed to be subdivided, by
section, township and range, and other terms as used in describing the land on
the records of the Recorder of Deeds, Kane County;
            3.   Boundary lines of the proposed subdivision, including bearing
and dimensions, as prepared and certified by a land surveyor registered in the
state;
            4.   Total acreage, within the boundaries of the tract;
            5.   Names and address of the owner, owner of record (including the
names and addresses of all beneficiaries of any land trust, accompanied by a
certified copy of the trust agreement and all amendments thereto), the
subdivider, the surveyor, the engineer and land planner who designed the plan;
            6.   Location and names of adjacent subdivisions and owners of
adjoining parcels of unsubdivided land; and
            7.   Date, scale and north point.
         (b)   Existing conditions, on and within 200 feet of the tract:
            1.   Topographic data, including contours at vertical intervals of
not more than two feet with reference to U.S.G.S. datum, except in unusual
topographic conditions when the vertical intervals may be altered as determined
by the Village Engineer;
            2.   Other natural features such as source of water supply, water
courses (with highest flood levels indicated), marshes, ponds, springs, rock
outcrop, wooded areas and other features;
            3.   Existing improvements, including the location, width and names
of all existing or previously platted streets or other rights-of-way showing
type of improvement, if any, railroad and utility rights-of-way, parks and
other public open spaces, buildings and structures, historic sites and
landmarks;
            4.   Existing improvements, including the location, capacity and
size of domestic water supply, water mains, sewer lines, culverts, drainage or
farm tile, towers, poles and other underground and above ground facilities,
also indicating such data as locations and surface and invert grade elevations
of catch basins, manholes and fire hydrants; (If water mains and sewers are not
on or adjacent to the tract, indicate the direction and distance to and the
size of the nearest useable facilities. If requested additional drawings, maps
or photographs shall be submitted in order to accurately locate existing
features.)
            5.   Easements, including location width and purpose; and
            6.      Political boundaries, including corporate limits, school,
park and fire protection district boundaries and national and local historic
district boundaries.
         (c)   Proposed subdivision design features:
            1.   Proposed zoning;
            2.   Layout of streets, including location and width of alleys,
pedestrian ways, drainage ways and utility and other easements;
            3.   Other rights-of-way, including location and width;
            4.   Lots, including layout, number, dimension and area (in square
feet), for each lot in the subdivision;
            5.   Setback lines including front and side street building setback
lines and dimensions;
            6.   Location of utilities, including proposed method of sewage and
waste disposal and location of sewer lines, water mains, stormwater drains and
surface drainage for each lot or building area and method of stormwater
detention and retention;
            7.   No land will be approved for subdivision which is subject to
periodic flooding or which contains inadequate drainage facilities or other
topographic and soil conditions which may increase danger to health or property
or aggravate erosion or flood hazard unless the subdivider agrees to make
improvements which will, in the opinion of the Village Engineer and Plan
Council, make the land safe for development and occupancy;
            8.   Sites intended to be dedicated or reserved for public use or
set aside for use of property owners in the subdivision, including the
conditions, if any, of the dedication or reservation;
            9.   Land use designations, including sites for multiple-family
dwellings, shopping centers, churches, industry and other non-public uses
exclusive of single-family dwellings, with the approximate acreage of each
indicated; and
            10.      The following certificate shall be shown in the lower
right-hand corner of the preliminary plan:
APPROVAL OF PRELIMINARY PLAN
            The preliminary plan of a subdivision shown hereon has received
approval by the Board of Trustees of the Village of East Dundee, Illinois, and
upon compliance by the subdivider with requirements of qualifications governing
the approval of preliminary plans and with other revisions and stipulations
that may be required, the Village Board will receive the final plat for
consideration when submitted by the subdivider in such form and within such
time as required by this subchapter, and approved by the Plan Council. Approval
of the subdivision is only preliminary. Approval allows the subdivider to
prepare improvement plans and/or a final plat.
            The Board of Trustees of the Village of East Dundee, Illinois.
            Date:                                                 ,
                           
            By:
                                                                                  
President
            Attest:
                                                                              
Village Clerk
   (B)   Filing. The subdivider shall submit to the Village Administrator the
following documents:
      (1)   Twenty copies of the completed application for preliminary plan
approval;
      (2)   Twenty copies of a preliminary plan of subdivision;
      (3)   Filing fees shall be as set in the village annual fee schedule;
(The fee shall be paid in cash, by money order or certified check made payable
to the village.)
      (4)   Concept plan, if prepared by the subdivider;
      (5)   Location map;
      (6)   Natural resources inventory, prepared by the Kane-DuPage Soil and
Water Conservation District, as required by Illinois statute;
      (7)   Soils report, if required by the Village Engineer, prepared by a
professional soils engineer of sufficient scope which addresses itself to the
natural resources identified in the report prepared by the Kane-DuPage Soil and
Water Conservation District; and which determines potential ground absorption,
runoff, flooding deficiencies, the presence of unstable soils (or soils which
may constitute problems for conventional construction), the presence of
subsurface rock that would affect the installation of underground improvements
on the provisions of the above ground improvement; (If, in the opinion of the
Village Engineer, additional soil investigations, boring or other soil tests
are necessary to determine the nature and extent of the questionable material,
the subdivider shall perform the needed investigations.)
      (8)   Preliminary engineering report(s) and plan(s), but not limited to
the consideration of the following:
         (a)   Community or individual water facilities;
         (b)   Streets and sidewalks;
         (c)   Site grading and erosion and siltation control; and
         (d)   Storm sewers and drainage plan for storage and controlled
release of stormwater following a 100-year frequency storm. The design
standards shall be according to those contained in the current “Specifications
for Stormwater Control and Detention Improvements” on file with the Village
Engineer.
      (9)   Evidence of ownership of the land proposed to be subdivided; (Where
the subdivider does not own the land, written notarized permission from the
owner shall be provided authorizing the subdivider to subdivide such and under
the provisions of this chapter.)
      (10)   Letter of approval from the mortgagor;
      (11)   Text of protective covenants, deed restrictions, homeowner’s
association contracts and other restrictions whereby the subdivider proposes to
regulate land use in the subdivision and otherwise protect the proposed
development;
      (12)   Environmental, fiscal and transportation impact reports and other
information as requested by the Plan Council; and
      (13)   Preliminary plan checklist, signed by the applicant indicating
that all items necessary for review have been submitted.
   (C)   Consideration by Plan Council.
      (1)   The Plan Council shall review the preliminary plan and other
documents. In cases where the subdivision of land involves a variation or
exception from the zoning ordinance, the Plan Council shall direct the
applicant to submit the preliminary plan to the Zoning Board of Appeals for
their review.
      (2)   Within 90 days of the official filing of the preliminary plan with
the Plan Council, unless the time is extended by mutual consent, the Plan
Council shall recommend to the Village Board for its action: approval or
disapproval of the preliminary plan and shall submit its written
recommendations, which may include the recommendations of the Village Attorney,
Village Planner, citizens and other government officials, to the Board of
Trustees and to the subdivider or conditional approval of the preliminary plan
and shall submit its recommendations and modifications to the Board of Trustees
and to the subdivider.
   (D)   Review fee. During the course of their review, the Plan Council may
submit the preliminary plan to the Village Planner, Village Attorney and/or
other technical consultants in order to obtain assistance for the proper review
of the plan. The subdivider shall be notified that technical assistance has
been sought in accordance with these regulations and shall be responsible for
the cost of all technical services, including the services of the Village
Engineer. The Village Engineer, Village Planner, Village Attorney and/or other
technical consultant shall submit their itemized bill for services to the
village which shall transmit a bill to the subdivider. The bill for services
shall be set by the village at a rate normally charged for professional
services and shall include all travel and other expenses normally charged to
the village. The subdivider shall pay the village for their services rendered
within ten days after the submission of the bill from the village to him or
her.
   (E)   Consideration by Board of Trustees. The Board of Trustees shall
approve, approve with conditions or disapprove the preliminary plan within 30
days after its next regularly scheduled meeting following the action of the
Plan Council unless the time is extended by mutual consent. The subdivider
shall, within 30 days thereof, be notified, in writing, of any conditions of
approval or the reasons for rejection.
   (F)   Effect of approval of preliminary plan.
      (1)   Approval by the Board of Trustees at this stage does not constitute
acceptance of the subdivision. Approval of the preliminary plan shall be:
         (a)   Considered permission to prepare detailed plans and
specifications for the proposed subdivision and for all public improvements
therein; and
         (b)   Effective for no more than 12 months from the date approval was
granted unless, upon application of the subdivider within the period that the
approval is valid, the Board of Trustees grants an extension of time beyond the
period. The application for the extension shall not require an additional fee.
      (2)   If a final plat has not been approved as required by the provisions
of this chapter within the 12-month period, or any extensions granted thereto,
the preliminary plan must be resubmitted to the Plan Council as if the plan had
never been approved.
(1981 Code, § 22.202) (Ord. 88-15, passed 11-7-1988; Am. Ord. 14-28, passed 9-
15-2014)
§ 155.027 INSTALLATION OF SURVEY MONUMENTS.
   (A)   After approval of the preliminary plan, survey monuments and markers
shall be laid out and set according to the following.
      (1)   Permanent monuments shall be placed at all corners and at points
tangent to curve lines along the boundary of the subdivision. Permanent
monuments shall be constructed of concrete, the minimum dimensions of which
shall be a minimum of four inches square or four inches in diameter at the top
of the monument. The monument shall be a minimum of 36 inches long, with an
iron dowel at least three-eighths inches in diameter and two and one-half
inches in length embedded in the top of the monument so that the dowel shall be
flush with the surface of the monument and placed in the center of the monument
marking the corner.
      (2)   Where concrete monuments are not required to be placed, all lot
corners, the ends of all curves, all angle points in any line and all angle
points along a meander line shall be marked by galvanized iron pipe not less
than three-fourths inch in diameter or solid iron reinforcement bars not less
than one-half inch diameter at least 24 inches long. The top of the pipe or bar
shall be set level with the established grade of the lot.
      (3)   For each 20 acres or fraction thereof in the subdivision, one
permanent bench mark shall be established at a location approved by the Village
Engineer. This bench mark shall be constructed of concrete, four inches by four
inches at the top, six inches by six inches at the bottom and 48 inches in
length with a brass plate securely fastened to the surface. The brass plate
shall be exposed about one inch above final grade and shall be inscribed with
the number and elevation of the benchmark. Elevations shall be referred to and
certified as U.S.G.S. datum.
   (B)   All country, state, county or other official benchmarks, monuments or
triangulation stations in or adjacent to the property shall be preserved in
precise position.
(1981 Code, § 22.203) (Ord. 88-15, passed 11-7-1988; Am. Ord. 14-28, passed 9-
15-2015)
§ 155.028 FINAL ENGINEERING AND SPECIFICATIONS FOR REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   Preparation. The subdivider shall prepare detailed plans and
specifications for all improvements required to be constructed under the
provisions of §§
155.095 through
155.099.
   (B)   Preliminary review. The plans and specifications for required
improvements shall be submitted to the Village Engineer for review to determine
their compliance with the provisions of this chapter and other applicable
ordinances. The plans and specifications shall also be reviewed by appropriate
state, county and local officials and utility companies concerned with the
improvements and approval from these officials shall be given, in writing,
respecting their particular interests. Following the aforementioned review by
the Village Engineer and the other officials concerned, the Village Engineer
shall transmit the plans and specifications to the Board of Trustees,
accompanied by its recommendations and the letters of approval from the
aforesaid officials where applicable.
   (C)   Review fees. Prior to the consideration of the plans and
specifications for required improvements by the Village Board, the subdivider
shall reimburse the village for the fees involved in the review and processing
of the plans and specifications.
   (D)   Cooperation with neighboring jurisdictions.
      (1)   Where a proposed stormwater improvement may result in changes to an
existing stormwater carrying system of neighboring upstream or downstream
communities, copies of the stormwater improvement plans and specifications
shall be submitted to the affected communities. Where the proposed improvement
may affect the stormwater carrying system of a site occupied by or planned for
development by a school and/or park district, copies of the plans and
specifications shall be forwarded to the affected districts.
      (2)   The affected communities and/or taxing districts shall be given
written notification of the proposed improvements and shall be requested to
respond to the village having jurisdiction over the proposed improvements. The
response shall be submitted, in writing, within 15 days upon receipt of the
request.
      (3)   If any alterations to the plans and specifications are requested by
the affected communities and/or taxing districts and, if the alterations are in
accordance with the plans and standards of the affected local governments, the
village having jurisdiction may require the applicant to revise the plans and
specifications in accordance with the requests of the affected governments.
   (E)   Final approval.
      (1)   If the Board of Trustees finds that the plans and specifications
for required improvements comply with the provisions of this chapter and other
applicable ordinances, it shall grant final approval to the plans and
specifications. The Village Engineer and Village President shall thereupon
affix their signatures to the plans and specifications, in the form set forth
herein and the Village Clerk shall attest the signatures. Final approval,
however, shall not constitute acceptance of the improvements by the village.
      (2)   The acceptance shall be governed by the provisions of §§
155.095 through
155.099.
(1981 Code, § 22.204) (Ord. 88-15, passed 11-7-1988; Am. Ord. 14-28, passed 9-
15-2014)
§ 155.029 FINAL PLAT.
   (A)   Preparation.
      (1)   The final plat may constitute only a portion of the approved
preliminary plan if it is determined acceptable by the Plan Council after
consideration by the Plan Council of the effect on the continuity of roads,
utilities and services. The final plat shall be accurately and legibly prepared
with waterproof, non-fading ink on a tracing cloth or Mylar, reproducible
print, measuring no less than eight and one-half inches by 14 inches, but no
more than 30 inches by 36 inches (24 inches by 36 inches preferred), and shall
be used as the original copy of the final plat for the purposes of formal
execution, approval and recording.
      (2)   The final plat shall include the following information:
         (a)   Date of preparation of the final plat and by whom prepared;
         (b)   Seal and certification of land surveyor;
         (c)   Scale, which shall be not less than 100 feet to the inch; (A
scale of 50 feet to the inch, if the area of subdivision is less than 40 acres,
shall be used unless a different scale is approved by the Village Engineer
prior to the submittal.)
         (d)   North point;
         (e)   Legal description;
         (f)   Layout of streets, showing right-of-way widths, street names and
the location and widths of all pedestrian walkways; (The location, right-of-way
widths and names of all streets adjoining the plat shall also be shown.)
         (g)   All easements established for public use and utility right-of-
way; (The developer shall furnish evidence from the utility companies that the
easements provided are satisfactory and adequate to provide service to the
subdivision.)
         (h)   All block and lot numbers and lines, with accurate dimensions
given in hundredths of feet;
         (i)   Proposed building setback lines on all lots and other sites;
         (j)   Accurate outlines and legal descriptions of all areas dedicated
or reserved for public use, with the deed to be transferred included, and all
areas to be reserved by deed covenant for the common use of all property
owners, together with the proposed uses indicated thereon;
         (k)   Water elevations of all lakes and streams, within or adjoining
the tract, at the date of survey and the approximate high and low water
elevations of the lakes or streams; (All elevations shall be referred
approximately to U.S.G.S. datum. If the subdivision borders on a lake or
stream, the distances and bearing of a meander-line established not less than
20 feet back from the average high- water mark of the lake or stream, as
determined from flood hazard maps or other data, with the distances noted.)
         (l)   Accurate angular and lineal dimensions for all lines, angles,
radii and areas used to describe all boundaries including perimeter survey of
tract, streets, alleys, easements, areas to be reserved or dedicated for public
use and other important features; (Error of closure of boundary line surveys
shall not exceed one foot for each 10,000 feet of perimeter survey. Angular
error shall not exceed plus or minus 20 seconds.)
         (m)      True angles and distances to the nearest established street
lines and official monuments (not less than three), which shall be accurately
described on the plat by location, and size to which all dimensions, angles,
bearings and similar data on the plat shall be referred;
         (n)   Municipal, township, county and section lines accurately tied to
the lines of the subdivision by distances and angles; and
         (o)   Certificates, as shown herein.
   (B)   Filing.
      (1)   Within one year after approval of the preliminary plan, the
subdivider shall submit the following documents to the Village Administrator or
Clerk:
         (a)   Two copies of the completed application for final plat approval;
         (b)   The original tracing cloth or Mylar of the final plat, which
shall be returned to the applicant upon final plat approval for recording with
the County Recorder of Deeds;
         (c)   One copy of the final plat, drawn on sepia Mylar for future use
by the village in its planning and development activities;
         (d)   Twenty copies of the final plat of subdivision to be used for
review by village officials;
         (e)   Four copies of the plans and specifications for all improvements
required under §§
155.045 through
155.056;
         (f)   Filing fee as set forth in the village annual fee schedule;
         (g)   Reimbursement statement, whereby the subdivider agrees to
reimburse the village for all costs incurred by the village for the review of
the final plat submittals; (The fees shall be paid by the subdivider prior to
final plat approval.)
         (h)   Performance guarantee, in the amount equal to 125% of the
estimated costs of the required subdivision improvements as approved by the
Village Engineer, in order to insure that the work is performed according to
the plans and specifications and according to good engineering practices; (The
guarantee shall be in accordance herewith.)
         (i)   Completion guarantee, in the amount equal to 30% of the costs of
the required subdivision improvements as approved by the Village Engineer, in
order to insure that the work is satisfactorily completed within the prescribed
time limit; (The guarantee shall be in accordance herewith.)
         (j)   Inspection statement, whereby the subdivider agrees to provide
an inspection in accordance herewith;
         (k)   Deposit for village inspection, in accordance herewith;
         (l)   Text of protective covenants, deed restrictions, home owner’s
association contracts and other restrictions relating to any part of the
proposed subdivision, including, but not limited to building restrictions, use
restriction, building setback lines, buffer areas, common open space,
maintenance of improvements and the like;
         (m)   Final plat checklist, signed by the applicant indicating that
all items necessary for review have been submitted; and
         (n)   Certificates. The final plat shall not be considered until the
following certificates have
been duly executed:
            1.   Owner’s certificate;
            2.   Surveyor’s certificate;
            3.   Certificate of special assessments;
            4.   County Clerk’s certificate; and
            5.   Roadway access certificate by the highway authorities, as set
forth in the Plat Act.
      (2)   The Village Administrator shall transmit the final plat and
accompanying material to the Village Attorney and the Plan Council.
   (C)   Consideration by Plan Council.
      (1)   Within 30 days from the date of final plat submittal, unless the
time is extended by mutual consent, the Plan Council shall determine if the
final plat meets all applicable village requirements. If the Plan Council finds
that the final plat is not in accordance with the village requirements, it
shall disapprove the plat and provide written notification to the Board of
Trustees stating the reasons for the disapproval.
      (2)   If the Plan Council determines that the final plat meets all
applicable village requirements, it shall submit the final plat and
accompanying documents to the Board of Trustees.
      (3)   The Plan Council may also recommend that the Village Board consider
other provisions prior to final plat approval.
   (D)   Consideration by Board of Trustees.
      (1)   When the final plat and accompanying documents have been forwarded
to the Board of Trustees by the Plan Council, the Board of Trustees shall
consider the plat to be officially filed.
      (2)   Within 60 days from the date of official filing, unless the time is
extended by mutual consent, the Board of Trustees shall consider approval of
the final plat, and if approved, the Village President shall sign the final
plat and the Village Clerk shall attest the signature.
      (3)   If the final plat is disapproved, the subdivider shall be given
written notice of the reasons for the disapproval.
   (E)   Recording.
      (1)   Upon approval of the final plat by the Village Board, the final
plat shall be recorded within 60 days thereof with the Recorder of Deeds of
Kane County, Illinois. If the recording is not effected within that time, the
approval by the Village Board shall become null and void, in which case, the
deposits for required subdivision improvements held by the village shall be
refunded in full to the depositor, without interest. The recording of the final
plat is a requirement for the sale of land or lots in the subdivision and for
the issuance of any building permit.
      (2)   The applicant shall record the plat and return the recorded
document to the village.
(1981 Code, § 22.205) (Ord. 88-15, passed 11-7-1988; Am. Ord. 14-28, passed 9-
15-2014)
§ 155.030 PLAT FORMS.
   The following plat forms shall be used to the extent possible as indicated:
   (A)   The final plat shall contain an owner’s certificate substantially in
the form as follows:
OWNER’S CERTIFICATE
   STATE OF ILLINOIS
   SS.
   COUNTY OF KANE
   THIS IS TO CERTIFY THAT the undersigned is the owner of land described in
the annexed plat, and has caused the same to be surveyed and subdivided, as
indicated thereon, for the uses and purposes therein set forth, and does hereby
acknowledge and adopt the same under the style and title thereon indicated.
   The undersigned hereby dedicated for public use the lands shown on this plat
for thoroughfares, streets, alleys and public services; and hereby also
reserves for the Illinois Bell Telephone Company and the Public Service
Company, Division of Commonwealth Edison Company, Northern Illinois Gas
Company, the easement provisions which are stated on their standard form which
is attached hereto.
   Witness our hands and seal this                     day of
                                      ,                   .
   STATE OF ILLINOIS
   SS.
   COUNTY OF KANE
   Before the undersigned Notary Public, in and for the County and State
aforesaid, personally appeared
                                                                                        
, and each separately and severally acknowledged the execution of the foregoing
instrument as his/her voluntary act and deed, for the purposes therein
expressed.
   Witness my hand and notarial seal this                         day of
                             ,                  .
                                                                                                      
Notary Public
   (B)   The final plat shall contain a surveyor’s certificate substantially in
the form as follows:
SURVEYOR’S CERTIFICATE
   STATE OF ILLINOIS
   SS.
   COUNTY OF KANE
   This is to certify that I,                                                ,
am an Illinois Registered Land Surveyor in compliance with the laws of the
State of Illinois, and that this plat correctly represents a survey completed
by me on                                                that all monuments and
markers shown thereon actually exist, and that I have actually shown the
materials that they are made of; that all regulations enacted by the Board of
Trustees relative to plats and subdivisions have been complied with in the
preparation of this plat.
   Surveyor’s Seal
                                                                                   
Signature
                                                                                   
Date
                                                                                   
Illinois Land Surveyor Number
   (C)   The final plat shall contain a certificate of special assessments
substantially in the form as follows:
CERTIFICATE OF SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS
   STATE OF ILLINOIS
   SS.
   COUNTY OF KANE
   I,                                                              , Village
Treasurer of the Village of East Dundee, do hereby certify that there are no
delinquent or unpaid current or forfeited special assessments or any deferred
installments thereof that have been apportioned against the tract of land
included in the plat.
   Dated at                                                          , Kane
County, Illinois, this                      day of
                                       ,                           .
                                                                                                              
Village Treasurer
   (D)   The final plat shall contain a County Clerk certification
substantially in the form as follows:
COUNTY CLERK CERTIFICATE
   STATE OF ILLINOIS
   SS.
   COUNTY OF KANE
   I,                                                                      ,
County Clerk of Kane County, Illinois, do hereby certify that there are no
delinquent general taxes, no unpaid forfeited taxes, and no redeemable tax
sales against any of the land included in the annexed plat.
   Given under my hand and seal at Geneva, Kane County, Illinois, this day
                      of                          ,                            
.
                                                                                                                
County Clerk
   (E)   The final plat shall contain a village certificate of approval as
follows:
CERTIFICATE OF APPROVAL
   STATE OF ILLINOIS
   SS.
   COUNTY OF KANE
   Under the authority provided by  Ordinance No.  adopted by the Village Board
of the Village of East Dundee, Illinois, this plat was approved by the Village
of East Dundee and must be recorded within sixty (60) days of the date of
approval by the Village Board, otherwise it is null and void.
   Approved by the Village Board of Trustees at a meeting held
                                ,                  .
                                                                                           
President
                                                                                           
Village Clerk
   Approved by the Village Engineer
                                                                                           
Village Engineer
   (F)   The final plat shall contain a roadway access certificate of approval
as follows:
   STATE OF ILLINOIS
   COUNTY OF                                   
   Approved this                         day of
                                 ,                        , as to roadway
access to (State/County) highway also known as:
                                                                                    
District Engineer Illinois Department of Transportation
   or
                                                                                           
Kane County Superintendent of Highways or appropriate local authority
(1981 Code, § 22.206) (Ord. 88-15, passed 11-7-1988; Am. Ord. 14-28, passed 9-
15-2014)
§ 155.031 FILING OF MATERIALS.
   All materials submitted to the village in connection with proposed
development plans, including applications, concept plans, preliminary plans,
final plats and the like shall be submitted in both hardcopy and electronic
format, unless this requirement is otherwise excused by the village.
(Ord. 07-35, passed 6-18-2007)
DESIGN STANDARDS
§ 155.045 STREET LAYOUT AND DESIGN.
   (A)   New and proposed street arrangements within a subdivision shall
provide for the continuation of all existing streets into the area proposed to
be subdivided unless topographical or other conditions make a continuance or
conformance to existing streets impractical.
   (B)   New and proposed street arrangements within a subdivision shall allow
for the future continuation of the street into adjacent tracts according to
topographic conditions of the adjacent tracts and/or according to the
consideration of future traffic circulation.
   (C)   Where a tract is subdivided into parcels larger than ordinary building
lots, the parcels shall be arranged to allow the opening of future streets and
further re-subdivision in a logical and orderly manner.
   (D)   All required streets shall conform to the table of minimum standards
for street design and the materials and specifications on file with the Village
Engineer.
   (E)   Minor streets shall be so laid out that their use by through traffic
will be discouraged.
   (F)   Half streets shall be prohibited, except where:
      (1)   A dedicated half street exists adjacent to the parcel being
subdivided; and (Under this condition, the other half shall be platted and
approved according to the standards herein.)
      (2)   The Plan Council and Village Board determine that it will be
practicable to require the dedication of a right-of-way on land not wholly
owned by the developer. Under this condition, the village may take action as is
required to secure the right-of-way and the applicant shall pay the costs as
well as the costs of the required improvements.
   (G)   (1)   The maximum length of a cul-de-sac shall be 500 feet measured
along the center line from the intersection at origin through center of circle
to end of right-of-way.
      (2)   Each cul-de-sac shall have a terminus of nearly circular shape with
a minimum diameter of at least 120 feet from the property line to property
line.
      (3)   The minimum cul-de-sac right-of-way width shall be 60 feet and the
minimum pavement width shall be 28 feet.
      (4)   The use of cul-de-sac streets shall be prohibited in multi-family,
business or industrial districts.
   (H)   The following standards are established for the purpose of providing
protection for individual properties and to provide for traffic safety and the
efficient use of the primary street for its intended function of accommodating
through traffic.
      (1)   A marginal access street may be required in commercial or
industrial zones, separated from a primary street by a planting or grass strip
having a minimum width of 20 feet between the pavement of the primary street
and pavement of the marginal access street. Points of access from the frontage
road to the primary street shall be spaced at a minimum of 1,320 feet.
      (2)   In residential areas, access to primary streets shall be provided
by one of the following means:
         (a)   The subdivision of lots so as to back onto the primary street
and front onto a local street; and/or (No access to individual lots shall be
provided from the primary street and a landscaped screening, as approved by the
Plan Council, shall be provided in a strip of land at least 12 feet wide along
the rear property lines of the lots.)
         (b)   A marginal access street, separated from the primary street by a
planting or grass strip having a minimum width of 15 feet between the pavement
of the primary street and the pavement of the marginal access street. Points of
access from the frontage road to the primary street shall be spaced at a
minimum of 1,320 feet.
   (I)   It must be evidenced that all street intersections and confluences
encourage safe traffic flow.
      (1)   The intersection of more than two streets at one point shall be
avoided, except where otherwise impractical to secure a proper street system.
      (2)   Streets shall intersect one another at an angle as near to a right
angle as possible and in no event shall the intersections be at angles of less
than 60 degrees.
      (3)   The minimum curb radius at the intersection of two minor streets
shall be 20 feet; at the intersection of a minor street and a collector street,
the minimum curb radius shall be 30 feet and at the intersection of two
collector streets, the minimum curb radius shall be 40 feet. All street corners
along designated truck routes where the intersecting street leads directly to,
from or is within property zoned for manufacturing purposes, shall have a
minimum radius of 45 feet.
      (4)   Proposed new intersections along one side on an existing street,
shall, wherever practicable, coincide with any existing intersections on the
opposite side of such street. Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than
125 feet shall be prohibited.
      (5)   When connecting streets deflect from each other at any point by
more than 30 degrees, they shall be connected by a curve with a radius adequate
to insure a sight distance of not less than 200 feet and of a greater radii as
the Plan Council shall determine for special cases.
   (J)   Where a subdivision borders an existing narrow road or when the
official map and/or official plan or zoning setback regulations indicate plans
for realignment or widening a road that would require use of some of the land
in the subdivision, the applicant shall be required to improve and dedicate, at
his or her expense, the areas for widening or realignment according to the
standards required by these regulations.
   (K)   Bridges of primary benefit to the applicant, as determined by the Plan
Council, shall be constructed at full expense of the applicant without
reimbursement from the village. The sharing expense for construction of bridges
not of primary benefit to the applicant, as determined by the Plan Council,
will be fixed by special agreement between the village and the applicant.
   (L)   (1)   General reference. It is intended that all public streets shall
be constructed in accordance as far as applicable with the most recently
adopted edition of the State of Illinois, Department of Transportation,
“Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction,” including current
highway standards, special provisions and supplemental specifications as issued
by the Department. These shall be referred to as the “state standard
specifications” hereinafter.
      (2)   Subgrade. The subgrade of all public streets shall be prepared in
accordance with Section 212 of the state standard specifications. It is
required that the soil composing the subgrade have a minimum soil support value
of “three” as determined by the IBR, Illinois Bearing Ratio. Test procedures
used by the Illinois Department of Transportation. When, in the opinion of the
Village Engineer, evaluation of the suitability of the subgrade to support the
proposed pavement is warranted, a competent soils engineer contracted by the
developer, at his or her expense and approved by the Village Engineer, shall
perform the necessary soil tests to insure that a stable subgrade as specified
is being provided.
      (3)   Design of pavement.
         (a)   Procedure.
            1.   The required thickness of the pavement shall be determined in
accordance with the current Illinois Department of Transportation Manual of
Instructions for the Structural Design of Bituminous Pavements on Projects
involving MFT, FAS, FAUS and TOPICS Funds or Illinois Department of
Transportation Design Manual, Section 7-100, Structural Design of Portland
Cement Concrete Pavement.
            2.   The anticipated traffic volumes, the composition of the
traffic and the subgrade support strength provided by the roadbed soils shall
be considered in the design of the pavement. This information is subject to the
review and approval of the village.
         (b)   Minimum design criteria. Not less than the minimum requirements
listed below shall be permitted in the design of streets.
Street Classification Minimum Structural Number
Street Classification              Minimum Structural Number
Primary or major street:
*ADT over 15,000                   5.5
*ADT 7,000 - 15,000                5.0
*ADT under 7,000                   4.0
Secondary or collector street      3.3
Minor or local street              2.7
Marginal access or frontage street 2.7
Cul-de-sac                         2.7
Industrial park streets            3.5
NOTE TO TABLE:
*Average daily traffic anticipated ten years beyond completion of subdivision
 
         (c)   Minimum pavement thickness requirements. For Portland cement
concrete pavements, no less than six inches in thickness will be allowed. For
bituminous pavements, the minimum requirements for surface course, base course,
and sub-base course shall be in compliance with those given in Table 2 of the
aforesaid Manual of Instructions for the Structural Design of Bituminous
Pavements on Projects Involving MFT, FAS, FADS and TOPICS FUNDS.
      (4)   Review of pavement design.
         (a)   The village shall be furnished with copies of the soils report
when a soil support IBR value of three or greater is used in the pavement
design, a list of proposed street classifications, the anticipated traffic
volumes which will be generated and traffic factors based on preceding date.
         (b)   The Village Engineer shall review this design information and
report the evolution of same to the Plan Council prior to its consideration of
the engineering plans.
      (5)   State construction requirement for bituminous pavements. For
subdivision streets, the installation of the final one and one-quarter inch of
bituminous concrete surface of the proposed pavement shall be delayed for one
winter. After May 1 of the year following the initial construction of the
pavement, the contractor and the Village Engineer shall inspect and mark all
distressed or damaged areas. These areas shall be removed and repaired to the
satisfaction of the Village Engineer. The entire surface of the existing
pavement shall then be cleaned; primed at a minimum rate of 0.05 gallons per
square yard; sanded, if the street is open to traffic, at the minimum rate of
two pounds per square yard; and surfaced with the final layer of bituminous
concrete as required.
      (6)   Materials inspection.
         (a)   Subgrade compaction and all materials incorporated into the
roadway section shall be tested by a competent quality assurance testing
company. Tests shall be made in compliance with current state recommendations,
except that plant inspectors will not be required in concrete or blacktop
plants continuously during production. However, one random test shall be made
daily on all material used by a competent quality assurance testing company.
Results of all tests conducted shall be forwarded to the Village Engineer for
his or her review and approval. Work will not be accepted without the test
results submitted to the village.
         (b)   The owner shall provide a pavement core for every 1,000 square
yards of pavement to determine the thickness, strength and/or density of the
pavement, as requested by the Village Engineer, to determine their compliance
with the contract specifications.
(1981 Code, § 22.301) (Ord. 88-15, passed 11-7-1988; Am. Ord. 14-28, passed 9-
15-2014)
§ 155.046 LOT STANDARDS.
   (A)   The lot size, width, depth, shape and orientation shall be appropriate
for the location of the subdivision and for the type of development and use
contemplated. Due regard shall be shown for all natural features, such as
trees, water courses, historic and scenic sites and similar conditions which,
if preserved, will add attractiveness and value to the proposed development.
   (B)   Lot width and area shall conform to or exceed the requirements as set
forth in the zoning ordinance of the village or that of the appropriate county
in the areas beyond the village limits.
   (C)   All lots shall have full frontage abutting a publicly dedicated
street.
   (D)   Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles or radial to the
street line.
   (E)   Additional building setbacks may be required in the case of corner
lots to assure the proper development of intersection design and traffic
safety. Driveway locations on corner lots may be required to be designated by
note on the final plat and the location designated shall appear as a covenant
running with that lot.
   (F)   In order to provide an adequate building site, additional lot width
and depth shall be required when more than 10% of the minimum lot area includes
land within a drainage way, channel or stream, or when less than 80% of the
minimum lot area is at least three feet above the highest ground-water level as
estimated from soil boring test data.
   (G)   (1)   Double-frontage lots are forbidden, except where lots back upon
a limited-access highway, a major street, a secondary street or a railroad
right-of-way. Double-frontage lots shall not have vehicular access through the
lots.
      (2)   The lots shall have an additional depth of at least 12 feet in
order to accommodate a protective screen planting of the nature and type as
deemed appropriate by the Plan Council.
   (H)   A hillside lot, as referred to herein, is defined as one with an
average slope of more than 15%. The Plan Council shall determine which lots are
to comply with the regulations contained herein and the lots shall be so
designated on the final plat.
      (1)   No minimum size is established, but the lot shall be of adequate
size to comply with all regulations contained herein.
      (2)   Erosion controls such as retaining walls, cribbing or vegetative
cover may be required by the Plan Council. When required by the Plan Council,
plans must be submitted to the Village Engineer for approval before starting
any construction on the lot and the requirement shall appear on the plat as a
covenant which will run with the land.
      (3)   No subsurface sanitary waste disposal system may be constructed on
a hillside lot. Exceptions will only be made based on detailed studies provided
by the subdivider and approved by the Plan Council.
      (4)   Major cuts, excavation, grading and filling will not be permitted
if it results in a slope of two and one-half to one or greater along adjacent
lot lines, except where adequate provision is made to prevent slides and
erosion. Where cuts or fills are required to provide a building site,
engineering data must be presented to show existing and proposed topography,
location of the building site and an analysis of the fill material to be used.
      (5)   The maximum grade on driveways shall not exceed 12%. Each drive
shall provide sufficient space and distance to turn around before entering the
street.
(1981 Code, § 22.302) (Ord. 88-15, passed 11-7-1988; Am. Ord. 14-28, passed 9-
15-2014)
§ 155.047 EASEMENTS.
   (A)   Easements shall be designed to provide continuity throughout the
entire subdivision.
   (B)   (1)   Utility distribution or transmission installments serving the
subdivision shall be located in easements and so designated on the subdivision
plat of record. The easements shall be located along the rear lot lines, side
lot lines or front lot lines. They shall occupy not less than ten feet of which
five feet may be shown on each of two adjacent lots. Utility easements shall be
indicated as such on the final plat and shall not be used for drainage
purposes, except that they may be graded as a drainage swale.
      (2)   A two-foot easement shall be required on one side of and adjacent
to an alley to accommodate pole lines.
   (C)   (1)   Whenever it is necessary to install water main, sanitary sewer,
storm sewers or other underground utilities to be maintained by the village in
areas other than public right-of-way, easements shall be established and so
designated. Easements may not be less than ten feet wide, five feet of which
may be shown on each of two adjacent lots.
      (2)   Whenever the village utilities and the public utilities follow a
common route, they may be in a common easement termed a utility easement. The
easements shall be of adequate width for the purpose intended, but in no case
shall it be less than 15 feet.
   (D)   Where a subdivision is traversed by a water course, drainage way,
channel or stream, there shall be provided a drainage easement or right-of-way
conforming substantially with the lines of the water course and further width
as will be necessary for the purpose of adequately maintaining or improving the
water course. The easements shall not be used for any other purposes, except
that utilities may cross this easement; provided that, the crossing does not
alter the intended use of the easement.
(1981 Code, § 22.303) (Ord. 88-15, passed 11-7-1988)
§ 155.048 SIDEWALKS.
   (A)   (1)   Sidewalks shall be required on both sides of the street in
residential subdivisions and for all commercial lots. Sidewalks may be required
for industrial lots and elsewhere if considered necessary by the Plan Council
for public safety.
      (2)   All sidewalks shall be constructed of Portland cement concrete
unless another material is required by the Village Engineer. Depressed curbs at
all intersections shall be required; any other provisions for the elderly or
the handicapped may be required if considered necessary by the Plan Council.
   (B)   Unless otherwise directed by the Village Engineer, sidewalks shall be
located within the dedicated right-of-way and shall be laid one foot from the
property line of abutting lots and along the line as extended at intersections.
   (C)   Sidewalks in residential subdivisions shall be not less than five feet
in width and not less than five inches in thickness; sidewalks for commercial
and industrial lots shall be not less than eight feet in width and not less
than five inches in thickness. Both sidewalks shall be not less than six inches
in thickness where they intersect a driveway.
(1981 Code, § 22.304) (Ord. 88-15, passed 11-7-1988; Am. Ord. 14-28, passed 9-
15-2014)
§ 155.049 LANDSCAPING.
   (A)   All unpaved areas within street rights-of-way shall be seeded or
sodded with Kentucky Bluegrass mixture or with such other grass mixture as
approved by the Village Engineer.
   (B)   No improvements other than village approved landscaping, sidewalks and
mailboxes shall be placed within the street right-of-way. Low voltage lighting
may be placed in the street right-of-way with permission of the Village Public
Works Department. All landscaping, decorative landscape, decorative fencing and
the like placed in the street right-of-way shall be at the owners risk and may
be removed by the village and replaced with grass seed or sod in conjunction
with village repair and maintenance of the public street and utilities.
   (C)   The subdivider shall prepare a landscape plan for the subdivision in
accordance with the standards and specifications for landscaping on file with
the village.
   (D)   Protective screen planting may be required to secure a reasonable
effective physical barrier between residential properties and adjoining uses to
minimize adverse conditions of sight and sound. The screen planting plan shall
be prepared by a landscape architect and shall meet the approval of the Plan
Council.
(1981 Code, § 22.305) (Ord. 88-15, passed 11-7-1988; Am. Ord. 04-34, passed 9-
20-2004; Am. Ord. 14-28, passed 9-15-2014)
§ 155.050 STREET LIGHTING.
   Street lighting, including underground service cable, shall be provided by
the subdivider throughout the subdivision, using materials, equipment and
methods approved by the Village Engineer.
(1981 Code, § 22.306) (Ord. 88-15, passed 11-7-1988)
§ 155.051 STREET SIGNS.
   Street signs shall be provided at all street intersections.
(1981 Code, § 22.307) (Ord. 88-15, passed 11-7-1988)
§ 155.052 STORM SEWER SYSTEM.
   (A)   An adequate storm drainage system shall be designed in accordance with
Chapter 154 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   There shall be submitted for approval by the Village Engineer,
at the time of final plat approval, a lot grading and foundation elevation
plan. It shall show at each lot corner the proposed U.S.G.S. elevation for that
point. Arrows drawn along all lot lines shall show the direction of drainage
flow. The top of the foundation shall be shown by a U.S.G.S. elevation. That
elevation shall be noted inside the symbol for the structure location on the
lot.
      (2)   Where there is more than one foundation level for the structure,
the elevation for the lowest foundation level shall be shown. The foundation
elevation shall be such that the lot drainage be designed to run away from the
top of the foundation. In the event that conditions dictate that some parts of
the lot be higher than the structure foundation, the grading plan will show
specific drainage configurations for the lot specifying that all drainage is
directed away from the foundation.
(1981 Code, § 22.308) (Ord. 88-15, passed 11-7-1988)
§ 155.053 PATHWAYS.
   The Plan Council may require the provision of a pathway system at
appropriate locations upon consideration of the safety of pedestrian and
bicycle access to public areas.
(1981 Code, § 22.309) (Ord. 88-15, passed 11-7-1988; Am. Ord. 14-28, passed 9-
15-2014)
§ 155.054 SANITARY SEWERS.
   Standards and specifications are on file with the Village Engineer.
(1981 Code, § 22.310) (Ord. 88-15, passed 11-7-1988)
§ 155.055 WATER SYSTEM DESIGN CRITERIA.
   (A)   Criteria.
      (1)   The criteria in this section are for extending the water system in
a uniform, adequate and reliable manner.
      (2)   Standards and specifications for materials and construction methods
to be used for water distribution installations are on file with the village.
   (B)   Overall plan. The village’s long range water distribution system plan
shall be followed.
   (C)   Computations.
      (1)   All water supply demands on the village system shall be indicated.
      (2)   Calculations of pressure drops within the proposed distribution
system during average hourly, peak hourly and fire flow demands shall be
provided to substantiate the selection of water main sizing.
   (D)   Design approval. The Village Engineer shall approve all designs and
shall alter the following design requirements as necessary to meet the
village’s water system plan.
   (E)   Water main coefficient of roughness. The design basis for water system
designs in the village shall be from the Hazen and Williams method for
computation. A coefficient of roughness (C) shall equal 120 for new
installations.
   (F)   Fire protection supplies. In order to design proper water supply for
fire protection purposes and for domestic consumption, the following are
considered by the village as methods for arriving at flows necessary.
      (1)   Public fire flow requirements (Fire Department pumper supply) and
domestic consumption demands are cumulative.
      (2)   Fire flow requirements used will be approved by the village.
However, the following guidelines are suggested.
         (a)   Manufacturing and storage: 3,000 to 5,000 gpm;
         (b)   Institutional: 3,000 to 4,000 gpm;
         (c)   Commercial and mercantile buildings: 3,000 to 4,500 gpm;
         (d)   Business and office uses: 2,500 to 3,500 gpm;
         (e)   Single-family detached residential homes: 1,000 to 1,500 gpm;
         (f)   Town or row house construction: 1,500 to 2,000 gpm; and
         (g)   Apartment buildings: 3,000 to 4,000 gpm.
      (3)   The minimum residual pressure in the proposed system shall be 20
psi during a fire flow event. The Village Engineer will furnish the expected
static pressure at the point of connection(s).
   (G)   Minimum size of water mains. Minimum size of water mains shall be as
follows:
      (1)   Detached single-family residential area: six inch diameter with
interconnecting loops of eight inches in diameter or larger.
      (2)   Other than detached single-family residential developments,
including town/row houses and apartment buildings: minimum eight inches in
diameter water mains with interconnecting mains of eight inches or larger
diameter.
      (3)   Other uses, excepting for small isolated developments: minimum size
water mains shall be ten inches in diameter.
   (H)   Valves. Valves shall be located so as to effectively isolate system
with minimum disruption. The following guides shall be considered.
      (1)   Valves shall be installed so that not over 500 to 700 feet of main
will be shut off at any given time.
      (2)   Where a “tee” is installed, at least two valves will be utilized.
Their location will be based upon location of other valves in the system.
      (3)   Where a “cross” is installed, at lease three valves will be
utilized. The valves shall be located with relation to other valves in the
system.
   (I)   Gridiron or looping. Gridiron or looping shall be as follows:
      (1)   Each six-inch diameter water main shall be looped at a distance not
to exceed 600 feet.
      (2)   Eight-inch diameter water mains shall be looped at distances not to
exceed 1,000 feet.
      (3)   Ten-inch and larger water mains shall be looped at distances not to
exceed 2,000 feet by ten-inch or larger mains.
      (4)   No dead ended water mains are allowed.
   (J)   Fire hydrant location. Fire hydrant installation for all areas,
including buildings set back from public water supplies, shall be as follows:
      (1)   Fire hydrants shall be installed along public streets or easements
so that no portion of a building will be over 300 feet from a public fire
hydrant. In general, linear hydrant spacing will not exceed 350 feet in single-
family areas, nor 300 feet elsewhere.
      (2)   Hydrant location will be so that:
         (a)   No portion of the building will be over 300 feet from a fire
hydrant;
         (b)   In addition to other requirements, the fire flow divided by 750
equals the number of hydrants necessary within 500 feet of a building; and
         (c)   A flow of 1,000 gpm from each fire hydrant will be provided.
      (3)   Hydrants shall be located so that:
         (a)   Hydrants shall be located approximately ten feet from an all-
weather roadway;
         (b)   Hydrants shall be located approximately 50 feet from the
buildings, if practical; and
         (c)   Access to hydrants shall be by all-weather routes adequate in
width, clearance and strength for all units. The routes shall be maintained
during all seasons of the year.
(1981 Code, § 22.311) (Ord. 88-15, passed 11-7-1988)
§ 155.056 DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITY ADJACENT TO WATER.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      DEVELOPMENT. The carrying out of any building, agricultural or mining
operation, or the making of any change in the use or appearance of land, and
the dividing of land into two or more parcels. The following activities or uses
shall be taken for the purposes of this section to involve DEVELOPMENT, as
defined herein:
         (a)   Any construction, reconstruction or alteration of a structure to
occupy more or less ground area or the on-site preparation for same;
         (b)   Any change in the intensity of use of land, such as an increase
in the number of dwelling units on land, or a material increase in the site
coverage of businesses, manufacturing establishments, offices and dwelling
units, including mobile homes, campers and recreational vehicles on land;
         (c)   The commencement of drilling, except to obtain soil samples or
the commencement of mining, filling, excavation, dredging, grading or other
alterations of the topography;
         (d)   Demolition of a structure or redevelopment of a site;
         (e)   Clearing of land as an adjunct of construction for agricultural,
private residential, commercial or industrial use;
         (f)   Deposit or refuse, solid or liquid waste or fill on a parcel of
land or the storage of materials;
         (g)   Construction, excavation or fill operations relating to the
creation or modification of any road, street, parking facility or any drainage
canal or to the installation of utilities or any other grading activity that
alters the existing topography;
         (h)   Construction or erection of dams, levees, walls, fences, bridges
or culverts; and
         (i)   Any other activity that might change the direction, height or
velocity of flood or surface waters.
      ORDINARY HIGH WATER MARK or OHWM. The point on the bank or shore up to
which the presence and action of surface water is so continuous so as to leave
a distinctive mark such as by erosion, destruction or prevention of terrestrial
vegetation, predominance of aquatic vegetation or other easily recognized
characteristics.
      SETBACK. The horizontal distance between any portion of a structure or
any development activity and the ordinary high water mark of a perennial or
intermittent stream, the ordinary high water mark of a lake or pond or the edge
of a wetland, measured from the structures or development’s closest point to
the ordinary high water mark or edge.
      STREAM. A body of running water flowing continuously or intermittently in
a channel on or below the surface of the ground. Minute topographic maps of the
U.S. Geological survey are one reference for identifying perennial and
intermittent streams. For purposes of this section, the term STREAM does not
include storm sewers.
   (B)   (1)   No development activity, except as provided below, may occur
within the minimum setback which is defined as 75 feet from the ordinary high
water mark of streams, lakes and ponds, the edge of wetlands or within a
designated depressional area. In no case shall the setback be less than the
boundary of the 100-year floodway, as defined by FEMA. These setback
requirements do not apply to a stream in a culvert unless the stream is taken
out of the culvert as part of development activity. If a culvert functions as a
low-flow culvert where water is intended to periodically flow over it, the
setback requirements apply.
      (2)   Development activities may be permitted subject to the
establishment of easements, covenants or restrictions running with the land as
may be determined to be appropriate by the Village Board within the minimum
setback areas if, as a practical matter, they cannot be located outside the
setback area or it is found that the development activity is in the public
interest. The development activities will only be approved based upon the
evidence as the Village Engineer may specify which may, but need not
necessarily include a report, prepared by a qualified professional, which
demonstrates that they will not adversely affect water quality, destroy, damage
or disrupt significant habitat area; adversely affect drainage and/or
stormwater retention capabilities; adversely affect flood conveyance and
storage; lead to unstable earth conditions, create erosion hazards or be
materially detrimental to any other property in the area of the subject
property or to the village as a whole, including the loss of open space or
scenic vistas.
      (3)   An applicant for the development approval must stabilize areas left
exposed after land surface modification with vegetation normally associated
with that stream or wetland. The planting of native riparian vegetation is
recommended as the preferred stabilization measure. Other techniques should be
used only when and where vegetation fails to control erosion. The preferred
alternative is riprap, using natural rock materials where practicable,
installed on eroding bank areas in a manner that provides interstitial space
for vegetative growth and habitat for macro invertebrates and other stream
organisms. Lining of the stream channel bottom is not permitted.
   (C)   A site development plan must be prepared for any proposed development
within, or partly within, the minimum 75-foot setback and should indicate, if
applicable:
      (1)   Dimension and area of parcel showing also the vicinity of the site
in sufficient detail to enable easy location in the field of the site for which
development permission is sought, and including the boundary line, underlying
zoning, a legend, a scale and a north arrow; (This requirement may be satisfied
by the submission of a separate vicinity map.)
      (2)   Location of any existing and proposed structures;
      (3)   Location of existing or proposed on-site sewage systems or private
water supply systems;
      (4)   Location of any perennial or intermittent stream, lake or pond and
its ordinary high water mark;
      (5)   Location and landward limit of all wetlands;
      (6)   Location of setback lines, as defined in this section;
      (7)   Location of the 100-year floodway;
      (8)   Location of existing or future access roads;
      (9)   Specifications and dimensions of stream, wetland or other water
areas proposed for alterations;
      (10)   Cross-sections and calculations indicating any changes in flood
storage volumes; and
      (11)   Other information as reasonably requested by the village.
(Ord. 95-03, passed 2-6-1995)
DEDICATION OF LANDS
§ 155.070 CRITERIA FOR REQUIRING SCHOOL SITE DEDICATION.
   (A)   (1)   The ultimate number of students to be generated by a subdivision
or planned unit development shall bear directly upon the amount of land
required to be dedicated for school sites.
      (2)   The land dedication requirement shall be determined by obtaining
the ratio of: (1) estimated children to be served in each classification over
the (2) maximum recommended number of students to be served in each school
classification as stated herein, and then applying the ratio to the (3) minimum
recommended number of acres for a school site of each school classification as
stated herein.
      (3)   The product thereof shall be the acres of land deemed needed to
have sufficient land for school sites to serve the estimated increased children
in each school classification.
   (B)   School classifications and size of school sites within the village
shall be determined in accordance with the following criteria:
 
School Classification by Maximum Number of Students Minimum Number of Acres of
Grades                   for Each School            Land for Each School
                         Classification             Classification
Elementary Schools
Grades: Kindergarten     670                        15
through Fifth (K - 5)
Junior High Schools
Grades: Sixth through    850                        25
Eighth (6 - 8)
High Schools
Grades: Ninth through    1,500                      70
Twelfth (9 - 12)
 
   (C)   The official plan of the village and the standards of the affected
school district shall be used as guidelines in locating sites.
(1981 Code, § 22.401) (Ord. 88-15, passed 11-7-1988; Am. Ord. 04-33, passed 9-
20-2004)
§ 155.071 CRITERIA FOR REQUIRING PARK AND RECREATION LAND DEDICATION.
   (A)   The ultimate density of a proposed development shall bear directly
upon the amount of land required for dedication. The total requirement shall be
six acres of land per 1,000 of the ultimate population in accordance with the
following standards by types of recreation and park areas:
 
Types of Recreation Areas Size Range                Minimum Acres per 1,000
                                                    Population
Play lot                  Minimum 8,000 square feet NA
Neighborhood park         Minimum 3.5 acres         1.0
School park or            Minimum six acres         1.5
neighborhood playground
Community wide recreation Minimum 12 acres          1.5
park
District-township wide    Minimum 15 acres          2.0
park
TOTAL                                               6.0 acres of land per 1,000
                                                    people
 
   (B)   The official plan of the village and any plans and standards adopted
by the affected park district shall be used as guidelines for locating sites. A
park site adjoining all elementary school sites of not less than five acres
shall be considered a requirement. A central location which will serve equally
the entire development is most desirable. In large developments, these sites
can be located throughout the development according to established standards
for park distances.
   (C)   (1)   When subdividers or developers provide their own open space for
recreation areas and facilities, it has the effect of reducing the demand for
local public recreational services. Depending on the size of the development, a
portion of the park and recreation area in subdivisions or planned unit
developments may, at the option of the Village Board, be provided in the form
of private open space in lieu of dedicated “public” open space. The extent of
same shall be determined by the Village Board, based upon the needs of the
projected residents and in conformance to the total park and recreation land
for the general area.
      (2)   In general, a substitution of private open space for dedicated
parks will imply a substantially higher degree of improvement and the
installation of recreational facilities, including equipment by the developer
as part of his or her obligation. Detailed plans of the areas, including
specifications of facilities to be installed, must be approved by the village,
and before any credit is given for private recreation areas, the subdivider or
developer must guarantee that these private recreation areas will be
permanently maintained for the use by the execution of the appropriate legal
documents. Private II “swimming clubs” are included in this provision. When an
adjustment for private recreation areas is warranted, it will be necessary to
compute the total park land dedication that would have been required from the
subdivision or planned unit development and then subtract the credit to be
given.
(1981 Code, § 22.402) (Ord. 88-15, passed 11-7-1988)
§ 155.072 CRITERIA FOR REQUIRING A CONTRIBUTION IN LIEU OF PARK AND SCHOOL
SITES.
   (A)   Where a development is small and the resulting site is too small to be
practical or when the available land is inappropriate for park and recreational
purposes or school site, the village shall require the subdivider or developer
to pay a cash contribution in lieu of land dedication required.
   (B)   The cash contributions in lieu of park and recreation land dedication
or school site dedication shall be held by the village and forwarded semi-
annually (January 1 and July 1) to the school district or the park district, as
appropriate, to be used in the acquisition or development of land for a park
site or a school site or for the improvement to any existing park site or
school site.
      (1)   Fair market value. The cash contribution in lieu of land shall be
based on the fair market value of the acres of land in the area improved, as
specified herein, that otherwise would have been dedicated as park and
recreation and school sites. It has been determined that the present fair
market value of the improved land in and surrounding the village is $110,000
per acre and the figure shall be used in making any calculation herein unless
the subdivider or developer files a written objection thereto. In the event of
any such objection, the developer shall submit an appraisal showing the fair
market value of the improved land in the area of his or her development or
other evidence thereof and final determination of the fair market value per
acre of improved land shall be made by the Village Board based upon the
information submitted by the subdivider or developer and from other sources
which may be submitted to the Village Board by the park district, school
district or others.
      (2)   Criteria for requiring the dedication and a fee. There will be
situations in subdivisions or planned unit developments when a combination of
land dedication and a contribution in lieu of land are both necessary. These
occasions will arise when:
         (a)   Only a portion of land to be developed is proposed as the
location for a park or school site; and (The portion of land within the
subdivision falling within the park or school location shall be dedicated as a
site as aforesaid and a cash contribution in-lieu-thereof shall be required for
any additional land that would have to be dedicated.)
         (b)   A major part of the local park or recreation site or school site
has already been acquired and only a small portion of land is needed from the
development to complete the site. The remaining portions shall be required by
dedication and a cash contribution in lieu thereof shall be required.
   (C)   Contribution fees paid pursuant to this chapter shall be restricted to
use solely and exclusively for paying the cost of public facilities and capital
improvements, or for other improvements at the discretion of the Village Board,
within the village, whether payment is made directly therefore, or as a pledge
against bonds, revenue certificates, or other obligations of indebtedness.
(1981 Code, § 22.403) (Ord. 88-15, passed 11-7-1988; Am. Ord. 93-10, passed 10-
4-1993; Am. Ord. 96-09, passed 3-18-1996; Am. Ord. 99-11, passed 4-19-1999; Am.
Ord. 04-32, passed 9-20-2004; Am. Ord. 07-09, passed 3-19-2007)
§ 155.073 DWELLING UNIT POPULATION FORMULA.
   (A)   The Table of Estimated Ultimate Population Per Dwelling Unit, prepared
by the Illinois School Consulting Services, Associated Municipal Consultants,
Inc., and dated 1996 and numbered 96-4.1A is generally indicative of current
and short range projected trends in family size for new construction and shall
be used in calculating the required land or cash contribution.
   (B)   (1)   In the event a subdivider or developer files a written objection
to the Table of Estimated Ultimate Population listed herein, he or she shall
submit his or her own demographic study showing the estimated additional
population to be generated from the subdivision or planned unit development
and, in that event, final determination of density formula to be used in the
calculations shall be made by the Village Board based upon the demographic
information submitted by the subdivider or developer and from other sources
which may be submitted to the Village Board by the school district or others.
      (2)   It is recognized that the years, and the specific formula for the
dedication of land, or the payment of fees in lieu thereof, as stated herein,
is subject to periodic review and amendment if necessary.
(1981 Code, § 22.404) (Ord. 88-15, passed 11-7-1988; Am. Ord. 93-10, passed 10-
4-1993; Am. Ord. 99-11, passed 4-19-1999)
§ 155.074 RESERVATION OF ADDITIONAL LAND.
   (A)   Where the comprehensive plan or the standards of the village call for
a larger amount of park and recreational land or school sites in a particular
subdivision or planned unit development than the developer is required to
dedicate, the land needed beyond the developer’s contribution shall be reserved
for subsequent purchase by the village or other public body designated by the
village.
   (B)   The acquisition is made within one year from the date of approval of
the final plat, or if an agreement between the developer and the village is
recorded outlining specific conditions for the conveyance of the property.
(1981 Code, § 22.405) (Ord. 88-15, passed 11-7-1988)
§ 155.075 COMBINING WITH ADJOINING LAND.
   Where the subdivision or planned unit development is less than 40 acres,
public open space or a school site which is to be dedicated should, where
possible, be combined with dedications from adjoining developments in order to
produce useable recreation areas or school sites without hardship on a
particular developer.
(1981 Code, § 22.406) (Ord. 88-15, passed 11-7-1988)
§ 155.076 TOPOGRAPHY AND GRADING.
   The slope, topography and geology of the dedicated site as well as its
surrounding site must be suitable for its intended purposes. Grading on sites
dedicated for park and recreational uses shall not differ greatly from
surrounding land unless approved by the Village Board.
(1981 Code, § 22.407) (Ord. 88-15, passed 11-7-1988; Am. Ord. 14-28, passed 9-
15-2014)
§ 155.077 IMPROVED SITES.
   All sites shall be dedicated in a condition ready for full service of
electrical, water, sewer and streets, including enclosed drainage and curb and
gutter, as applicable to the location of the site, or acceptable provision made
therefor. The sidewalks and trees normally included within the definition of
“improved” sites may be deleted due to the delay time between dedication of any
such school site and construction of school facilities thereon.
(1981 Code, § 22.408) (Ord. 88-15, passed 11-7-1988)
§ 155.078 TITLES OF SITES.
   (A)   All sites shall be conveyed to the village, or other public body
designated by the village, either by warranty or trustee’s deed.
   (B)   The subdivider or developer shall be responsible for conveying good,
merchantable title to the sites and shall be responsible for payment of all
real estate taxes to the date of conveyance, including any agricultural roll
back taxes which might be extended or levied against the sites, for any tax
years or periods prior to the time of conveyance.
(1981 Code, § 22.409) (Ord. 88-15, passed 11-7-1988)
§ 155.079 DEDICATION OR CONTRIBUTION AS CONDITION OF ANNEXATION.
   The dedications of land or cash contributions, as required by this section,
shall also be required as a condition to the annexation of any land to the
village and provisions therefore shall be incorporated in any pre-annexation
agreement governing the land.
(1981 Code, § 22.410) (Ord. 88-15, passed 11-7-1988)
REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
§ 155.095 ASSURANCE FOR COMPLETION OF REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   (1)   No work shall be started on any improvement until the applicant
has posted a guarantee in the amount equal to 110% of the estimated costs of
the subdivision improvements, as approved by the Village Engineer, in order to
insure that the work is performed according to the plans and specifications and
according to good engineering and installation practices. The performance
guarantee shall also be sufficient to secure all lot improvements on the
individual lots of the subdivision, as required in these regulations, and shall
be conditional upon the installation of the required improvements within two
years from the date that the final plat is approved by the Board of Trustees.
The performance guarantee shall comply with all statutory requirements and
shall be satisfactory to the Village Attorney as to form and manner of
execution and shall be approved by the Village Board as to the amount and
surety and conditions satisfactory to the Village Board.
      (2)   The performance guarantee shall be secured by an instrument of a
type permitted in § 3 of the Illinois Public Construction Bond Act, ILCS
Chapter 30, Act 550, § 3, as amended from time to time.
   (B)   A performance guarantee shall be reduced only upon recommendation of
the Village Engineer and approval by the Village Board upon application for
payout by the subdivider in amounts such that funds or credit remaining will
always equal 110% of the value of the uncompleted work, as determined by the
Village Engineer; and such that not more than 90% of the guarantee amount is
released prior to the acceptance of the improvements by the village in
accordance herewith.
   (C)   The village shall not release the performance guarantees until there
has been filed a maintenance guarantee in accordance herewith and not until
there has been an acceptance of the improvements by the village according to
the provisions hereof.
   (D)   The village shall refund and/or release the performance guarantee as
set forth in § 3 of the Illinois Public Construction Bond Act, ILCS Chapter 30,
Act 550, § 3, as amended from time to time.
(1981 Code, § 22.501) (Ord. 88-15, passed 11-7-1988; Am. Ord. 94-31, passed 11-
7-1994; Am. Ord. 18-17, passed 7-9-2018)
§ 155.096 INSTALLATIONS.
   (A)   (1)   The developer of a proposed subdivision shall install or cause
to be provided the following facilities in accordance with the standards set
forth herein and other engineering specifications on file with the Village
Engineer:
         (a)   All roadways, private drives, alleys, gutters and street
drainage facilities;
         (b)   All sidewalks located within public areas;
         (c)   A water-line connection for each lot of the proposed
subdivision; (The water supply lines shall be connected to the village water
system at least at the two most advantageous locations as determined by the
Village Engineer, taking into account the size of the village water main at the
locations and the expected demands of the proposed subdivision. Dead end water
mains shall be prohibited. Additional standards and specifications are on file
with the Village Engineer.)
         (d)   Fire hydrants of the type and quality specified in standards on
file with the Village Engineer;
         (e)   A sanitary sewer line connection for each lot; (The sanitary
sewer line shall be connected to the sanitary sewer system of the village at
the point or points as the Village Engineer shall determine based upon the
location and size of the village sanitary sewer system in relation to the
estimated flow of the sanitary sewers of the proposed subdivision. Additional
standards and specifications are on file with the Village Engineer.)
         (f)   A stormwater runoff system, separate and independent of the
sanitary sewer system; (The stormwater runoff system shall be connected to an
existing storm sewer system of the village where available. If the connection
is unavailable, other adequate means for the discharge of the stormwater shall
be provided by the developer according to the specifications on file with the
Village Engineer.)
         (g)   A street lighting system;
         (h)   Landscaping of all public areas, including the grading and
seeding thereof and the planting of trees, meeting the applicable provisions
hereof;
         (i)   Street signs of a location, type and size as approved by the
Village Board, giving due regard for the prevailing type, size, pattern and
location utilized throughout the village; and
         (j)   All original utility distribution lines for telephones, cable
television and electric service to be installed shall be placed underground
within easements or dedicated public ways. The installation of the facilities
shall be made in compliance with applicable orders, rules and regulations of
the Illinois Commerce Commission and according to applicable village franchise
agreements now or hereafter effective. The owner or subdivider of any property
to be served from underground installations shall be responsible for compliance
with such rules, regulations and agreements, now and hereafter effective and
filed with the Commission pursuant to the Illinois Public Utilities Act, or any
public utility whose services will be required with respect to the provision of
the underground facilities.
      (2)   The requirements contained herein and in the referenced ordinances
and standards are considered minimum requirements. The Village Engineer, in the
review of the plans and specifications and the inspection of the installation
of the improvements, may require additional work if, in his or her opinion, it
is necessary to meet good engineering practice. He or she may also incorporate
in his or her review of the plans and specifications, by reference, certain
standards or require the installations of the improvements to conform to the
standards.
   (B)   Where the proposed subdivision is a re-subdivision or concerns an area
presently having any or all required improvements set forth herein, where the
improvements meet the regulations as set forth in this chapter and other
applicable village ordinances, no further provision need be made by the
developer to duplicate the improvements. However, where the existing
improvements do not meet the regulations of all applicable village ordinances,
the developer shall repair, correct or replace the improvements in order to
meet the aforesaid regulations and requirements.
   (C)   All required improvements shall be made by the applicant, at his or
her expense, without reimbursement by the village or any improvements district
therein.
   (D)   The applicant shall build, pay for all costs and maintain all
temporary improvements deemed necessary by the village. Prior to construction
of any temporary facility or improvement, the developer shall file with the
village a separate suitable bond for temporary facilities, which bond shall
insure that the temporary facilities will be properly constructed, maintained
and removed.
   (E)   (1)   The subdivider, his or her contractors and suppliers shall be
jointly and severally responsible that existing improvements and the property
of the village are not damaged or rendered less useful or unsightly by the
operations of the subdivider, his or her contractors or suppliers. This
provision is intended to include damage or nuisance with respect to the land,
improvements or landscaping of the village, damage to existing streets,
sidewalks, curbs and gutters, parkways by passage there over of equipment or
tracking of earth, sand or rock into existing streets, sidewalks, curbs and
gutters or pathways, the washing by stormwater of earth or sand onto streets,
sidewalks, curbs and gutters or onto intakes, damage of water mains, sanitary
sewers, culverts or storm sewers. To reduce or localize the possibility of
damage to streets by heavy trucking, the Village Engineer shall instruct the
subdivider as to the streets to be used for access to the subdivision by
equipment and trucks and the subdivider shall be responsible for enforcement of
this instruction upon his or her contractors and their suppliers. The
subdivider shall make provisions to prevent washing of earth or sand onto
sidewalks, streets, curbs and gutters and onto catch-basins by stormwater.
      (2)   Upon the recommendation of the Village Engineer, the Village Board
may require, either prior to commencement of construction or after construction
is in process, that the subdivider post a surety to guarantee repair of damages
or abatement of nuisances. Where need for surety becomes apparent after
construction is in progress, the Village Engineer shall have the power to order
construction discontinued until surety has been posted. Expenses incurred by
the village in repairing damages, cleaning streets, intakes and sewers shall be
deducted from the surety and, if the surety is inadequate, will be paid to the
village by the subdivider.
   (F)   (1)   The following general procedures shall apply to any earth
excavation related to the general development of the subdivision and
development of each lot:
         (a)   Temporary vegetation or, where appropriate, mulching or other
non-viable cover shall be used to protect areas exposed during development;
         (b)   Sediment basins, debris basins, desilting basins or silt traps
shall be installed and maintained to remove sediment from runoff waters from
land undergoing development;
         (c)   Provisions shall be made to effectively accommodate the
increased runoff caused by changed soil and surface conditions during and after
development;
         (d)   Permanent, final plant covering or structures shall be installed
as soon as possible; and
         (e)   The plan of development shall relate to the topography and soils
of the site so that the lowest potential for erosion is created and natural
plant covering is retained.
      (2)   The most current edition of the “Standards and Specifications for
Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in Northeastern Illinois,” as prepared by the
area’s Soil and Water Conservation Districts (August 1973), are hereby
incorporated in this subchapter and made a part hereof by this reference for
the purpose of delineating procedures and methods for controlling excessive
erosion.
(1981 Code, § 22.502) (Ord. 88-15, passed 11-7-1988; Am. Ord. 14-28, passed 9-
15-2014)
§ 155.097 INSPECTION.
   (A)   The subdivider shall provide an engineer, registered in the state, who
shall be responsible for the full-time inspection of the installation of the
required improvements. The engineer shall certify, in compliance herewith, that
the required improvements have been installed according to the approved plans
and specifications and good engineering practice.
   (B)   (1)   All improvements required by the provisions of this subchapter
shall be inspected by the Village Engineer at various times during the course
of construction and at completion. At the time that the subdivider submits the
application for final plat approval in accordance herewith, he or she shall pay
to the village an inspection fee of 2% of the amount of the completion
guarantee or the estimated cost of required improvements.
      (2)   The fee shall be used to defray the cost of inspection by the
village. In the event that actual inspection costs exceed 2%, the costs shall
be charged to and paid by the subdivider. The fees shall also include all
travel and other expenses normally charged to the village.
(1981 Code, § 22.503) (Ord. 88-15, passed 11-7-1988)
§ 155.098 ASSURANCE FOR MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   The applicant shall be required to maintain all improvements and
provide for snow removal on streets and sidewalks until acceptance of the
improvements by the Village Board.
   (B)   Not less than 24 hours prior to any maintenance of any improvement by
the subdivider during the period of the completion guarantee, the subdivider
shall notify the Village Engineer and obtain his or her approval as to the
nature and manner of the maintenance work to be done.
   (C)   (1)   At the time of the acceptance of the required improvements by
the Village Board in accordance herewith, the subdivider shall file a
maintenance guarantee with the Village Board in the amount of 15% of the
estimated cost of the required improvements and in a form satisfactory to the
Village Attorney. The guarantee may be held by the village for a period of 15
months after acceptance of the improvements for the purpose of:
         (a)   Guaranteeing and securing the correction of any defect in
material or workmanship furnished for the surface improvements, latent in
character and not discernable at the time of final inspection or acceptance by
the village; and
         (b)   Guaranteeing against any damage to such improvements by reason
of the settling of ground, base or foundation thereof.
      (2)   The maintenance guarantee shall also provide that, if the defects
have so developed, then the guarantee may be applied by the village on matters
to assure the correction of the defects.
(1981 Code, § 22.504) (Ord. 88-15, passed 11-7-1988)
§ 155.099 ACCEPTANCE.
   (A)   (1)   Following the completion of all required improvements and prior
to their dedication, the subdivider shall prepare a set of as-built plans. The
as-built plans shall be prepared with waterproof, non-fading ink on a tracing
cloth or Sepia reproducible print(s). The as-built plans shall be a map showing
the actual location of all improvements required to be installed, shall clearly
designate any and all changes from the approved plans and specifications and
shall bear the signature and seal of the Illinois Registered Professional
Engineer who prepared it. The subdivider shall submit the reproducible print
for future use by the village and shall submit two complete copies of the as-
built plans for inspection by the Village Engineer.
      (2)   The Village Engineer, the design engineer and the contractor shall
make a final inspection of the completed work. The Village Engineer shall then
prepare a list of all items not meeting the requirements of the approved plans
and specifications.
   (B)   (1)   Following the completion of all required improvements and upon
the final inspection by the Village Engineer, the subdivider shall submit the
following material:
         (a)   The certificate of approval and acceptance of the required
improvements, signed by the design engineer and the owner/developer;
         (b)   Title insurance policy, indicating that the improvements have
been completed, are ready for dedication to the village and are free and clear
of any and all liens and encumbrances; and
         (c)   Maintenance guarantee, in accordance with the provisions hereof.
The completion and performance guarantees may be released only upon the
satisfactory completion of the required improvements and upon the filing of a
maintenance guarantee.
      (2)   Upon the satisfactory review of the submittals by the Village
Engineer, he or she shall sign the Village Engineer’s certification and shall
transmit all submittals to the Village Attorney for his or her review.
   (C)   The acceptance of the required improvements shall be made only by the
adoption of a resolution by the Village Board after all the provisions hereof
have been met.
(1981 Code, § 22.505) (Ord. 88-15, passed 11-7-1988; Am. Ord. 14-28, passed 9-
15-2014)
CHAPTER 156: SIGNS
Section
   
156.01   Intent
   
156.02   Definitions
   
156.03   General regulations
   
156.04   Signs regulated by zoning district
   
156.05   Permit application and fees
   
156.06   Interpretation
   
156.07   Off-premises signs
   
156.08   Village electronic sign rental
 
   
156.99   Penalty
§ 156.01 INTENT.
   (A)   It is the intent of this chapter to prohibit all off-site advertising
of any kind whatsoever, except as expressly allowed by this chapter, where the
off-site advertising is specifically permitted under the terms of the Highway
Advertising Control Act of 1971, as amended from time to time.
   (B)   The regulations set forth in this chapter shall apply to and govern
signs in all zoning districts in the village. No sign shall be erected,
repaired, altered, relocated or maintained, except in conformance with the
regulations for the district in which it is located, unless the sign is
otherwise specifically regulated by special use provisions or provisions
relating to variances.
(1981 Code, § 29.01) (Ord. 90-20, passed 10-15-1990)
§ 156.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDONED SIGN. A sign which no longer directs attention to or advertises
any person, business, lessor, owner, product, idea, place, activity,
institution or service which is conducted or available.
   ADVERTISING MESSAGE. The copy on a sign describing products or services
being offered or available to the public.
   AREA OF SIGN. The gross surface area within a single continuous perimeter
composed of a single rectangle enclosing the extreme limits characters,
lettering, illustrations or ornamentations or other figures, together with any
material, or color forming an integral part of the display or to differentiate
the sign from the background to which it is placed. Structural supports bearing
no sign copy shall not be included in gross surface area; however, if any
portion of the required structural supports become enclosed for decorative or
architectural purposes, that portion will be included in the total gross
surface area of the sign. For computing the area of any sign which consists of
individual letters or separate graphic elements, the AREA shall be deemed to be
the area of the smallest rectangular figure which can encompass all of the
letters or elements, including both sides if applicable.
   BILLBOARD. A non-point-of-sale sign which advertises business service,
organization, event, person, place, thing unless the sign is more specifically
defined herein. A flat surface, as of a panel, wall or fence on which bills or
signs are posted or painted.
   BUILDING FACE OR WALL. All window and wall area of a building in one plane
or elevation.
   BUILDING FRONTAGE. The linear length of a building facing the right-of-way.
   BUILDING OFFICIAL. The Building Inspector or any deputy thereof for the
village.
   BUSINESS FRONTAGE. The frontage of a lot on public right-of-way or
privately-owned circulation road which functions mainly as a collector and
distributor of commercial traffic.
   COMMUNITY SIGN. A sign located on public property and owned and maintained
by a unit of government for the benefit of the village, its residents,
businesses, institutions and the general public.
   DIRECTIONAL/INSTRUCTIONAL SIGN. A sign of non-commercial nature which
directs the reader to public parks, buildings, historical structures or areas,
schools and other public institutions; or provides information concerning
traffic circulation or parking.
   DISTRICTS. As contained in this chapter, references to residential, business
and manufacturing districts shall be synonymous with those contained in
Chapter 157 of this code of ordinances, as now or hereafter amended.
   FACADE AREA. Total area of a building including the building face and roof
as measured on a vertical plane established at the exterior wall of the
building facing the right-of-way.
   FLAG. An article of cloth, paper or similar light weight material, varying
in size, shape and/or design, usually attached at one edge to a staff or cord,
used as a symbol, standard, signal or emblem.
      (1)   COMMON FLAG. A flag other than an official insignia flag, including
pennant banners and those bearing symbol mottos or slogans and the like.
      (2)   INSIGNIA FLAG. A flag bearing the insignia, name, device, rank,
logotype or similar designation of specific activities, political parties,
persons, agencies, private businesses and the like.
      (3)   OFFICIAL FLAG. The flag of any nation, state, county, city or other
recognized government entity.
   FLASHING SIGNS. Specifically noted as a lighted feature of a sign or light
which has an intermittent connection from a power source to simulate motion or
movement or distraction to the eye.
   FRONTAGE. The length of the property line of any one parcel parallel to and
along each right-of- way it borders.
   HEIGHT OF SIGN. The vertical distance measured from the adjacent street
grade or upper surface of the nearest street curb other than an elevated
roadway, which vertical distance shall permit the greatest height to the
highest point of the sign.
   LETTERS AND DECORATIONS. The part of a sign pertaining to the letters,
illustrations, symbols, figures, insignia and other devices employed to express
and illustrate the message of the sign.
   LOCATION. A lot, premise, building, wall or any place whatsoever upon which
a sign is erected, constructed or maintained.
   LOT. An area of land of sufficient size to meet zoning requirements for a
permitted or special use. The lot shall have frontage on an improved public
street or on an approved private street and may consist of:
      (1)   A single lot of record;
      (2)   A portion of a lot of record; or
      (3)   A combination of complete lots of record; of complete lots of
record and portions of lots of record; or of portions of lots of record.
   LOT, CORNER. A lot whose frontage is adjacent to two or more streets.
   NON-CONFORMING SIGN (LEGAL). A non-conforming sign shall be any sign which:
      (1)   A sign which was lawfully erected and maintained prior to such time
as it came within the purview of this chapter and any amendments hereto, and
which fails to conform to all applicable regulations and restrictions contained
in this chapter; or
      (2)   A non-conforming sign for which a permit has been issued.
   OCCUPANT. Any person who:
      (1)   Owns, rents or leases; and
      (2)   Occupies a property or building for the purpose of:
         (a)   Residing in; and/or
         (b)   Carrying on a business, trade or profession thereon or therein.
   OFF-PREMISES SIGN. A sign which directs attention to a use, business,
commodity, service or activity not conducted, sold or offered upon the premises
where the sign is located.
   OWNER. Any person, group of persons, partnership, corporation or other legal
entity holding legal or equitable title to real estate located within the
village, including, but not limited to contract purchasers and all of the
beneficiaries under a land trust.
   PENNANTS. A flag which floats in the wind, commonly shaped in a triangle,
comprised of a soft material which allows freedom of movement.
   PORTABLE SIGN. Any sign on a trailer with or without wheels, but capable of
being moved and not permanently attached to the ground or building.
   PROJECTING SIGN. A sign other than a wall sign, which extends beyond the
line of the building and is supported by or attached to a wall of the building.
The sign shall be allowed only as expressly permitted in this chapter.
   PUBLIC AREA.
      (1)   The right-of-way of any area owned by the state, any county or the
village and which is used for a highway, street, road or sidewalk;
      (2)   The right-of-way of any area dedicated for highway, street or road
purposes; or
      (3)   Any automobile parking area owned by or subject to a lease
agreement with the village.
   REVERSE COPY LETTERS. Illuminated translucent letters against a non-
illuminated opaque background.
   ROOF LINE. The top edge of the roof or the top of the parapet of the
building; whatever forms the top line of the building silhouette.
   ROOF SIGN. A sign erected and maintained upon or over the roof of any
building, with the principal support on the roof structure. A sign which is
attached to a mansard roof and protrudes wholly or partially above the roof
line of the building or structure to which the mansard roof is attached shall
be considered a ROOF SIGN.
   SETBACK. The distance between the property line and the closest edge of a
structure. With respect to the location of signs, the SETBACK shall be measured
as the shortest distance between the frontage property line and a theoretical
vertical plane established at the closest edge of the sign.
   SIGN.
      (1)   Any name, identification, description, advertisement, display or
illustration which is affixed to or painted or represented directly upon a
building, structure or other outdoor surface or piece of land; and which
directs attention to an object, idea, product, philosophy, place, activity,
person, institution, service, organization or business; and which is located,
on a permanent or temporary basis, on the premises at or on which the object,
idea, product, philosophy, place, activity, person, institution, service,
organization or business is located, offered or sold.
      (2)   The term SIGN shall not refer to any display of official court or
public notices, nor shall it include the emblem or insignia of a nation,
political unit, school or religious group. The term SIGN shall not include any
name, identification, description, advertisement, display or illustration
located completely within an enclosed building or structure unless the content
thereof shall be exposed to view from the outside of the building.
      (3)   For purposes of this chapter, a building or portion of a building
which departs from standard architectural treatment in an attempt to attract
attention to the premises by reason of color scheme, or part of a building
facade not required structurally or for maintenance and which is intended to
direct attention to products, goods, services, events or entertainment, shall
be considered a SIGN and be subject to all pertinent regulations.
      (4)   The term SIGN shall include, but not be limited to the following
categories, types and styles of signs.
         (a)   Content.
            1.   BUILDING IDENTIFICATION SIGN. A sign indicating the name or
trademark of a building or its occupants, the name of the building’s management
entity and the telephone number of the establishment or the business directory
listing of the building on which the sign is located. Street numbers, by
themselves, do not constitute an identification sign.
            2.   BUSINESS IDENTIFICATION SIGN. A sign relating to the
commodities, services, entertainment, activities or events which are sold,
offered, conducted on or relating to the occupants of the premises on which the
sign is located.
            3.   COMMUNITY IDENTIFICATION SIGN. A sign incorporating
information referring exclusively to service clubs, churches, not-for-profit
groups, community slogans, directional information to public facilities or
historic markers and/or governmental statistics.
            4.   NAMEPLATE. A non-illuminated sign identifying only the name
and occupation of the occupant, or the name of the premises, on which the sign
is located.
            5.   PUBLIC SERVICE INFORMATION SIGN. A sign intended primarily to
promote items of general interest to the community, including, but not limited
to items such as time, temperature, date, atmospheric conditions, new and/or
traffic control.
            6.   REAL ESTATE SIGN. A sign indicating the sale, lease or rental
of the parcel, structure or establishment on which the sign is located.
         (b)   Illumination and movement.
            1.   ANIMATED SIGN. A sign which includes or incorporates action or
movement.
            2.   CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN/READER BOARD. A sign on which copy is
manually changed in the field.
            3.   ELECTRICAL SIGN. A sign containing electrical wiring which is
attached or intended to be attached to an electrical energy source.
            4.   FULL ELECTRONIC MESSAGE DISPLAY. A sign capable of displaying
words, symbols, figures or images that can be electronically or mechanically
changed by remote or automatic means, including animated graphics and video.
            5.   ILLUMINATED SIGN. A sign in which the source of illumination
is a fundamental or integral part of the sign.
            6.   INDIRECTLY ILLUMINATED SIGN. A sign which reflects light from
a source intentionally directed upon it.
            7.   NON-ILLUMINATED SIGN. A sign which has no direct or indirect
source of light.
            8.   MONUMENT SIGN. A freestanding sign supported primarily by an
integral structural framework having the appearance of a solid base or
integrated into landscaping or other solid structural features other than
support poles or pylons. The width of the top of the sign shall be no more than
120% of the width of the base.
            9.   STATIC ELECTRONIC MESSAGE DISPLAY. A sign capable of
displaying words, symbols, figures or images that can be electronically or
mechanically changed by remote or automatic means. Consistent with the
definitions below, said displays shall change only through dissolve or fade
transitions, or with the use of other subtle transitions and frame effects that
do not have the appearance of moving text or images, but which may otherwise
not have movement, or the appearance or optical illusion of movement, of any
part of the sign structure, design or pictorial segment of the sign, including
movement of any illumination or the flashing, scintillating or varying of light
intensity.
               a.   DISSOLVE. A mode of message transition on an electronic
message display accomplished by varying the light intensity or pattern, where
the first message gradually appears to dissipate and lose legibility
simultaneously with the gradual appearance and legibility of the second
message.
               b.   FADE. A mode of message transition on an electronic message
display accomplished by varying the light intensity, where the first message
gradually reduces intensity to the point of not being legible and the
subsequent message gradually increases intensity to the point of legibility.
               c.   FRAME. A complete, static display screen on an electronic
message display.
               d.   FRAME EFFECT. A visual effect on an electronic message
display to change one message to another.
               e.   TRANSITION. A visual effect used on an electronic message
display to change from one message to another.
         (c)   Materials and placement.
            1.   AWNING. A temporary shelter supported entirely from the
exterior wall of a building and composed of non-rigid materials, except for the
supporting framework. When an awning contains, embodies or displays any
verbiage, trademark, logo or similar representation, these elements shall
constitute a SIGN.
            2.   BANNER SIGN. A temporary sign composed of light weight
materials secured or mounted so as to allow movement of the sign such as is
caused by movement of the atmosphere, comprised generally of cloth, canvass,
light fabric or Visqueen with or without frames.
            3.   BUILDING SIGN. A sign attached to or supported by the exterior
of any part of a building, except its roof, but which does not project over a
street, alley or public way.
            4.   CANOPY. A structure other than an awning made of cloth, metal
or other materials with frames affixed to a building and carried by a frame
which is supported by the ground. When a canopy contains, embodies or displays
any verbiage, trademark, logo or similar representation, those elements
constitute a SIGN.
            5.   FREE STANDING SIGN. A sign which is not attached to any
building or structure, but is permanently secured to the ground.
            6.   PORTABLE SIGN. Any sign on a trailer with or without wheels,
but capable of being moved anal not permanently attached to the ground or
building.
            7.   ROOF SIGN. A sign erected and maintained upon or over the roof
of any building, with the principal support on the roof structure. A sign which
is attached to a mansard roof and protrudes wholly or partially above the roof
line of the building or structure to which the mansard roof is attached shall
be considered a ROOF SIGN.
            8.   WALL SIGN.
               a.   A sign which is placed against a building or other
structure and which is attached to the exterior front, rear or side wall of a
building.
               b.   The term WALL SIGN shall include a sign attached to a
mansard roof and not protruding, wholly or partially, above the lowest point of
the roof of the building or structure to which the mansard roof is attached.
            9.   WINDOW SIGN. A sign which is applied or attached to the
interior or exterior of a window of a building or structure, or which is
located within two feet of the interior of a window, which sign may be seen
through the window from the exterior of the structure.
   SIGN STRUCTURE. Any structure which supports, had supported or is capable of
supporting a sign.
   SITE PLAN. The development plan for one or more lots on which is shown, and
dimensioned to scale, the existing and proposed condition of the lot.
   STREAMERS. A flag which floats in the wind, ribbon like, long, narrow, wavy
strip of cloth, vinyl or paper.
   STRUCTURAL ELEMENTS. The supports, uprights, bracing and framework of a
sign.
   STRUCTURAL TRIM. The molding, batons, cappings, nailing strips, latticing
and platforms which are attached to a sign structure.
   UNLAWFUL SIGN. A sign which contravenes the term of this chapter or which
the Building Official has declared to be unlawful because it poses a danger to
public safety by reason of dilapidation or abandonment; a non-conforming sign
for which any permit required under any previous ordinance was not obtained.
   VILLAGE. The area contained within the corporate limits of the village.
   WALL SIGNS.
      (1)   A sign which is placed against a building or other structure and
which is attached mechanically to the exterior front, rear or side wall of a
building.
      (2)   A sign painted directly on the exterior of a structure or building
is expressly prohibited.
(1981 Code, § 29.02) (Ord. 90-20, passed 10-15-1990; Am. Ord. 06-23, passed 7-
17-2006; Am. Ord. 06-46, passed 10-16-2006; Am. Ord. 15-40, passed 9-21-2015;
Am. Ord. 16-05, passed 3-7-2016)
§ 156.03 GENERAL REGULATIONS.
   (A)   In general. Any sign not specifically permitted under the terms of
this chapter or of ILCS Chapter 225, Act 440, §§ 1 et seq., the Highway
Advertising Control Act of 1971, shall be prohibited.
   (B)   Owner’s consent. Except as provided in division (C) below, no person
shall erect, alter or relocate any sign within the village without first
obtaining the express consent of the owner of the land upon which the sign
shall be erected, altered or relocated, in addition to obtaining a sign permit
from the Building Official and making payment therefor.
   (C)   Permits not required; certain signs. No permits shall be required for
the following signs when erected or displayed as set forth below and in
accordance with all other requirements of the zoning district in which they are
located. Except as noted, the signs shall not be illuminated and shall not be
placed in or otherwise erected upon any public right-of-way, nor be attached to
any building or structure thereon.
      (1)   Interior signs. Any sign which is completely within an enclosed
building and which sign is not visible from outside the building.
      (2)   Monuments and markers. Tablets, grave markers, headstones, statuary
or remembrances of persons or events which are non-commercial in nature.
      (3)   Decorations and displays. Non-commercial decorations or displays
celebrating the occasion of legal or religious holidays and which are erected
and/or maintained for a period of less than 45 days. The decorations or
displays may be illuminated.
      (4)   Vehicular signs. Signs on a truck, bus, trailer or other vehicle
while the vehicle is operated in the normal course of a business which is not
primarily the display of the signs.
      (5)   Real estate signs. Free standing signs which are used to offer for
sale, lease or rent the property upon which the sign is placed.
      (6)   No trespassing and no dumping signs. No trespassing or no dumping
signs not exceeding two square feet in area per sign and not exceeding four
signs in number per acre.
      (7)   Temporary civic signs. Temporary signs not exceeding eight square
feet in area and which pertain to drives or events sponsored by civic,
charitable, philanthropic, educational or religious organizations; provided
that, the signs are posted only during the drive or immediately prior to the
event, but for no longer than 15 days.
      (8)   Political signs. Signs or posters announcing or describing
candidates seeking public political office, announcing or describing political
issues and data pertinent thereto. The signs shall contain a sign surface area
not to exceed nine square feet. A double faced sign shall not exceed 18 square
feet. Signs or posters relating to the candidates for office or issues shall be
erected not more than 30 days prior to the election at which the candidates are
to be elected or issues voted upon, and shall be taken down by the person or
campaign committee or organization promoted by the sign or poster not more than
three days after the date of the election to which they relate.
      (9)   Garage/rummage sale signs. Temporary signs announcing the sale of
new or used personal property from a private residence where the sale activity
is occasional and infrequent and not associated with a permanent commercial
establishment.
      (10)   Employment or “help wanted” signs. Employment or help wanted signs
which are placed in the window of establishment which intends to employ the
personnel described in the sign and which is located in any commercial, office
or industrial district.
         (a)   Employment or “help wanted” signs shall, in the aggregate, not
exceed four square feet for any one establishment.
         (b)   No more than two signs shall be displayed for any one
establishment.
      (11)   Daily temporary signs.
   (D)   Obstructions. No sign shall be erected, relocated or maintained so as
to prevent free access to, or egress from, any door, window or fire escape. No
sign containing advertising of any kind shall be attached or affixed to any
standpipe or fire escape.
   (E)   Traffic hazards. In order to assure traffic safety, no sign shall be
erected, relocated or maintained in a manner as will, in the determination of
the Building Official:
      (1)   By reason of size, location, content, coloring or manner of
illumination, obstruct the vision of drivers or obstruct or detract from the
visibility or effectiveness of any traffic sign or control device on streets
and roads within the village; or
      (2)   Make use of words, phrases, symbols, lights or characters, in a
manner as to interfere with, mislead or confuse traffic.
   (F)   Movement. Moving, rotating or animated signs or signs creating the
illusion of movement shall be prohibited, except for those signs permitted to
contain an electronic message display as per the provisions of an overlay
district established within this chapter.
   (G)   Illumination. In addition to other applicable requirements set forth
in this chapter, all illuminated sighs must comply with the following
provisions.
      (1)   All illuminated signs within 100 feet of any residential zoning
district shall be turned off between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
unless the establishment is engaged in the operation of business during the
period, in which case the sign may be lit during the hours of operation only.
      (2)   Illumination shall be installed or applied only through a
translucent surface; or recessed into the sign structure; or if the light
source is external to the sign, directed to and concentrated on the sign. Signs
utilizing exposed neon tubing shall not be permitted.
      (3)   Signs shall be shaded as necessary to avoid casting a bright light
upon property located in any residential district or upon any public street or
park.
      (4)   Floodlights, gooseneck reflectors or other external sources of
illumination shall be contained within a protective casing.
      (5)   Illumination shall be constant in intensity and color, and shall
not consist of flashing, animated, chasing, scintillating or other illumination
conveying the sense of movement except for those signs that exhibit time and
temperature or are permitted to contain an electronic message display as per
the provisions of an overlay district established within this chapter.
   (H)   Vertical and horizontal extension.
      (1)   Any sign placed flat against a wall, mansard roof, canopy or awning
shall not extend beyond any vertical corner edge of the wall, canopy, awning,
roof line or parapet.
      (2)   In addition to the above requirements, placement of any wall sign
must meet the following provisions:
         (a)   Signs shall not cover, wholly or partially, any wall opening,
nor project beyond the sides of the wall opening, nor project beyond the sides
of the wall to which it is affixed.
         (b)   Signs shall not project from the wall on which they are mounted
in a manner as to pose an obstruction or hazard to pedestrians or vehicles.
   (I)   Changeable copy. Unless specifically provided for otherwise herein,
changeable copy signs are prohibited. Where such signs are permitted, the area
of the changeable copy sign shall be included within the total permitted area
of the sign.
   (J)   Sign placement in public areas. Except for official signs erected by
an agency or unit of government, no sign shall be erected on any tree, utility
pole, traffic standard or other public sign standard.
   (K)   Planned development signs. Signs located within a planned development
shall be governed by those standards set forth in the underlying zoning
district. The standards may, however, be modified by the Plan Commission in
accordance with the provisions of the planned development section of the zoning
ordinance of the village as now or hereafter amended.
   (L)   Historic District.
      (1)   Prior to granting a permit for the erection of a sign to be located
anywhere within the Historic District of the village or to be attached to any
building or premises of any building outside the Historic District, but within
the corporate limits of the village and constructed prior to the year 1900, the
owner must make application to the Historic District Commission (HDC) to review
the application and submit recommendations.
      (2)   The following requirements are hereby established:
         (a)   All signs shall be of material that was or could have been used
in the era the building was designed, built, or renovated to reflect.
Substitute materials with the same appearance may be approved.
         (b)   Sign materials shall utilize colors compatible with the era the
building was designed, built, or renovated to reflect.
         (c)   Lettering shall be of a style compatible with the era the
building was designed, built, or renovated to reflect.
         (d)   All three-dimensional signs shall be of a style used in the era
the building was designed, built, or renovated to reflect and should pertain to
the type of business conducted within.
         (e)   Signs may be externally illuminated only by fixtures compatible
with the era the building was designed, built, or renovated to reflect.
Internally illuminated signs shall not be allowed within the district. External
neon signs may be permitted and shall not be housed in any sign canister or
container.
         (f)   All signs shall be constructed or painted in a workmanlike
manner and all lettering intended to be of a uniform size and style.
         (g)   Signs of a period other than when the building was erected may
be approved if of special design merit.
         (h)   Any original sign that was used at any time on a building prior
to the year 1900 or an authentic facsimile thereof may be replaced on that
building subject to HDC approval.
         (i)   Within the historic district, signs shall identify only the name
of the business and the general type of goods, produces or service offered. In
addition to lettering, graphics may include a trademark, symbol or other
representation directly related to the use but not advertising a specific brand
sold within the building. A brand name or symbol may be included, however, if
the business is a franchise and/or it is the major brand sold or service
offered on the premises.
         (j)   The style, composition and appearance of all signs within the
historic district shall comply as much as possible with any further design
guidelines which may be adopted by the village for administration of the
district.
   (M)   Flags.
      (1)   There shall be permitted for each zoning lot a maximum of one
American flag and one flag bearing any other content, except as may otherwise
be allowed by special use.
      (2)   There shall be a maximum of one flag pole for each zoning lot in
all zoning districts governed by the following regulations:
         (a)   The maximum height of flag poles shall be 20 feet in zoning lots
within all residential districts. The maximum height of flag poles in all non-
residential districts shall be 40 feet.
         (b)   The setback of a flag pole in residential zoning districts from
any property line shall not be less than its height. The setback of a flag pole
in all non-residential districts shall be not less than 20 feet from any
property line. If the setback is not available in a zoning lot for a flag pole
of specified height, the flag pole shall not be permitted.
         (c)   Flag poles shall be permitted obstructions in front yards under
Chapter 157 of this code of ordinances and shall be defined as structures under
both the Building Code and Chapter 157 of this code of ordinances.
         (d)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, the setback and height
restrictions for flag poles shall not apply to schools, libraries or principal
offices of governmental entities.
         (e)   The vertical length of a permitted flag on a flag pole shall not
exceed one-third the length of the pole upon which it is hung. All flags are to
be maintained in an orderly fashion. Torn flags shall be taken down and
replaced.
   (N)   Inspection.
      (1)   Every new sign in the village shall be subject to a general
inspection; electrical inspection, if necessary; footing inspection; and any
other inspections deemed necessary by the Building Official.
      (2)   The Building Official shall conduct subsequent periodic inspections
as he or she deems necessary for the purpose of ascertaining whether a sign
requires removal or repair.
   (O)   Maintenance. Every sign in the village shall be subject to a general
inspection; electrical inspection, if necessary; footing inspection; and any
other inspections deemed necessary by the Building Official. The Building
Official shall conduct subsequent periodic inspections as he or she deems
necessary for the purpose of ascertaining whether a sign requires removal or
repair.
   (P)   Abandoned and obsolete signs.
      (1)   Any sign which no longer identifies a bonafide business, activity,
event or service conducted, or product sold on the premises where the sign is
located, or otherwise, shall be taken down by the owner of the building,
structure or property upon which the sign is located.
      (2)   If the sign is not removed, the Building Official shall issue
written notification to the owner of the building, structure or property and
the sign shall be removed within ten days of receipt of the notification.
   (Q)   Non-conforming signs. It is reasonable that special conditions be
placed upon the continuance of existing non-conforming signs. This special
condition program permits the current business to continue using the non-
conforming sign while at the same time assuring that the district in which the
non-conforming sign exists will eventually comply.
      (1)   Continuance of non-conforming signs. Any sign prohibited by §
156.03(R) shall be considered nonconforming signs. All nonconforming signs
which exist as of March 7, 2016, shall be altered, removed or otherwise made to
comply with the provisions of this chapter within six months from March 7,
2016. The provisions contained in §§
153.03(Q)(2) and
153.03(Q)(3) of this chapter shall in no case permit non-conforming signs to be
operated or maintained beyond the six month limitation described herein.
      (2)   Termination of non-conforming signs.
         (a)   Abandonment or cessation for a period of 90 days or the change
of the principal use to which the non-conforming sign is accessory shall
terminate immediately the right to maintain the sign.
         (b)   Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall terminate
immediately the right to maintain a non-conforming sign.
         (c)   The right to maintain any non-conforming sign shall terminate
and shall cease to exist whenever the sign:
            1.   Is damaged or destroyed, from any cause whatsoever, to the
extent that its repair or replacement cost exceeds 50% of its replacement cost
as of the date it became non-conforming;
            2.   Becomes obsolete or substandard under any applicable ordinance
of the village; or
            3.   Becomes a hazard or a danger to the safety or welfare of the
general public.
         (d)   Change of business or business name shall terminate immediately
the right to maintain a non-conforming sign. The occupant has 90 days from
close of sale within which to bring the non-conforming sign into compliance.
      (3)   Notification of removal.
         (a)   If the Building Official shall find that any sign is unsafe or
insecure, or is a menace to the public or has been constructed or erected or is
being maintained in violation of the provisions of this chapter, the Building
Official shall issue written notice of the condition or violation to the person
to whom the permit for the sign has been issued.
         (b)   All notices issued by the Building Official shall describe the
sign and its location and shall specify the manner in which the sign is in
violation of the ordinances of the village. All notices issued by the Building
Official shall be sent by certified mail return receipt requested to the
current owner. Any time period provided for in this chapter shall be deemed to
commence on the date of the receipt of the certified mail.
         (c)   If the party to whom the notice is issued fails to remove or
alter the sign so as to comply with the provisions of this chapter, within ten
days of the receipt of the certified mail, the Building Official may remove or
alter the sign at the expense of the owner.
         (d)   The cost of removing the sign may be recovered by the village
through any appropriate legal proceeding or by assessment against the property.
The cost of removal shall be deemed to include any and all incidental expenses,
as well as all direct and indirect costs, incurred by the village in connection
with removal of the sign.
         (e)   The Building Official may cause any sign which is an immediate
peril to persons or property to be removed summarily and without notice.
         (f)   The Building Official shall not issue any sign permit to any
person who refuses to pay costs or expenses incurred by the village in removing
or altering any sign for which he or she has previously obtained a permit,
regardless of whether legal proceedings have been initiated for the purpose of
recovering the costs.
   (R)   Prohibited signs.
      (1)   Billboards;
      (2)   Flags shall be prohibited, except to the extent they conform to the
requirements as set forth above;
      (3)   Flashing signs, except for those signs permitted to contain an
electronic message display as per the provisions of an overlay district
established within this chapter;
      (4)   Off-premises signs;
      (5)   Pennants;
      (6)   Portable signs;
      (7)   Projecting signs;
      (8)   Roof signs;
      (9)   Streamers;
      (10)   Wall signs;
      (11)   Signs (other than neon signs) which contain bare, unshielded light
or tubes; and
      (12)   Light strings, festoon lighting, neon tube lighting or light
emitting diode (LED) lighting which outlines or illuminates the features of a
building or structure, with the exception of Christmas lights or holiday
lights, which shall be permitted during the period of November 15 to the
following January 15.
   (S)   Exemptions.  All community signs approved by a majority of the Village
Board are hereby exempt from all regulations in this chapter.
   (T)   Electronic message display.
      (1)   Notwithstanding the provisions included elsewhere in this chapter,
electronic message displays containing a fully electronic message display
consisting of words, symbols, figures or images that can be electronically or
mechanically changed by remote or automatic means, including animated graphics
and video shall be permitted as a special use for the following businesses:
         (a)   Gas stations.
      (2)   Signs with an electronic message display permitted as a special use
are subject to the requirements set forth elsewhere in this chapter.
(1981 Code, § 29.03) (Ord. 90-20, passed 10-15-1990; Am. Ord. 97-02, passed 2-
3-1997; Am. Ord. 00-10, passed 6-5-2000; Am. Ord. 06-04, passed 2-6-2006; Am.
Ord. 06-23, passed 7-17-2006; Am. Ord. 06-46, passed 10-16-2006; Am. Ord. 07-
23, passed 5-7-2007; Am. Ord. 07-45, passed 11-5-2007; Am. Ord. 16-05, passed
3-7-2016) Penalty, see §
156.99
§ 156.04 SIGNS REGULATED BY ZONING DISTRICT.
   (A)   All districts generally.
      (1)   Construction signs. Construction signs shall be allowed in all
zoning districts for the purpose of denoting the construction of individual
buildings or projects as follows:
         (a)   Construction signs shall not be erected any earlier than four
months prior to the actual commencement of construction.
         (b)   All construction signs shall be confined to the construction
site.
         (c)   All construction signs shall be removed within ten days after
completion of construction and in all cases prior to occupancy.
         (d)   The content of construction signs shall be limited to the
project name/logo; the architect; the engineer; the contractor; the builder or
developer; the lending institution; the business of the establishment under
construction; its opening date; the type of units being offered; information
pertaining to the price of the units; the leasing agent and his or her
telephone number; and financing and amenities.
         (e)   No more than one construction sign shall be allowed per street
frontage per project. Separate construction signs may be allowed in planned
developments in accordance with the type of buildings to be constructed in the
planned development.
         (f)   The maximum size of any construction sign fronting on Routes 25,
72 or 68 shall be 100 square feet. The maximum size of any construction sign
fronting on any other street shall not exceed 50 square feet.
         (g)   Construction signs shall not exceed nine feet in height.
         (h)   Construction signs shall be located with a minimum setback of 15
feet.
         (i)   Construction signs shall not be illuminated.
      (2)   Directional signs. Signs which provide only direction or
information for vehicular movement to churches, public places, shopping centers
and places of public accommodation shall be permitted as follows.
         (a)   Directional signs shall not exceed four square feet per sign.
         (b)   There shall be no maximum number of signs, but the number of
signs and location of all directional signs shall be as determined by the
Village Engineer as necessary for safety.
         (c)   Except within residential or agricultural districts, directional
signals may be illuminated.
      (3)   Development identification signs. Free standing signs shall be
permitted for the purpose of identifying planned developments, subdivisions or
retail commercial development of three acres or more, subject to the following
conditions:
         (a)   There shall be a maximum of one free standing signs for each
planned development; provided, however, that additional signs may be granted by
the Building Official where the planned development has multiple frontages
along public street.
         (b)   The total size, including the base of a free standing sign shall
not exceed nine feet in height, seven feet in width, nor 16 inches in
thickness.
         (c)   The sign area shall not exceed 35 square feet per side, limited
to two sides, or 70 square feet total. A retail commercial or multi-use planned
development of three acres or more may be granted a sign area not to exceed 63
square feet per side, limited to two sides or 126 square feet total.
         (d)   The sign shall be located such that the nearest edge shall be
set back a minimum of 15 feet from the frontage property line.
         (e)   The sign shall not impede normal pedestrian movement nor
obstruct the driver line-of sight for motor vehicle traffic.
         (f)   Except within residential or agricultural, the sign may be
illuminated.
   (B)   Residential or agricultural districts (E, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, AG-
1).
      (1)   Real estate signs. Real estate signs shall be permitted as follows:
         (a)   There shall be a maximum of one real estate sign per zoning lot,
except that on a corner lot having frontage on two streets, two signs shall be
permitted.
         (b)   Real estate signs shall not exceed five feet in height.
         (c)   The maximum size of a real estate sign shall be four square feet
per side.
         (d)   Real estate signs shall be located with a minimum setback of
five feet.
         (e)   Real estate signs shall not be illuminated.
      (2)   Home occupation/nameplate signs. Home occupation/nameplate signs
shall be permitted as follows.
         (a)   There shall be a maximum of one sign per zoning lot.
         (b)   Home occupation/nameplate signs shall contain only the name,
address, telephone number and occupation of the occupant.
         (c)   The maximum size of any home occupation/nameplate sign shall be
one square foot.
         (d)   Home occupation/nameplate signs shall be located on front of
building, next to or over door.
         (e)   Home occupation/nameplate signs shall not be illuminated.
      (3)   Church bulletins. Church bulletins shall be permitted as follows.
         (a)   There shall be a maximum of one such sign per zoning lot;
provided, however, that a maximum of two such signs shall be permitted when the
church to which the sign refers is located on a corner lot.
         (b)   The maximum size of any church bulletin signs shall be 16 square
feet.
         (c)   Church bulletin signs shall be located with a minimum setback of
five feet.
         (d)   Church bulletin signs shall not exceed five feet in height.
         (e)   A church bulletin sign may be illuminated.
      (4)   Building identification signs. Identification signs shall be
permitted only in conjunction with a multi-family building or structure,
subject to the following conditions.
         (a)   There shall be a maximum of one such sign per multi-family
zoning lot; provided, however, that a maximum of two such signs shall be
permitted when the multi-family complex to which the sign refers is located on
a corner lot.
         (b)   The maximum size of any building identification sign shall be
four square feet.
         (c)   Building identification signs shall not exceed five feet in
height.
         (d)   Building identification signs shall be located with a minimum
setback of five feet.
         (e)   An identification sign may be illuminated.
      (5)   Garage/rummage sale signs. Garage and rummage sale signs shall be
permitted as follows.
         (a)   Only one such sign shall be allowed on the premises where the
sale is taking place unless the property has frontage on two public streets, in
which case two signs are permitted, one at each frontage.
         (b)   Three additional locations (not to include the public right-of-
way or any buildings or structures thereon) may be selected for placement of
rummage sale or garage sale signs announcing the same sale. Any sign to be
placed on property owned by others must have verifiable permission of that
property owner.
         (c)   No rummage sale or garage sale sign shall exceed three square
feet in surface area.
         (d)   No garage/rummage sale sign shall exceed five feet in height.
         (e)   No sign shall be placed or otherwise erected for more than three
consecutive days at a location permitted under this chapter.
         (f)   No garage sale or rummage sale signs shall be posted or
displayed on street light poles, utility poles, street signs, traffic sign
poles or otherwise erected upon any public right-of-way. Nor shall they be
displayed on or within vehicles or be placed in such a location to cause an
obstruction to the clear view of traffic.
         (g)   No rummage sale or garage sale signs shall be erected before 6:
00 a.m., nor remain after 7:00 p.m., on any day of the sale. No such signs
shall be erected prior to the sale date and all signs must be removed by 7:00
p.m. the next day.
         (h)   All sale signs shall have the street address and the date(s) of
the sale printed legibly and be dark printing on a light background.
         (i)   No sale items shall be located and no activities shall be
conducted on a public sidewalk, parkway area or other public property. Further,
no sale items shall be left out for display later than 7:00 p.m. on any day.
         (j)   No more than three rummage or garage sales shall be conducted on
the same premises in any calendar year. One rummage or garage sale shall be
limited to a period of not more than three consecutive days and shall be
conducted only during the hours between 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. The sale shall
be conducted without the use of outdoor speakers, other amplification equipment
or illuminated advertising devices.
   (C)   Business districts (B-1, B-2, B-3, B-4).
      (1)   Wall signs. Business identification wall signs shall be permitted
subject to the following conditions.
         (a)   There shall be a maximum of one such wall sign for each business
establishment; provided, however, that a maximum of two signs shall be
permitted when the business establishment to which the sign refers is located
on a corner lot.
         (b)   The maximum size of any business identification wall sign shall
not exceed 10% of the front building facade area to a maximum of 100 square
feet.
         (c)   Business identification signs may be illuminated.
      (2)   Free standing signs.
         (a)   In addition to the signs otherwise permitted in business
districts, one free standing sign may be permitted where it is determined
signage would be inadequate in identifying the business use and that one of the
following conditions is met.
            1.   The use is a restaurant or service station;
            2.   The business use is located on a parcel which, by virtue of
topographic conditions, substantially restricts the visibility of the premises;
(Required landscaping, mounding and required building setbacks shall not be
deemed an obstruction to visibility.)
            3.   A business use which employs a free standing sign in lieu of a
wall sign due to the unique requirements of the business; and/or
            4.   Businesses located in the downtown area, B-1, will not be
allowed a free standing sign.
         (b)   The required conditions to erection, relocation and maintenance
of free standing signs are as follows.
            1.   The total size, including the base of a free standing sign
shall not exceed 15 feet in height, seven feet in width, nor 16 inches
thickness.
            2.   The sign area shall not exceed 35 square feet per side,
limited to two sides or 70 square feet total. A retail commercial or multi-use
planned development of three acres or more may be granted a sign area not to
exceed 50 square feet per side, limited to two sides or 100 square feet total.
            3.   The sign shall be located with a minimum setback of 15 feet.
            4.   The sign shall not impede normal pedestrian movement nor
obstruct the driver line-of-sight for motor vehicle traffic.
            5.   The sign may be illuminated.
            6.   The sign may incorporate a reader board within the allowable
area.
      (3)   Real estate signs. Real estate signs shall be permitted as follows.
         (a)   There shall be a maximum of one sign for each zoning lot.
         (b)   The maximum size of the signs shall be 16 square feet.
         (c)   The signs shall not exceed nine feet in height.
         (d)   The sign shall be located with a minimum setback of 15 feet.
         (e)   No real estate sign shall be illuminated.
      (4)   Temporary window signs. Each commercially-zoned establishment may
have one or more temporary window signs, subject to the following provisions.
         (a)   The aggregate area of window signs shall not exceed 50% of the
total display glass area.
         (b)   Temporary window signs shall be limited to those describing or
advertising a retail sale promotion or special sale or event and shall not
remain in the window area of the establishment for a period of more than 30
days.
         (c)   Temporary window signs shall not be included in the computation
of total allowable sign surface area.
      (5)   Signs accessory to automobile service stations and automobile
stations/mini-marts. The following signs are permitted as accessory only to
automobile service stations subject to the conditions specified below.
         (a)   No outside storage or display racks shall be permitted.
         (b)   One double-faced sign presenting the pricing of gasoline
products sold upon the premises shall be permitted as follows.
            1.   Each sign shall not exceed ten square feet per side.
            2.   No letter or numeral on any pricing sign shall exceed ten
inches by 14 inches in size.
            3.   No pricing sign shall exceed a height of 15 feet.
            4.   All pricing signs shall be located with a minimum setback of
15 feet.
            5.   Pricing signs may be combined as part of the permitted free
standing business identification sign. Total area of such combined signs shall
not exceed 45 square feet per side. All other provisions hereof shall apply.
         (c)   Only one ice machine and one soft drink machine will be allowed
on exterior of building.
      (6)   Banner signs and balloon signs. Banner signs shall be permitted as
follows for individual businesses and for shopping centers.
         (a)   Banner signs are only allowed for grand openings for the first
30 days of operations, at that address.
         (b)   The maximum size of any banner sign shall not exceed 10% of the
gross area of the front facade up to a maximum of 150 square feet.
         (c)   Balloon signs under continuos inflation shall be permitted for
the first 30 days of grand opening only at that location.
         (d)   The maximum size of a balloon sign shall be 25 feet in height.
         (e)   Balloon signs must be secured to the ground with appropriate tie
downs. Roof mounting is prohibited.
         (f)   A liability insurance policy in the amount of $1,000,000 must be
provided for balloon signs naming the village as additional insured.
         (g)   All banner and balloon signs shall relater to the activity being
conducted on the premises where they are placed.
      (7)   Awning or canopy signs. Letters may be painted or otherwise
permanently affixed to any permissible awning or canopy subject to the
following conditions.
         (a)   Lettering and/or symbols shall not project above, below or
beyond the physical dimensions of the awning or canopy.
         (b)   Awning or canopy sign area shall count toward the total wall
sign area permitted hereunder.
      (8)   Signs accessory to new car dealerships. The following signs are
permitted in the B-4, automotive new car dealership only:
         (a)   Two double-faced free standing signs:
            1.   One not to exceed 75 square feet per side;
            2.   One not to exceed 50 square feet per side;
            3.   Both no taller than 30 linear feet from average grade; and
            4.   Minimum set back 20 feet from property line.
         (b)   One double faced ground sign:
            1.   Not to exceed 25 square feet per side;
            2.   Not to exceed five feet in height above average grade; and
            3.   Minimum set back 20 feet from property line.
      (9)   Projecting signs.
         (a)   In addition to permitted wall signs, any commercial or
institutional activity in the B-1 district may display one projecting sign on
the building in which that activity occurs per street frontage.
         (b)   Every projecting sign, including the frames, braces and supports
thereof shall be securely built and designed and may require approval from a
structural engineer or registered architect as requested by the Zoning
Administrator.
         (c)   Projecting signs must clear sidewalks by at least ten feet and
may project no more than three feet from the building or closer than two feet
from the back of curb edge of the sidewalk, whichever is less.
         (d)   Projecting signs are not permitted at the intersection of
streets, except at right angles to a building front.
         (e)   Projecting signs shall not extend above a point 15 feet above
the ground.
         (f)   Projecting signs shall not exceed ten square feet with a maximum
of two feet in width and five feet in height.
         (g)   Prior to granting a permit for the erection of a sign to be
located anywhere within the Historic District of the village or to be attached
to any building or premises of any building outside the Historic District, but
within the corporate limits of the village and constructed prior to the year
1900, the owner must make application to the Historic District Commission (HDC)
to review the application and submit recommendations, pursuant to the
guidelines set forth herein.
      (10)   Temporary sign.  A temporary sign permit shall only be issued for
a maximum of 30 days for the following occasions:
         (a)   Special event involving six or more separate businesses in a
coordinated fashion or a special event sponsored by public, charitable,
educational or religious organization;
         (b)   Grand opening for an individual business when it is a new
business, under new ownership, or reopened after being closed for one month or
more;
         (c)   Daily temporary (permit not required). A sign that is placed in
front of a business on a daily basis and taken in nightly. This sign may
utilize the public sidewalk immediately in front of the business for display.
This type of sign shall not exceed nine square feet in total display area of
all visible sides, and should be in close proximity to the front door.
Examples:
            1.   Sandwich board 18 x 36 inches with display copy on two sides.
            2.   Three-legged easel with a single side display area of 36 x 36
inches.
   (D)   Office districts (O-D).
      (1)   Site identification. All signs in the O-D district shall be limited
to the following.
         (a)   There shall be one sign per lot.
         (b)   Signs are restricted to the front yard only.
         (c)   Signs are permitted for identification purposes only, no
advertising.
         (d)   Signs shall not exceed four feet in height from the average
grade in the 30-foot front yard landscape area.
         (e)   The maximum area of any sign shall be limited to 32 square feet
in size.
         (f)   No edge of the sign shall be closer than 20 feet from the right-
of-way of any public street.
         (g)   No sign shall be allowed on any wall or window of any building
within the district. It is the intent of this provision that all forms of
outside advertising shall be prohibited.
         (h)   Signs shall be limited in color to brown and white or black and
white or a color which blends with or matches the color and texture of the
building.
         (i)   Flashing and rotating lights on signs are prohibited. All
mechanical devices on signs are prohibited. External lighting is allowed.
      (2)   Real estate signs. Real estate signs shall be permitted as follows.
         (a)   There shall be a maximum of one such sign for each zoning lot;
provided, however, that a maximum of two such signs shall be permitted when the
zoning lot on which they are located is a corner lot.
         (b)   The maximum size of any real estate sign shall be 16 square
feet, per side.
         (c)   Real estate signs shall not exceed nine feet in height.
         (d)   Real estate signs shall be located with a minimum setback of 15
feet.
         (e)   Real estate signs shall not be illuminated.
   (E)   East Side Commercial Overlay District.
      (1)   District area. The area of the East Side Commercial Overlay
District includes all lots zoned B-2, B-3, or B-4 with frontage on Highways 25
and/or 72 within the following boundaries:
         (a)   On the north, the south side of the Highway 68 right-of-way;
         (b)   On the south, the village corporate limits;
         (c)   On the east, the village corporate limits; and
         (d)   On the west, a north-south line crossing a point in the center
of the Highway 72 right-of-way approximately 1,077.18 feet from of the center
of the intersection of Highways 25 and 72 as measured down the centerline of
Highway 72.
      (2)   Permitted freestanding signs. Freestanding signs shall be permitted
in the East Side Commercial Overlay District subject to the following:
         (a)   One freestanding sign is permitted on each side of a lot with
frontage on a public street provided that the width of the frontage is 100 feet
or greater.
         (b)   In the event other provisions of this chapter permit other
freestanding signs on a lot within the overlay district, each freestanding sign
permitted by this subsection shall be in lieu of one other freestanding sign of
the most similar size otherwise permitted on the lot.
         (c)   The total size of the freestanding sign, including all
structural elements, shall not exceed 20 feet in height, 15 feet in width, nor
3 feet in thickness.
         (d)   The sign area shall not exceed the following:
            1.   For lots with a width of at least 100 feet but less than 250
feet, 125 square feet per side, limited to two sides or 250 square feet total.
            2.   For lots with a width of 250 feet and greater, 140 square feet
per side, limited to two sides of 280 square feet total.
            3.   The freestanding sign shall have a minimum front setback of 15
feet and a maximum front setback of 30 feet.
            4.   The freestanding sign shall have a minimum setback of 100 feet
from any lot located within a residential zoning district.
            5.   The freestanding sign shall not impede normal pedestrian
movement nor obstruct the driver line-of-sight for the motor vehicle traffic.
      (3)   Electronic message display. For new car dealerships, gas stations,
multi-tenant retail centers and amusement establishments only, the freestanding
sign permitted in division (E)(2)(d)2., above, may contain a fully electronic
message display consisting of words, symbols, figures or images that can be
electronically or mechanically changed by remote or automatic means, including
animated graphics and video, subject to the following:
         (a)   The area of the electronic message display shall not exceed 75%
of the sign area.
         (b)   The intensity of illumination and the movement of any
illumination or the flashing, scintillating or varying of light intensity shall
not constitute a traffic hazard as described in §
156.03(E).
      (4)   Compliance with all other regulations. Except where expressly
stated otherwise in this subsection, all freestanding signs permitted herein
shall comply with all other applicable regulations contained in this chapter.
   (F)   Hilltop Commercial Overlay District.
      (1)   District area. The area of the Hilltop Overlay District includes
all properties zoned B-2, B-3, or B-4 with frontage on Highway 72 within the
following boundaries:
         (a)   On the west, a north-south line crossing a point in the center
of the Highway 72 right-of-way approximately 1,077.18 feet from of the center
of the intersection of Highways 25 and 72 as measured down the centerline of
Highway 72; and
         (b)   On the east:
            1.   On the north side of Highways 72, the east right-of-way line
of Highway 68; and
            2.   On the south side of Highway 72, a line parallel to and
approximately 361.76 feet from the centerline of the Van Buren Street right-of-
way a point in the center of the intersection of Highway 72 and Van Buren
Street.
      (2)   Permitted freestanding signs. Freestanding signs shall be permitted
in the Hilltop Commercial Overlay District subject to the following:
         (a)   One freestanding sign is permitted on each lot with a minimum of
100 feet of frontage on Highway 72.
         (b)   In the event other provisions of this chapter permit other
freestanding signs on a lot within the overlay district, each freestanding sign
permitted by this subsection shall be in lieu of one other freestanding sign of
the most similar size otherwise permitted on the lot.
         (c)   The total size of the freestanding sign, including all
structural elements, shall not exceed 15 feet in height, 10 feet in width, nor
3 feet in thickness.
         (d)   The sign area shall not exceed 50 square feet per side, limited
to two sides or 100 square feet total.
         (e)   The freestanding sign shall have a minimum front setback of 15
feet and a maximum front setback of 30 feet.
         (f)   The freestanding sign shall have a minimum setback of 100 feet
from any lot located within a residential zoning district.
         (g)   The freestanding sign shall not impede normal pedestrian
movement nor obstruct the driver line-of-sight for the motor vehicle traffic.
      (3)   Electronic message display. For new car dealerships, multi-tenant
retail centers and amusement establishments only, the freestanding sign may
contain a static electronic message display capable of displaying words,
symbols, figures or images that can be electronically or mechanically changed
by remote or automatic means, subject to the following:
         (a)   The area of the electronic message display shall not exceed 75%
of the sign area.
         (b)   The electronic display shall contain static messages only. Said
messages shall change only through dissolve or fade transitions, or with the
use of other subtle transitions and frame effects that do not have the
appearance of moving text or images, but which may otherwise not have movement,
or the appearance or optical illusion of movement, of any part of the sign
structure, design or pictorial segment of the sign, including movement of any
illumination or the flashing, scintillating or varying of light intensity.
         (c)   Each message on the sign shall be displayed for a minimum of ten
seconds.
         (d)   The intensity of illumination shall not constitute a traffic
hazard as described in §156.03(E).
      (4)   Compliance with all other regulations. Except where expressly
stated otherwise in this subsection, all freestanding signs permitted herein
shall comply with all other applicable regulations contained in this chapter.
   (G)   Manufacturing districts (M-1 and M-2).
      (1)   Wall signs. Business identification wall signs shall be permitted
subject to the following conditions:
         (a)   There shall be a maximum of one such wall sign for each business
establishment; provided, however, that a maximum of two signs shall be
permitted when the business establishment to which the sign refers is located
on a corner lot.
         (b)   The maximum size of any business identification wall sign shall
not exceed 10% of the front building facade area to a maximum of 200 square
feet.
         (c)   Business identification signs may be illuminated.
(1981 Code, § 29.04) (Ord. 90-20, passed 10-15-1990; Am. Ord. 00-10, passed 6-
5-2000; Am. Ord. 06-04, passed 2-6-2006; Am. Ord. 06-46, passed 10-16-2006; Am.
Ord. 07-22, passed 5-7-2007; Am. Ord. 21-31, passed 10-4-2021)
Penalty, see § 156.99
§ 156.05 PERMIT APPLICATION AND FEES.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, it shall be unlawful for
any person to erect, re erect, alter, relocated, affix or paint any sign
without first having obtained a sign permit therefor; provided, however, that
it shall not be necessary for any person to obtain a permit for the routine
maintenance, changing of lettering, changing printed copy or painting on an
existing sign on which frequent or periodic change is customary.
   (B)   Where electrical and/or construction permits are required in
connection with erecting, re- erecting, relocating, altering, affixing or
painting a sign, these shall be obtained at the same time as the sign permit.
      (1)   Application procedure.
         (a)   Application for a sign permit shall be made in writing on forms
provided by the Building Official and shall include:
            1.   Site plans for free standing signs only, in triplicate, drawn
to scale and fully dimensioned, showing:
               a.   A north arrow;
               b.   A dimensioned site plan of the parcel or lot upon which the
sign is to be located;
               c.   The name, address and telephone number of the person
erecting the sign;
               d.   The name address and telephone number of the person
applying for the sign permit;
               e.   The name, address and telephone number of the owner of the
property upon which the sign is to be erected; and
               f.   The location and setback of the sign upon the parcel or lot
upon which it is to be erected.
            2.   Three copies of all signage drawings, including free standing
signs, with elevation and section showing sign faces; exposed surfaces and
horizontal dimension in scale as to size, proportion and color, and indicating
the dimensions between the lowest elevation of the sign and grade; the
projection from buildings or sign structures; and a description of the sign
including, but not limited to illumination and colors;
            3.   Three copies of structural and electrical plans;
            4.   The written consent of the owner of the building, structure or
property upon or to which the sign is to be erected; and
            5.   Other information as the Building Official shall require to
show full compliance with this and all other laws and ordinances of the
village.
         (b)   Each application for a sign permit shall be reviewed by the
Building Official for the purpose of determining compliance with the provisions
of this chapter and all applicable laws and ordinances of the village.
         (c)   Signs requested in conjunction with special uses shall become
part of the special use application procedure.
      (2)   Issuance of denial of signs permit. The Building Official shall
issue a sign permit for the erection, re-erection, alteration, relocation,
affixing or painting of a sign within the village when the required permit
application is properly made, all appropriate fees have been paid and the
Building Official has determined that the sign will comply with the provisions
of this chapter and all other applicable laws and ordinances of the village.
      (3)   Variances.
         (a)   The procedure for obtaining any variation from the terms of this
chapter shall be that procedure described in Chapter 157 of this code of
ordinances, except that the Village Board shall hear the requests for
variation.
         (b)   If the variance is within 15% of the numerical requirements of
this chapter, an administrative variance may be requested. This variance
hearing is held by the Building Inspector and a recommendation will be
forwarded to the Village Board for final approval.
         (c)   In granting an administrative variance, the same criteria will
be used as the Zoning Board of Appeals. An applicant must still demonstrate a
significant physical hardship in meeting sign code requirements to be granted a
variance.
         (d)   If construction commences prior to receiving a building permit,
this hardship is self- created and the Building Department shall refer all such
matters directly to the Village Board.
      (4)   Procedures for administrative variances.
         (a)   The person must meet with the Building Department to discuss
requirements.
         (b)   If the criteria for an administrative variance is met, all
appropriate application forms will be provided and must then be completed by
the applicant and returned. The application submission requirements are the
same as for the Zoning Board of Appeals, as outlined in
Chapter 157 of this code of ordinances.
         (c)   After submission of the completed application, a date and time
will be set to hear the request for an administrative variance.
         (d)   The matter will be discussed at the specified time and any
evidence pertaining to the variance shall be presented.
         (e)   A determination will be made at that time. It will be in a form
of a finding of fact which will be sent to the Village Board for final
approval.
         (f)   Upon approval or denial from the Village Board, a letter stating
same shall be sent to applicant.
      (5)   Limitations. Signs permits shall permit the erection, re-erection,
alteration, relocation, affixing or painting of a sign only on the property
designated in the permit and only by the person to whom the permit was issued
and shall not be transferable. A separate sign permit must be obtained for each
sign for which a permit is required.
      (6)   Permit fees. Permit fees will be assessed as per the village annual
fee schedule.
(1981 Code, § 29.05) (Ord. 90-20, passed 10-15-1990)
Penalty, see § 156.99
§ 156.06 INTERPRETATION.
   When there is any ambiguity or dispute concerning the interpretation of this
chapter, the interpretation of the Building Official shall prevail, subject to
appeal as provided in the ordinances of the village.
(1981 Code, § 29.06) (Ord. 90-20, passed 10-15-1990)
§ 156.07 OFF-PREMISES SIGNS.
   (A)   No off-premises signs or advertising structures shall be allowed.
   (B)   The foregoing prohibition against off-premise signs may be suspended
during the calendar year under the following circumstances:
      (1)   The Village Board adopt by motion a determination that a specific
off-premise sign or signs has been made necessary by construction activity on
or adjacent to a highway in the village;
      (2)   The Village Board limit any permit granted for an off-premise sign
to be in force no longer than the duration of the construction activity; or
      (3)   The Village Board impose such other limitations and constraints as
a condition of granting the sign permit as it may deem reasonable under the
circumstances
(Ord. 96-10, passed 3-18-1996)
Penalty, see § 156.99
§ 156.08 VILLAGE ELECTRONIC SIGN RENTAL.
   Businesses within the corporate limits, nonprofit organizations serving the
corporate limits, and governmental entities may rent space on the electronic
sign owned and operated by the village for purposes of posting messages related
to the operations of the entity, as provided within the village annual fee
schedule. Priority shall be given to messages pertaining to the business of the
village, The content, number and frequency of messages shall be approved by the
Village Administrator or his/her designee.
(Ord. 07-27, passed 5-7-2007; Am. Ord. 17-58, passed 12-18-2017)
§ 156.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who violates this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof,
be fined not less than $25 or more than $750, exclusive of court costs and
administrative fees established by statute and the costs of prosecution for
each offense.
   (B)   A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or
on which a violation occurs or continues.
(1981 Code, § 29.07) (Ord. 90-20, passed 10-15-1990; Am. Ord. 96-03, passed 2-
21-1996)
CHAPTER 157: ZONING
Section
General Provisions
   
157.001   Title
   
157.002   Purpose and intent
   
157.003   Rules and definitions
   
157.004   Interpretation
Zoning Districts Generally
   
157.015   Establishment of districts
   
157.016   Map
   
157.017   Boundaries of districts
   
157.018   Annexed territory
   
157.019   Exemptions
Residence Districts
   
157.030   General requirements
   
157.031   E, estate residence district
   
157.032   R-1, single-family residence district
   
157.033   R-2, single-family residence district
   
157.034   R-3, single-family residence district
   
157.035   R-4, general residence district
   
157.036   R-5, multiple dwelling residential district
   
157.037   AG-1, agricultural district
Business Districts
   
157.050   General requirements
   
157.051   B-1, downtown business district
   
157.052   B-2, community business district
   
157.053   B-3, general service business district
   
157.054   B-4, automotive service district
   
157.055   O-D, office district
Manufacturing Districts
   
157.065   General requirements
   
157.066   M-1, limited manufacturing district
   
157.067   M-2, limited manufacturing district
Cannabis Overlay District
   
157.070   Purpose
   
157.071   Definitions
   
157.072   Cannabis overlay district
   
157.073   Allowable use table
   
157.074   Cannabis business establishment requirements
General Regulations
   
157.080   Building on lots
   
157.081   Allowable use of land and/or building
   
157.082   Prohibited use of land and/or building
   
157.083   Control over use
   
157.084   Control over bulk
   
157.085   Accessory buildings and uses
   
157.086   Special uses
   
157.087   Permitted obstructions; yards
   
157.088   Yards in general
   
157.089   Flood plain area
   
157.090   Sanitary sewer and water supply
   
157.091   Parking within certain zoning districts
   
157.092   Towers generally
Non-Conforming Buildings, Structures and Uses
   
157.105   Statement of purpose
   
157.106   Authority to continue
   
157.107   Exemptions
   
157.108   Restrictions
   
157.109   Non-conforming use of conforming buildings or structures
   
157.110   Non-conforming use of land
Off-Street Loading
   
157.120   Requirement
   
157.121   Location
   
157.122   Size
   
157.123   Access
   
157.124   Surfacing
   
157.125   Repair and service
   
157.126   Spaces allowed
   
157.127   Required loading berths
Off-Street Parking
   
157.140   Requirement
   
157.141   Use
   
157.142   Location
   
157.143   Computation
   
157.144   Collective provisions for non-residential uses
   
157.145   Repair and service
   
157.146   Size
   
157.147   Access
   
157.148   Yards; location
   
157.149   Design and maintenance
   
157.150   Required spaces
Towers; Performance Standards
   
157.165   Purpose
   
157.166   Towers in residential districts
   
157.167   Towers in non-residential districts
   
157.168   Co-location requirements
   
157.169   Construction requirements
   
157.170   Tower and antenna design requirements
   
157.171   Setbacks
   
157.172   Height
   
157.173   Lighting
   
157.174   Signs and advertising
   
157.175   Accessory utility buildings
   
157.176   Abandoned or unused towers or portions of towers
   
157.177   Antennas mounted on roofs and the like
   
157.178   Interference with public safety telecommunications
   
157.179   Additional submittal requirements
Administration and Enforcement Generally
   
157.190   Organization
   
157.191   Building Inspector
   
157.192   Fees
   
157.193   Waiver of development regulations by Village Board of Trustees
Zoning Board of Appeals
   
157.205   Membership
   
157.206   Jurisdiction
   
157.207   Powers; appeals; variation procedure
Plan Commission
   
157.220   Creation
   
157.221   Jurisdiction
   
157.222   Meetings and rules
   
157.223   Amendments
   
157.224   Special uses
Planned Unit Development
   
157.240   Purpose; intent
   
157.241   Authority
   
157.242   Definition and size limitations
   
157.243   Procedures for establishment
   
157.244   Pre-application conference
   
157.245   Concept PUD plan review
   
157.246   Preliminary PUD plat
   
157.247   Final PUD plat
   
157.248   Amendments or minor revisions to PUD
   
157.249   Conditions for approval
   
157.250   Development standards and design criteria
   
157.251   Required land dedications
   
157.252   Fees
   
157.253   Severability
   
157.254   Effective period of Planned Unit Development
Landscape Waste Compost Facilities; Performance Standards
   
157.265   Scope; applicability
   
157.266   Definitions
   
157.267   Minimum performance standards and reporting requirements for
landscape waste compost facilities
   
157.268   Location standards for landscape waste compost facilities
   
157.269   Additional stormwater and landscape waste leachate controls at
permitted landscape waste compost facilities
   
157.270   Additional operating standards for permitted landscape waste compost
facilities
   
157.271   Operating plan for permitted landscape waste compost facilities
   
157.272   Salvaging at permitted landscape waste compost facilities
   
157.273   Access control at permitted landscape waste compost facilities
   
157.274   Load checking at permitted landscape waste compost facilities
   
157.275   Personnel training for permitted landscape waste compost facilities
   
157.276   Recordkeeping for permitted landscape waste compost facilities
   
157.277   Contingency plan for permitted landscape waste compost facilities
   
157.278   Closure plan for permitted landscape waste compost facilities
   
157.279   Quality of end-product compost: scope and applicability
   
157.280   Compost classes
   
157.281   Performance standards for general use compost
   
157.282   Testing requirements for end-product compost derived from landscape
waste
   
157.283   Sampling methods
   
157.284   Off-specification compost
   
157.285   Notices; violations
Operating Standards for General and Clean Construction or Demolition Debris
Fill Operations
   
157.300   Scope; applicability
   
157.301   Definitions
   
157.302   Prohibitions
   
157.303   Surface water drainage
   
157.304   Annual facility map
   
157.305   Operating standards
   
157.306   Certifications; load checking
   
157.307   Salvaging
   
157.308   Boundary control
   
157.309   Use of painted CCDD as fill material
   
157.310   Uncontaminated soil fill operations: prohibitions
   
157.311   Uncontaminated soil fill operating standards
   
157.312   Compliance with rules
   
157.313   Facilities accepting exclusively general construction or demolition
debris for transfer, storage, or treatment
   
157.314   Notices; violations
 
   
157.999   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Pollution control facilities, see §§
50.30 et seq.
   Transient and itinerant merchants, see §
114.01
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 157.001 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known, cited and referred to as the “East Dundee
Zoning Chapter” and may be cited herein as “this chapter.”
(1981 Code, Art. I) (Ord. passed 12- -1986)
§ 157.002 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   This chapter is adopted for the purpose of:
   (A)   Promoting the public health, safety, comfort, morals, convenience and
general welfare;
   (B)   Securing adequate light, pure air and safety from fire and other
dangers;
   (C)   Conserving the taxable value of land and buildings throughout the
village;
   (D)   Dividing the entire village into districts and classifying,
restricting and regulating therein the trades and industries and the location,
construction, reconstruction, alternation and use of buildings, structures and
land, whether for residence, business, manufacturing or other specified uses;
   (E)   Avoiding or lessening congestion in the public streets;
   (F)   Preventing the overcrowding of land through regulating and limiting
the height and bulk of buildings hereafter erected as related to land area;
   (G)   Establishing, regulating and limiting the building or setback lines on
or along streets, alleys, traffic ways, drives, parkways or property lines;
   (H)   Regulating and limiting the intensity of the use of lot areas and
regulating and determining the area of open spaces within and surrounding the
buildings;
   (I)   Establishing standards to which buildings or structures therein shall
conform;
   (J)   Prohibiting uses, buildings or structures incompatible with the
character of the residence, business or manufacturing districts;
   (K)   Preventing additions to and alterations or remodeling existing
buildings or structures in a way as to avoid the restrictions and limitations
imposed hereunder;
   (L)   Providing for the gradual elimination of those uses, buildings and
structures which are incompatible with the character of the districts in which
they are made or located, including, without being limited thereto:
      (1)   Elimination of the uses of unimproved lands or lot areas when
existing rights of the persons in possession thereof are terminated or when the
uses to which they are devoted are discontinued;
      (2)   Elimination of uses to which the buildings and structures are
devoted if they are adaptable for permitted uses; and
      (3)   Elimination of the buildings and structures when they are destroyed
or damaged in major part or when they have reached the age fixed by the
corporate authorities of the municipality as the normal, useful life of such
buildings or structures.
   (M)   Providing for the acquisition by purchase, condemnation or otherwise
of any buildings or structures which do not conform to the standards fixed by
the village;
   (N)   Defining and limiting the powers and duties of the administrative
officers and bodies as provided hereinafter; and
   (O)   Prescribing penalties for the violation of the provisions of this
chapter or of any amendment thereto.
(1981 Code, Art. II) (Ord. passed 12- -1986)
§ 157.003 RULES AND DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   The language set forth in the text of this chapter shall be
interpreted in accordance with the following rules of construction.
      (1)   The singular number includes the plural and the plural the
singular.
      (2)   The present tense includes the past and the future tenses and the
future the present.
      (3)   The word SHALL is mandatory, while the word MAY is permissive.
      (4)   The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter.
      (5)   Whenever a word or term defined hereinafter appears in the text of
this chapter, its meaning shall be constructed as set forth in the definition
thereof, and any word appearing in parenthesis between a word and its
definition herein shall be constructed in the same sense as that word.
      (6)   All measured distances, expressed in feet, shall be to the nearest
integral foot; if a fraction is one-half foot or more, the integral foot next
above shall be taken.
   (B)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      ACCESSORY BUILDING. A subordinate building or a portion of a principal
building, the use of which is incidental and customary to that of the principal
building. When an accessory building is attached to and made a part of the
principal building, the accessory building shall comply in all respects with
the requirements of this chapter applicable to the principal building. An
accessory building, unless attached to and made a part of the principal
building, as above provided for, shall not be closer than ten feet to the
principal building.
      ACCESSORY COMMERCIAL OPERATIONS YARD. An establishment with an outdoor or
only partially enclosed area utilized for the storage of motor vehicles,
equipment, or materials necessary for and incidental and accessory to an
authorized principal use located elsewhere within the village limits of the
Village of East Dundee. Accessory commercial operations yards shall not include
junk yards or vehicle recycling, disassembly or salvage operations.
      ACCESSORY USE. A subordinate use which is clearly and customarily
incident to the principal use of a building or premises and which is located on
the same lot as the principal building or use, except for the accessory parking
facilities as are specifically authorized to locate elsewhere.
      ADDITION. The increasing of the cubic contents of a building or the
increasing of its ground area.
      ADULT USES. Adult uses are defined to include:
         (a)   ADULT BOOKSTORE. An establishment having, as a substantial
portion of its stock in trade, books, magazines, films or videotapes for sale
or viewing on the premises by use of motion picture devices or other coin-
operated means, and other periodicals which are distinguished by their emphasis
on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas as such terms are defined in this section, or an
establishment with a segment or section devoted  to the sale or display of such
material. Adult bookstores may alternatively or in conjunction with the above
stock in trade sell undergarments and other clothing designed for the display
of specified anatomical areas or for the enhancement of specified sexual
activities. Further, an adult bookstore may alternatively or in conjunction
with the above stock in trade sell prosthetic devices, dolls, candles,
vibrators and other objects for sexual gratification which take the form of
specified anatomical areas and for the purpose of enhancing specified sexual
activities.
         (b)   ADULT ENTERTAINMENT CABARET. An establishment offering to its
patrons, as entertainment, any exhibition or display or any theatrical or other
live performances which include topless or go-go dancers, exotic dancers,
strippers, male or female impersonators, or similar entertainers, or any
persons singing, reading, posing, modeling, or serving food or beverages, where
the exhibition, performance, display or dance is intended to sexually arouse
the entertainer or the patrons, or where the attire of persons involved is such
as to expose specified anatomical areas, as defined in this section.
         (c)   ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER. An enclosed building, regardless
of its seating capacity, which is used to present for public view on the
premises, films, movies, previews, trailers or advertisements which are
distinguished by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, as defined in this
section.
         (d)   ADULT USE. Includes any store which sells any of the following
items:
            1.   Marijuana or hashish pipes. A pipe characterized by a bowl
which is so small that the primary purpose of which is the smoking of
marijuana, rather than the lawful smoking of tobacco, and which may or may not
be equipped with a screen.
            2.   Separation gins and sifters which may be used in removing
twigs and seeds, or otherwise cleaning or refining marijuana.
            3.   Water pipes.
            4.   Smoking and carburetion masks.
            5.   Roach clips - meaning objects used to hold burning material
such as marijuana cigarettes that have become too small or too short to hold in
the hand.
            6.   Chamber pipes.
            7.   Bongs.
            8.   Ice pipes or chillers.
            9.   Electric pipes.
            10.   Air-drawn pipes.
            11.   Rolling papers.
            12.   Any other device constituting drug paraphernalia as defined
in the Drug Paraphernalia Control Act, ILCS Ch. 720, Act 600, §§ 2 et seq.
      AIRCRAFT. Any contrivance, now known or hereafter invented for use in or
designed for navigation of or flight in the air.
      AIRPORT or LANDING STRIP HELIPORT OR HELISTOP. Any premises which are
used or intended for use for the landing and take-off of aircraft; and any
appurtenant areas which are used or intended for use for airport buildings or
other airport buildings and structures located thereon.
      ALLEY. A right-of-way with a width not exceeding 24 feet which affords a
secondary means of access to abutting property.
      ANIMAL HOSPITAL. Any building or portion thereof designed or used for the
care, observation or treatment of domestic animals.
      ANTENNA. Any structure or device used for the purpose of collecting or
transmitting electromagnetic waves, including, but not limited to directional
antennas, such as panels, micro-wave dishes and satellite dishes and omni-
directional antennas, such as whip antennas.
      APARTMENTS. See DWELLING, MULTIPLE FAMILY.
      ARCHITECTURAL DRAWINGS. A geometrical representation of a building in
plan, elevation, section or perspective; the process of making such a
representation.
      AUTOMOBILE LAUNDRY. Any building or portion thereof where automobiles are
washed using a conveyor, blower, steam-cleaning equipment or other mechanical
device of production line nature.
      AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION. Any building or premises used for dispensing,
sale or offering for sale, at retail, any automotive fuel or oils, having pumps
and storage tanks; also, where battery, tire and other similar services are
rendered when located wholly within lot lines. Where the dispensing, sale or
offering for sale any fuels or oils is incidental to the conduct of a public
garage, the premises shall be classified as a “public garage.” The term does
not include automobile or trailer sales lots, new or used, on which vehicles
are parked for purposes of inspection and sale.
      AUTOMOBILE WRECKING YARD. Any area of land where three or more motor
vehicles not in running condition, or the parts thereof, are stored in the open
and are not being restored to operation, or any land, building or structure
used for the wrecking or storing of the automobiles or parts thereof.
      AWNING. A roof-like cover, temporary in nature, which projects from the
wall of a building and which may overhang a street.
      BASEMENT. A portion of a building located partly underground, but having
less than half its clear floor-to-ceiling height below the average grade of the
adjoining ground.
      BLOCK. A tract of land bounded by streets or by a combination of one or
more streets and public parks, cemeteries, railroad rights-of-way, bulkhead
lines or shore lines of waterways or corporate boundary lines.
      BOARDING HOUSE, LODGING HOUSE, ROOMING HOUSE or TOURIST HOME. A building
in which is carried on the business of providing food or lodging for three or
more persons, but not more than 20 persons, who are not members of the family
of the owner or of the tenant of the premises where the food or lodging is
served, and only to such persons as may make contractual arrangements and not
to the general public.
      BODIES OF WATER. Waters of the United States, waters of the State of
Illinois, wetlands, floodplains and such areas as may be defined under federal,
state, county or local law or regulation. Excluded: any man-made drainageways
and stormwater retention or detention facilities.
      BREW PUB. A brewery that brews beer only on the premises for sales to
distributors and non-licensees only for consumption, stores beer on the
premises, and is allowed sales for on and off premises consumption. The BREW
PUB may have but is not required to have food service. Total sales for off-
premises consumption shall not exceed 155,000 gallons per calendar year. A BREW
PUB shall include a premises described as a microbrewery or nano-brewery.
      BUFFER YARD.  A landscaped area intended to separate and partially
obstruct the view of two adjacent land uses or properties from one another.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/16574ba874f17dfbd958615eed907c929c4100f2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6791.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/16574ba874f17dfbd958615eed907c929c4100f2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6793.jpg]
      BUILDABLE AREA FOR THE PURPOSE OF MEASURING LOT WIDTH. The first 30 feet
of lot depth immediately in back of the front yard setback line.
      BUILDING. Any structure having a roof supported by columns or by walls
and intended for the shelter, housing or enclosure of any person, animal or
chattel. When any portion thereof is completely separated from every other
portion by a party wall, then the portion shall be deemed to be a separate
building.
      BUILDING COVERAGE.  Determined by dividing that area of a lot which is
occupied or covered by the total horizontal projected surface of all buildings,
including covered porches and accessory buildings, by the gross area of that
lot. (See illustration A)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/16574ba874f17dfbd958615eed907c929c4100f2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6795.jpg]
 
      BUILDINGS, ACCESSORY. A subordinate building or portion of a principal
building, the use of which is incidental to that of the principal building and
the customary in connection with that use.
      BUILDINGS, COMPLETELY ENCLOSED. A building separated on all sides from
the adjacent open space or from other buildings or structures by a permanent
roof and party walls and by exterior walls pierced only by windows and normal
entrance or exit doors.
      BUILDINGS, DETACHED. A principal building surrounded by open space on the
same lot.
      BUILDINGS, PRINCIPAL. A non-accessory building in which is conducted the
principal use of the lot on which it is located.
      BUILDINGS, RESIDENTIAL. A building arranged, designed, used or intended
for to be used for residential occupancy by one or more families. RESIDENTIAL
BUILDINGS include, but are not limited to the following the following types:
         (a)   Single-family detached dwelling;
         (b)   Two-family dwellings; and
         (c)   Multiple-family dwellings.
      BUILDINGS, TEMPORARY. Any building not designed to be permanently located
in the place where it is or where it is intended to be placed or affixed.
      BUILDING HEIGHT. The vertical distance measured from the established curb
level or existing terrain, whichever is higher, to the highest point of the
coping of a flat roof or to the deck line of a mansard roof, or to the mean
height level between eaves and ridge for gable, hip or gambrel roofs. Chimneys,
elevator penthouses, cooling towers and similar structures or mechanical
enclosures and antenna or towers less than 15 feet in height, other than signs,
shall not be included in calculating BUILDING HEIGHT.
      BULK. A composite characteristic of a given building as located upon a
given lot, not definable as a single quantity, but involving all of the
following characteristics:
         (a)   Size and height of building;
         (b)   Location of exterior walls at all levels in relation to lot
lines, streets or to other buildings;
         (c)   Gross floor area of the building in relation to lot area (floor
area ratio);
         (d)   All open spaces allocated to the building; and
         (e)   The amount of lot area provided per dwelling unit.
      BUSINESS. An occupation, employment or enterprise which occupies time,
attention, labor and materials or wherein merchandise is exhibited or sold, or
where services are offered.
      CELLAR. The portion of a building located partly or wholly underground
and having half or more than half of its clear floor-to-ceiling height below
the average grade of the adjoining ground. In dwellings, it shall not be used
for the purposes of sleeping or the preparation of food, except for single-
family residences.
      CLUB OR LODGE, PRIVATE. A non-profit association of persons who are bona-
fide members paying dues which owns, hires or leases a building or portion
thereof, the use of the premises being restricted to members and their guests.
      COMMERCIAL SPORTS AND ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENT, INDOOR. A fully
enclosed facility with a capacity of 100 or more people, with or without
seating for spectators, the primary purpose of which is providing
accommodations for a fee for a variety of individual or organized sports,
recreation, and competition activities as well as a variety of sales or
entertainment events, either passive or active, for the pleasure of the patrons
including performances, exhibitions, educational programs, religious services,
flea markets, collector shows, and other forms of public gathering. This use
includes accessory food services facilities but does not include adult uses as
defined in Chapter 117 of this code, or any of the regulated activities
included within said chapter.
      COMMERCIAL WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION SERVICES. Licensed commercial
wireless telecommunication services including cellular, personal communication
services (PCS), specialized mobilized radio (SMR), enhanced specialized
mobilized radio (ESMR), paging and similar services that are marketed to the
general public.
      COMMON OPEN SPACE. Common open space pertains to the land within a PUD
that is devoid of buildings and other structures, other than recreational and
pedestrian facilities and uses accessory thereto, and is suitable for active
and passive recreational activities. COMMON OPEN SPACE specifically excludes
parking lots, street rights-of-way, required front, rear, and side yard setback
areas if buildings and lots are subdivided and individually owned, school
sites, and retention ponds, unless they are capable of sustaining water-based
recreation.
         (a)   ACTIVE OPEN SPACE. An appropriately-sized and usable open space
area, a minimum of 125 feet wide, capable of comfortably supporting one or more
active recreational activities, such as playgrounds, ball fields, tennis
courts, swimming pools, recreation buildings, jogging trails/fitness courses,
detention basins designed for recreational use, and other miscellaneous
recreational activities.
         (b)   PASSIVE OPEN SPACE. Open space a minimum of 50 feet wide that is
incapable of comfortably supporting active recreational activities due to its
size, soil conditions, steep slope or substantial vegetation, or special or
endangered wildlife or plant habitats. If not meeting these conditions the open
space is planned for passive use such as paths and picnic areas.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/16574ba874f17dfbd958615eed907c929c4100f2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6797.jpg]
 
      CONFORMING BUILDING OR STRUCTURE. Any building or structure which:
         (a)   Complies with all regulations of this chapter or of any
amendments hereto governing bulk of the zoning district in which the building
or structure is located; or
         (b)   Is designed or intended for a permitted or special use as
applicable in the district in which it is located.
      COURT, HEIGHT. The vertical distance from the lowest level of a court to
the mean height of its bounding walls.
      COURT, INNER. An open, uncovered, unoccupied space surrounded on all
sides by walls or by walls and an interior lot line. The latter is also a LOT
LINE COURT.
      COURT, LENGTH OF OUTER. The mean horizontal distance between the open and
closed ends of an outer court.
      COURT, OUTER. An open, uncovered, unoccupied space other than a yard on
the same lot with a building extending directly to and having at least one side
thereof opening for its full width upon a street, alley or other permanent
public open space.
      CURB LEVEL. The level of the established curb in front of a building or
structure measured at the center of the front. Where no curb level has been
established, it shall be deemed to be the established level of the center line
of the street surface in front of a building or structure measured at the
center line of the front.
      DATA CENTER. A facility primarily used for the storage, management,
processing and transmission of digital data including related office areas
through the use of support equipment such as servers, networks and other
similar computer-based components.
      DECIBEL. A unit of measurement of the intensity (loudness) of sound.
Sound level meters which are employed to measure the intensity of sound are
calibrated in decibels.
      DENSITY. A measure of land use intensity for residential developments
stated in numbers of dwelling units per acre of land.
         (a)   GROSS DENSITY. The total number of dwelling units per gross acre
of land, determined by dividing the total gross acreage of the site by the
minimum lot or dwelling unit size of the appropriate residential district.
         (b)   NET DENSITY. The total number of dwelling units per net acre of
land determined by dividing the calculated net acreage of the site by the
minimum lot or dwelling unit size of the appropriate residential district.
      DISTRICT. Sections of the village for which the regulations governing the
height, the area or the use of buildings and premises are the same.
      DRIVE-IN ESTABLISHMENT. An establishment or part thereof in which is
provided facilities to serve or consume commodities, or both, which is intended
to occur primarily in patron’s automobiles parked on the premises.
      DUPLEX. A building containing two dwelling units, each of which typically
has access to the outside or to a common hall, no unit is located over the
other, and each is separated from the other by one or more common fire
resistant walls.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/16574ba874f17dfbd958615eed907c929c4100f2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6799.jpg]
 
      DWELLING. A building, or portion thereof, designed or used exclusively
for residential occupancy, including one-family dwellings, two-family dwellings
and multiple-family dwellings, but not including hotels, motels, boarding or
rooming houses, tourist homes and trailers, with or without wheels.
      DWELLINGS, ATTACHED or GROUP, ROW AND TOWNHOUSES. A dwelling which is
joined to other dwellings at both sides by party walls, as one of a series of
not more than six dwellings arranged in a row including the semi-detached
dwellings at the ends and not more than two stories in height.
      DWELLINGS, DETACHED. A dwelling which is entirely surrounded by open
space on the same lot.
      DWELLINGS, MULTIPLE-FAMILY. A dwelling containing three or more dwelling
units.
      DWELLINGS, SEMI-DETACHED. A dwelling which is joined to another dwelling
at one side only by a party wall.
      DWELLINGS, SINGLE-FAMILY. A detached building designed for and intended
to be occupied as a residence by only one family and servants.
      DWELLINGS, TWO-FAMILY. A dwelling designed for or occupied exclusively by
two families living in separate housekeeping units, where each dwelling unit is
detached and not semi-detached.
      DWELLINGS, TWO-FAMILY DUPLEX. A dwelling designed for or occupied
exclusively by two families living in separate housekeeping units, the two
dwelling units being semi-detached.
      DWELLING UNIT. A group of rooms constituting all or part of a dwelling,
being a residential accommodation, including complete kitchen facilities,
permanently installed, which are arranged, designed, used or intended for use
exclusively as living quarters for one family and not for more than an
aggregate of two roomers or boarders. Where a private garage is structurally
attached, it shall be considered as a part of the building in which the
dwelling unit is located.
      EFFECT OR SEPARATE ENTRANCE. Any dwelling wherein there is provided means
of ingress and egress separate from those provided for the first floor shall be
considered a two-family or multiple-family dwelling.
      EFFICIENCY UNIT or STUDIO APARTMENT. A dwelling unit consisting of one
principal room together with bathroom, kitchen, hallway and closets, and may
contain a dining alcove directly off the principal room, provided such dining
alcove does not exceed 125 square feet in area.
      ELECTRIC DISTRIBUTION CENTER. A terminal at which electric energy is
received from the transmission system and is delivered to the distribution
system only.
      ELECTRIC SUBSTATION. A terminal at which electrical energy is received
from the transmission system and is delivered to other elements of the
transmission system and, generally, to the local distribution system.
      ESTABLISHMENT OF USE. Whenever reference is made to the establishment of
a use or by other words to the same effect, the language shall refer either to
the creation of a new use or to the alteration or modification of an existing
use.
      FAMILY. One or more persons each related to the other by blood, marriage
or legal adoption, or a group of not more than three persons not all so
related, together with his, her or their domestic servants, maintaining a
common household in a dwelling unit. A FAMILY may include two roomers, boarders
or permanent guests, whether or not gratuitous.
      FARM. An area which is used for the growing of the usual farm products
such as vegetables, fruits, trees and grain, and their storage on the area, as
well as for the raising thereon of the usual farm poultry and farm animals for
the use or consumption of the person or persons operating the farm. The term
FARMING includes the operating of such an area for one or more of the above
uses, including the necessary accessory uses for treating or storing the
produce; provided, however, that the operation of the accessory uses shall be
secondary to that of the normal farming activities; and provided further, that
fuming does not include the feeding of garbage or offal to swine or other
animals.
      FENCE. A structure which is a barrier and used as a boundary or means of
protection or confinement.
      FENCE, OPEN. A fence, including entrance and exit gates, designed and
constructed so that the surface area of any segment of the fence contains at
least 50% open spaces, as compared with solid materials.
      FENCE, SOLID. A fence, including solid entrance and exit gates, which
conceals from viewers in or on adjoining properties and streets, materials
stored and operations conducted behind it.
      FILLING STATION. Any building or premises used for the dispensing, sale
or offering for sale at retail of any automotive fuels or oils. When the
dispensing, sale or offering for sale is incidental to the conduct of a public
garage, the premises are classified as a “public garage.”
      FIREARM. Any device, by whatever name known, which is designed to expel a
projectile or projectiles by the action of an explosion, expansion of gas or
escape of gas, excluding, however:
         (a)   Any pneumatic gun, spring gun, paint ball or B-B gun which
either expels a single globular projectile not exceeding eighteen one-
hundredths in diameter or breakable paint balls containing washable marking
colors;
         (b)   Any device used exclusively for signaling or safety and required
or recommended by the United States Coast Guard or the Interstate Commerce
Commission;
         (c)   Any device used exclusively for the firing of stud cartridges,
explosive rivets or similar industrial ammunition;
         (d)   An antique firearm (other than an assault weapon) which although
designed as a weapon, the Department of State Police finds by reasons of the
date of its manufacture, value, design, or other characteristic is primarily a
collector's item and is not likely to be used as a weapon.
      FLOOD BASE ELEVATION. See
Chapter 152 of this code of ordinances.
      FLOOD PLAIN. See
Chapter 152 of this code of ordinances.
      FLOOD RESERVOIR. A ponding area created for the purpose of impounding
flood waters and alleviating any flood damage which might result from man-made
fills.
      FLOOR AREA.
         (a)   For the purpose of determining the floor area ratio, conversions
of existing structures and maximum size of businesses and establishments. The
sum of the horizontal area of the floor space contained in all floors,
including a basement floor, but not including a cellar floor of a building or
buildings on a lot, measured in square feet from the exterior faces of the
exterior walls of each building or from the center line of party walls
separating two buildings.
         (b)   The FLOOR AREA shall include:
            1.   Space devoted to elevator shafts and stairwells at each floor;
            2.   Floor space used for mechanical equipment when the structural
headroom exceeds seven feet, ten inches in height, except equipment such as
bulkheads, water tanks and cooling towers, when located on the roof whether or
not the equipment is in the open or enclosed;
            3.   Floor space in that part of a half-story where the headroom is
seven feet, ten inches or more in height;
            4.   Floor space devoted to interior balconies, mezzanines and
enclosed porches;
            5.   Floor space devoted to accessory uses in the principal
building and in the accessory building or buildings; and
            6.   Floor space devoted to enclosed off-street parking and off-
street loading.
         (c)   For the purpose of determining off-street parking and off-street
loading requirements, the sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several
floors of the building or portion thereof devoted to the use requiring off-
street parking and off-street loading, including accessory storage areas
located within selling or working space such as counters, racks or closets and
any basement floor area devoted to dwelling purposes, to retailing activities,
to the production or processing of goods or to business or professional
offices. However, the FLOOR AREA shall not include: floor area devoted
primarily to storage purposes, except as otherwise noted herein; floor area
devoted to off-street parking or loading facilities, including aisles, ramps
and maneuvering space; or cellar floor area other than area devoted to
retailing activities, to the production or processing of goods or to business
or professional offices.
      FLOOR AREA RATIO. The numerical value obtained through dividing the floor
area of a building or buildings by the net lot area on which the buildings are
located.
      FREQUENCY. The number of oscillations per second in a sound or other type
of wave measuring the pitch of the resulting sound.
      FRONTAGE. All property on one side of a street between two intersecting
streets (crossing or terminating), measured along the line of a street, or if
the street is dead ended, then all of the property abutting on one side between
an intersecting street and the dead end of the street.
      FRONTAGE ROAD. A road constructed parallel to and immediately adjacent to
the right-of- way of a primary highway and designed to serve the properties
fronting on the primary highway.
      GARAGE, PRIVATE. An accessory building or an accessory portion of the
principal building which is intended for and used for storing the private
passenger vehicles and one commercial vehicle of not more than one-ton load
capacity of a family or families resident upon the premises, which shall be
limited to three parking spaces for single-family dwellings, and in multiple-
family dwellings shall be limited in the number of parking spaces to one and
one-half times the number of dwelling units plus one, and in which no business,
service or industry connected directly or indirectly with the automotive
vehicles is carried on, provided that not more than one-half of the space may
be rented for the private passenger vehicles of persons not resident on the
premises, except that all the space in a garage of one or two-car capacity may
be so rented.
      GARAGE, PUBLIC. Any building within which automotive vehicles are
painted, repaired, rebuilt, reconstructed or stored for compensation.
      GARAGE, STORAGE. A building used for the housing only of motor vehicles
pursuant to previous arrangements and not for transients; and where no
equipment or parts are sold and vehicles are not rebuilt, services, hired or
sold, except that fuel, grease or oil may be dispensed within the building to
vehicles stored herein.
      GOLF COURSE. Public, semi-public or private grounds over which the game
of golf is played, including accessory buildings and land uses incidental
thereto, and consisting of at least 25 acres for each nine-hole “par 3” course.
      GRADE.
         (a)   For buildings having walls adjoining one street only, the
elevation of the sidewalk at the center of the wall adjoining the streets.
         (b)   For buildings having walls adjoining more than one street, the
average of the elevations of the sidewalk at the center of all walls adjoining
the streets.
         (c)   For buildings having no wall adjoining the street, the average
level of the finished surface of the ground adjacent to the exterior walls of
the building.
         (d)   The closest wall approximately parallel to a street line is to
be considered as adjoining the street. Where no sidewalk exists, the grade
shall be established by the Superintendent of Public Works.
      GROSS ACREAGE. The total acreage of a site less land within the planted
rights-of-way of existing roads, utilities and easements of access.
      GROUND FLOOR AREA. The lot area in square feet covered by a single-family
dwelling, measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls of the
building. The area shall include only the area devoted to dwelling purposes,
including enclosed utility rooms on the ground floor of a dwelling, shall be
exposed on all elevations and shall not include area devoted to garage,
breezeway or carport.
      GUN SHOP. A federally- and state-licensed establishment engaged in the
retail sales, service and repair of legal firearms, ammunition, archery
equipment, knives, and other weapons for hunting, personal safety, public
safety, and competitions. This use also includes sales and service of equipment
related to the foregoing, legal antique weapons, and instructional classes that
do not involve the discharge of weapons of any type.
      HEAVY COMMERCIAL. Heavy commercial uses and equipment shall be defined to
include uses and equipment of a kind not generally involving purchase or use by
the average resident in the usual, conduct of matters pertaining to living and
residence in the community, as contrasted with and distinguished from the usual
general retail and services uses. HEAVY COMMERCIAL USES are exemplified by
sales and service of earth moving equipment, prime-source turbines and
generators, industrial heating apparatus and factory-type machine tools.
      HOME OCCUPATION. A gainful occupation or profession conducted by a member
of a family residing on the premises and where the business or profession is
conducted wholly within the dwelling.
      HOTEL. A building containing not less than 14 lodging rooms, a general
kitchen and dining room, a common entrance lobby, halls and stairway; and where
lodging rooms do not have a doorway opening directly to the outdoors, except
for emergencies; and where more than 50% of the lodging rooms are for rent,
with or without meals, to transient guests for a continuous period of less than
30 days.
      HOTEL, APARTMENT. A hotel in which at least 50% of the hotel
accommodations are for occupancy by permanent guests (30 days or more).
      IMPERVIOUS SURFACE COVERAGE. Determined by dividing that area of a lot
which is occupied or covered by any material that substantially reduces or
prevents the infiltration of stormwater into previously undeveloped land.
Impervious surface shall include, but not be limited to the ground area covered
by buildings, driveways, parking areas, sidewalks and patios. Dedicated public
roadways shall be excluded from impervious surface. (See illustration A above.)
      INDOOR MALL. A retail complex over 50,000 square feet with one singular
address containing a variety of individual stores and often restaurants and
other individual business establishments housed in a single building sharing a
common interior space where no other clear primary use can be assigned. All
permitted uses in the Business District B-3 shall be permitted in an indoor
mall.
      INSTITUTION. A building occupied by a non-profit organization or a non-
profit establishment for public use.
      JUNK YARD. An open area where waste, used or second-hand materials are
bought, sold, exchanged, stored, baled, packed, disassembled or handled,
including, but not limited to scrap iron and other metals, paper, rags, rubber
tires and bottles. A JUNK YARD includes an autowrecking yard, but does not
include such uses as are conducted entirely within enclosed buildings.
      KENNEL. Any premises where three or more domestic animals over four
months of age are owned, boarded, bred and/or offered for sale.
      LIVE ENTERTAINMENT. Shall consist of live music, dancing and/or singing
performances, floor shows, D.J. shows and other amplified entertainment
performances, whether or not an admission fee is charged. LIVE ENTERTAINMENT
shall not include subtle ambient or incidental background music provided for
guests or patrons by musicians such as unamplified background music, piano
player, harpist, strolling violinist, traditional juke box, karaoke, or
guitarist. However, if there is an admission charge requirement to observe or
attend such subtle ambient or incidental background music or entertainment, it
shall be considered LIVE ENTERTAINMENT.
      LOADING SPACE. A space, accessible from a street, alley or way, in a
building or on a lot, for the use of vehicles while loading or unloading
merchandise or materials.
      LODGING HOUSE. See BOARDING HOUSE.
      LODGING ROOM. A room rented as sleeping and living quarters, but without
facilities and with or without and individual bathroom. In a SUITE OF LODGING
ROOMS, each room which provides sleeping accommodations shall be counted as one
LODGING ROOM.
      LOT.
         (a)   Except in the case of a planned development, a parcel of land of
record in the office of the Recorder of Deeds of Kane County, Illinois, which
may be composed of one or more lots of record, and which is occupied or
intended for occupancy by one principal building, together with permitted
accessory buildings and required open spaces, and having its principal frontage
upon a street.
         (b)   The term LOT is distinguished from the term “lot of record,” as
defined below.
      LOT AREA. The area of a horizontal plane bounded by the vertical planes
through front, side and rear lot lines.
      LOT CORNER. A lot situated at the junction of and abutting on two or more
intersecting streets or a lot at the point of deflection in alignment of a
single street, the interior angle of which is 135 degrees or less.
      LOT DEPTH. The mean horizontal distance between the front lot line and
the rear lot line of a lot measured within the lot boundaries.
      LOT, INTENSITY OF USE. The relation which the built-over portion of a
lot, called the building area, has to the whole area of the lot.
      LOT, INTERIOR. A lot other than a corner lot.
      LOT LINE. A property boundary line of any lot held in single or separate
ownership, except that where any portion of the lot extends into the abutting
street or alley, the lot line shall be deemed to be the street or alley right-
of-way lines.
      LOT LINE, FRONT. The boundary lines of a lot which is along an existing
or dedicated street lot line and which is established by the owner as a FRONT
LOT LINE. On corner lots, the owner may select either street lot line as the
FRONT LOT LINE.
      LOT LINE, REAR. The boundary of a lot which is most distant from and is,
or is approximately parallel to the front lot line. If the REAR LOT LINE is
less than ten feet in length, or if the lot forms a point at the rear, the REAR
LOT LINE shall be deemed to be a line ten feet in length with the lot, parallel
to and at the maximum distance.
      LOT LINE, SIDE. Any boundary or a lot which is not a front or rear lot
line.
      LOT OF RECORD. A lot of record is a parcel of land which is a designated
lot created and delineated in a duly recorded plat subdivision or a parcel of
land described in and conveyed by or provided to be conveyed by an instrument
of record, is on the date of recording of the instrument the parcel of land met
all of the requirements of the zoning ordinance then in force; provided that,
if the grantor or seller in the instrument owned a parcel of land contiguous
thereto, both the parcel retained and the parcel conveyed must also have met
all the requirements of this chapter. If an unrecorded instrument is relied
upon to establish a lot of record, the matter shall be referred to the Zoning
Board of Appeals to determine from evidence submitted to it the authenticity of
the instrument and that the other requirements of this section were met as of
the state of the unrecorded instrument.
      LOT, REVERSED CORNER. A corner lot, the street-side lot line of which is
substantially a continuation of the front lot line of the first lot to its
rear.
      LOT, THROUGH.
         (a)   A lot which has a pair of opposite lot lines along two more or
less parallel streets and which is not a corner lot.
         (b)   On a THROUGH LOT, both street lines shall be deemed front lot
lines, except, in the case where an entire block consists of through lots,
there shall be one common front lot line.
      LOT, WIDTH. Where a minimum lot width is specified, each lot for which
the minimum lot width is specified shall have a minimum frontage at the front
building line not less than the width so specified.
      MAIN BUILDING OR USE. The main or primary purpose for which land or a
structure or use thereon is designed, arranged or intended, or for which it may
be occupied or maintained under this chapter. All other structures or uses on
the same lot and incident or supplementary thereto and permitted under this
chapter shall be considered accessory uses.
      MANOR HOUSE. A multiple family residential housing design which typically
features a two- story building with attached garages and two common entrances
containing eight dwellings, of which four are located on the first floor and
four are located on the second floor of the building.
      MARQUEE CANOPY.  A roof-like structure of permanent nature which projects
from the wall of a building and may overhang the public way.
      MATERNITY GROUP HOME. A community-based, adult-supervised transitional
living arrangement that provides pregnant or parenting minors or adults and
their children with a supportive and supervised living arrangement, in which
such pregnant or parenting minors or adults are provided the opportunity to
learn parenting skills, including child development, family budgeting, health
and nutrition, and other skills to promote their long-term economic
independence in order to ensure the well-being of their children.
      MIXED USE DEVELOPMENT. A PUD which combines two or more of the following
land uses: detached or attached single family residential, multiple family
residential, business, retail, industrial and office/research.
      MOTEL or TOURIST COURT. A building containing lodging rooms having
adjoining individual bathrooms and where each lodging room has a doorway
opening directly to the outdoors and more than 50% of the lodging rooms are for
rent to transient tourists for a continuous period of less than 30 days.
      MOTOR FREIGHT TERMINAL. A building and premise in which freight, shipped
by motor truck or railroad, is received, assembled, sorted and rerouted for
local, intrastate or interstate shipment by motor truck.
      MOTOR VEHICLE. Any self-propelled wheeled vehicle designed primarily for
transportation of persons or goods along public streets.
      MOTOR VEHICLE IMPOUNDMENT YARD. An establishment utilized exclusively for
the temporary indoor or outdoor storage of motor vehicles that are towed in as
a result of unlawful parking  on private property, repossessions, police
orders, accidents, mechanical problems, or otherwise being rendered inoperable.
Motor vehicle impoundments yards shall not include automotive service uses that
temporary store vehicles brought in for repair. The use also shall not include
junk yards or vehicle recycling, disassembly or salvage operations.
      MOVED. The act of permanently establishing a structure upon a portion of
land after removing same from another part of the same or a different lot,
tract or parcel of land.
      MULTIPLE FAMILY DWELLING. A building containing three or more dwelling
units.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/16574ba874f17dfbd958615eed907c929c4100f2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6801.jpg]
      NAMEPLATE. A sign indicating the name and address of a building or the
name of an occupant thereof and the practice of a permitted occupation therein.
      NET ACREAGE.  The gross acreage minus the acreage devoted to street
rights-of-way, storm water retention and detention basins, bodies of water,
public parks, school sites, municipal sites, conservation areas, and areas with
slopes greater than 20%.
      NET LOT AREA. The area inside of lot lines, exclusive of streets and
alleys.
      NON-CONFORMING BUILDING. Any building which does not comply with all of
the regulations of this chapter governing bulk for the district in which the
building is located, or is designed or intended for a non-conforming use.
      NON-CONFORMING USE. A building, improvements of which lawfully existed on
any lot or premises prior to the effective date of this chapter, but which at
that time and thereafter, did not comply with the regulations of this chapter
for the district within which the buildings, improvements or uses are located.
      NOXIOUS MATTER. Material which is capable of causing injury or malaise to
living organisms or is capable of causing detrimental effects upon the health
or the psychological, social or economic well-being of human beings.
      NURSING HOME. An establishment for the care of children of the aged or
infirm. A home does not contain equipment for medical and surgical care or for
the treatment of disease or injury, nor does it provide care in maternity or
mental illness or physical infirmities.
      OCTAVE BAND. A term denoting all frequencies between any given frequency
and double that frequency.
      OCTAVE BAND FILTER. An electrical frequency separator, designed according
to standards formulated by the American Standards Association and used in
conjunction with a sound-level meter to take measurements in specific octave
intervals. (American Standards for Sound-Level Meters, A.S.S. No. 224.3-1944).
      OPEN SALES LOTS. Any land used or occupied for the purpose of buying,
selling or renting passenger cars, trucks, trailers, motor scooters,
motorcycles, boats, aircraft or monuments and for the storing of same prior to
sale or rental.
      PARCEL. See LOT.
      PARKING LOT. A premise where three or more motor vehicles in running
condition are parked, whether or not a fee is charged; and where parking of
motor vehicles is primarily for continuous periods of less than 12 hours time;
and where no equipment or parts are sold and motor vehicles are not processed
or rebuilt; cars, trucks, trailers, motor scooters, motorcycles, boats,
aircraft or monuments and for the storing of same prior to sale or rental.
      PARKING SPACE, AUTOMOBILE. A suitable surfaced and permanently maintained
area on privately-owned property, either within or outside of a building, of
sufficient size to store one standard automobile, but no event less than 200
square feet, exclusive of passage-ways, driveways or other means of circulation
of access.
      PARTICULATE MATTER. Material which is suspended in or discharged into the
atmosphere in finely divided form as a liquid or solid at atmospheric
temperature and pressure.
      PARTY WALL. A wall starting from the foundation and extending
continuously through all stories to or above the roof which separates one
building from another and is in joint use by each building.
      PERFORMANCE STANDARD. A criterion to control noise, odor, smoke, toxic or
noxious matter, vibrations, fire and explosive hazards or glare or heat
generated by or inherent in uses of land or buildings.
      PERMANENT COSMETICS, MICROBLADING, MICROPIGMENTATION AND SIMILAR CARE
SERVICES. The practice of placing ink or other pigment into the skin or mucosa
by the aid of needles or any other instrument used to puncture a person's skin
for the purpose of permanent cosmetic restoration or enhancement of the
epidermis for re-pigmentation. This category of services does not include other
forms of body art such as body piercing or the adornment of the body with
letters, images,  drawings, or other illustrations. The use is also commonly
known as dermal implantation, areola restoration, micro-stroking, eyebrow
embroidery, nano brows, faux body replacement and long-time/long lasting
makeup.
      PERSON. Every natural individual, firm, partnership, association,
corporation or organization of any kind.
      PET CREMATORIUM. A “provider of companion animal cremation services”
operating in full compliance with the Illinois Companion Animal Cremation Act
(ILCS Chapter 815, Act 318, §§1 et seq.) provided, however, that such services
shall be limited to only the provision of “individually portioned cremation” of
up to two “companion animals” at any one time using equipment specifically
designed and constructed for such purposes. Further, the “cremation remains”
shall be returned to the owner of the animal or otherwise legally disposed of
off-site. Terms used within this definition of PET CREMATORIUM that are
contained within quotation marks (“ ”) shall have the same meanings ascribed to
them in the Illinois Companion Animal Cremation Act as such act may be amended
from time to time provided that if such Act or terms are repealed in their
entirety, the meanings of such terms shall be those last in effect.
      PLANNED DEVELOPMENT. A planned development is a use of land in single
ownership or control, where the specific requirements of a zoning district
maybe modified, which offers benefits to the neighborhood of which it is a part
or to the general public welfare beyond those required by this chapter and
which use of land will contain or provide amenities not otherwise required by
law, including, but not limited to provisions for common open space,
recreational facilities or specific design, engineering, architectural, site
planning or landscape features.
      PLANNED RESIDENTIAL CLUSTER SUBDIVISION. A comprehensively planned single
family residential development in which dwelling units are clustered at one or
more locations, but where the overall density does not exceed the maximum
density permitted under the regulations for the zoning district in which said
subdivision is located. The remaining land “saved” is devoted to common open
space.
      PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD).  A development wherein a mixture of one
or more of the following land use types occurs; residential (single- or multi-
family), office, retail commercial, industrial. The PUD is planned as a
functionally and physically integrated development as a single entity, although
portions of the parcel may be sold off to another party to be developed
according to the approved PUD plan.
      PLOT. Any parcel of land, subdivided or unsubdivided.
      PROMOTIONAL SALE OR PROGRAM. The use of outdoor displays for the
promotion of store sales.
      PRIVATE STREET.
         (a)   PRIVATE STREET BY EASEMENT.  A non-dedicated private roadway
shared by at least two but not more than five dwelling units located within an
easement on private property.
         (b)   PRIVATE STREET WITHIN COMMON OPEN SPACE. A non-dedicated private
roadway shared by at least two dwelling units located within the common open
space of the development.
      PUBLIC UTILITY. Persons, corporations or governments supplying gas,
electric, transportation, water, sewer or land line telephone service to the
general public. For the purpose of this chapter, commercial wireless
telecommunication service facilities shall not be considered PUBLIC UTILITY
USES and are defined separately.
      QUADRUPLEX. A multiple family residential housing design which typically
contains four dwelling units, with each unit having direct access to the
outside and separated from the other dwelling units by one or more common fire
resistant walls.
      REFUSE. All waste products resulting from human habitation, except
sewage.
      RESEARCH LABORATORY. A building or group of buildings in which are
located facilities for scientific research, investigation, testing or
experimentation, but not facilities principally for the manufacture or sale of
products.
      REST HOME. See NURSING HOME.
      RINGLEMANN CHART.  A chart which is described in the U.S. Bureau of Mines
Information Circular 6888 and on which are illustrated graduated shades of grey
for use in estimating the light-obscuring capacity of smoke.
      RINGLEMANN NUMBER. The number of the area on the Ringlemann Chart that
coincides most nearly with the light-obscuring capacity of smoke.
      ROADWAY. The portion of a street between the regularly established curb
lines or that part, improved or unimproved, which is used or intended to be
used for vehicular travel.
      ROOMING HOUSE. See BOARDING HOUSE.
      ROW HOUSE. See DWELLING, ATTACHED.
      SCREENING. A structure erected or vegetation planted for concealing from
viewers the area behind it.
      SETBACK, FRONT YARD. The minimum horizontal distance between the front
lot line and the line of any main or accessory building or other structure
located on the lot, disregarding steps.
      SHOOTING RANGE, INDOOR. A fully enclosed facility designed or used for
archery and/or the discharging of legal firearms for the purposes of target
practice, training or competitions.
      SHOOTING RANGE, OUTDOOR. The use of land specifically laid-out and
approved for archery and/or the discharging of legal firearms for the purposes
of target practice, skeet and trap shooting, training, or competitions.
      SIDEWALK SALE. The selling of merchandise on the exterior of a commercial
establishment, generally on the sidewalk adjacent to the building.
      SIGN.
         (a)   A name, identification, description, display or illustration
which is affixed to or painted or represented directly or indirectly upon a
building or other outdoor surface or piece of land; and which directs attention
to an object, product, place, activity, person, institution, organization or
business.
         (b)   However, a SIGN shall not include the following:
            1.   Any display of official court or public office notices;
            2.   The flag emblem or insignia of a nation, political unit,
school or religious group; and
            3.   A sign located completely within an enclosed building unless
the context is intended to be viewed from a street.
         (c)   Each display surface of a sign shall be considered to be a
separate sign.
      SIGN, ADVERTISING or BILLBOARD OR POSTAL PANEL. A sign which directs
attention to a business, commodity, service or entertainment conducted, sold or
offered at any location other than upon the premises where the sign is located
or to which it is affixed.
      SIGN, BUSINESS. A sign which directs attention to a business or
profession conducted or to a community, service or entertainment conducted,
sold or offered upon the premises where the sign is located or to which it is
affixed.
      SIGN, FLASHING. Any illuminated sign on which the artificial light is not
maintained stationary or constant in intensity or in color at all times when
the sign is in use. For the purpose of this chapter, any moving illuminate sign
shall be considered a FLASHING SIGN.
      SIGN, GROSS SURFACE AREA OF. The entire area within a single continuous
perimeter enclosing the extreme limits of a sign, and, in no case, passing
through or between any adjacent elements of the same. However, the perimeter
shall not include any structural elements lying outside the limits of the sign
and not forming an integral part of the display.
      SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING.  A building containing one dwelling unit.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/16574ba874f17dfbd958615eed907c929c4100f2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6803.jpg]
 
      SMOKE UNITS, NUMBER OF. The number obtained by multiplying the smoke
density in Ringlemann numbers by the time of emission in minutes. For the
purpose of this calculation, a Ringlemann density reading is made at least once
every minute during the period of observation; each reading is then multiplied
by the time in minutes during which it is observed; the various products are
then added together to give the total number of smoke units observed during the
total period under observation.
      SOLID WASTE FACILITIES.
         (a)   ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION ACT. Those provisions found in ILCS
Chapter 415, Act 5, and its implementing regulations, as both may be amended
from time to time, which include definitions for the following terms as used in
this chapter provided that if such act, codes or terms are repealed in their
entirety, the meanings of such terms shall be those last in effect.
            1.   COMPOST as defined in ILC5 Chapter 415, Act 5, §3.150;
            2.   COMPOSTING as defined in ILCS Chapter 415, Act 5, §3.155;
            3.   COMPOSTING OPERATION as defined in 35 IL Admin Code 830.102:
            4.   FACILITIES ACCEPTING EXCLUSIVELY GENERAL CONSTRUCTION OR
DEMOLITION DEBRIS FOR TRANSFER, STORAGE, OR TREATMENT as defined in ILCS
Chapter 415, Act 5, §22.38;
            5.   GENERAL CONSTRUCTION or DEMOLITION DEBRIS as defined in ILCS
Chapter 415, Act 5, §3.160(a);
            6.   LANDSCAPE WASTE as defined in ILCS Chapter 415, Act 5, §3.270;
            7.   LANDSCAPE WASTE COMPOST FACILITY as defined in 35 IL Admin.
Code 830.102:
            8.   LOCAL SITING REVIEW as defined in ILCS Chapter 415, Act 5,
§39.2;
            9.   POLLUTION CONTROL FACILITY as defined in ILCS Chapter 415, Act
5, §3.330:
            10.   TRANSFER STATION as defined in ILCS Chapter 415, Act 5,
§3.500;
         (b)   RECYCLING, MATERIALS RECOVERY AND WASTE MINIMIZATION/ WASTE
DIVERSION FACILITIES. Those facilities and/or operations which sort, handle,
process, gather and recovery materials from waste streams which would otherwise
be disposed of or permanently discarded,  so as to render such materials usable
in a process or alone such that the same can be returned to the economic
mainstream/stream of commerce in the form of raw materials or products.
      SOUND-LEVEL METER. An instrument standardized by the American Standards
Association for measurement of the intensity of sound.
      STABLE, PRIVATE. A stable is any building which is located on a lot on
which a dwelling is located, designed, arranged or used for not more than four
horses for the private use of occupants of the dwelling, not exceeding 600
square feet in area.
      STABLE, PUBLIC. A building where horses are kept for hire or sale.
      STAND, ROADSIDE. A structure for the display and sale of products with no
space for customers within the structure itself.
      STEEPLE. An unoccupied, ornamental tower built on or above the roof of a
building.
      STORY. The portion of a building included between the surface of any
floor and the surface of the floor next above; or if there is no floor above,
the space between the floor and the ceiling next above. A basement shall be
counted as a story if the floor of the basement is less than three feet below
grade or if the ceiling of the basement is more than five feet above grade.
      STORY, HALF. A space under a sloping roof which has the line of
intersection of roof decking and wall not more than three feet above the top
floor level, and in which space not more than 60% of the floor area is
completed for principal or accessory use.
      STREET, AVENUE, PLACE, LANE, ROAD, BOULEVARD, TERRACE or PARKWAY. All
property dedicated or intended for public or private street, highway, freeway
or roadway purposes or subject to easements therefor.
      STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS. Any change, other than incidental repairs, in the
supporting members of a building or structure, such as bearing walls,
partitions, foundations, columns, beams or girders or any substantial change in
the roof or exterior walls.
      STRUCTURE. Anything erected the use of which requires more or less
permanent location on the ground or attached to something having a permanent
location on the ground. A sign or other advertising device, detached or
projecting, shall be construed to be a separate structure.
      STUDIO APARTMENT. See EFFICIENCY UNIT.
      SWIMMING POOL. Any temporary or permanent artificial pool or receptacle
for water installed, constructed or maintained in, on or above the ground, (not
including those enclosed and located entirely within a dwelling), having a
perimeter of more than 25 feet and a depth of more than two feet at any point.
A SWIMMING POOL shall be considered to be a main building and use; provided,
however, that a SWIMMING POOL may be considered to be an accessory building or
use customarily incident to a dwelling when located on the same lot therewith
and designed and used for swimming or bathing in connection with the dwelling
solely by the persons living therein or their private guests. No swimming pool
designed or used for any commercial or other non-residential purpose shall be
considered to be an accessory building or use customarily incident to a
dwelling.
      TATTOO.  The insertion of pigment under the surface of the skin of a
human being by pricking with a needle or otherwise, so as to produce an
indelible mark or figure visible through the skin but shall not include
tattooing performed for medical purpose by a person licensed or otherwise
authorized by the state to practice medicine or osteopathy.
      TAVERN. A place of business that primarily serves alcoholic beverages
with a legally approved village liquor license and may include a limited food
service for human consumption. A TAVERN with live entertainment requires a
special use permit.
      TOURIST HOME. See BOARDING HOUSE.
      TOWER. Any ground or roof mounted pole, spire, structure or combination
thereof taller than 15 feet, including supporting lines, cables, wires, braces
and masts, intended primarily for the purpose of mounting an antenna,
meteorological device or similar apparatus above grade.
      TOWER, MULTI-USER. A tower to which is attached the antennas of more than
one commercial wireless telecommunication service provider or government
entity.
      TOWER, SINGLE-USER. A tower to which is attached only the antennas of a
single user, although the tower may be designed to accommodate the antennas of
multiple users as required in this chapter.
      TOWNHOUSE. An attached single-family residential housing design which
typically contains three or more residential dwelling units, each of which has
its own front and rear access to the outside, no unit is located over another
unit, and each is separated from any other unit by one or more common fire
resistant walls.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/16574ba874f17dfbd958615eed907c929c4100f2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6805.jpg]
 
      TOWNHOUSE DWELLINGS. See DWELLING, ATTACHED.
      TOXIC MATERIAL. A substance (liquid, solid or gaseous) which, by reason
of an inherent deleterious property, tends to destroy life or impair health.
      TRAILER or CAMPER TRAILER. An automobile or truck-drawn highway vehicle
designed to serve as temporary living quarters while traveling or camping.
      TRAILER HOUSE. Any vehicle or portable structure constructed so as to
permit occupancy thereof for lodging or dwelling purposes or for use as an
accessory building or structure in the conduct of a business, trade or
occupation; and which is so designed and constructed that it is, or may be,
mounted on wheels and used as a conveyance on streets and highways; and which
is propelled or drawn by its own or other motive power.
      TRAILER PARK. Any premises on which are parked one or more trailers or
any premises used or held out for the purpose of supplying to the public a
parking space for one or more such trailers. The term does not include sales
lots on which automobiles or unoccupied trailers, new or used, are parked for
purposes of inspection and sale.
      USE. The purpose or activity for which the land or building thereon is
designed, arranged or intended, or for which it is occupied or maintained.
      USE, ACCESSORY. A subordinate use which is clearly and customarily
incidental to the principal use of a building or premises, and which is located
on the same lot as the principal building or use, except for the accessory
parking facilities as are specifically authorized to be located elsewhere.
      USE, LAWFUL. The use of any building, structure or land that conforms
with all the regulations of this chapter or any amendment hereto and which
conforms with all the codes, ordinances and other legal requirements, as
existing at the time of the enactment of this chapter or any amendments
thereto, for the structure or land that is being examined.
      USE, NON-CONFORMING. See NON-CONFORMING USE.
      USE, PERMITTED. Any use which may be lawfully established in a particular
district or districts, provided it conforms with all requirements, regulations
and performance standards, if any, of the district.
      USE, PRINCIPAL. The main use of land or building, as distinguished from a
subordinate or accessory use.
      USE, SPECIAL. Any building, structure and use which complies with the
applicable regulations governing special uses.
      USEABLE COMMON OPEN SPACE. Useable common open space is that portion of
the common open space that is available for active or passive recreational use.
      USED CAR LOT. Any land used or occupied for the purpose of buying and
selling second- hand passenger cars and/or trucks and the sorting of same prior
to sale.
      VEHICLE TOWING ESTABLISHMENT. An establishment whose principal operation
is the removal of motor vehicles by towing, carrying, hauling, or pushing from
public or private property to other locations for repair when such vehicles
have become inoperable or have been ordered to be impounded to a public or
private motor vehicle impound yard for temporary storage. Such use does not
include a motor vehicle impoundment yard, accessory commercial operations yard,
junk yard, salvage or recycling center, or any other type of indoor or outdoor
storage, repair or disassembly of towed or inoperable vehicles provided,
however, that a vehicle towing establishment may be operated in conjunction
with such an impoundment, operations and storage or salvage facilities that
have been separately permitted per the provisions of this chapter. Vehicle
towing establishments shall not include automotive service uses that have
accessory towing operations limited to transporting inoperable vehicles to
their own premises for repairs.
      VENDING MACHINE. A machine for dispensing merchandise or services
designed to be operated by the customer.
      VISION CLEARANCE. An open, unoccupied triangular space at the street
corner or a corner lot, the space being defined as a setback line extending
across the corner between points established on the street lines by
measurements from the corner.
      YARD. An open space on a lot which is unoccupied and unobstructed from
its lower level to the sky. A YARD extends along a lot line and at right angles
to the line to a depth or width specified in the yard regulations for the
zoning district in which the lot is located.
      YARD, FRONT. A yard extending across the front of a lot and being the
minimum horizontal distance between the street line and the main building or
any projection thereof other than the projection of the usual steps.
      YARD, REAR. A yard extending across the rear of a lot and being the
minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot line and the rear of the main
building or any projections other than steps. On corner lots, the REAR YARD
shall be considered as parallel to the street upon which the lot has its least
dimension. On both cases, the rear yard shall be at the opposite end of the lot
from the front yard.
      YARD, SIDE. A yard extending along a side lot line between the front and
rear yards.
(1981 Code, Art. III) (Ord. passed 12- -1986; Am. Ord. 97-19, passed 9-2-1997;
Am. Ord. 98-01, passed 2-2-1998; Am. Ord. 06-48, passed 10-16-2006; Am. Ord.
08-40, passed 7-7-2008; Am. Ord. 11-25, passed 4-18-2011; Am. Ord. 12-46,
passed 6-30-2012; Am. Ord. 13-08, passed 4-1-2013; Am. Ord. 13-45, passed 11-
18-2013; Am. Ord. 15-48, passed 12-14-2015; Am. Ord. 22-40, passed 8-22-2022;
Am. Ord. 22-44, passed 9-19-2022; Am. Ord. 23-08, passed 2-20-2023; Am. Ord.
23-23, passed 5-15-2023; Am. Ord. 24-36, passed 10-21-2024)
§ 157.004 INTERPRETATION.
   (A)   The zoning district regulations are designed to govern the erecting,
enlarging, reconstructing, moving or structurally altering of each building or
structure and the use or change of use thereof or the use or change of use of
land in accordance with the function and type of physical development intended
for a specific zoning district as an integral part of the entire village.
   (B)   (1)   In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this
chapter shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the
public health, safety, morals and welfare.
      (2)   Where the conditions imposed by any provision of this chapter upon
the use of land or buildings, the bulk of buildings, floor area requirements,
lot area requirements and yard requirements are either more restrictive or less
restrictive than comparable conditions imposed by any other law, ordinance,
resolution, rule or regulation of any kind, the regulations which are more
restrictive or which impose higher standards or requirements shall govern.
      (3)   This chapter is not intended to abrogate any easement, covenant or
other private agreement; provided that, where the regulations of this chapter
are more restrictive or impose higher standards or requirements that the
easements, covenants or other private agreements, the requirements of this
chapter shall govern.
      (4)   No buildings, structures or uses not lawfully existing at the time
of the adoption of this chapter shall become or be made lawful solely by reason
of the adoption of this chapter and to the extent and manner the unlawful
building, structure or use is in conflict with the requirements of this
chapter, the building, structure or use remains unlawful.
      (5)   Uses not listed as permitted uses or special uses, but which are
similar to or compatible with the uses, shall be treated as special uses.
(1981 Code, Art. IV, A) (Ord. passed 12- -1986)
ZONING DISTRICTS GENERALLY
§ 157.015 ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS.
   In order to carry out the purpose and provisions of this chapter, the
village is hereby divided into the following zoning districts:
   (A)   Residence districts.
      (1)   E, estate residence;
      (2)   R-1, single-family residence;
      (3)   R-2, single-family residence;
      (4)   R-3, single-family residence;
      (5)   R-4, general residence;
      (6)   R-5, multiple-family residence; and
      (7)   AG-1, agricultural districts.
   (B)   Business districts.
      (1)   B-1, downtown business;
      (2)   B-2, local business;
      (3)   B-3, service business;
      (4)   B-4, heavy service business; and
      (5)   O-D, office district.
   (C)   Manufacturing district.  
      (1)   M-1, limited manufacturing;
      (2)   M-2, limited manufacturing.
(1981 Code, Art. VI, A) (Ord. passed 12- -1986; Am. Ord. 04-44, passed 12-20-
2004)
§ 157.016 MAP.
   (A)   The districts and their boundaries are as shown upon a zoning map
entitled “Village of East Dundee, Illinois, Zoning Map,” which map and all
amendments thereto and all notations, reference and other information shown
thereon are hereby incorporated and made a part of this chapter, with the same
force and effect as if the zoning map, amendments, notations, references and
other information were fully herein set forth.
   (B)   The map shall be filed with the office of the Village Clerk and
certified copies thereof in the office of the Building Inspector and shall be
open to public references at all times during which those offices are open.
(1981 Code, Art. VI, B) (Ord. passed 12- -1986)
§ 157.017 BOUNDARIES OF DISTRICTS.
   When uncertainty exists with the respect to the boundaries of the various
districts, as shown on the zoning district map, the following rules shall
apply.
   (A)   District boundary lines are either the center lines of railroads,
highways, streets, alleys, right- of-way, easements, tract or lot lines or the
lines extended unless otherwise indicated.
   (B)   In areas not subdivided into lots and blocks, wherever a district is
indicated as a strip adjacent to and paralleling a street, highway or railroad
rights-of-way, the depth of the strips shall be in accordance with dimensions
shown on the maps measured at right angles from the center line of a street,
highway or railroad and the length of frontage shall be in accordance with
dimensions shown on the map from center lines of streets, highways or railroad
rights-of-way unless otherwise indicated.
   (C)   Where a district boundary line divides a lot in single ownership, the
regulation for either portion of the lot may, in the owner’s discretion, extend
to the entire lot, but not more than 25 feet beyond the boundary line of the
district, except that where a district boundary line dividing the lot creates
two parcels each of which extends more than 25 feet into the adjoining
district, the entire parcel shall take the zoning classification of the
district containing the majority of the lot area.
(1981 Code, Art. VI, C) (Ord. passed 12- -1986)
§ 157.018 ANNEXED TERRITORY.
   Any additions to the incorporation area of the village resulting from
disconnection by county or otherwise shall be automatically classified as the
R-1, single-family residence, district unless otherwise classified by amendment
to this chapter.
(1981 Code, Art. VI, D) (Ord. passed 12- -1986)
§ 157.019 EXEMPTIONS.
   The following public utility uses, with the exception of all types and
styles of telecommunication antennae and towers exceeding 20 feet in height,
are permitted in any district: poles, wires, cable, conduits, vaults, laterals,
pipes, mains, valves, lift stations and any other similar distribution
equipment; provided that, installation shall conform with rules and regulations
of the applicable administrative authorities.
(1981 Code, Art. VI, E) (Ord. passed 12- -1986; Am. Ord. 96-20, passed 11-4-
1996)
RESIDENCE DISTRICTS
§ 157.030 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Allowable use of land and buildings.
      (1)   Allowable uses table. Permitted uses, special uses, accessory uses,
and temporary uses in the residence districts shall be as indicated on the
following table. All other provisions of this chapter to the contrary
notwithstanding, the Building Inspector shall determine whether a proposed use
that is not specifically listed on the table is most similar to and compatible
with one or more permitted uses, special uses, accessory uses, temporary uses,
or prohibited uses and classify the use accordingly. Such determinations shall
be recorded in writing and maintained on file in the Village Clerk's office.
Allowable
uses of
land and
buildings:           Single-   Single-   Single-             Multiple
           Estate    Family    Family    Family    General   Dwelling    Agricultural
P:         Residence Residence Residence Residence Residence Residential District
Permitted  District  District  District  District  District  District    (AG-1)
by-right   (E)       (R-1)     (R-2)     (R-3)     (R-4)     (R-5)
S:
Permitted
by special
use permit
                                                                             Estate    Single-   Single-   Single-   General   Multiple
Allowable uses of land and buildings:                                        Residence Family    Family    Family    Residence Dwelling    Agricultural
P: Permitted by-right                                                        District  Residence Residence Residence District  Residential District
S: Permitted by special use permit                                           (E)       District  District  District  (R-4)     District    (AG-1)
                                                                                       (R-1)     (R-2)     (R-3)               (R-5)
(a) Agriculture and natural resource uses.
1. Resource conservation.                                                                                                             
   Forestry; an area which is used specifically for the purpose of produci                                                        S
trees, Christmas trees and other wood products
   Wildlife, fisheries, and natural resource conservation; an area which is
developed and managed specifically for the natural or artificial propagation
and growth of native and non-native species of terrestrial and aquatic                                                               S
vertebrate life (fish, amphibians, reptiles, birds, mammals) in order to
enhance the natural resource community
2. Cultivation.                                                                                                                       
   Agricultural crops, no on-site retail; an area which is used specificalSy        S         S         S         S         S           P
for the purpose of producing crops including truck gardens
   Agriculture, crops; an area which is used specifically for the purpose                                                         P
producing crops including truck gardens
3. Livestock.                                                                                                                         
   Agriculture, livestock; an area which is used specifically for producin                                                        P
livestock, poultry, waterfowl and upland game birds, or dairy products
   Commercial concentrated feeding of poultry and livestock                                                                       S
   Fur bearing animal pens and buildings; no building or pen housing any
mammal, other than household pets belonging to the occupant and not bred for                                                         S
sale, shall be located nearer than 500 feet to any residence district
   Production of fish; tanks, ponds and impoundments shall not be located                                                         S
less than 30 feet from the property line
   Riding academies and stables                                                                                                   S
4. Agricultural support.                                                                                                              
   Agricultural products sales yards; wholesale or retail including, but n                                                        S
limited to, fruits, vegetables, flowers, plants and the like
   Animal feed, storage, preparation, grinding and mixing; wholesale and                                                          S
retail
   Commercial agricultural implement and machinery sales, service and repa                                                        S
   Commercial blacksmith or welding shop                                                                                          S
   Commercial grain elevators and storage                                                                                         S
   Fertilizer sales; includes bulk storage and mixing also includes                                                               S
anhydrous ammonia equipment, containers, and storage facilities
5. Mineral extraction and batch operations.                                                                                           
   Excavation, extraction, screening, mining, crushing, washing or quarrying
of raw materials from the earth for resale; operation area shall not be
nearer than 1,000 feet to any public school or to any dwelling except for: a
residence occupied by the owner, lessee or operator of the premises on which                                                         S
the activity takes place; or a residence where the owner and occupant of
which have executed written consent for the operations to be conducted
nearer than 1,000 feet from the residence
   Filling holes, pits, or low lands; includes only non-combustible materi                                                        S
free from refuse and food wastes
   Oil or gas well drilling; the well shall be located more than 200 feet                                                         S
from the boundary of a residence district
   Mining of clay, gravel, peat, sand, and stone and the structures
incidental to loading same; subject to the provisions of §                           S                                                
157.030(A)(2)(a)
(b) Residential uses.
1. Single-family and two-unit dwellings.                                                                                              
   Conversion of an existing single-family farm residence into a two-family
dwelling; when at least one dwelling unit will continue to be occupied by a                                                          S
person and the family thereof owning, operating, or employed full-time in
operations on the premises of a farm, private hunting preserve or game farm
   Single-family detached dwellings                                       P         P         P         P         P                     
   Two-family dwellings; detached and semi- detached, maximum of 3 bedroom                                    P         P            
dwelling unit
2. Multiple-family dwellings.                                                                                                         
   Attached dwellings; maximum 3 bedrooms/dwelling unit                                                       P         P            
   Attached dwellings; one 4-bedroom unit for every 10 units                                                  S         S            
   Mobile home parks                                                                                                   S            
   Multiple-family dwellings; 5-24 dwelling units per structure                                                        P            
   Multiple-family dwellings; one efficiency unit for every 10 units                                                   S            
provided the lot area for each efficiency unit is not less than 3,500 sq ft
   Multiple-family dwellings; one three-bedroom unit per 20 units provided                                             S            
the lot area for each three-bedroom unit is not less than 6,000 sq ft
3. Group living facilities.                                                                                                           
   Maternity group home, subject to the provisions of §                                                      S                     
157.030 (A)(2)
   Senior citizen dwellings; subject to the provisions of §                                                  S         S            
157.030(A)(2)(b)
(c) Retail uses.
1. General merchandise.                                                                                                               
   Art gallery                                                            S         S         S         S         S         S           S
2. Food and beverage.                                                                                                                 
3. Greenhouses and nurseries.                                                                                                         
   Greenhouse and nursery; retail                                                                                                 S
   Greenhouse and nursery; wholesale                                      S         S         S         S         S         S           S
(d) Clubs, restaurants, taverns and lodging uses.
1. Clubs, lodges and meeting halls.                                                                                                   
   Clubs, not-for-profit; does not include restaurant or bar facilities   S         S         S         S         S         S            
2. Restaurants, specialty foods and taverns.                                                                                          
3. Lodging.                                                                                                                           
(e) Recreation and entertainment uses; public and private.
1. Indoor recreation and entertainment.                                                                                               
   Community center buildings, public or non-profit; includes clubhouses,
recreation buildings gymnasiums, swim clubs, swimming pools, tennis clubs,   S         S         S         S         S         S           S
tennis courts, roller skating and ice skating rinks
   Museums                                                                S         S         S         S         S         S           S
2. Outdoor recreation and entertainment.                                                                                              
   Driving range and par-3 golf course, public or private                                                                         S
   Golf Courses, public or private; includes accessory driving range      S         S         S         S         S         S           S
   Miniature golf course                                                                                                          S
   Parks and playgrounds, not-for-profit                                  S         S         S         S         S         S           S
   Parks and playgrounds, public                                          P         P         P         P         P         P           P
(f) Service, contracting, storage and broadcasting uses.
1. Personal services.                                                                                                                 
2. Dry cleaning and laundry services.                                                                                                 
3. Finance, insurance and real estate services.                                                                                       
   Automatic teller machine as stand-alone structure                                                                   S           S
4. General services.                                                                                                                  
5. Contractor and repair shops and showrooms.                                                                                         
6. Equipment and supplies.                                                                                                            
7. Storage, transport and mail order sales.                                                                                           
8. Broadcasting facilities and recording studios.                                                                                     
   Radio and television transmission or receiving tower                   S         S         S         S         S         S           S
(g) Automotive and related uses.
1. Accessory sales.                                                                                                                   
2. Fuels sales, service and repair.                                                                                                   
3. Parking.                                                                                                                           
4. Vehicle sales and rental.                                                                                                          
(h) Office uses.
1. Professional offices.                                                                                                              
2. Organizations.                                                                                                                     
(i) Healthcare and veterinary uses.
1. Medical and dental offices, clinics and labs.                                                                                      
   Chiropodist's office and podiatrist's office                                                                        S           S
   Chiropractor's office                                                                                               S           S
   Clinics, medical and dental                                                                                         S           S
   Dentist's office                                                                                                    S           S
   Doctor's, surgeon's and/or physician's office                                                                       S           S
   Optician's office                                                                                                   S           S
   Osteopath's office                                                                                                  S           S
2. Hospitals and care homes.                                                                                                          
   Convalescent center, nursing home, geriatric center and rest home                                                   S           S
   Hospitals or sanitariums                                                                                            S           S
3. Veterinarian offices, hospitals and kennels.                                                                                       
   Veterinary clinic and animal hospital; without outdoor kennels                                                                 S
   Veterinary clinic and animal hospital; with outdoor kennels provided no
pen or building housing any animal shall be located nearer than 500 feet to                                                           
any residence district or to an off-site dwelling unit
(j) Manufacturing uses.
1. Manufacturing.                                                                                                                     
(k) Public, educational and institutional uses.
1. General public.                                                                                                                    
   Cemetery, public                                                       P         P         P         P         P         P           P
   Cemetery, public or private; includes crematories and mausoleums provided
that no building shall be located less than 100 feet from side and rear                                                              S
property lines
   Library and branch library                                             S         S         S         S         S         S           S
   Police or fire station                                                 S         S         S         S         S         S           S
2. Educational.                                                                                                                       
   Colleges and universities, for-profit; includes dormitories,                                                                   S
fraternities, sororities and other accessory buildings and structures
   Colleges and universities, public or non-profit; includes dormitories, S         S         S         S         S         S           S
fraternities, sororities and other accessory buildings and structures
   Schools, private; elementary, middle and high                          S         S         S         S         S         S           S
   Schools, public; non-boarding elementary, middle, high and vocational  P         P         P         P         P         P           S
   Schools, business, trade and vocational; non-boarding public or private                                                        S
3. Childcare.                                                                                                                         
   Nursery school; includes children's day school, day nursery child care
center and day care center - must have at least 150 square feet of outdoor   S         S         S         S         S         S           S
play area for each child
4. Institutional and assembly.                                                                                                        
   Church, chapel, temple and synagogue                                   S         S         S         S         S         S           S
   Convents, monasteries and seminaries                                   S         S         S         S         S         S           S
(l) Transportation, utility and solid waste uses.
1. Transportation.                                                                                                                    
   Transit and transportation passenger shelter                           S         S         S         S         S         S           S
2. Utility.                                                                                                                           
   Public utility and public service use; subject to the provisions of § S         S         S         S         S         S           S
157.030(A)(2)(c)
   Sewage treatment plant                                                 S         S         S         S         S         S           S
   Telephone booth                                                                                                                S
3. Solid waste.                                                                                                                       
   Storage of digested sludge; lots shall be located not less than 1,320                                                          S
feet (80 rods) from a residential lot line
(m) Accessory uses.
1. Accessory to agricultural uses.                                                                                                    
   Accessory uses provided in accordance with the provisions of §        P         P         P         P         P         P           P
157.085
   Farm residence                                                                                                                 P
   Roadside stands; subject to the provisions of §                                                                               P
157.030(A)(2)(d)
   Service and repair of farm machinery; accessory to the use of the                                                              P
premises for agriculture
   Truck parking areas; for loading and shipping of farm products,                                                                S
livestock, poultry, fertilizer and the like
2. Accessory to residential uses.                                                                                                     
   Accessory uses provided in accordance with the provisions of §        P         P         P         P         P         P           P
157.085
   Home occupations; subject to the provisions of §                      P         P         P         P         P         P           P
157.030(A)(2)(e)
3. Accessory to commercial uses.                                                                                                      
   Accessory uses provided in accordance with the provisions of §        P         P         P         P         P         P           P
157.085
4. Accessory to manufacturing uses.                                                                                                   
5. Other accessory uses.                                                                                                              
   Rectories, parsonages, parish houses, and other uses accessory to      S         S         S         S         S         S           S
institutional uses
(n) Temporary uses.
1. Temporary uses.                                                                                                                    
   Temporary building for construction purposes; not to exceed the duratioP         P         P         P         P         P           P
of the construction
(o) Other special uses.
1. Other special uses.                                                                                                                
   Building height increase; up to three and one-half stories, or 40 feet,                                             S            
whichever is lower
   Lot size reduction; minimum lot area may be reduced to 30,000 sq ft wheSe                                                        
the property is served by the village sanitary sewer system
   Planned unit development                                               S         S         S         S         S         S           S
 
      (2)   Use-specific standards. The standards listed below are specific to
each use as indicated and are in addition to all other standards of the
district in which the use is located. In the event of a conflict between these
standards and those listed for the district, the more restrictive standards
shall apply.
         (a)   Mining of clay, gravel, peat, sand and stone and the structures
incidental to loading same.
            1.   Includes processing, screening and washing yards including
plants for crushing and mixing aggregate, the principal ingredient of which is
gravel mined on the premises.
            2.   Uses shall be subject to execution by the mining operator,
satisfactory to the Village Board, of an agreement that upon cessation of the
mining operations:
               a.   All mining and mixing apparatus and equipment and other
accessory buildings and structures shall be removed from the premises;
               b.   As the mining operations progress, the mined land shall be
restored in an orderly fashion to usable condition; and
               c.   Upon cessation of mining activities for 180 days, the
special use shall expire.
            3.   Strip mines, stone quarries, gravel mines, saw mills, and all
other uses, operations and endeavors which do, or are likely to, produce loud
and disturbing noises nor any other machinery, equipment, explosives and
utensils incidental to the operation shall be used or operated on any Sunday or
legal holiday, as defined by the Illinois Compiled Statutes, nor on any
weekday, except after the hour of 6:00 a.m. and before the hour of 9:00 p.m.
            4.   Exceptions to these restrictions may be granted by the Village
Board only upon a showing that, within the specific times for which exceptions
are requested, the interests of the village will not be substantially
compromised.
         (b)   Senior citizen dwellings.
            1.   No senior citizen development shall be located on a lot of
less than 30,000 square feet in area.
            2.   A senior citizen development may consist of one or more
principal buildings otherwise complying with the provisions of the zoning
district and special use.
            3.   If the senior citizen development has on-site, common use
dining and/or recreation facilities, the density for the associated multi-
family units shall not exceed two times the base density for the zoning
classification.
            4.   Each dwelling unit located in a senior citizen development
shall be occupied only by senior citizens, which for the purposes of this
chapter shall mean any individual who is at least 55 years of age, or any
unrelated family, all the members of which are at least 55 years of age, or any
related family, one spouse of which is at least 55 years of age (except that
there may be provided not more than two dwelling units for members of the
development staff, regardless of age); provided, however, not to exceed 10% of
the units in a senior citizen multiple-family dwelling development may be
occupied by physically handicapped persons of any age.
            5.   For the purpose of this section, the following definition
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning:
               HANDICAPPED PERSON. A person having an impairment which:
                  i.   Is expected to be of long, continued and indefinite
duration;
                  ii.   Substantially impedes his or her ability to live
independently; and
                  iii.   Is of a nature that such disability could be improved
by more suitable housing conditions.
            6.   The development shall have recorded against the title to the
underlying land, covenants running with the land complying with the Illinois
Human Rights Act, P.A. 90-581, ILCS Chapter 775, Act 5, §§ 3-101 et seq., and
the Fair Housing Act, 42 USC § 3607, as they may be amended from time to time,
restricting the dwelling units within the development to "housing for older
persons" as defined therein.
            7.   Variations permitted. A senior citizen development and the
buildings therein shall be so designed as to accommodate the specific needs and
serve the convenience of the residents. To this end, the developer is
encouraged to increase the open area, eliminate any unnecessary parking space,
and in general, so plan the development as to serve the residents to the
greatest degree possible consistent with needs of the community.
               a.   The special use permit may allow an increase of up to one
square foot in lot coverage by the principal building or buildings for each
additional square foot of open space provided beyond the minimum requirements
of the district.
               b.   The bulk regulations and height regulations of the district
may be modified by the special use permit to serve the intent and purpose of
this chapter, including the desire to provide adequate senior citizen dwellings
for the residents of the village.
               c.   The regulations of the district concerning off-street
parking spaces may be modified by the provisions of the special use permit
provided that there is furnished a number of off-street parking spaces to serve
the reasonable requirements of those residents who possess automobiles, their
visitors and delivery vehicles; provided further, that in no event shall the
number of off-street parking spaces be reduced to a number less than 50% of the
number of dwelling units. It is the purpose of this provision to authorize a
reduced number of parking spaces, thereby enabling the developer to furnish
more open space for the use and enjoyment of the residents of the development.
               d.   There may be located in any senior citizen development as
accessory uses, retail business and personal service facilities designed and
intended for the exclusive use and convenience of the residents thereof;
provided, the shops occupy not more than 5% of the total floor area of the
building or buildings in the development; provided further, there is no
business sign or pedestrian entrance for the shops located on or at the
exterior of any building in the development.
               e.   The floor area ratio may be increased to a number not to
exceed 0.6.
            8.   Inspections. The village shall have the right, on reasonable
notice, to inspect the records of the development to verify that the provisions
of this chapter and of the special use permit are being fulfilled.
         (c)   Public utility and public service use.
            1.   Uses and facilities include: electric sub-stations and booster
stations; telephone exchanges, repeater stations, micro-wave relay towers and
stations, antenna towers and other outdoor equipment essential to the operation
of the exchange in the interest of the public convenience; potable water well
head stations, well separators, pumping stations, water filtration plants,
reservoirs, and storage tanks and towers; natural gas regulator stations and
similar above the ground facilities customarily used for the distribution,
transmission or storage of natural gas as a part of the operation of a public
utility; and satellite dishes as accessory to any of the above.
            2.   The use shall be located more than 200 feet from the boundary
of a residential use.
            3.   Natural gas equipment and other installations may be in
completely enclosed buildings or in the open, but along with electric
substations and booster stations, must be completely enclosed behind two-inch
or less mesh chainlink fence or equal, no less than six feet in height.
         (d)   Roadside stands.
            1.   Limited to the sale of produce and poultry grown and raised on
or in the immediate area of the premises; does not include live animals.
            2.   The stand shall not contain more than 600 square feet of floor
area.
            3.   The stand shall provide facilities for vehicular ingress and
egress and adequate off-street parking approved by the Building Inspector.
         (e)   Home occupations.
            1.   Permitted home occupations may include any of the following:
               a.   Art studio;
               b.   Dressmaking;
               c.   Professional offices of a clergyman, physician, dentist,
lawyer, architect, engineer or accountant, but limited to one employee at any
one time;
               d.   Teaching, including musical instruments or dancing, but not
limited to one pupil at a time; and
               e.   Similar and compatible uses to those listed as permitted
home occupations.
            2.   Permitted home occupations shall not extend to any use
including or similar, but not limited to, the following:
               a.   The operation of any wholesale or retail business or
service unless conducted entirely by mail or telephone and does not involve the
sale, repair, receipt or delivery of merchandise on the premises;
               b.   Any manufacturing or processing of goods, materials or
products;
               c.   A repair shop or service establishment of any kind
operating on or from the premises;
               d.   A clinic or hospital;
               e.   A barber shop or beauty parlor; and
               f.   A stable or kennel.
         (f)   Maternity group homes.
            1.   No maternity group home development shall be located on a lot
of less than 25,000 square feet in area per residential building.
            2.   No maternity group home development shall contain more than
six bedrooms per residential building.
            3.   A maternity group home development may consist of one or more
principal buildings otherwise complying with the provisions of the zoning
district and special use.
            4.   The maternity group home development shall have common use
kitchen and dining facilities.
   (B)   Except in the case of planned developments, only one principal
building is permitted on any lot and no principal building shall be constructed
across the lot line of a subdivided lot otherwise classified by amendment to
this chapter unless a variation is granted pursuant hereto.
   (C)   Signs shall be subject to the regulations contained in
Chapter 156 of this code of ordinances.
   (D)   Noise shall be limited in accordance with provisions set forth herein.
   (E)   Loading berths shall be in accordance with provisions set forth
herein.
   (F)   Parking spaces shall be in accordance with provisions set forth
herein.
   (G)   For purposes of computing minimum floor area in resident districts,
the floor area shall not include accessory buildings or accessory uses in
primary structures such as automobile garages, whether attached or detached.
(1981 Code, Art. VII, A) (Ord. passed 12- -1986; Am. Ord. 90-19, passed 1-15-
1990; Am. Ord. 13-09, passed 4-1-2013; Am. Ord. 22-40, passed 8-22-2022)
§ 157.031 E, ESTATE RESIDENCE DISTRICT.
   (A)   Generally.
      (1)   Lot area is not to be less than 43,560 square feet.
      (2)   Lot width is to be not less than 120 feet at the building line.
      (3)   Minimum floor area per dwelling:
         (a)   One-story dwellings: not less than 2,500 square feet on the
ground floor and shall not include attached garages, breezeways or porches.
         (b)   Dwellings having more than one story: not less than 2,500 square
feet for all floors.
         (c)   Split-level dwellings: not less than 2,500 square feet for the
first two floors of living area, which floors must be fully exposed on all
elevations, without including in the computation thereof any living area below
or partially below, ground level.
      (4)   Floor area ratio is not to exceed 0.3.
      (5)   Building height is not to exceed two and one-half stories, or 30
feet, whichever is lower.
      (6)   (a)   The front yard is to be not less than 35 feet in depth.
         (b)   Side yards:
            1.   Two side yards each having a width of not less than 10% of the
lot width or 20 feet, whichever is greater.
            2.   A side yard abutting a street shall be deemed a front yard.
         (c)   Rear yard is to be not less than 40 feet in depth.
      (7)   Private wells and on-site sewage disposal systems are permitted
only in the E district; provided that, suitable soil and slope conditions for
on-site systems are present and the systems are approved by the village.
   (B)   Permitted uses. See §
157.030(A).
   (C)   Special uses. See §
157.030(A).
(1981 Code, Art. VII, B) (Ord. passed 12- -1986; Am. Ord. 90-9, passed 5-7-
1990; Am. Ord. 13-09, passed 4-1-2013)
§ 157.032 R-1, SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT.
   (A)   General conditions.
      (1)   Lot area is to be not less than 18,000 square feet.
      (2)   Lot width is to be not less than 100 feet.
      (3)   Minimum floor area per dwelling:
         (a)   One-story dwellings: not less than 1,350 square feet on ground
floor.
         (b)   Dwellings having more than one story: not less than 1,000 square
feet on ground floor and not less than 1,350 square feet for all floors.
         (c)   Split-level dwelling: not less than 1,350 square feet on the
first two floors of living area without including in the computation thereof
any living area below, or partially below, ground level.
      (4)   Floor area ratio is not to exceed 0.3.
      (5)   Building height is not to exceed two and one-half stories or 30
feet, whichever is lower.
      (6)   Yards:
         (a)   Front yard is not to be less than 35 feet in depth.
         (b)   Side yards:
            1.   Two side yards having a combined width of 20 feet and neither
side yard less than eight feet in width.
            2.   A side yard abutting a street not to be less than 30 feet
wide.
         (c)   Rear yard is not to be less than 40 feet in depth.
   (B)   Permitted uses. See §
157.030(A).
   (C)   Special uses. See §
157.030(A).
(1981 Code, Art. VII, C) (Ord. passed 12- -1986; Am. Ord. 13-09, passed 4-1-
2013)
§ 157.033 R-2, SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT.
   (A)   Purpose. The R-2, single-family residence, district is intended
primarily to preserve and protect existing single-family residences constructed
on smaller lots. The district should be mapped in those areas where dwellings
are presently construed on smaller lots and where small tracts of developable
land are available, in order to maintain and enhance the character of these
areas.
   (B)   General conditions.
      (1)   Lot area is to be not less than 9,000 square feet.
      (2)   Lot width is to be not less than 75 feet.
      (3)   Minimum floor area per dwelling.
         (a)   One-story dwellings: not less than 1,000 square feet on the
ground floor.
         (b)   Dwellings having more than one story: not less than 600 square
feet on the ground floor and not less than 1,000 square feet for all floors.
         (c)   Split-level dwelling: not less than 1,000 square feet on the
first two floors of living area without including in the computation thereof
any living area below, or partially below, ground level.
      (4)   Floor area ratio is not to exceed 0.4.
      (5)   Building height is not to exceed two and one-half stories or 30
feet, whichever is lower.
      (6)   Yards:
         (a)   Front yard is not to be less than 30 feet in depth.
         (b)   Side yards:
            1.   Side yards having not less than 10% of the total lot width for
each side, but not less than five linear feet each side to any portion of any
principle structure, including overhangs, porches, mechanical equipment,
stoops, chimneys or the like. A side yard need not be more than eight linear
feet, except where a driveway exists or is proposed, not less than ten linear
feet.
            2.   A side yard abutting a street not to be less than 30 feet
wide.
         (c)   Rear yard is not to be less than 30 feet in depth.
   (C)   Permitted uses. See §
157.030(A).
   (D)   Special uses. See §
157.030(A).
(1981 Code, Art. VII, D) (Ord. passed 12- -1986; Am. Ord. 04-01, passed 1-5-
2004; Am. Ord. 04-15, passed 5-17-2004; Am. Ord. 13-09, passed 4-1-2013)
§ 157.034 R-3, SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT.
   (A)   Purpose. The R-3, single-family residence, district is intended
primarily to preserve and protect existing single-family residences constructed
on smaller lots. The district should be mapped in those areas where dwellings
are presently constructed on smaller lots, and where small tracts of
developable land are available, in order to maintain and enhance the character
of these areas.
   (B)   General conditions.
      (1)   Lot area is to be not less than 7,200 square feet.
      (2)   Lot width is to be not less than 60 feet.
      (3)   Minimum floor area per dwelling.
         (a)   One-story dwellings: not less than 800 square feet on the ground
floor.
         (b)   Dwellings having more than one story: not less than 500 square
feet on the ground floor and not less than 800 square feet for all floors.
         (c)   Split-level dwelling: not less than 800 square feet on the first
two floors of living area without including in the computation thereof any
living area below, or partially below, ground level.
      (4)   Building height is not to exceed two and one-half stories or 30
feet, whichever is lower.
      (5)   Yards:
         (a)   Front yard setback shall not be less than 25 linear feet to any
part of a structure not including up to five steps open to the sky.
         (b)   Side yards:
            1.   Side yards having not less than 10% of the total lot width for
each side, but not less than five linear feet each side to any portion of any
principle structure, including overhangs, porches, mechanical equipment,
stoops, chimneys or the like. A side yard need not be more than eight linear
feet, except where a driveway exists or is proposed, not less than ten linear
feet.
            2.   A side yard abutting a street not to be less than 25 feet
wide.
         (c)   Rear yard is not to be less than 30 feet in depth.
   (C)   Permitted uses. See §
157.030(A).
   (D)   Special uses. See §
157.030(A).
   (E)   Kimball Hill variations to R-3 and R-4 zoning districts.
      (1)   The areas designated for detached single-family dwelling units be
approved for the approved for the R-3 zoning classification with a minimum lot
size not less than 9,000 square feet.
      (2)   Single-family lots shall be subject to the yard dimension
variations set forth:
         (a)   Front yard to be not less than 25 feet where a 30-foot minimum
is required.
         (b)   Side yard abutting a street to be not less than 25 feet where a
30-foot minimum is required.
         (c)   Rear yard to be not less than 30 feet where a 40-foot minimum is
required.
      (3)   The area designated for attached single-family dwelling units be
approved for the R-4 zoning classification with no more than 160 dwelling units
permitted.
      (4)   Single-family development shall be subject to the yard dimension
variations set forth:
         (a)   Front yard to be not less than 25 feet where a 35-foot minimum
is required.
         (b)   Side yard abutting a street to be not less than 25 feet where a
30-foot minimum is required.
         (c)   Rear yard to be not less than 30 feet where a 40-foot minimum is
required. This variation is for building exclusively.
      (5)   Attached single-family development to be allowed to utilize cul-de-
sac streets as noted on the preliminary development plan.
      (6)   The complete development shall be subject to the notations and
comments of the Village Engineer’s memo dated May 4, 1994.
(1981 Code, Art. VII, E) (Ord. passed 12- -1986; Am. Ord. 87-24, passed 12-7-
1987; Am. Ord. 98-10, passed 5-4-1998; Am. Ord. 04-01, passed 1-5-2004; Am.
Ord. 04-15, passed 5-17-2004; Am. Ord. 13-09, passed 4-1-2013)
§ 157.035 R-4, GENERAL RESIDENCE DISTRICT.
   (A)   General conditions.
      (1)   Lot area:
         (a)   Single-family detached dwellings: 9,000 square feet.
         (b)   Two-family detached dwellings: 8,000 square feet per dwelling
unit.
         (c)   Two-family semi-detached dwellings, duplex: 8,000 square feet
per dwelling unit.
         (d)   Attached dwellings, group, row and townhouses: 8,000 square feet
per dwelling unit.
      (2)   Lot width:
         (a)   Not less than 75 feet at the buildable area for single-family
detached or two-family detached dwellings; and
         (b)   Not less than 90 feet for two-family semi-detached, attached
dwellings and multiple- family dwellings.
      (3)   Floor area:
         (a)   Single-family detached dwellings:
            1.   One-story dwellings: not less than 1,000 square feet on the
ground floor of each dwelling unit.
            2.   Dwellings having more than one story: not less than 600 square
feet on the ground floor and not less than 1,000 square feet for ail floors of
each dwelling unit.
            3.   Split-level dwellings: not less than 1,000 square feet on the
first two floors of living area without including in the computation thereof
any living area below, or partially below, ground level of each dwelling unit.
         (b)   Two-family semi-detached dwellings:
            1.   One-story dwellings: not less than 1,200 square feet on the
ground floor each dwellings unit.
            2.   Dwellings having more than one story: not less than 600 square
feet on the ground floor and not less than 1,200 square feet for all floors of
each dwelling unit.
            3.   Split-level dwellings: not less than 1,200 square feet on the
first two floors of living area without including in the computation thereof
any living area below, or partially below, ground level of each dwelling unit.
         (c)   Two-family detached dwellings: not less than 1,200 square feet
per each dwellings unit.
      (4)   Floor area ratio not to exceed 0.4.
      (5)   Building height not to exceed two and one-half stories or 30 feet,
whichever is lower.
      (6)   Yards: same as in the R-1 district.
      (7)   Efficiency dwelling units are not permitted.
      (8)   Off-street parking for attached dwellings:
         (a)   One and three-quarter parking spaces per dwelling unit; and
         (b)   Size as per §§
157.120 through
157.127.
   (B)   Permitted uses. See §
157.030(A).
   (C)   Special uses. See §
157.030(A).
(1981 Code, Art. VII, F) (Ord. passed 12- -1986; Am. Ord. 98-10, passed 5-4-
1998; Am. Ord. 99-02, passed 3-1-1999; Am. Ord. 13-09, passed 4-1-2013)
§ 157.036 R-5, MULTIPLE DWELLING RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.
   (A)   General conditions.
      (1)   Lot area, multiple-family dwellings:
         (a)   Two bedroom: not less than 4,300 square feet.
         (b)   One bedroom: not less than 4,000 square feet.
      (2)   Lot width is to be not less than 100 feet.
      (3)   Minimum floor area:
         (a)   Efficiency units (special use): not less than 500 square feet.
         (b)   One bedroom: not less than 650 square feet.
         (c)   Two bedroom: not less than 850 square feet.
         (d)   Three bedroom (special use): not less than 1,050 square feet.
      (4)   Floor area ratio not to exceed 0.4.
      (5)   Building height is not to exceed two and one-half stories or 30
feet, whichever is lower.
      (6)   Yards: same as R-1 district.
      (7)   Efficiency dwelling units are not permitted, except under special
uses.
      (8)   Spacing between buildings:
         (a)   Not less than 50 feet when any part of the front wall of a
dwelling is opposite the front wall or rear wall of the dwelling located on the
same lot or adjoining lot.
         (b)   Not less than 40 feet when any part of the rear wall of a
dwelling is opposite the rear wall of the nearest dwelling located on the same
lot or an adjoining lot.
         (c)   Not less than 20 feet when any part of the side wall dwelling
located on the same lot of adjoining lot.
         (d)   Not less than 30 feet when any part of the side wall of the
dwelling is opposite the front or rear wall of the nearest dwelling located on
the same lot or adjoining lot.
         (e)   In courts, a corner at the ends of a front or rear wall of a
dwelling that is located at the end of a court, shall be at least 20 feet from
the nearest corner of a front or rear wall of a dwelling forming the side of
the court.
      (9)   Off-street parking:
         (a)   One and three-quarters parking spaces per dwelling unit; and
         (b)   Size as per §§
157.120 through
157.127.
      (10)   The number of bedrooms per dwelling unit allowable shall not
exceed two, except under special uses.
   (B)   Permitted uses. See §
157.030(A).
   (C)   Special uses. See §
157.030(A).
(1981 Code, Art. VII, F) (Ord. passed 12- -1986; Am. Ord. 99-02, passed 3-1-
1999; Am. Ord. 13-09, passed 4-1-2013)
§ 157.037 AG-1, AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT.
   (A)   Purpose. There shall be established a zoning district to be known as
AG-1, agricultural, district. This district is established to protect land best
suited for the production of crops, to prevent the mixture of urban and rural
uses which would contribute to the premature termination of agricultural
pursuits and to conform to this chapter and the regulations thereunder to the
land uses as permitted herein.
   (B)   Permitted uses. See §
157.030(A).
   (C)   Accessory uses. See §
157.030(A).
   (D)   Special uses. See §
157.030(A).
   (E)   Minimum lot area. The minimum lot area of ten acres shall be provided.
   (F)   Building setback. Every building hereafter erected or enlarged shall
provide and maintain a setback from the public street in accordance with the
following requirements:
      (1)   Primary thoroughfares: 60 feet from the property line or 110 feet
from the center line of the right-of-way, whichever distance is greater.
      (2)   Collector thoroughfares: 50 feet from the property line or 90 feet
from the center line of the right-of-way, whichever is greater.
      (3)   All other streets: 50 feet from the property line or 80 feet from
the center line of the right- of-way, whichever is greater.
      (4)   Side yards: each building hereafter erected or remodeled shall have
a side yard on each side of each building of not less than 40 feet.
   (G)   Permitted signs. Signs shall be subject to the regulations contained
in
Chapter 156 of this code of ordinances.
      (1)   Temporary signs not exceeding four square feet in area, pertaining
to farm produces for sale on the premises where the sign is located; provided,
the sign is removed before December 31 of the crop year.
      (2)   Flashing and rotating lights or signs are prohibited. All
mechanical devices on signs are prohibited. External lighting is allowed.
(1981 Code, Art. VII, H) (Ord. passed 12- -1986; Am. Ord. 90-19, passed 10-15-
1990; Am. Ord. 13-09, passed 4-1-2013)
BUSINESS DISTRICTS
§ 157.050 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Purpose.
      (1)   The business districts set forth herein are established to protect
public health, to promote public safety, comfort, convenience and the general
welfare and to protect the economic base of the village and the value of the
property.
      (2)   These general purposes include, among others, the following
objectives:
         (a)   To promote the most desirable use of land in accordance with a
well considered plan so that adequate space is provided in appropriate
locations for the various types of business uses, thereby protecting and
strengthening the economic base of the village;
         (b)   To place in separate districts those businesses which may create
noise, odors, hazards, unsightliness or which may generate excessive traffic;
         (c)   To permit selected business uses in districts adjacent to
residential areas where sufficient value or convenience to the residential area
offsets the disadvantages of the business use;
         (d)   To encourage the grouping in appropriate locations of compatible
business uses which will tend to draw trade that is mutually interchangeable
and so promote public convenience and business prosperity and contribute to the
alleviation of traffic and pedestrian congestion by encouraging the use of a
common ingress and egress;
         (e)   To promote the establishment of off-street parking facilities
permitted and required so as to alleviate traffic congestion and so promote
shopping convenience and business prosperity; and
         (f)   To promote design appearance, style and construction of
structures in the business districts which will be essentially compatible with
the residential character of the village.
   (B)   Business districts. The business districts described in this
subchapter include:
      (1)   B-1, downtown business district;
      (2)   B-2, community business district;
      (3)   B-3, service business district;
      (4)   B-4, automotive business district; and
      (5)   O-D, office district.
   (C)   Special uses.
      (1)   It is recognized that there are certain uses which, because of
their unique characteristics, cannot be properly classified without
consideration of the impact, in each case, of these uses upon neighboring land
and of the public need for the particular use at the particular location.
      (2)   These uses fall into two categories:
         (a)   Uses publicly operated or traditionally affected with a public
interest; or
         (b)   Private uses of such an unusual nature the their operation may
give rise to unique problems with respect to their impact upon neighboring
property.
      (3)   The special uses listed in each district may be permitted by the
adoption of a special use ordinance by the Village Board of Trustees upon
receiving the recommendation of the Plan Commission. The procedures for
requesting a special use permit are described in §§
157.190 through
157.192.
   (D)   Accessory uses.
      (1)   These uses include building or other structures customarily
incidental to and commonly associated with a permitted or special use. These
uses may be permitted provided they are operated and maintained under the same
ownership and on the same lot as the permitted or special use and do not
include structures or structural features inconsistent with these uses and do
not involve the conduct of any business, profession, trade or industry.
      (2)   A further discussion on, and the standards for accessory buildings
and uses, are described in §§
157.080 through
157.092.
   (E)   Lot and bulk provisions. With the exception of planned developments,
these regulations shall be as set forth under each specific business district
contained herein.
   (F)   Allowable use of land or buildings. 
      (1)   Allowable uses table. Permitted uses, special uses, accessory uses,
and temporary uses in the business districts shall be as indicated on the
following table. All other provisions of this chapter to the contrary
notwithstanding, the Building Inspector shall determine whether a proposed use
that is not specifically listed on the table is most similar to and compatible
with one or more permitted uses, special uses, accessory uses, temporary uses,
or prohibited uses and classify the use accordingly. Such determinations shall
be recorded in writing and maintained on file in the Village Clerk's office.
Allowable
uses of land
and          Downtown     Community    Service      Automotive
buildings:   Business     Business     Business     Service      Office
P: Permitted District (B- District (B- District (B- Business     District (O-D)
by-right     1)           2)           3)           District (B-
S: Permitted                                        4)
by special
use permit
                                                                               Downtown Community Service  Automotive
Allowable uses of land and buildings:                                          Business Business  Business Service    Office
P: Permitted by-right                                                          District District  District Business   District
S: Permitted by special use permit                                             (B-1)    (B-2)     (B-3)    District   (O-D)
                                                                                                           (B-4)
(a) Agriculture and natural resource uses.
1. Resource conservation.                                                                                          
2. Cultivation.                                                                                                    
3. Livestock.                                                                                                      
4. Agricultural support.                                                                                           
   Farm and garden supply store                                                              P                   
   Feed store                                                                                P                   
5. Mineral extraction and batch operations.                                                                        
(b) Residential uses.
1. Single-family and two-unit dwellings.                                                                           
2. Multiple-family dwellings.                                                                                      
   Residential units above the first floor of any business; subject to the
provisions of §                                                               P        S         S                  S
157.050(F)(2)(a)
3. Group living facilities.                                                                                        
(c) Retail uses.
1. General merchandise.                                                                                            
   Art and school supply store                                              P        P         P                   
   Appliance store                                                          P        P         P                   
   Art gallery                                                              P        P         P                   
   Bicycle store; includes sales, retail and repair                         P        P         P                   
   Book and stationery store                                                P        P         P                   
   Building material sales                                                                   S                   
   Casket and casket supplies sales                                                          P                   
   Catalog store                                                            P        P         P                   
   China and glassware store                                                P        P         P                   
   Clothing and art needlework store; includes production, alteration and   P        P         P                   
repair for on-site retail sale
   Coin, philatelic, stamp and numismatic store                             P        P         P                   
   Department store                                                         P        P         P                   
   Direct selling establishment where products are stored                                    P                   
   Drapery store                                                            P        P         P                   
   Drug store or pharmacy                                                   P        P         P                   
   Floor covering store; includes rugs, linoleum and carpets                P        P         P                   
   Flower shop                                                              P        P         P                   
   Furniture store; includes upholstering when conducted as part of the retaPl       P         P                   
operation and secondary to the principal use
   Furrier shop; includes incidental storage & conditioning of furs         P        P         P                   
   Gift shop                                                                P        P         P                   
   Gun shop                                                                                  S                   
   Hearing aid store                                                        P        P         P                   
   Hobby shop                                                               P        P         P                   
   Indoor mall                                                                               S                   
   Jewelry and watch store; includes production, alteration and repair for oP-       P         P                   
site retail sale
   Leather goods and luggage store                                          P        P         P                   
   Millinery shop                                                           P        P         P                   
   Music shop                                                               P        P         P                   
   Office supplies and stationery                                           P        P         P                   
   Orthopedic and medical appliance store; does not include the assembly or                  P                   
manufacture of articles
   Paint and wallpaper store                                                P        P         P                   
   Pet shop                                                                 P        P         P                   
   Sewing machine sales and service                                         P        P         P                   
   Sporting goods store; does not include the sale of firearms as defined inP        P         P                   
this chapter
   Tack shop                                                                P        P         P                   
   Tile store; includes wall and floor                                      P        P         P                   
   Tombstone and monument sales                                                              P                   
   Toy store                                                                P        P         P                   
   Trading stamp store                                                      P        P         P                   
   Variety and notion store                                                 P        P         P                   
2. Food and beverage.                                                                                              
   Bakery; includes manufacture of goods for on-site retail sale only       P        P         P                   
   Butcher shop                                                             P        P         P                   
   Candy and confectionery store                                            P        P         P                   
   Dairy products store                                                     P        P         P                   
   Grocery and food store                                                   P        P         P                   
   Package liquor store                                                     S        S         S                   
   Roadside stand                                                                            S                   
3. Greenhouses and nurseries.                                                                                      
   Greenhouse and nursery; retail and wholesale                                              P                   
(d) Clubs, restaurants, taverns and lodging uses.
1. Clubs, lodges and meeting halls.                                                                                
   Clubs, lodges and meeting halls; private, fraternal or religious with no P        P         P                  P
live entertainment or dancing
   Clubs, lodges and meeting halls; private, fraternal or religious with livS        S         S                  S
entertainment or dancing
2. Restaurants, specialty foods and taverns.                                                                       
   Banquet hall                                                             S        S         S        S           
   Brew pub                                                                 P        P         P                   
   Brew pub; with live entertainment                                        S        S         S                   
   Delicatessen                                                             P        P         P        P          S
   Ice cream shop                                                           P        P         P        P          S
   Restaurant; no live entertainment                                        P        P         P        P          S
   Restaurant; with live entertainment                                      S        S         S        S           
   Restaurant; drive-in or drive-through facilities                         S        S         S        P           
   Taverns                                                                  P        P         P                  S
   Taverns; with live entertainment                                         S        S         S                   
3. Lodging.                                                                                                        
   Hotel; includes apartment hotel, dining room and meeting rooms                            S        S          S
   Motel                                                                                     S        S           
(e) Recreation and entertainment uses; public and private.
1. Indoor recreation and entertainment.                                                                            
   Billiard and pool hall                                                                    S                   
   Bowling alley                                                                             S                   
   Commercial sports and entertainment establishment; subject to the licensure
requirements of                                                                                 S                   
Chapter 118 of the East Dundee Code of Ordinances
   Community center buildings, public or non-profit; includes clubhouses,
recreation buildings, gymnasiums, swim clubs, swimming pools, tennis clubs,            S         S        S          S
tennis courts, roller skating and ice skating rinks
   Game rooms; employing amusement devices commonly known as pinball machines,
shuffleboards, bowling machines and coin-operated games of skill subject to
the licensure requirements of                                                  S        S         S                   
Chapter 112 of the East Dundee Code of Ordinances, but does not include
regulation bowling alleys or pool or billiard tables
   Museum                                                                                    P                  S
   Shooting range                                                                            S                   
   Theater                                                                  S        S         S        S           
2. Outdoor recreation and entertainment.                                                                           
   Drive-in theater                                                                                  S           
   Outdoor private amusement establishment; includes trampoline center,                      S                   
miniature golf course, kiddy park and the like
   Parks and playgrounds, not-for-profit                                    S        S         S        S          S
   Parks and playgrounds, public                                            P        P         P        P          P
   Swimming clubs and pools                                                                  P                  P
   Tennis clubs and courts                                                                   P                  P
(f) Service, contracting, storage and broadcasting uses.
1. Personal services.                                                                                              
   Barber shop                                                              P        P         P                  S
   Beauty parlor                                                            P        P         P                  S
   Massage establishments and massage services as defined in §             S        S         S                   
111.01
   Accessory use massage services as defined in §                          P        P         P                   
111.02 as exceptions
   Permanent cosmetics, microblading, micropigmentation and similar care    P        P         P                   
services
   Tattooing                                                                S        S         S                   
2. Dry cleaning and laundry services.                                                                              
   Dry cleaning and laundry establishment, without drive-through; employing
not more than 5 persons where on-site equipment for dry cleaning does not      P        P         P                  S
exceed units of 30-pound capacity
   Dry cleaning and laundry establishment, with drive-through; employing not
more than 5 persons where on-site equipment for dry cleaning does not exceed                    S                  S
units of 30-pound capacity
3. Finance, insurance and real estate services.                                                                    
   Automatic teller machine as stand-alone structure                                S         S        S          S
   Bank                                                                     P        P         P                  P
   Credit agency                                                            P        P         P                  P
   Currency exchange                                                                P         P                  P
   Financial institution                                                    P        P         P                  P
   Insurance agency                                                         P        P         P                  P
   Investment company                                                       P        P         P                  P
   Loan company                                                             P        P         P                  P
   Real estate office                                                       P        P         P                  P
   Savings and loan                                                         P        P         P                  P
   Security and commodity broker                                            P        P         P                  P
4. General services.                                                                                               
   Auction room                                                                              S        S           
   Catering establishment                                                                    P                   
   Clothing and costume rental store                                        P        P         P                   
   Detective agency                                                         P        P         P                  P
   Employment agency                                                        P        P         P                  P
   Photographic studio; includes developing and printing as part of the retaPl       P         P                  S
business
   Picture framing; conducted for retail trade                              P        P         P                   
   Printing shop; limited to presses having not more than 14 inches by 20   P        P         P                  P
inches in size
   Secretarial service                                                      P        P         P                  P
   Scientific research agency                                               P        P         P                  P
   Shoe repair shop                                                         P        P         P                   
   Tailor, hat and clothes repair or dressmaker shop                        P        P         P                   
   Taxidermist                                                                               P                   
   Testing laboratory                                                                        S                   
   Travel bureau and transportation ticket office                           P        P         P        P          P
   Undertaking establishment and funeral parlor                                     S         S        S           
5. Contractor and repair shops and showrooms.                                                                      
   Artists and industrial design studio                                     P        P         P                  P
   Furniture repair and upholstery                                                           P                   
   General minor repair or fix it shop                                      P        P         P                   
   Interior decorating studio; includes upholstery and making draperies, slip
covers and other similar articles when conducted as a secondary activity to    P        P         P                   
the principal use
   Lawn mower repair shop                                                           S         P        S           
   Locksmith                                                                P        P         P                   
   Building services and supplies; no outside storage                               S         P        S           
   Contractor shop; no outdoor storage                                              S         P        S           
   Electrical shop and supply shop                                                  S         P        S           
   Exterminating service                                                            S         P        S           
   Heating and air conditioning retail sales and service                            S         P        S           
   Plumbing and heating showroom and shop                                           S         P        S           
   Refrigeration shop, service and repair                                           S         P        S           
   Swimming pool sales and service                                                           P                   
   Sewer cleaning and rodding shop                                                           P                   
   Sign contractor; no outside storage                                              S         P        S           
   Window cleaning firm                                                             S         P        S           
6. Equipment and supplies.                                                                                         
   Bottled gas dealer                                                                        P        P           
   Business machines store                                                  P        P         P                   
   Equipment and appliance repair shop                                                       P                   
   Equipment rental and leasing service                                                      P                   
   Milk machine sales                                                                        P                   
   Water softener service                                                                    P                   
   Water sales and bottling                                                                  P                   
7. Storage, transport and mail order sales.                                                                        
   Ambulance service                                                                         S        S           
   Frozen food locker                                                                        P                   
   Limousine service                                                        P        P         P        P          S
   Mail order sales and warehousing                                                          P                   
   Storage, warehousing and wholesale establishments; does not include fuel                  S                   
oil, gasoline and other flammable material
8. Broadcasting facilities and recording studios.                                                                  
   Radio and television broadcasting studio                                                  P                  S
   Recording studio                                                                          P                  S
(g) Automotive and related uses.
1. Accessory sales.                                                                                                
   Automobile accessory, tire and battery stores                                    S         S        P           
2. Fuels sales, service and repair.                                                                                
   Automobile fuel sales; with or without service                                   S         S        S           
   Automobile and truck service without fuel sales; includes car washes, oil        S         S        S           
change service, repair facilities, and related uses not otherwise listed
   Body and fender shop                                                                      S        S           
   Paint shop                                                                                S        S           
3. Parking.                                                                                                        
   Parking lot; commercial                                                  S        S         P        P          S
4. Vehicle sales and rental. In districts where the following uses require a
special use permit, the provisions of §                                                                           
157.050(F)(2)(b) also shall apply.
   Boat dealer                                                                               S        P           
   Camper dealer (sales)                                                                     S        P           
   Mobile home dealer                                                                        S        P           
   Motor vehicle dealer, new or used                                                         S        P           
   Motor vehicle dealer; used only                                                  S         S        P           
   Motorcycle sales                                                                          S        P           
   Recreation vehicle sales or rental                                                        S        P           
   Snowmobile, sales and service                                                             S        P           
   Trailer sale or rental                                                                    S        P           
(h) Office uses.
1. Professional offices.                                                                                           
   Accounting, auditing and bookkeeping                                     P        P         P                  P
   Attorney and law office                                                  P        P         P                  P
   Business and professional office                                         P        P         P                  P
   Business office in which goods, wares or merchandise are displayed and soPd       P         P                  P
on the premise
   Engineering and architectural service                                    P        P         P                  P
   Land surveyor                                                            P        P         P                  P
   Landscape architect                                                      P        P         P                  P
   Newspaper office; does not include printing                              P        P         P                   
   Professional Consultant                                                  P        P         P                  P
2. Organizations.                                                                                                  
   Better Business Bureau                                                   P        P         P                  P
   Chamber of Commerce                                                      P        P         P                  P
   Charitable organization                                                  P        P         P                  P
   Civic association                                                        P        P         P                  P
   Labor union and organization                                             P        P         P                  P
   Merchants association                                                    P        P         P                  P
   News syndicate                                                           P        P         P                  P
   Political organization                                                   P        P         P                  P
   Professional membership association                                      P        P         P                  P
   Real estate board                                                        P        P         P                  P
   Social service and fraternal association                                 P        P         P                  P
   Trade association                                                        P        P         P                  P
(i) Healthcare and veterinary uses.
1. Medical and dental offices, clinics and labs.                                                                   
   Chiropodist's office and podiatrist's office                             P        P         P                  P
   Chiropractor's office                                                    P        P         P                  P
   Dentist's office                                                         P        P         P                  P
   Doctor's, surgeon's and/or physician's office                            P        P         P                  P
   Laboratory, medical and dental                                           P        P         P                  P
   Medical and dental clinic                                                P        P         P                  P
   Optician's office                                                        P        P         P                  P
   Osteopath's office                                                       P        P         P                  P
2. Hospitals and care homes.                                                                                       
   Convalescent center, nursing home, geriatric center and rest home                         S                  S
   Hospitals or sanitariums                                                                  S                  S
3. Veterinarian offices, hospitals and kennels.                                                                    
   Veterinary clinic and animal hospital; without outdoor kennels           P        P         P                  P
   Veterinary clinic and animal hospital; with outdoor kennels                               S                   
(j) Manufacturing uses.
1. Manufacturing.                                                                                                  
(k) Public, educational and institutional uses.
1. General public.                                                                                                 
   Library and branch library                                               S        S         S        S          S
   Police or fire station                                                   S        S         S        S          S
   Post office and post office sub-station                                  S        S         S        S          S
   Public service or municipal garage                                                                S           
2. Educational.                                                                                                    
   Dancing school or studio                                                 P        P         P                  P
   Music school with sales                                                  P        P         P                  P
   Schools, public or private; non-boarding elementary, middle, high, colleg                                   P
and university
   Schools, business, trade or vocational; non-boarding public or private                    P        P          P
3. Childcare.                                                                                                      
   Nursery school; includes children’s day school, day nursery child care S        S         S                  S
center and day care center
4. Institutional and assembly.                                                                                     
   Church, chapel, temple and synagogue                                     S        S         S                  P
   Convention hall and center                                                                S                  S
   Religious reading room                                                   P        P         P                  P
(l) Transportation, utility and solid waste uses.
1. Transportation.                                                                                                 
   Public transportation facilities; includes shelters, terminals, parking                   S        S           
areas and service buildings
   Transit and transportation passenger shelter                             S        S         S        S          S
2. Utility.                                                                                                        
   Public utility and public service use; subject to the provisions of §   S        S         S        S          S
157.050(F)(2)(c)
   Telephone booth                                                          S        S         S        S          S
3. Solid waste.                                                                                                    
(m) Accessory uses.
1. Accessory to agricultural uses.                                                                                 
2. Accessory to residential uses.                                                                                  
   Accessory uses provided in accordance with the provisions of §          P        P         P                  P
157.085
3. Accessory to commercial uses.                                                                                   
   Accessory uses provided in accordance with the provisions of §          P        P         P        P          P
157.085
   Firearm coating, refinishing, adding accessories and general modification                 S                   
accessory to gun shop
   Offices ancillary to any permitted or special use                        P        P         P        P          P
   Open sales lot                                                                                    S           
   Pet crematorium; operated as an accessory use to a permitted principal use
providing services to household pets such as a kennel, veterinary, clinic,                      S                   
animal hospital, or pet groomer.
   Residential dwelling unit for the owner or manager of the principal
business; all other village ordinances must be complied with including fire    S        S         S                  S
and life safety codes
   Storage yard; materials or equipment for on-site sales only                                       S           
4. Accessory to manufacturing uses.                                                                                
5. Other accessory uses.                                                                                           
(n) Temporary uses.
1. Temporary uses.                                                                                                 
   Temporary building for construction purposes; not to exceed the duration Pf       P         P        P          P
the construction
(o) Other special uses.
1. Other special uses.                                                                                             
   Planned unit development                                                 S        S         S        S          S
   Similar and compatible uses to those listed as special uses              S        S         S        S          S
   Twenty-four hour per day. operation of any permitted or special use      S        S         S                   
 
      (2)   Use-specific requirements. The following uses shall comply with all
listed requirements in addition to all other requirements specified in this
chapter. In the event of a conflict between a requirement listed hereunder and
that of another section of this chapter, the more restrictive requirement shall
prevail.
         (a)   Residential units above the first floor of any business.
            1.   Shall comply with all other village ordinances including fire
and life safety codes; and
            2.   Shall provide not less than one off-street parking space for
each unit on the same lot as the residential use.
         (b)   Vehicle sales and rental.
            1.   Shall be located on parcels sufficiently large enough to fully
comply with the following:
               a.   A minimum lot area of 40,000 square feet; and
               b.   The applicable perimeter landscaping and buffering
requirements contained in §
158.04(D).
         (c)   Public utility and public service use.
            1.   Uses and facilities include: electric sub-stations and booster
stations; telephone exchanges, repeater stations, micro-wave relay towers and
stations, antenna towers and other outdoor equipment essential to the operation
of the exchange in the interest of the public convenience; potable water well
head stations, well separators, pumping stations, water filtration plants,
reservoirs, and storage tanks and towers; natural gas regulator stations and
similar above the ground facilities customarily used for the distribution,
transmission or storage of natural gas as a part of the operation of a public
utility; and satellite dishes as accessory to any of the above.
            2.   The use shall be located more than 200 feet from the boundary
of a residential use.
            3.   Natural gas equipment and other installations may be in
completely enclosed buildings or in the open, but along with electric
substations and booster stations, must be completely enclosed behind two-inch
or less mesh chainlink fence or equal, no less than six feet in height.
   (G)   Parking requirements. Parking requirements shall be in accordance with
the applicable regulations set forth in §§
157.140 through
157.150. In addition, the parking of trucks when accessory to the conduct of a
permitted use, shall be limited to vehicles having not over one and one-half
tons capacity, except for delivery services which shall be at the rear entrance
or loading dock.
   (H)   Storm drainage and entrance curbs. Storm drainage and entrance curbs
are required on all street frontages and shall meet the approval of the Village
Engineer and be in accordance with village ordinances.
   (I)   Performance standards. All activities shall conform with the
performances standards established for the M-1, limited manufacturing,
district, except where otherwise stated. These standards are presented in §
157.066.
   (J)   Standards. The following standards shall apply to all business
districts.
      (1)   All business shall be retail, wholesale, service or office
establishments dealing directly with the consumer.
      (2)   All business, services, storage, merchandise display and processing
shall be conducted entirely within an enclosed building with the exception of
off-street parking or loading, automotive service stations, open sales lots and
outdoor amusement and recreation areas in districts where they are permitted.
There shall be no storage or overnight parking at gas stations with the
exception of vehicles under active repair but not to exceed four vehicles.
      (3)   No business shall be open to the public between the hours of 2:00
a.m. and 5:00 a.m. on any day of the week, except for the following uses:
automobile service station, hotels and motels, supermarkets, veterinary clinic
or animal hospitals limousine set-vices or as provided by special use.
      (4)   Except in the case of a planned development, only one principal
structure will be allowed on any subdivided lot and no principal structure
shall be constructed across a subdivision lot line.
      (5)   Exterior lighting fixtures shall be shaded wherever necessary to
avoid casting excessive glare upon adjacent properly.
      (6)   All premises shall be furnished with all-weather hard-surface walks
and except for parking areas, the grounds shall be landscaped.
      (7)   If the lot adjoins a lot containing a residential building,
screening shall be provided at the lot line sufficient to protect on a year-
round basis the privacy of the adjoining residential uses.
      (8)   Site plan approval pursuant to ordinance shall be required for all
uses, except public and quasi-public.
      (9)   Additional special provisions are contained in each of the
individual district regulations.
   (K)   Signs. Signs shall be subject to the regulations contained in Chapter
156 of this code of ordinances.
   (L)   Off-street parking and loading. Off-street parking and loading
facilities shall be provided as required in §§
157.140 through
157.150.
   (M)   Site plan review.
      (1)   (a)   All applicants for building permits, re-zoning and annexation
or pre-annexation for the following zoning districts and those districts which
may thereafter be created where reference is made therein to site plan review
shall comply with the site plan review process:
            1.   B-1, downtown business district;
            2.   B-2, community business district;
            3.   B-3, service business district;
            4.   B-4, automotive service business district; and
            5.   O-D, office district.
            6.   M-I Limited Manufacturing District.
         (b)   This section shall not apply to building additions, minor
interior modifications, such as tenant spaces in shopping centers and office
spaces, which do not effect the intensity of use, type of use or free standing
signage and shall not apply to the B-1, downtown business, district to the
extent the setback and yard requirements render this section inapplicable.
      (2)   This division (M) is adopted for the following purposes:
         (a)   Promoting the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and
general welfare;
         (b)   Protection of the economic base in the village;
         (c)   Enhancement of aesthetic qualities and economic values within
the commercial and office zoned areas of the village;
         (d)   Establishing a reasonable transition between commercial, office
and other land use areas within the village;
         (e)   Ensuring the safe movement of vehicular traffic;
         (f)   Preserving natural resources; and
         (g)   Implementing the village’s comprehensive planning.
      (3)   Any uses in the specified districts shall comply with the following
standards:
         (a)   Access points and parking.
            1.   Points of vehicular ingress and egress from the site shall be
limited to adjacent major and/or secondary thoroughfares, and all points of
access shall be reviewed by the Village Engineer for location and design of
curb cuts and driveways and for layout of parking and loading areas. The design
and location of access points shall be coordinated with adjoining uses,
buildings and properties to provide for safe and efficient traffic movement.
            2.   Parking and loading areas shall be reviewed for their
compliance with requirements of §§
157.120 through
157.127 and
157.140 through
157.150. In addition, the parking of trucks, when accessory to the conduct of a
permitted use, shall be limited to vehicles having not over one and one-half
ton capacity, except for delivery services which shall be at the rear door.
         (b)   Screening.
            1.   Where a commercial use abuts or is across the street from a
residential district or use, adequate screening shall be provided.
            2.   Where the commercial use directly abuts a residential
district, this required screening may be accomplished with the use of berms,
landscaping plantings or fences, or a combination of these methods. Placement
of the landscape screening shall not impair the safety of pedestrian or
vehicular traffic.
            3.   Where a commercial use is directly across a public street from
a residential district, screening in the form of berms and/or landscaping may
be required along the road frontage.
            4.   The landscape screening plan. shall be incorporated as part of
the overall landscape plan for the development and shall indicate thereon the
visual lines-of-sight resulting from the proposed landscaped screening plan.
This plan shall require approval by the Village Engineer.
         (c)   Lighting. Exterior lighting proposed for use on the site shall
be planned, erected and maintained so the light is confined to the property and
will not cause direct glare or light upon adjacent properties or public right-
of-way. All lighting fixtures and standards should be designed to aesthetically
relate to the character of the development. The lighting plan shall be subject
to approval by the Chief of Police and Village Engineer.
         (d)   Landscaping.
            1.   All areas of the site, including street rights-of-way, which
are not paved, shall be landscaped with trees, shrubs, flowers and/or grass to
retard water runoff, restrict blowing trash and litter and deter improper and
unsafe access and site use by the public. Trees used in landscaping shall be a
minimum of three-inch caliper when measured 18 inches from grade when
installed. All plant materials shall be kept alive and in good condition or be
replaced.
            2.   A landscaped plan must accompany all applications for building
permits. The plan shall be subject to approval by the Plan Commission. In the
case of a planned development or special use, the Plan Commission may require a
preliminary and/or final landscape plan prior to recommending approval of the
subject zoning request. A landscape plan shall include the species, size and
location of plant materials and all other landscape treatment such as, but not
limited to earth mounds, fences, ground covers, ornamental lighting, paving
materials and sod locations.
            3.   The landscape plan must make provision for screening of waste
receptacles. If landscaping, sidewalks, parking lots and other external
improvements are not completed at final occupancy inspection, an irrevocable
letter of credit in an amount equal to 110% of the uncompleted work as
certified by the Building Inspector in a form satisfactory to the Village
Attorney, shall be supplied prior to the issuance of an occupancy permit.
            4.   Provision shall be made for perimeter screening through the
use of landscaping which should unless otherwise recommended by the Plan
Commission and approved by the Village Board include a minimum landscape
barrier of a ten-foot wide planting strip with one tree in each 40 lineal feet
or fraction thereof.
         (e)   Setback bulk and sign regulations. The principal and accessory
buildings and structures shall comply with yard and setback requirements, floor
area and height limitations and sign regulations as prescribed in the district
regulations.
      (4)   Prior to the issuance of a building permit, the owners of the tract
of land shall submit to the Building Inspector for his or her review, six
copies of the site plan drawn to scale as to clearly indicate what is planned
for the subject property, the site plan to include the following information.
The Building Inspector may waive certain herein listed items, where these items
are under his or her jurisdiction, when deemed unnecessary.
         (a)   Site information:
            1.   Name and address of the owner, applicant, planner, architect,
engineer and landscape architect;
            2.   Date, scale, north arrow;
            3.   Total acreage;
            4.   Title by which the property or project is to be referred; and
            5.   Proof of ownership.
         (b)   A copy of a survey by a registered surveyor including therein a
legal description of the subject property;
         (c)   Location and size of all buildings and structures, both existing
and proposed;
         (d)   Ground elevations of the property;
         (e)   Location of flood plain areas and existing vegetation;
         (f)   Soil analysis, if required by the Village Engineer;
         (g)   Yards and spaces between all structures;
         (h)   Location and dimensions of all fences and walls;
         (i)   A landscape plan prepared by a landscape architect;
         (j)   Vehicular, pedestrian and service access, including the distance
from the driveway opening at the curb to the prolongation of the property line
of the nearest intersecting street, the width of the driveway, identification
and location of curb lines, property lines, sidewalks, existing driveways,
parking regulations and signs, traffic signals, utility poles, light standards
and fire hydrants;
         (k)   Off-street parking and loading facilities, including numbers of
spaces and dimensions of typical areas;
         (l)   Signs and lighting, including locations, size, height and method
of illumination, including a point by point illumination plan showing foot
candle intensities;
         (m)   Outdoor storage areas, if any;
         (n)   Waste disposal facilities, trash bins and provision for
screening of the facilities and bins; and
         (o)   Preliminary engineering, drainage and grading plans if required
by the Village Engineer. Final engineering plans shall be approved by the
Village Engineer prior to the issuance of a building permit.
      (5)   (a)   The Building Inspector shall determine whether all of the
necessary information required under the ordinance has been furnished by the
applicant and shall prepare a recommendation to the Plan Commission as to
whether the standards for site plan approval have been satisfied.
         (b)   The site plan along with the recommendation shall then be
forwarded to the Plan Commission for review and approval.
(1981 Code, Art. VIII, A) (Ord. passed 12- -1986; Am. Ord. 04-17, passed 5-17-
2004; Am. Ord. 08-22, passed 6-2-2008; Am. Ord. 13-10, passed 4-1-2013; Am.
Ord. 15-48, passed 12-14-2015; Am. Ord. 19-01, passed 1-7-2019; Am. Ord. 22-13,
passed 4-18-2022; Am. Ord. 22-44, passed 9-19-2022; Am. Ord. 23-08, passed 2-
20-2023; Am. Ord. 23-22, passed 5-1-2023; Am. Ord. 23-23, passed 5-15-2023; Am.
Ord. 23-24, passed 5-15-2023; Am. Ord. 24-08, passed 2-19-2024)
§ 157.051 B-1, DOWNTOWN BUSINESS DISTRICT.
   (A)   Purpose. The zoning regulations for this zoning district shall
recognize the historic significance, spatial layout, yard and parking
limitations of the original downtown business district.
   (B)   Permitted uses. See §
157.050(F).
   (C)   Accessory uses. See §
157.050(F).
   (D)   Special uses. See §
157.050(F).
   (E)   Temporary uses. See §
157.050(F).
   (F)   Lot size requirements. With the exception of planned unit
developments, a separate ground area, herein call the zoning lot, shall be
designated, provided and continuously maintained for each structure containing
a permitted use or special use.
      (1)   Minimum lot area: not less than 2,000 square feet; and
      (2)   Minimum lot width: not less than 20 feet at the front building
line.
   (G)   Yard requirements.
      (1)   Front yard or setback: none required unless adjacent property has a
front yard established, in which case the front yard setback shall be the
average of the front yard setbacks of the buildings on the adjacent lots. A
side yard adjoining a street shall be considered as a front yard.
      (2)   Side yard or setback: none required unless adjacent property has a
side yard established, in which case the side yard setback shall not be less
than the average of the side yard setbacks of the buildings on the adjacent
lots.
      (3)   Rear yard or setback: zero feet unless the property is adjacent to
a residential district then the rear yard or setback shall be eight feet.
   (H)   Building standards. Floor area ratio: not to exceed 3.0, the total
floor area shall not be more than three times the total square foot area of the
lot.
   (I)   Building height. Not more than 40 feet or three stories, whichever is
less.
   (J)   Accessory buildings. Accessory buildings used in conjunction with the
principal use on a lot, shall have a front yard of not less than 50 feet, and a
side and rear yard of not less than three feet from the established lot lines.
In no event shall an accessory building have a front yard of less than the
front yard of the principal building located on the lot.
   (K)   Off-street parking and loading. In addition to the applicable
regulations set forth in §§
157.120 through
157.127 and
157.140 through
157.150, the following parking regulations shall apply in the B-1 district.
      (1)   No parking spaces shall be required unless the computation of total
parking spaces pursuant to this section requires ten or more additional parking
spaces for the establishment. In computing whether ten additional parking
places are required, all exemptions hereinafter provided shall be first
considered. If the construction or reconstruction of any building deletes
existing parking spaces, they shall be counted in computing whether or not ten
parking space requirement has been reached.
      (2)   One parking space per 200 square feet of floor area is required for
each of the following categories; provided that:
         (a)   For retail stores and facilities providing personal and
commercial services, the first 2,500 square feet of floor area on the first
floor and the first 3,500 square feet of floor area on any other floor of an
existing building are exempt from the parking requirement.
         (b)   For business and professional offices, the first 1,500 square
feet of floor area on the first floor and the first 3,000 square feet of floor
area on any other floor of an existing building are exempt from the parking
requirement.
         (c)   For establishments providing for the sale and consumption on the
premises of food and refreshment, the first 2,000 square feet of floor area on
the first floor and the first 2,500 square feet of floor area on any other
floor of an existing building are exempt from the parking requirement.
         (d)   For educational services, the first 2,500 square feet of floor
area on any floor, except the first floor of an existing building, are exempt
from the parking requirement.
      (3)   Residential housing units: one parking space is required per single
family unit and must be provided on the property.
      (4)   New buildings, additions to or remodeling of existing buildings,
that increase floor area, as defined herein, or a change in the permitted use
of existing buildings, which increases the parking requirements pursuant to
this section, shall invoke the requirements of this section. Existing parking
spaces provided on the premises shall be used to satisfy new parking
requirements required hereunder, except for required, on-premises residential
parking. Change of use only within the same business category for parking
purposes shall not impose new parking requirements on the establishment.
      (5)   Establishments shall provide parking in accordance with the terms
of this chapter. In the event an establishment cannot provide parking on-site
or within 300 feet from the establishment, except for residential uses, the
applicant shall contribute an amount equal to 50% of the actual cost of each
required parking space to a special fund created by the village for the purpose
of maintaining and improving existing downtown public parking, and to acquire
and construct new parking facilities in the downtown area.
      (6)   Signs shall be required in accordance with the applicable
regulations set forth in Chapter 156 of this code of ordinances.
(1981 Code, Art. VIII, B) (Ord. passed 12- -1986; Am. Ord. 87-28, passed 12-21-
1987; Am. Ord. 05-33, passed 12-19-2005; Am. Ord. 06-49, passed 10-16-2006; Am.
Ord. 08-23, passed 6-2-2008; Am. Ord. 10-38, passed 8-16-2010; Am. Ord. 13-10,
passed 4-1-2013; Am. Ord. 17-34, passed 6-19- 2017)
§ 157.052 B-2, COMMUNITY BUSINESS DISTRICT.
   (A)   Purpose. The B-2 district is intended to provide areas to be used as
the primary shopping area for residents of the village and other nearby towns,
transients and for the shopping area for occupants of various business and
manufacturing establishments. The district permits most all types of business
and commercial enterprises, offices and service establishments. This district
is normally centrally located with respect to the shopping service area and
located at the convergence or along the major thoroughfares of the village.
   (B)   Permitted uses. See §
157.050(F).
   (C)   Accessory uses. See §
157.050(F).
   (D)   Special uses. See §
157.050(F).
   (E)   Temporary uses. See §
157.050(F).
   (F)   Lot size requirements. With the exception of planned unit
developments, a separate ground area, herein called the zoning lot, shall be
designated, provided and continuously maintained for each structure containing
a permitted use or special use.
      (1)   Minimum lot area: 20,000 square feet.
      (2)   Minimum lot width: 100 feet.
   (G)   Yard requirements.
      (1)   Minimum yard requirements for each lot in the B-2 district shall be
as follows:
         (a)   Minimum front yard: all structures shall maintain a setback of
not less than 20 feet, plus 100% of the building height with a minimum of 35
feet from the front lot line. The first ten feet of all front yards shall be
devoted to landscape materials such as sod, trees and means of ingress and
egress, signs and obstructions as permitted by other provisions of this
chapter.
         (b)   Minimum corner side yard: same as front yard.
         (c)   Minimum interior side yard: 20 feet combined, with one side not
less than 12 feet.
         (d)   Minimum rear yard: 20 feet.
         (e)   Transition yards: where a side or rear lot line in this district
coincides with a side or rear lot line in the adjacent residential district,
the respective yard requirements of the residential district shall apply to the
side or rear yard requirements of this district, whichever is greater.
   (H)   Bulk regulations.
      (1)   Maximum structure height: 30 feet or two stories whichever is less.
      (2)   Floor area ratio: 0.6.
   (I)   Special provision.
      (1)   Enclosure of operations: all business, servicing or processing
shall be conducted within completely enclosed buildings, except:
         (a)   Off-street parking or loading; and
         (b)   Accessory uses when allowed by the special use procedure.
      (2)   No parking or roads shall be permitted in the first ten feet of the
front yard.
      (3)   No parking or roads shall be permitted in the minimum rear yard or
side yard.
(1981 Code, Art. VIII, C) (Ord. passed 12- -1986; Am. Ord. 95-21, passed 10- -
1995; Am. Ord. 97-29, passed 1-12-1997; Am. Ord. 98-10, passed 5-4-1998; Am.
Ord. 01-13, passed 8-20-2001; Am. Ord. 05-26, passed 11-7-2005; Am. Ord. 08-23,
passed 6-2-2008; Am. Ord. 09-27, passed 9-8-2009; Am. Ord. 13-10, passed 4-1-
2013)
§ 157.053 B-3, GENERAL SERVICE BUSINESS DISTRICT.
   (A)   Purpose. The B-3 district is intended to provide areas to be used for
most types of retailing and service uses, wholesale and warehousing uses and
some limited industrial activities that are normally associated with business
areas. The uses allowed are often large space uses and cater to customers who
do not make frequent purchases. The market area for the permitted uses extends
to an area much larger than the village. The district is normally located along
major thoroughfares, where adequately sized parcels of land allow for large
setbacks, clear vision and safe ingress and egress.
   (B)   Permitted uses. See §
157.050(F).
   (C)   Accessory uses. See §
157.050(F).
   (D)   Special uses. See §
157.050(F).
   (E)   Temporary uses. See §
157.050(F).
   (F)   Lot size requirements. With the exception of planned development, a
separate ground area, herein called the zoning lot, shall be designated,
provided and continuously maintained for each structure containing a permitted
use or special use.
      (1)   Minimum lot area: 40,000 square feet.
      (2)   Minimum lot width: 125 feet.
   (G)   Yard requirements. Minimum yard requirements for each lot in the B-
3 district shall be the same as for the B-2 district.
      (1)   All structures shall maintain a setback of not less than 20 feet,
plus 100% of the building height with a minimum of 35 feet from the front lot
line. The first ten feet of all front yards shall be devoted to landscape
materials such as sod, trees and a means of ingress and egress, signs and
obstructions as permitted by other provisions of this chapter.
      (2)   Minimum corner side yard: same as front yard.
      (3)   Minimum interior side yard: 20 feet combined, with one side not
less than 12 feet.
      (4)   Minimum rear yard: 20 feet.
      (5)   Transition yards: where a side or rear lot line in this district
coincides with a side or rear lot line in the adjacent residential district,
the respective yard requirements of the residential district shall apply to the
side or rear yard requirements of this district, whichever is greater.
   (H)   Bulk regulations.
      (1)   Maximum structure height: 35 feet or three stories whichever is
less 0.8.
      (2)   Floor ratio: 0.8.
   (I)   Special provisions.
      (1)   All outdoor sales space shall be provided with a permanent durable
and dustless surface and shall be graded and drained as to dispose of all
surface water.
      (2)   All outdoor storage facilities for accessory uses and products
shall be enclosed by a fence, wall or plant materials adequate to conceal the
facilities from adjacent properties and the public right-of-way.
      (3)   No materials or wastes shall be deposited upon a lot in a form that
they may be transferred off the property by natural causes or forces.
      (4)   No parking or roads shall be permitted in the first 30 feet of the
front yard.
      (5)   No parking or roads shall be permitted in the minimum rear yard or
side yard.
      (6)   In addition to all other conditions and restrictions that may be
imposed by the Village Board as part of the special use approval, all vehicle-
related sales and service uses listed as special uses in division (D), above,
shall be located on parcels sufficiently large enough to fully comply with the
following;
         (a)   A minimum lot area of 40,000 square feet; and
         (b)   The applicable perimeter landscaping and buffering requirements
contained in §
158.04(D).
(1981 Code, Art. VIII, D) (Ord. passed 12- -1986; Am. Ord. 87-28, passed 12-21-
1987; Am. Ord. 11-25, passed 4-18-2011; Am. Ord. 12-46, passed 6-30-2012; Am.
Ord. 13-10, passed 4-1-2013)
§ 157.054 B-4, AUTOMOTIVE SERVICE DISTRICT.
   (A)   Purpose. This district is intended to provide certain land and
structures for automotive service type use and automotive associated uses such
as drive-ins. The district is intended to be located only along major
thoroughfares where adequately sized and properly located parcels of land will
allow for adequate setbacks, clear vision and safe ingress and egress. Frontage
roads should be provided where possible.
   (B)   Permitted uses. See §
157.050(F).
   (C)   Accessory uses. See §
157.050(F).
   (D)   Special uses. See §
157.050(F).
   (E)   Temporary uses. See §
157.050(F).
   (F)   Lot size requirements. With the exception of planned developments, a
separate ground area, herein called the zoning lot, shall be designated,
provided and continuously maintained for each structure containing a .permitted
use or a special use.
      (1)   Minimum lot area: 40,000 square feet.
      (2)   Minimum lot width: 125 feet.
   (G)   Yard requirements.
      (1)   Minimum front yard: all structures shall maintain a setback of not
less than 50 feet from the front line. The first 30 feet of all front yards
shall be devoted to landscape materials such as sod, trees and a means of
ingress and egress, signs, and obstructions as permitted by other provisions of
this chapter.
      (2)   Minimum corner side yard: 50 feet.
      (3)   Minimum interior side yard: 30 feet, with one side at least 12
feet.
      (4)   Minimum rear yard: 40 feet.
      (5)   Transition yards: where a side or rear lot line in this district
coincides with a side or rear lot line in an adjacent residential district, the
respective yard requirements of the residential district shall apply to the
side or rear yard requirements of this district.
   (H)   Bulk regulations.
      (1)   Maximum structure height: 35 feet or three stories, whichever is
less.
      (2)   Floor ratio: 0.8.
   (I)   Special provisions.
      (1)   All outdoor sales space shall be provided with a permanent durable
and dustless surface and shall be graded and drained as to dispose of all
surface water.
      (2)   All outdoor storage facilities for accessory uses and products
shall be enclosed by a fence, wall or plant materials adequate to conceal the
facilities from adjacent properties and the public right-of-way.
      (3)   No materials or wastes shall be deposited upon a lot in a form that
they may be transferred off the property by natural causes or forces.
      (4)   No parking or roads shall be permitted in the first 30 feet of the
front yard.
      (5)   No parking or roads shall be permitted in the minimum rear yard or
side yard.
(1981 Code, Art. VIII, E) (Ord. passed 12- -1986; Am. Ord. 98-10, passed 5-4-
1998; Am. Ord. 13-10, passed 4-1-2013)
§ 157.055 O-D, OFFICE DISTRICT.
   (A)   Description of district.
      (1)   The office district is intended to provide office space for uses
which do not require any form of research or industrial operations on the
premises.
      (2)   The uses permitted are characterized by a low volume of traffic and
limited outdoor advertising, so as to protect any surrounding residential uses.
The district may be used as a buffer between residential and commercial areas.
   (B)   Permitted uses. See §
157.050(F).
   (C)   Special uses. See §
157.050(F).
   (D)   Accessory uses. See §
157.050(F).
   (E)   Site and bulk provision.
      (1)   Minimum lot area: the minimum lot area of 40,000 square shall be
provided.
      (2)   Minimum lot width: a minimum lot width of 150 feet shall be
provided for each lot used for a permitted or special use.
      (3)   Front yard: all structures shall be set back from the front lot
line at least 70 feet with parking permitted after 30 feet landscape area from
front of line.
      (4)   Interior side yard, adjacent to a zoning lot: all structures shall
be set in form the side lot line a distance of not less than 15 feet or one-
half the height of the structure whichever is greater, as defined herein.
      (5)   Corner side yard, adjacent to a street: all strictures shall be set
in from the side lot line adjacent to the street right-of-way a distance of not
less than 70 feet.
      (6)   Rear yard: All structures shall be set back from the rear lot line
a distance of not less than 20 feet or one-half the height of the structure
whichever is greater, as defined herein.
      (7)   Bulk regulations:
         (a)   Maximum structure height: 35 feet or three stores, whichever is
less.
         (b)   Floor area ratios: 1.0.
   (F)   Special provisions. Screening and landscaping:
      (1)   The entire site shall be adequately and attractively landscaped in
accord with plans prepared by as professional landscape designer and shall be
subject to approval by the Plan Commission.
      (2)   When the proposed office use abuts a street, the initial 30 feet of
setback from the right-of- way shall be landscaped plan.
      (3)   Parking shall not be permitted within the 30-foot front yard
landscape strip.
   (G)   Standards. This district is subject to the general standards and
regulations hereof. Property located in this district is also subject to the
following additional standards:
      (1)   All operations, activities and storage shall be conducted wholly
inside a building or buildings.
      (2)   No retail sales or services shall be permitted, except as
incidental or accessory to a permitted use.
      (3)   Dispensing of gasoline front underground storage tanks oil premises
shall be limited to the requirements of vehicles necessary to the conduct of a
permitted use.
      (4)   Service and maintenance of vehicles shall be permitted only such as
is necessary to the conduct of a permitted use.
   (H)   Off-street loading and off-street parking. Off-street loading and
parking shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of §§
157.120 through
157.127 and
157.140 through
157.150.
   (I)   Signs. Signs shall be subject to the regulations contained in
Chapter 156 of this code of ordinances.
(1981 Code, Art. VIII, F) (Ord. passed 12- -1986; Am. Ord. 90-19, passed 10-15-
1990; Am. Ord. 98-10, passed 5-4-1998; Am. Ord. 13-10, passed 4-1-2013)
MANUFACTURING DISTRICTS
§ 157.065 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Allowable use of land and buildings.
      (1)   Allowable uses table. Permitted uses, special uses, accessory uses,
and temporary uses in the manufacturing districts shall be as indicated on the
following table. All other provisions of this chapter to the contrary
notwithstanding, the Building Inspector shall determine whether a proposed use
that is not specifically listed on the table is most similar to and compatible
with one or more permitted uses, special uses, accessory uses, temporary uses,
or prohibited uses and classify the use accordingly. Such determinations shall
be recorded in writing and maintained on file in the Village Clerk's office.
Allowable uses of land and
buildings:                  Limited Manufacturing Limited Manufacturing
P: Permitted by-right       District (M-1)        District (M-2)
S: Permitted by special use
permit
Allowable uses of land and buildings:                                            Limited       Limited
P: Permitted by-right                                                            Manufacturing Manufacturing
S: Permitted by special use permit                                               District (M-  District (M-
                                                                                 1)            2)
(a) Agriculture and natural resource uses.
1. Resource conservation.                                                                      
2. Cultivation.                                                                                
3. Livestock.                                                                                  
4. Agricultural support.                                                                       
   Farm and garden supply store                                               P             P
   Feed store                                                                 P             P
5. Mineral extraction and batch operations.                                                    
   Batch asphaltic concrete, cement concrete or mortar mixing plant           S             S
   Stone or gravel quarry; crushing, grading, washing and loading operations
shall, at a minimum, conform with the applicable regulations set forth in §     S             S
157.065
(b) Residential uses.
1. Single-family and two-unit dwellings.                                                       
2. Multiple-family dwellings.                                                                  
3. Group living facilities.                                                                    
(c) Retail uses.
1. General merchandise.                                                                        
   Building material sales                                                    P             P
   Direct selling establishment where products are stored                     P             P
   Gun shop                                                                   S             S
   Tombstone and monument sales                                               P             P
2. Food and beverage.                                                                          
3. Greenhouses and nurseries.                                                                  
   Greenhouse and nursery; retail                                             P             P
   Greenhouse and nursery; wholesale                                          P             P
(d) Clubs, restaurants, taverns and lodging uses.
1. Clubs, lodges and meeting halls.                                                            
2. Restaurants, specialty foods and taverns.                                                   
   Banquet hall                                                               S             S
   Restaurant; no live entertainment                                          P             P
   Restaurant; with live entertainment                                        S             S
   Restaurant; drive-in or drive-through facilities                           P             P
   Taverns                                                                    P             P
   Taverns; with live entertainment                                           S             S
3. Lodging.                                                                                    
   Hotel, including apartment hotel, dining room and meeting rooms            P             P
   Motel                                                                      P             P
(e) Recreation and entertainment establishments; public and private.
1. Indoor recreation and entertainment.                                                        
   Adult uses                                                                              S
   Commercial sports and entertainment establishment; subject to the licensure
requirements of                                                                  S             S
Chapter 118 of the East Dundee Code of Ordinances
   Community center buildings, public or non-profit; includes clubhouses,
recreation buildings, gymnasiums, swim clubs, swimming pools, tennis clubs,      P             P
tennis courts, roller skating and ice skating rinks
   Museum                                                                     P             P
   Shooting range                                                             S             S
2. Outdoor recreation and entertainment.                                                       
   Drive-in theater                                                           P             P
   Parks and playgrounds; privately-owned, not-for-profit                     S             S
   Parks and playgrounds, publicly owned                                      P             P
   Shooting range                                                             S             S
(f) Service, contracting, storage and broadcasting uses.
1. Personal services.                                                                          
   Massage establishment and massage services; subject to the licensure
requirements of                                                                  S             S
Chapter 111 of the East Dundee Code of Ordinances
2. Dry cleaning and laundry services.                                                          
   Dry cleaning, laundry, dyeing and rug-cleaning establishment; with or withoPt            P
drive through and no limitation on the number of employees
3. Finance, insurance and real estate services.                                                
   Automatic teller machine as stand-alone structure                          P             P
4. General services.                                                                           
   Auction room                                                               P             P
   Catering establishment                                                     P             P
   Printing shop; no press size limitations                                   P             P
   Secretarial service                                                                      
   Scientific research agency                                                 P             P
   Taxidermist                                                                P             P
   Testing laboratory                                                         P             P
   Travel bureau and transportation ticket office                             P             P
   Undertaking establishment and funeral parlor                               P             P
5. Contractor and repair shops and showrooms.                                                  
   Artists and industrial design studio                                       P             P
   Furniture repair and upholstery                                            P             P
   General minor repair or fix it shop                                        P             P
   Interior decorating studio; includes upholstery and making draperies, slip
covers and other similar articles when conducted as a secondary activity to the  P             P
principal use
   Lawn mower repair shop                                                     P             P
   Locksmith                                                                  P             P
   Board showroom                                                             P             P
   Building services and supplies; no outside storage                         P             P
   Contractor shop; no outdoor storage                                        P             P
   Contractor shop; with outdoor storage                                      P             P
   Electrical shop and supply shop                                            P             P
   Exterminating service                                                      P             P
   Heating and air conditioning retail sales and service                      P             P
   Plumbing and heating showroom and shop                                     P             P
   Refrigeration shop, service and repair                                     P             P
   Swimming pool sales and service                                            P             P
   Sewer cleaning and rodding shop                                            P             P
   Sign contractor; no outside storage                                        P             P
   Window cleaning firm                                                       P             P
6. Equipment and supplies.                                                                     
   Bottled gas dealer                                                         P             P
   Business machines store                                                    P             P
   Equipment and appliance repair shop                                        P             P
   Equipment rental and leasing service                                       P             P
   Machinery sales establishment                                              P             P
   Milk machine sales                                                         P             P
   Water softener service                                                     P             P
   Water sales and bottling                                                   P             P
7. Storage, transport and mail order sales.                                                    
   Ambulance service                                                          P             P
   Frozen food locker                                                         P             P
   Limousine service                                                          P             P
   Mail order sales and warehousing                                           P             P
   Storage, warehousing and wholesale establishments; does not include fuel oiP,            P
gasoline and other flammable material
8. Broadcasting facilities and recording studios.                                              
   Radio and television broadcasting studio                                   P             P
   Radio and television transmission or receiving tower                       P             P
   Recording studio                                                           P             P
9. Tattooing.                                                                    S             P
(g) Automotive and related uses.
1. Accessory sales.                                                                            
   Automobile accessory, tire and battery stores                              P             P
2. Fuels sales, service and repair.                                                            
   Automobile fuel sales; with or without service                             P             P
   Automobile and truck service without fuel sales; includes car washes, oil  P             P
change service, repair facilities, and related uses not otherwise listed
   Body and fender shop                                                       P             P
   Motor vehicle impoundment yard; subject to the provisions of §                         S
157.065(A)(2)(a)
   Paint shop                                                                 P             P
   Vehicle towing establishment; subject to the provisions of §              S             S
157.065(A)(2)(b)
3. Parking.                                                                                    
   Parking lot; commercial                                                    P             P
4. Vehicle sales and rental.                                                                   
   Boat dealer                                                                P             P
   Camper dealer (sales)                                                      P             P
   Mobile home dealer                                                         P             P
   Motor vehicle dealer, new or used                                          P             P
   Motorcycle sales                                                           P             P
   Recreation vehicle sales or rental                                         P             P
   Snowmobile, sales and service                                              P             P
   Trailer sale or rental                                                     P             P
(h) Office uses.
1. Professional offices.                                                                       
   Accounting, auditing and bookkeeping                                       P              
   Attorney and law office                                                    P              
   Business and professional office                                           P              
   Business office; goods, wares or merchandise are displayed or sold on the  P              
premise
   Data center                                                                P             P
   Engineering and architectural service                                      P              
   Land surveyor                                                              P              
   Landscape architect                                                        P              
   Newspaper office; does not include printing                                P              
   Professional Consultant                                                    P              
2. Organizations.                                                                              
   Better Business Bureau                                                     P              
   Chamber of Commerce                                                        P              
   Charitable organization                                                    P              
   Civic association                                                          P              
   Labor union and organization                                               P              
   Merchants association                                                      P              
   News syndicate                                                             P              
   Political organization                                                     P              
   Professional membership association                                        P              
   Real estate board                                                          P              
   Social service and fraternal association                                   P              
   Trade association                                                          P              
(i) Healthcare and veterinary uses.
1. Medical and dental offices, clinics and labs.                                               
   Laboratory, medical and dental                                             P             P
2. Hospitals and care homes.                                                                   
   Hospitals or sanitariums                                                   P              
3. Veterinarian offices, hospitals and kennels.                                                
   Veterinary clinic and animal hospital; without outdoor kennels             P              
   Veterinary clinic and animal hospital; with outdoor kennels                P              
(j) Manufacturing uses.
1. Manufacturing.                                                                              
   Manufacturing, assembly, disassembly, fabricating, repairing, storing,
cleaning, servicing or testing establishment; operation shall conform with the   P             P
applicable performance standards in §
157.065 and shall not be specifically prohibited by this chapter
(k) Public, educational and institutional uses.
1. General public.                                                                             
   Cemetery, public or private; includes crematories and mausoleums provided
that no building shall be located less than 100 feet from side and rear property S             S
lines
   Library and branch library                                                 P             P
   Police or fire station                                                     P             P
   Post office and post office sub-station                                    P             P
   Public service or municipal garage                                         P             P
2. Educational.                                                                                
   Schools, business, trade or vocational; non-boarding public or private     P             P
3. Childcare.                                                                                  
4. Institutional and assembly.                                                                 
   Convention hall and center                                                 S             S
(l) Transportation, utility and solid waste uses.
1. Transportation.                                                                             
   Airports                                                                   S             S
   Cartage and express establishments; does not include motor freight terminalP             P
   Public transportation facilities; includes shelters, terminals, parking arePs            P
and service buildings
   Transit and transportation passenger shelter                               P             P
2. Utility.                                                                                    
   Public utility and public service use; subject to the provisions of §     P             P
157.065(A)(2)(c)
   Sewage treatment plant                                                     P             P
   Telephone booth                                                            P             P
3. Solid waste.                                                                                
   Waste transfer, storage and treatment facilities; as defined in the Illinois
Environmental Protection Act in ILCS Chapter 415, Act 5 that are not otherwise
defined in such Act as Pollution Control Facilities and subject to the           S             S
provisions of §
157.065(A)(2)(d)
(m) Accessory uses.
1. Accessory to agricultural uses.                                                             
2. Accessory to residential uses.                                                              
3. Accessory to commercial uses.                                                               
   Accessory commercial operations yard; subject to the provisions of §      S             S
157.065(A)(2)(e)
   Accessory uses provided in accordance with the provisions of §            P             P
157.085
   Offices ancillary to any permitted or special use                          P             P
   Open sales lot                                                             S             S
   Storage yard; materials or equipment for on-site sales only                P             P
4. Accessory to manufacturing uses.                                                            
   Accessory commercial operations yard subject to the provisions of §       S             S
157.065(A)(2)(e)
   Accessory uses provided in accordance with the provisions of §            P             P
157.085
   Offices ancillary to any permitted or special use                          P             P
   Storage yard for material or equipment sales                               P             P
5. Other accessory uses.                                                                       
(n) Temporary uses.
1. Temporary uses.                                                                             
   Temporary building for construction purposes; not to exceed the duration ofP             P
the construction
(o) Other special uses.
1. Other special uses.                                                                         
   Planned unit development                                                   S             S
   Similar and compatible uses to those listed as special uses                S             S
   Twenty-four hour per day operation of any permitted or special use         S             S
 
      (2)   Use-specific requirements. The following uses shall comply with all
listed requirements in addition to all other requirements specified in this
chapter. In the event of a conflict between a requirement listed hereunder and
that of another section of this chapter, the more restrictive requirement shall
prevail.
         (a)   Motor vehicle impoundment yards.
            1.   Areas utilized for motor vehicle yards shall comply with all
principal structure setbacks requirements of the zoning district.
            2.   Areas utilized for motor vehicle yards shall be provided with
a permanent durable and dustless surface.
            3.   Areas utilized for motor vehicle impoundment yards shall be
lit from dusk to dawn at an intensity of not less than 1.0 foot candles nor
greater than 1.5 foot candles using poles no higher than 25 feet and cutoff
fixtures that direct light downward such that the intensity of light at the
property line does not exceed 0.5 foot candles.
            4.   Areas utilized for motor vehicle impoundment yards shall be
completely enclosed with a solid wall or fence of not more than eight feet in
height. No chain link or mesh type of fence with inserted screening slats shall
be used to comply with the provisions of this section.
            5.   No vehicle shall be stored longer than 60 days provided
vehicles subject to seizure or impoundment orders shall be exempt from any such
limitation.
         (b)   Vehicle towing establishment.
            1.   All towing vehicles and equipment must be stored inside a
building or in areas with a paved, dustless surface that complies with all
principal structure setback requirements of the zoning district. In no case
shall towing vehicles be stored closer to the street than the front wall of the
primary structure.
         (c)   Public utility and public service use.
            1.   Uses and facilities include: electric sub-stations and booster
stations; telephone exchanges, repeater stations, micro-wave relay towers and
stations, antenna towers and other outdoor equipment essential to the operation
of the exchange in the interest of the public convenience; potable water well
head stations, well separators, pumping stations, water filtration plants,
reservoirs, and storage tanks and towers; natural gas regulator stations and
similar above the ground facilities customarily used for the distribution,
transmission or storage of natural gas as a part of the operation of a public
utility; and satellite dishes as accessory to any of the above.
            2.   The use shall be located more than 200 feet from the boundary
of a residential use.
            3.   Natural gas equipment and other installations may be in
completely enclosed buildings or in the open, but along with electric
substations and booster stations, must be completely enclosed behind two-inch
or less mesh chainlink fence or equal, no less than six feet in height.
         (d)   Waste transfer, storage and treatment facilities. As defined in
the Illinois Environmental Protection Act in ILCS Chapter 415, Act 5 that are
not otherwise defined in such Act as Pollution Control Facilities.
            1.   Such facilities shall only include the following:
               a.   Facilities accepting exclusively general construction or
demolition debris for transfer, storage, or treatment;
               b.   Landscape waste compost facilities;
               c.   Landscape waste transfer stations; and
               d.   Other recycling, materials recovery and waste minimization/
waste diversion facilities.
            2.   All facilities listed hereunder shall comply fully with all
applicable requirements contained in the Environmental Protection Act and its
implementing regulations, as both may be amended from time to time, in addition
to all applicable requirements contained in this chapter provided that in the
event that those requirements imposed by the State of Illinois conflict with
those of this chapter, the more restrictive provisions shall apply.
               a.   Facilities accepting exclusively general construction or
demolition debris for transfer, storage, treatment or as fill shall comply with
all provisions in §§
157.300 through
157.314.
               b.   Landscape waste compost facilities shall comply with all
provisions in §§
157.265 through
157.285.
         (e)   Accessory commercial operations yard.
            1.   Shall be accessory to an authorized and licensed principal use
located within the village limits. If the principal use ceases to operate or
relocates out of the village, the accessory commercial operations yard shall be
immediately vacated and all equipment and materials removed.
            2.   Areas utilized for accessory commercial operations yards shall
comply with all principal structure setback requirements of the zoning
district.
            3.   Areas utilized for accessory commercial operations yards shall
be provided with a permanent durable and dustless surface.
            4.   Areas utilized for accessory commercial operations yards shall
be completely enclosed and screened with a solid wall or fence of not more than
12 feet in height and/or a berm or evergreen plants of any height. No materials
or equipment shall be stored at a height greater than the height of the
screening; except that when there is no reasonable alternative, material or
equipment may be stored at a height greater than the height of the screening
provided that the area utilized for an accessory commercial operations yard is
setback a minimum of one additional linear foot from all lot lines for each one
foot of storage height above the screening. No chain link or mesh type of fence
with inserted screening slats shall be used to comply with the screening
provisions of this section.
   (B)   Additional use restrictions.
      (1)   Unless specifically provided for otherwise in §
157.065(A), no lot, parcel or tract of land shall be used and no building or
structure shall be erected, altered or remodeled for any of the following uses:
abattoirs; acid manufacture; arsenals; crematories; creosote treatment or
manufacture; fat rendering; fertilizer manufacture; fireworks or explosive
manufacture or storage; dumping or reduction of garbage; dead animals; offal;
or refuse; ore reduction, petroleum processing or refining; nitrocellulose
manufacture; synthetic polymers manufacture; gutta perca manufacture or
treatment; salt works; sauerkraut manufacture; soap manufacture; smelters;
stock yard or slaughter of animals or fowls; tallow, grease or lard manufacture
or treatment; tanning, curing, or storage of rawhides or skins; tar
distillation or manufacture; or junk yards.
      (2)   To the extent that a Pollution Control Facility subject to local
siting review as provided for in ILCS Chapter 415, Act 5, § 39.2 is proposed to
be located in the village, those areas designated as manufacturing districts on
the village zoning map are deemed the most appropriate locations for such a
facility provided that the facility, and its location, otherwise comply with
all applicable requirements of the Illinois Environmental Protection Act and
its implementing administrative codes, as both may be amended from time to
time, and notwithstanding that local zoning or other local land use
requirements shall not be applicable to such siting decisions.
      (3)   No activities involving the storage, utilization or manufacture of
materials or products which decompose by detonation shall be permitted, except
such as specifically licensed by the village and which may include but not be
confined to: all primary explosives, such as lead azide, lead styphnate, and
tetracene; and all high explosives, such as TNT, RDX, HMX, PE TN and picric
acid, propellants and components thereof such as nitrocellulose, black powder,
boron hydrides, hydrazine and its derivatives; pyrotechnics and fireworks such
as magnesium powder, potassium chlorate and potassium nitrate; blasting
explosives such as dynamite and nitroglycerine; unstable compounds such as
acetylides, tetrazoles, perchlonc acid, perchlorates, chlorates, hydrogen
peroxide in concentrations greater than 35% and nuclear fuels, fissionable
materials and products and reactor elements such as Uranium 235 and Plutonium
239.
   (C)   Within 300 feet of a residence district boundary line all activities
and operations shall be within completely enclosed buildings, or may be out-of-
doors if completely screened by a solid wall or uniformly-painted fence at
least eight feet in height, and open storage shall not be of a greater height
dean that of the enclosing fence, except that off-street parking for vehicles
in operable condition and off-street loading spaces may be located in
accordance with §§
157.120 through
157.127.
   (D)   No buildings or structures shall be used for the manufacture,
fabricating, assembly, disassembly, repairing, storing, cleaning or servicing
of materials, products or goods, within 300 feet of any lot line of a lot
located in a residence district.
   (E)   (1)   Any use established in manufacturing districts which involves
the manufacturing, fabricating, assembly, disassembly, repairing, storing,
cleaning, servicing or testing of materials, goods or products shall be
operated in a manner as to comply with applicable performance standards as
hereinafter set forth governing noise, smoke, particulate matter, toxic or
noxious matter, odors, fire and explosive hazards or vibration, glare or heat
and no use already established on the effective date of this chapter shall be
so altered or modified as to conflict with, or further conflict with such
applicable performance standards.
      (2)   The application for a building permit shall be accompanied by a
certification from a recognized testing laboratory selected from a panel
approved by the Village Board.
         (a)   Performance standards; noise.
            1.   Sound levels shall be measured with a sound level meter and
associated octave band filter manufactured according to standards prescribed by
the American Standards Association. Measurements shall be made using the flat
network of the sound level meter. Impulsive type noises shall be subject to the
prescribed; provided that, the noises shall be capable of being accurately
measured with the equipment. Noises capable of being so measured for the
purpose of this chapter shall be those noises which cause rapid fluctuations of
the needle of the sound level meter with a variation of no more than plus or
minus two decibels. Noses incapable of being so measured, such as those of an
irregular and intermittent nature, shall be controlled so as not to become a
nuisance to adjacent uses.
            2.   At no point on the boundary of a residence or business
district shall the sound intensity level of any individual operation or plant,
other than the operation of motor vehicles or other transportation facilities,
exceed the decibel levels in the designated octave bands shown in the following
table:
Octave Band           Maximum Permitted Sound Level (Decibels)
(Frequency Cycles Per Along or in Residence Along or in Business District
Second)               District Boundaries   Boundaries
Octave Band           Maximum Permitted Sound Level (Decibels)
(Frequency Cycles Per Along or in Residence Along or in Business District
Second)               District Boundaries   Boundaries
0 to 75               72                    75
75 to 150             67                    70
150 to 300            59                    63
300 to 600            52                    57
600 to 1,200          46                    52
1,200 to 2,400        40                    45
2,400 to 4,800        34                    40
above 4,800           32                    38
 
         (b)   Performance standards; smoke and particular matter.
            1.   The emission of smoke or particular matter in a manner or
quantity as to endanger or to be detrimental to the public health, safety,
comfort or welfare is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and shall
henceforth be unlawful.
            2.   The emission of more than eight smoke units per hour per stack
is prohibited, including smoke of a density in excess of Ringlemann No. 2.
However, during one one-hour period in each 24-boil-day, each stack may emit up
to 16 units when blowing soot or cleaning fires. Only during fire-cleaning
periods, however, shall smoke of Ringlemann No.3 be permitted, and then for not
more than three minutes.
            3.   For the purpose of grading the density of smoke, the
Ringlemann Chart, published and used by the United States Bureau of Mines shall
be employed. The emission of smoke or particulate matter of a density greater
than No. 2 on the Ringlemann Chart is prohibited at all times, except as
otherwise provided hereinafter.
            4.   The emission, from all sources within any lot area of
particulate matter containing more than 10%, by weight, or particles having a
particle diameter larger than 44 microns, is prohibited.
            5.   Dust and other types of air pollution, borne by the wind from
such sources as storage areas, yards, roads and the like within lot boundaries,
shall be kept to a minimum by appropriate landscaping, paving, oiling, fencing
or acceptable means. Emission of particulate matter from such sources in excess
of the weight limitation hereinafter specified is prohibited.
         (c)   Performance standards; toxic or noxious matter. No use shall,
for any period of time, discharge across the boundaries of the lot wherein it
is located, toxic or noxious matter in concentrations as to be detrimental to
or endanger the public health, safety, comfort or welfare or cause injury or
damage to property or business.
         (d)   Performance standards; odors. The emission of odorous matter in
a quantity as to be readily detectable at any point along lot lines or as to
produce a public nuisance or hazard beyond lot lines is prohibited.
         (e)   Performance standards; fire and explosion hazard.
            1.   The storage, utilization or manufacture of materials or
products ranging from incombustible to moderate burning, as determined for
liquids by a closed cup flash point of not less than 187°F, is permitted
subject to compliance with all other performance standards for the M district.
            2.   The storage, utilization, or manufacture of materials or
products ranging from free or active burning to intense burning, as determined
for liquids by a closed cup flash point of less than 187°F, but not less than
105°F, is permitted subject to compliance with all other performance standards
for the M-1 district and provided the following conditions are met:
               a.   The materials or products shall be stored, utilized or
products within completely enclosed buildings or structures having exterior
walls of fire-resistive construction, in accordance with other ordinances in
this code of ordinances.
               b.   Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, all buildings or
structures shall be set back at least 40 feet from lot lines or, in lieu
thereof, all the buildings or structures shall be protected throughout by an
automatic sprinkler system complying with installation standards prescribed by
the National Fire Protection Association, or if the materials, goods or
products are liquids, the protection thereof shall be in conformity with
standards prescribed by the National Fire Protection Association.
            3.   The utilization in manufacturing processes of materials which
produce flammable or explosive vapors or gases, as determined for liquids by a
closed cup flash point of less than 105°F, shall be permitted in this district
provided:
               a.   The final manufactured product does not itself have a
closed cup flash point of less than 187°F;
               b.   The use and storage of the materials shall be in conformity
with standards prescribed by the National Fire Protection Association and with
the requirements of other ordinances in this code of ordinances; and
               c.   The storage of the materials shall be prohibited above
ground.
         (f)   Performance standards; glare or heat. Any operation producing
intense glare or heat shall be performed within a completely enclosed building
in a manner as not to create a public nuisance or hazard along lot lines.
         (g)   Performance standards; vibration.
            1.   No industrial operation or activity, except those not under
the direct control of the manufacturer, shall cause at any time ground
transmitted vibrations in excess of the limits set forth below.
            2.   Vibration (the periodic displacement, measured in inches, of
earth) shall be measured at any point along a residence district boundary line
with a three component measuring instrument approved by the Village Board and
shall be expressed as displacement in inches as follows:
 
Frequency (Cycles/Second) Maximum Permitted Displacement Along, Residence
                          District Boundaries (in inches)
0 to 10                   .0008
10 to 20                  .0005
20 to 30                  .0002
30 to 40                  .0002
40 to 50                  .0001
 
   (F)   Loading berths shall be in accordance with provisions set forth in §§
157.120 through
157.127.
   (G)   Parking spaces shall be in accordance with provisions set forth in §§
157.140 through
157.150.
   (H)   A site plan review shall be conducted as set forth in §
157.050(M), including review and recommendation by the Plan Commission and
final approval by the Village Board.
(1981 Code, Art. IX, A) (Ord. passed 12- -1986; Am. Ord. 04-17, passed 5-17-
2004; Am. Ord. 13-11, passed 4-1-2013; Am. Ord. 13-12, passed 4-1-2013; Am.
Ord. 13-45, passed 11-18-2013; Am. Ord. 14-20, passed 7-21-2014; Am. Ord. 14-
21, passed 7-21-2014; Am. Ord. 23-23, passed 5-15-2023; Am. Ord. 23-24, passed
5-15-2023; Am. Ord. 24-36, passed 10-21-2024)
§ 157.066 M-1, LIMITED MANUFACTURING DISTRICT.
   (A)   General requirements.
      (1)   Lot area is to be not less than 18,000 square feet.
      (2)   Lot width is to be not less than 100 feet.
      (3)   Floor area is to be not less than 5,000 square feet.
      (4)   Floor area ratio is not to exceed one and one-half.
      (5)   Building height is not to exceed 35 feet.
      (6)   Yards:
         (a)   Front yard is to be not less than 40 feet in depth.
         (b)   Side yards shall not be less than 25 feet in width, except a
side yard abutting a street shall not be less than 40 feet in width.
         (c)   Rear yard is to be not less than 40 feet in depth, except a rear
yard abutting an alley or railroad right-of-way may be reduced to 20 feet in
depth.
      (7)   No dwelling units will be allowed, except for owner or caretaker.
      (8)   Signs shall be subject to regulations contained in
Chapter 156 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Permitted uses. See §
157.065(A).
   (C)   Special uses. See §
157.065(A).
(1981 Code, Art. IX, B) (Ord. passed 12- -1986; Am. Ord. 90-10, passed 10-15-
1990; Am. Ord. 98-10, passed 5-4-1998; Am. Ord. 99-24, passed - -1999; Am. Ord.
06-14, passed 5-15-2006; Am. Ord. 11-25, passed 4-18-2011; Am. Ord. 13-11,
passed 4-1-2013)
§ 157.067 M-2, LIMITED MANUFACTURING DISTRICT.
   (A)   General requirements. The general requirements shall be the same as in
§
157.052(F), (G), (H) and (I).
   (B)   Permitted uses. See §
157.065(A).
   (C)   Special uses. See §
157.065(A).
(Ord. 04-44, passed 12-20-2004; Am. Ord. 08-39, passed 7-7-2008; Am. Ord. 11-
25, passed 4-18-2011; Am. Ord. 13-11, passed 4-1-2013)
CANNABIS OVERLAY DISTRICT
§ 157.070 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The purpose of the cannabis overlay district is to allow cannabis
business establishments to operate within the village. Cannabis business
establishments are enterprises unique and different from other uses and, as
such, in addition to the regulations imposed by the underlying zoning district,
require the imposition of certain specific regulations intended to promote the
public health, safety, comfort, morals and convenience by ensuring that such
uses are compatible with their surroundings. The district regulations are
designed to encourage compatibility with adjacent or nearby land uses.
   (B)   The cannabis overlay district is intended to only regulate cannabis
business establishments. All other uses shall be subject to the regulations of
the underlying zoning district.
(Ord. 20-04, passed 2-25-2020)
§ 157.071 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADULT-USE CANNABIS BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENT. An adult-use cannabis craft
grower, cultivation center, dispensing organization, infuser organization,
processing organization, or transporting organization, per the Cannabis
Regulation and Tax Act.
   ADULT-USE CANNABIS CRAFT GROWER. A facility operated by an organization or
business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of Agriculture to
cultivate, dry, cure and package cannabis and perform other necessary
activities to make cannabis available for sale at a dispensing organization or
use at a processing organization, per the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act.
   ADULT-USE CANNABIS CULTIVATION CENTER. A facility operated by an
organization or business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of
Agriculture to cultivate, process, transport and perform necessary activities
to provide cannabis and cannabis-infused products to licensed cannabis business
establishments, per the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act.
   ADULT-USE CANNABIS DISPENSING ORGANIZATION OR DISPENSARY. A facility
operated by an organization or business that is licensed by the Illinois
Department of Financial and Professional Regulation to acquire cannabis from
licensed cannabis business establishments for the purpose of selling or
dispensing cannabis, cannabis-infused products, cannabis seeds, paraphernalia
or related supplies to purchasers or to qualified registered medical cannabis
patients and caregivers, per the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act.
   ADULT-USE CANNABIS INFUSER ORGANIZATION OR INFUSER. A facility operated by
an organization or business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of
Agriculture to directly incorporate cannabis or cannabis concentrate into a
product formulation to produce a cannabis-infused product, per the Cannabis
Regulation and Tax Act.
   ADULT-USE CANNABIS PROCESSING ORGANIZATION OR PROCESSOR. A facility operated
by an organization or business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of
Agriculture to either extract constituent chemicals or compounds to produce
cannabis concentrate or incorporate cannabis or cannabis concentrate into a
product formulation to produce a cannabis product, per the Cannabis Regulation
and Tax Act.
   ADULT-USE CANNABIS TRANSPORTING ORGANIZATION OR TRANSPORTER. An organization
or business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of Agriculture to
transport cannabis on behalf of a cannabis business establishment or a
community college licensed under the Community College Cannabis Vocational
Training Pilot Program, per the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act.
   CANNABIS BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENT. A cultivation center, craft grower,
processing organization, infuser organization, dispensing organization or
transporting organization. As used in this section, a CANNABIS BUSINESS
ESTABLISHMENT shall also include all medical cannabis cultivation centers and
dispensaries licensed under the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program
Act (ILCS Chapter 410, Act 130, §§ 1 et seq.).
   CANNABIS REGULATION AND TAX ACT. The Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, (ILCS
Chapter 410, Act 705, §§ 1 et seq.), as amended from time to time, and
regulations promulgated thereunder.
   MEDICAL CANNABIS CULTIVATION CENTER. A facility operated by an organization
or business that is registered by the applicable State of Illinois agency
designated to oversee said facility to perform necessary activities to provide
only registered medical cannabis dispensing organizations with usable medical
cannabis in accordance with the laws of the State of Illinois.
 
   MEDICAL CANNABIS DISPENSARY. A facility operated by an organization or
business that is registered by the applicable State of Illinois agency
designated to oversee said facility to acquire medical cannabis from a
registered cultivation center for the purpose of dispensing cannabis,
paraphernalia, or related supplies and educational materials to registered
qualifying patients in accordance with the laws of the State of Illinois.
(Ord. 20-04, passed 2-25-2020)
§ 157.072 CANNABIS OVERLAY DISTRICT.
   The cannabis overlay district shall consist of the areas set forth in the
Cannabis Overlay District Map as part of the Village of East Dundee, Illinois,
Zoning Map pursuant to § 157.016 of this Code and defined as B-3, M-1 and M-
2 properties only, east of Route 25. The boundary of the cannabis overlay
district, as set forth in the Cannabis Overlay District Map, shall begin with
the B-3, M-1 and M-2 properties west of and fronting Route 25 and shall
continue east to the village limits.
(Ord. 20-04, passed 2-25-2020)
§ 157.073 ALLOWABLE USE TABLE.
   (A)   Permitted uses, special uses, accessory uses, and temporary uses in
the cannabis overlay district shall be as indicated on the following table.
Allowable Uses of Land Cannabis Overlay District  Cannabis Overlay District
and Buildings          with Underlying B-3 Zoning with Underlying M-1 and M-
                                                  2 Zoning
Allowable Uses of Land    Cannabis Overlay District  Cannabis Overlay District
and Buildings             with Underlying B-3 Zoning with Underlying M-1 and M-
                                                     2 Zoning
(a) Retail
Adult-use cannabis        S                          S
dispensing organizations
Medical cannabis          S                          S
dispensary
(b) Manufacturing Uses
Adult-use cannabis craft                             S
grower
Adult-use cannabis                                   S
cultivation center
Adult-use cannabis
infuser organization or                              S
infuser
Adult-use cannabis
processing organization                              S
or processor
Medical cannabis                                     S
cultivation center
(c) Transportation, Utility and Solid Waste Uses
1. Transportation
Adult-use cannabis
transporting organization                            S
or transporter
P: Permitted by right
S: Permitted by special use permit
 
   (B)   Any cannabis business establishments locating within the cannabis
overlay district shall abide by all zoning regulations and restrictions of the
underlying zoning district.
   (C)   Off-street parking and loading. Any cannabis business establishment
locating within the cannabis overlay district shall abide by all parking
regulations and restrictions of the underlying zoning district.
(Ord. 20-04, passed 2-25-2020)
§ 157.074 CANNABIS BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENT REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   The following items shall be submitted as part of the special use
request for a cannabis business establishment:
      (1)   An accurately dimensioned site plan indicating buildings, building
entrances, parking, sidewalks, adjacent streets and immediately surrounding
uses;
      (2)   A plan for disposal of any cannabis or byproducts that are not sold
in a manner that protects any portion thereof from being possessed or ingested
by any person or animal and shall abide by applicable state or local
regulations;
      (3)   A plan for ventilation of the cannabis business establishment that
describes the ventilation systems that will be used to prevent any odor of
cannabis off the premises of the business. For cultivation centers, such plan
shall also include all ventilation systems used to control the environment for
the plants and describe how such systems operate with the systems preventing
any odor leaving the premises;
      (4)   A security plan for the cannabis business establishment that
includes facility access controls, surveillance systems, on-site security
personnel, and other security measures required by state or local regulations.
Security arrangements must deter and prevent unauthorized entrance into areas
containing cannabis or cannabis products and the theft of cannabis or cannabis
products from the adult-use cannabis business establishment, and ensure the
safety of employees and customers of the adult-use cannabis business
establishment, as well as the surrounding area, and include no less than the
minimum security and lighting measures required by state law. The security plan
shall be reviewed and approved by the Chief of Police.
   (B)   A cannabis business establishment shall not be located within 1,500
feet of the property line of any preexisting cannabis business establishment
located within or outside the village.
   (C)   A cannabis business establishment may not be located within 2,500 feet
of the property line of a preexisting public or private preschool or elementary
or secondary school or day care center, day care home, group day care home,
part day child care facility, place of worship or an area zoned for residential
use. This location restriction shall not apply to adult-use cannabis dispensing
organizations or medical dispensaries.
   (D)   All cannabis business establishments shall abide by all other
applicable state and village regulations and requirements.
(Ord. 20-04, passed 2-25-2020)
GENERAL REGULATIONS
§ 157.080 BUILDING ON LOTS.
   In residential districts, every dwelling hereafter erected or structurally
altered shall be located on a lot and there shall not be more than one
principal building on one lot, except in a planned development or in the R-
5 Multiple Dwelling Residential District where no more than two principal
buildings shall be permitted on one lot as long as the buildings remain under
single ownership.
(1981 Code, Art. IV, C) (Ord. passed 12- -1986; Am. Ord. 20-16, passed 5-18-
2020)
§ 157.081 ALLOWABLE USE OF LAND AND/OR BUILDING.
   The following uses of land or buildings are allowed in the districts
indicated in §§
157.030 through
157.037,
157.050 through
157.055,
157.065 and
157.066:
   (A)   Uses established on the effective date of this chapter;
   (B)   Permitted uses as designated in §§
157.030 through
157.037,
157.050 through
157.055,
157.065 and
157.066; and
   (C)   Special uses.
(1981 Code, Art. IV, D) (Ord. passed 12- -1986)
§ 157.082 PROHIBITED USE OF LAND AND/OR BUILDING.
   (A)   No building or tract of land shall be devoted to any use other than
one which is specified as a permitted or special use in §§
157.030 through
157.037,
157.050 through
157.055,
157.065 and
157.066 in the zoning district in which the building or land is located.
   (B)   However, where a building permit for a building or structure has been
issued in accordance with law prior to the effective date of this chapter and
where construction has been begun within six months of the effective date and
diligently prosecuted to completion, the building or structure may be completed
in accordance with approved plans on the basis of which the building permit was
issued; and further, may upon completion be occupied under a certificate of
occupancy by the use originally designated, subject to the provisions of §§
157.105 through
157.110.
(1981 Code, Art. IV, E) (Ord. passed 12- -1986)
§ 157.083 CONTROL OVER USE.
   (A)   Substandard lot. No building or premises shall hereafter be used or
occupied, and no building or structure, or part thereof, shall be erected,
raised, moved, reconstructed, extended, enlarged or altered, except in
conformity with the regulations herein specified for the district in which it
is located. In residence districts, a parcel of land made up of one or more
lots of record at the time of the original adoption of this section on December
15, 1986, even though the parcel does not meet the requirements of this chapter
as to area or required lot width, may be used for single-family purposes,
provided:
      (1)   That the use conforms with all other regulations of the district in
which it is located; and
      (2)   That since December 15, 1986, the legal or beneficial interest in
the parcel has not been held by any person who, at the same time, held legal
title or had a beneficial interest in, directly or indirectly, any parcel
continuous thereto unless the separation of the parcels did not result in any
parcel which is less than the minimum area or yard requirements established by
this chapter.
   (B)   Intent. It is the intent of this §
157.083 that the exception provided by division (A) above shall not apply to
any parcel which a became nonconforming lot within its zoning classification
after December 15, 1986.
   (C)   Duties of Building Official; parties requesting relief. It shall be
the duty of the Building Official to request supporting documentation and
examine all submissions from a party requesting relief under this section. The
Building Official shall also require the party requesting such relief to give
notice to the persons to whom the current real estate tax bills are sent, if
any, as shown on the record of the local real estate tax assessor of all lots
lying within 250 feet of the property line of the lot for which the relief is
sought, excluding public street rights-of-way. The notice shall be sent by
certified mail, properly addressed as shown on the Tax Assessor’s rolls and
with sufficient postage affixed thereon with return receipt requested. The
applicant shall file a sworn affidavit with copies of the notices with the
Village Clerk showing the names and addresses of all notices the applicant has
sent. The affidavit shall be conclusive presumption of giving of the notices.
Such notice shall describe the relief being requested and shall state that
anyone desiring to comment should submit their comments or documentation to the
Building Official within 14 days of the date of the notice. Proof of such
notice shall be submitted to the Building Official, and his or her
determination of whether the petitioner is entitled to the relief requested
shall not be made until a date at least 21 days after the mailing date of such
notice.
(1981 Code, Art. IV, F) (Ord. passed 12- -1986; Am. Ord. 04-05, passed 3-15-
2004; Am. Ord. 04-16, passed 5-17-2004)
§ 157.084 CONTROL OVER BULK.
   Except in the case of planned developments, all new buildings shall conform
to the bulk regulations established herein for the district in which each
building is located. Further, no existing building shall be enlarged,
reconstructed, structurally altered, converted or relocated in a manner as to
conflict with the bulk regulations of this chapter for the district in which
the building shall be located.
(1981 Code, Art. IV, G) (Ord. passed 12- -1986)
§ 157.085 ACCESSORY BUILDINGS AND USES.
   (A)   (1)   Accessory uses shall be compatible with the principal use and
shall not be established prior to the establishment of the principal use and
shall not include the keeping, propagation or culture of poultry or livestock,
whether or not for profit.
      (2)   Private swimming pools shall be permitted accessory uses in any
residence district, provided they conform with the regulations of this chapter
and other applicable ordinances of the village.
   (B)   No accessory building unless it is structurally a part of the
principal building and unless it conforms with requirements of accessory
buildings for special uses shall be erected or altered at, nor moved to a
location within ten feet of the nearest wall of the principal building, or not
less than five linear feet to any part of a structure on any adjacent lot or
parcel, nor within the required area for front or side yard of the lot, as set
forth for the district and in residence districts. An accessory building in a
rear yard shall not be less than five feet from any property line, except where
a driveway along the side lot line is not adjacent to a driveway on an
adjoining lot, a detached garage need not be more than three feet from the side
lot line, except on corner lots an accessory building shall be not nearer than
the required depth of the front yard along the property line adjoining the
street and on through lots, not less than the distance required for a front
yard from the rear lot line abutting a street.
   (C)   No accessory building shall encroach upon that side yard of a corner
lot which is adjacent to the street, nor upon that side yard of a reserved
corner lot which is adjacent to the street, nor upon the rear yard of a through
lot.
   (D)   No accessory building shall have more than one story, nor exceed 15
feet in height, or the height of the principal building, whichever is less,
unless otherwise permitted as accessory to business and manufacturing uses or
to authorized special uses.
   (E)   An accessory building having vehicular access from an alley shall not
be less than five feet from the lot line abutting the alley.
(1981 Code, Art. IV, H) (Ord. passed 12- -1986; Am. Ord. 04-01, passed 1-5-
2004; Am. Ord. 04-15, passed 5-17-2004)
Penalty, see § 157.999
§ 157.086 SPECIAL USES.
   (A)   To provide for the location of certain uses hereinafter specified
which are deemed desirable for the public welfare within a given district or
districts, but which might have an adverse effect upon nearby properties or
upon the character and future development of the district in which they are
located, a classification of special uses is hereby established. Procedures for
special uses are set forth in §
157.224.
   (B)   (1)   Where a use exists on the effective date of this chapter and it
is classified as a special use hereby, it shall be considered to be a lawful
special use.
      (2)   Additions or alterations to existing buildings or land improvements
for expansion of lawful special uses may be made within the area of the lot
included in the ownership existing at the time of adoption of this chapter, and
they shall be subject to yard, floor area ratio and building height
requirements set forth in this chapter for permitted uses in the districts in
which they are located.
   (C)   A special use granted by the village after July 18, 2022 (i) shall not
run with title to the property; and (ii) shall not be transferrable. Special
uses granted by the village before July 18, 2022 (i) shall only run with title
to the property if the ordinance granting the special use provides that the
special use runs with title to the property; and (ii) shall only be
transferrable if the ordinance granting the special use provides that the
special use is transferrable.
   (D)   A special use shall expire at the earlier of (i) the sale of the
property, unless the ordinance granting the special use provides that the
special use runs with title to the property; (ii) operation of the special use
by a different person, unless the ordinance granting the special use provides
that the special use is transferrable; or (iii) after commencement of the
special use, discontinuance of the special use for a period of six consecutive
months, regardless of any reservation of an intent not to resume such special
use. Upon expiration, a special use shall not be reestablished or resumed
unless the Village President and Board of Trustees, in its discretion, grants a
new special use pursuant to, and in accordance with, §
157.224.
(1981 Code, Art. IV, I) (Ord. passed 12- -1986; Am. Ord. 22-39, passed 8-22-
2022)
§ 157.087 PERMITTED OBSTRUCTIONS; YARDS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following shall not be considered
as obstructions when located in the yards indicated or as permitted in §
151.006.
      (1)   In any yards.
         (a)   Chimneys, overhanging roof eaves, open terraces, marquees or
awnings adjoining the principal building; provided, they do not exceed 25% of
the depth of the yard; ornamental light standards and flagpoles and trees and
shrubs; and provided that, they do not block required sight lines from
adjoining streets.
         (b)   No fence, wall or shrubbery shall exceed a maximum of two feet
above the grade of the adjoining public right-of-way within the sight line
triangle, which is defined as a triangular shaped portion of land established
at street intersections within 25 feet of the intersection, in which nothing is
erected, placed, planted or allowed to grow in a manner as to limit or obstruct
the sight distance of motorists entering or leaving the intersection. The
purpose of this requirement is to provide for visual clearance and traffic
safety.
         (c)   An open fence, a wall, hedge or shrubbery may be located outside
of the sight line triangle in a required front yard or corner side yard so long
as the height thereof shall not exceed three feet above ground level adjacent
thereto. It is intended that ornamental shrubbery, which is trimmed in a way
that visibility over, around or through is not restricted will not be
prohibited even though it exceeds three feet above grade level.
      (2)   In side yards. Open accessory off-street parking spaces, except in
a side yards abutting a street.
      (3)   In rear yards. Private garages, open accessory off-street parking
spaces, accessory tool rooms or other similar accessory buildings, recreational
equipment, laundry-drying equipment; provide swimming pools, arbors and
trellises, open or solid fences not exceeding six feet in height; provided
that, nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit an open or solid fence
exceeding six feet in height which is used to enclose the immediate area
occupied and used as an electrical substation, tennis court, swimming pool,
construction site or cemetery. Accessory buildings or structures may occupy not
more than 30% of a rear yard.
   (B)   Any yard which adjoins a street shall be considered a front yard.
(1981 Code, Art. IV, J) (Ord. passed 12- -1986; Am. Ord. 87-28, passed 12-21-
1987; Am. Ord. 98-22, passed 12-21-1998; Am. Ord. 21-36, passed 10-18-2021)
§ 157.088 YARDS IN GENERAL.
   (A)   The minimum yard space required for one structure shall not again be
considered as yard space for another adjoining structure.
   (B)   No lot shall be reduced in area so that the yards or other open spaces
become less than required by this chapter.
   (C)   On streets where a front yard setback has been maintained for
buildings existing on lots or tracts having a frontage of 30% or more of the
total frontage on one side of that portion of any street lying between two
intersecting streets, or from an intersecting street and a corporate limits
line, no new building or portion thereof shall project beyond a straight line
drawn between the point closest to the street line of the residence upon either
side of the proposed structure, or if there be residences, but this one side,
then beyond the straight line projected from the front of the two nearest
residences, but this regulation, shall not be interpreted to require a front
yard of more than 125 feet, nor to permit a front yard of less depth than that
of the nearest building. Where the street is curved, the line shall follow the
curve of the street rather than to be a straight line.
   (D)   On a vacant through or corner lot, either of the lot lines abutting a
street right-of-way line may be established as its front lot line, except that
where two or more through lots are contiguous and a front lot line has been
duly established, by the construction of a building on one of the lots, the
same street lot line shall thereafter be deemed to be the front lot line of all
contiguous lots. On a through lot, a front yard shall be provided along any lot
line abutting a street.
(1981 Code, Art. IV, K) (Ord. passed 12- -1986)
§ 157.089 FLOOD PLAIN AREA.
   See
Chapter 152 of this code of ordinances for provisions concerning the regulation
of development and special flood hazard areas.
(1981 Code, Art. IV, L) (Ord. passed 12- -1986)
§ 157.090 SANITARY SEWER AND WATER SUPPLY.
   A lot within a subdivision or planned development, or an individual lot not
a part of an organized subdivision, shall be served by community or public
sanitary sewer and water supply systems, except as otherwise specifically
provided in this chapter. Any lot of record, when placed in use under the E
classification may be served by individual sewage treatment and water supply
which systems shall be designed and installed in accordance with applicable
village, county and state regulations and standards.
(1981 Code, Art. IV, M) (Ord. passed 12- -1986)
§ 157.091 PARKING WITHIN CERTAIN ZONING DISTRICTS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      ANTIQUE VEHICLE. A motor vehicle that is more than 25 years of age or a
bona fide replica thereof and which is driven on the highways only going to and
returning from and antique auto show or exhibition, or for servicing or
demonstration, or as firefighting vehicle more than 20 years old which is not
used as firefighting equipment, but is used only for the purpose of exhibition
or demonstration.
      BUS. Every motor vehicle designed for carrying more than ten passengers
and used for the transportation of persons; and every motor vehicle, other than
a taxicab, designed and used for the transportation of persons for
compensation.
      CAMPER. A recreational motor vehicle of the Second Division converted or
equipped and primarily used for living quarters or for human habitation, rather
than for the transportation of freight, goods, wares and merchandise and not
used as a commercial vehicle.
      CAMPING TRAILER. A trailer, not used commercially, constructed with
partial side walls which fold for towing and unfold to provide temporary living
quarters for recreational camping or travel use and of a size or weight not
requiring an over-dimension permit when towed on a highway.
      COMMUTER VAN. A motor vehicle having a capacity of 12 to 15 persons owned
or leased by a company or an employee organization and operated on a non-profit
basis with the primary purpose of transporting employees of the company between
the employees’ home and the company’s place of business or public
transportation station and in which the operating, administrative, maintenance
and reasonable depreciation costs are paid principally by the persons utilizing
the van.
      EXPLOSIVES. Any chemical compound or mechanical mixture that is commonly
used or intended for the purpose of producing an explosion and which contains
any oxidizing and combustive units or other ingredients in such proportions,
quantities or packing that an ignition by fire, by friction, by concussion, by
percussion or by detonator of any part of the compound or mixture may cause
such a sudden generation of highly heated gases that the resultant gaseous
pressures are capable of producing destructive effects on contiguous object or
of destroying life or limbs.
      FLAMMABLE LIQUID. Any liquid which has a flash point of 70°F or less, as
determined by a tagliabue or equivalent closed-cup test device.
      HOUSE CAR. A recreational motor vehicle of the First Division converted
or equipped and primarily used for living quarters or for human habitation,
rather than as a passenger car and not used as a commercial vehicle.
      HOUSE-TRAILER.
         (a)   A recreational trailer or semitrailer equipped and used for
living quarters or for human habitation, temporarily or permanently, rather
than for the transportation of freight, goods, wares and merchandise; or
         (b)   A house trailer or a semitrailer which is used commercially,
temporarily or permanently, that is, for the advertising, sales, display or
promotion of merchandise or services, or for any other commercial purpose,
except the transportation of property for hire or the transportation of
property for distribution by a private carrier.
      MOTOR HOME, MINI MOTOR HOME or VAN. A self- contained motor vehicle, not
used commercially, designed or permanently converted to provide living quarters
for recreational, camping or travel use, with direct walk through access to the
living quarters form the driver’s seat.
      MOTOR VEHICLE. Every vehicle which is self-propelled and every vehicle
which is propelled by electric power obtained form overhead trolley wires, but
not operated upon rails. For this chapter, MOTOR VEHICLES are divided into two
divisions:
         (a)   FIRST DIVISION. Those motor vehicles which are designed for the
carrying of not more than ten persons.
         (b)   SECOND DIVISION. Those motor vehicles which are designed for
carrying more than ten persons, those designed for living quarter and those
motor vehicles which are designed for pulling or carrying freight or cargo, and
those motor vehicles of the First Division remodeled for use and used as motor
vehicles of the Second Division.
      MULTI-PURPOSE PASSENGER VEHICLE. A passenger carrying vehicle which is
constructed either on a truck chassis or with special features for occasional
off-road operation.
      NON-COMMERCIAL VEHICLE. Any vehicle that is not a commercial vehicle.
      OWNER.  A person who holds legal title of a motor vehicle, or in the
event a motor vehicle is the subject of an agreement for the conditional sale
or lease thereof with the right of purchase upon performance of the conditions
stated in the agreement and with an immediate right of possession vested in the
conditional vendee or lessee, or in the event a mortgagor of the motor vehicle
is entitled to possession, then the conditional vendee or lessee or mortgagor
shall be deemed the owner for the purpose of this chapter.
      PARK or PARKING. Standing of a vehicle whether occupied or not, and
whether with motor running or not, otherwise than when temporarily and actually
engaged in loading or unloading merchandise or passengers.
      PASSENGER CARS. A motor vehicle of the First Division including a
multipurpose passenger vehicle, that is designed for carrying not more than ten
persons.
      POLE TRAILER. Every vehicle without motive power designed to be drawn by
another vehicle and attached to the towing vehicle by means of a reach or pole,
or by being boomed or otherwise secured to the towing vehicle, and ordinarily
used for transporting long or irregularly shaped loads such as poles, pipes or
structural members capable, generally, of sustaining themselves as beams
between the supporting connections.
      PRIVATE LIVING COACH. A recreational motor vehicle of the Second Division
equipped and primarily used for living quarters, human habitation or for mobile
living, rather than for the transportation of persons, with direct access to
the living quarters from the driver’s seat and not used as a commercial
vehicle.
      RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. Every vehicle originally designed or permanently
converted
and primarily used for living quarters or for human habitation and not used as
a commercial vehicle, including any house car, house trailer, camper or private
living coach.
      ROAD TRACTOR. Every motor vehicle designed and used for drawing other
vehicles and not so constructed as to carry any load thereon either
independently or any part of the weight of a vehicle or load so drawn.
      SEMITRAILER. Every vehicle without motive power, other than a pole
trailer, designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a
motor vehicle and so construed that some part of its weight and that of its
load rests upon or is carried by another vehicle.
      TOW TRUCK. Every truck designed or altered and equipped for and used to
push, tow, carry or draw disabled vehicles by means of a crane, hoist, towbar,
towline or auxiliary axle and to render assistance to disable vehicles.
      TRAILER.  Every vehicle without motive power in operation, other than a
pole trailer, designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by
a motor vehicle and so constructed that no part of its weight rests upon the
towing vehicle.
      TRAVEL TRAILER.  A trailer, not used commercially, designed to provide
living quarters, for recreational, camping or travel use and of a size or
weight not requiring an over-dimension permit when towed on a highway.
      TRUCK.  Every motor vehicle designed, used or maintained primarily for
the transportation of property.
      TRUCK CAMPER. A truck, not used commercially, when equipped with a
portable unit designed to be loaded onto the bed which is construed to provide
temporary living quarters for recreational, travel or camping use.
      TRUCK TRACTOR. Every motor vehicle designed and used primarily for
drawing other vehicles and not so constructed as to carry a load other than a
part of the weight of the vehicle and load so drawn.
      TRUCKSTER. Every motor vehicle or motorcycle with three wheels designed,
used or maintained primarily for the transportation of property.
      VEHICLE.  Every device, in, upon or by which any person or property is or
may be transported or drawn upon a highway, except devices moved by human
power, devices used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks and snowmobiles
as defined in the Snowmobile Registration and Safety Act.
   (B)   (1)   Prohibited parking.
         (a)   Parking of any of the following designated vehicles upon any lot
in residential district is prohibited:
            1.   Buses;
            2.   Commercial vehicles, over three-fourths ton capacity;
            3.   Commuter vans;
            4.   Pole trailers;
            5.   Road tractors;
            6.   Tow trucks; and
            7.   Truck tractors.
         (b)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, within the R-3 district, no more
than one of the following vehicles may be parked on any lot:
            1.   Commercial vehicles, up to and including one ton capacity;
            2.   Tow-trucks; and
            3.   Truck tractors.
      (2)   Restricted parking.
         (a)   Parking of any of the following vehicles upon any lot in a
residential district is permitted, provided:
            1.   No more than two vehicles are parked on any one lot within the
district; and
            2.   No portion of the vehicle shall extend closer than 15 feet
from the nearest edge of pavement of any street or three feet from the nearest
edge of any public sidewalk, whichever is furthest from the street line:
               a.   Antique vehicles;
               b.   Camping trailers;
               c.   Commercial vehicles, including and under three-fourths ton
capacity;
               d.   House cars;
               e.   House trailers;
               f.   Motor home, mini motor homes and van campers;
               g.   Private living coaches;
               h.   Recreational vehicles;
               i.   Semi trailers;
               j.   Travel trailers;
               k.   Truck campers;
               l.   Trailers.
         (b)   The following language shall not be construed to permit parking
of any commercial vehicle in a residential district, except as set forth above.
      (3)   Living use. The use of a recreational vehicle, commuter van, bus,
semitrailer, private living coach, house car or camper as an accessory building
or for human habitation upon any lot is prohibited, except where permitted as a
special use.
      (4)   Permitted parking limited. The parking of more than four permitted
motor vehicles on any lot outside of a garage of similar enclosure is
prohibited.
      (5)   Front yard parking. Parking in the required front yard of any lot
shall be limited to an area prepared with an impervious surface or graded
crushed stone with a width no greater than 30% of the lot width at the front
building line. This provision in no way supercedes any other section of the
municipal code or building code with regard to required driveways and where
there is a conflict the more restrictive ordinance applies.
      (6)   Explosive. Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, the
storage of explosives within or upon any vehicle for which parking is permitted
under division (B)(2) above is strictly prohibited.
(1981 Code, Art. IV, N) (Ord. passed 12- -1986; Am. Ord. 87-28, passed 12-21-
1987)
Penalty, see § 157.999
§ 157.092 TOWERS GENERALLY.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose hereof is to regulate the height of strictures in
order to maintain the character and scale of the predominant single-family
residential development in the village.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      PROTECTED RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY. Any property within the village that
meets all of the following requirements:
         (a)   The property is zoned E, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4 or R-5, and the
property may or may not also have a planned unit development (PUD) overlay
classification; or
         (b)   The property is used or subdivided for use as residential.
      STRICTURE HEIGHT.
         (a)   The height of towers shall be determined by measuring the
vertical distance from the tower’s point of contact with the ground or rooftop
to the highest point of the tower, including all antennas or other attachments.
         (b)   When towers are mounted upon other structures, the combined
height of the stricture and tower must meet the height restrictions of the
applicable section of this chapter.
   (C)   Tower height limitations.
      (1)   In all protected residential property, the maximum height of any
tower, including all antennas and other attachments, shall be 30 feet.
      (2)   In all residential zoning districts other than protected
residential property, the maximum height of any tower, including all antennas
and other attachments, shall not exceed one foot for each four feet the tower
is setback from protected residential property up to a maximum height of 150
feet.
      (3)   In all non-residential zoning districts, the maximum height of any
tower, including all antennas and other attachments, shall not exceed one foot
for each two feet the tower is setback from protected residential property up
to a maximum height of 150 feet.
   (D)   Applicability. The requirements of section shall apply to all
structures and developments otherwise permitted under this chapter, except:
      (1)   Planned developments, when approved as a part of a preliminary and
final development plan pursuant hereto;
      (2)   Public utility structures, including, but not limited to water
towers, antennas, lights and signals, power and telephone poles and poles
supporting emergency warning devices;
      (3)   Church sanctuaries, steeples and bell towers;
      (4)   Multi-user towers may exceed the height limitations of this section
by up to 20 feet; and
      (5)   In accordance with the Federal Communications Commission’s
preemptive ruling PRB 1, towers erected for the primary purpose of supporting
amateur radio antennas may exceed 40 feet in height provided that a
determination is made by the Building Inspector that the proposed tower height
is technically necessary to successfully engage in amateur radio
communications. All towers in excess of 40 feet must be self supporting.
   (E)   Noncompliance. Noncompliance of characteristics of structures and site
development created by the application of this section shall not in any manner
limit the legal use of the property, nor in any manner limit the repair,
maintenance or reconstruction of a non complying characteristic or feature;
however, in no instance, shall the degree of noncompliance be increased, except
as otherwise permitted by this chapter.
(1981 Code, Art. IV, O) (Ord. passed 12- -1986)
NON-CONFORMING BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES AND USES
§ 157.105 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to provide for the regulation of non-
conforming uses, buildings and structures and to specify those circumstances
and conditions under which those non-conforming buildings, structures and uses
may be continued.
(1981 Code, Art. V, A) (Ord. passed 12- -1986)
§ 157.106 AUTHORITY TO CONTINUE.
   (A)   Any non-conforming building, structure or use which existed lawfully
at the time of the adoption of this chapter and which remains non-conforming
and any such building, structure or use which shall become non-conforming upon
the adoption of this chapter or of any subsequent amendment thereto, may be
continued in accordance with the applicable regulations of this subchapter.
   (B)   For the purpose of this subchapter, a building or structure, lawfully
constructed or established on the effective date of this chapter, shall be
deemed to include any building or structure for which a building permit has
been issued prior to such date and on which construction is begun within the
required period of time as set forth in this chapter.
   (C)   Lawfully constructed buildings or structures which become non-
conforming due to condemnation actions or proceedings by a governmental entity
or agency may be continued in accordance with the applicable rules of this
chapter.
(1981 Code, Art. V, B) (Ord. passed 12- -1986; Am. Ord. 07-02, passed 1-16-
2007)
§ 157.107 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   No building, structure or use, lawfully established on the effective
date of this chapter, shall be subject to the provisions of this subchapter
solely by reason of being non-conforming with respect to the applicable
standards prescribed in this chapter for any of the following:
      (1)   Floor area ratio;
      (2)   Yards, front, side, rear or transitional;
      (3)   Lot area per dwelling unit;
      (4)   Lot width;
      (5)   Ground floor area per dwelling;
      (6)   Gross floor area;
      (7)   Performance standards; and
      (8)   Off-street parking or loading spaces.
   (B)   No building, or part thereof, lawfully existing on the effective date
of this chapter, which is designed and used or intended for use as a dwelling,
shall be subject to the provisions of this subchapter.
   (C)   It is intent of this §
157.107 to allow alteration, expansion, remodeling of non-conforming single-
family dwellings and/or other structures so long as expansion activities do not
make the buildings or structures “more” non-conforming.
(1981 Code, Art. V, C) (Ord. passed 12- -1986; Am. Ord. 04-01, passed 1-5-2004;
Am. Ord. 04-15, passed 5-17-2004)
§ 157.108 RESTRICTIONS.
   Any lawfully existing building or structure which does not conform with the
regulations of the district in which it is located shall be subject to the
provisions of this section.
   (A)   Repairs and alterations.
      (1)   Minor repairs and alterations may be made to a non-conforming
building or structure; provided that, no structural alterations shall be made
in or to the building or structure, all or substantially all of which is
designed or intended for a use not permitted in the district in which it is
located, except those required by law, or except to make the building or
structure, and use thereof, conform to the regulations of the district in which
it is located.
      (2)   Minor repairs and alterations shall be determined by the Building
Inspector and shall include, among other things, the replacement of storage
tanks where the safety of operation of the installation requires the
replacement.
   (B)   Additions and enlargements. A non-conforming building or structure,
all or substantially all of which is designed or intended for a use not
permitted in the district in which it is located, shall not be added to or
enlarged in any manner unless the non-conforming building or structure and use
thereof, including all additions and enlargements thereto, is made to conform
to all the regulations of the district into which it is located.
   (C)   Moving. No building or structure which does not conform to all of the
regulations of the district in which it is located shall be moved in whole or
in part to any other location unless every portion of the building or structure
is moved and is made to conform to all regulations of the district into which
it is moved.
   (D)   Restoration of damaged non-conforming building.
      (1)   A building or structure, all or substantially all of which is
designed or intended for a use which is not permitted in the district in which
it located, and which is destroyed or damaged by fire or other casualty or act
of God may be restored to its original bulk and used for the use existing at
the time of damage; provided that, restoration is started, as defined by a
building permit having been applied for and granted within 12 months from the
date the damage occurred.
      (2)   However, in the event the restoration of a building or structure
which is destroyed or damaged by fire or other casualty or act of God, to the
extent that the cost of restoration to the condition in which it was before the
occurrence will exceed 50% of the cost of restoration of the entire building or
structure new, is not started within 12 months after the damage occurred, the
building or structure and the use thereof shall thereafter be made to conform
to all regulations of the district in which it is located.
      (3)   An additional extension of the restoration period for six months
may be granted by the Village Board for good cause shown.
   (E)   Discontinuance of use of non-conforming building or structure. A
building, structure or portion thereof, all or substantially all of which is
designed or intended for a use which is not permitted in the district in which
it is located, and which is vacant on the effective date of this chapter or
thereafter becomes vacant and remains unoccupied, or is not used for a
continuous period of 180 days, shall not thereafter be occupied or used, except
by a use which conforms to the use regulations of the district in which it is
located.
   (F)   Expansion of use in non-conforming building or structure. The non-
conforming use of a part of a building or structure may be expanded within the
building or structure in which the use is presently located, but no changes or
structural alterations shall be made unless the changes or structural
alterations, and the use thereof, conform to all regulations of the district in
which the building or structure is located.
   (G)   Change of use in conforming building or structure. A non-conforming
use of a non-conforming building or structure may be changed to a use permitted
in the district in which the building or structure is located, or in residence
districts a building designed or intended for business use, which lawfully
exists within the village limits on the effective date of this chapter, may be
changed to a use permitted in a B-1 district, but no change shall extend or
modify any other applicable provisions of this subchapter.
(1981 Code, Art. V, D) (Ord. passed 12- -1986; Am. Ord. 04-01, passed 1-5-2004;
Am. Ord. 04-15, passed 5-17-2004)
§ 157.109 NON-CONFORMING USE OF CONFORMING BUILDINGS OR STRUCTURES.
   The lawfully existing non-conforming use of a part or all of a building or
structure, all or substantially all of which building or structure in which it
is located, may be continued subject to the following provisions.
   (A)   Expansion of non-conforming use. The non-conforming use of a part of a
building or structure, all or substantially all of which building or structure
is designed or intended for a use permitted in the district in which it is
located, shall not be expanded or extended into any other portion of the
building or structure, nor changed to any other non-conforming use.
   (B)   Discontinuance. If a non-conforming use of a building or structure,
all or substantially all of which building or structure is designed or intended
for a use permitted in the district in which it is located, is discontinued for
a period of 180 days, it shall not be renewed; and any subsequent use of the
building or structure shall conform to the use regulations of the district in
which the premises are located.
   (C)   Change of a non-conforming use. No non-conforming use shall be changed
to another non- conforming use when the nonconforming use is located in a
building or structure, all or substantially all of which building or structure
is designed or intended for a permitted use.
(1981 Code, Art. V, E) (Ord. passed 12- -1986)
Penalty, see § 157.999
§ 157.110 NON-CONFORMING USE OF LAND.
   The non-conforming use of land not involving a building or structure, or in
connection with which any building or structure thereon is incidental or
accessory to the principal use of land, may be continued subject to the
following provisions.
   (A)   Expansion. A non-conforming use of land shall not be expanded or
extended beyond the area it occupies.
   (B)   Discontinuance. If a non-conforming use of land is discontinued for a
period of six months, it shall not thereafter be renewed and any subsequent use
of land shall conform to the regulations of the district in which the land is
located.
   (C)   Change of use. A non-conforming use of land shall not be changed to
any other use, except to a use permitted in the district in which the land is
located.
(1981 Code, Art. V, F) (Ord. passed 12- -1986)
OFF-STREET LOADING
§ 157.120 REQUIREMENT.
   In connection with any building or structure which is to be erected or
substantially altered and which requires the receipt or distribution of
materials or merchandise by trucks or other similar vehicles, there shall be
provided off-street loading berths not less than the minimum requirements
specified in this subchapter.
(1981 Code, Art. XI, A) (Ord. passed 12- -1986)
§ 157.121 LOCATION.
   All required loading berths shall be located on the same lot as the use to
be served and no portion of the vehicles shall project into a street or alley.
In the manufacturing districts, no loading berth for vehicles of more than two-
ton capacity shall be located less than 300 feet to any residence district. No
permitted or required loading berth shall be located within 25 feet of the
nearest point of intersection of any two streets, nor shall it be located in a
required front yard of side yard.
(1981 Code, Art. XI, A1) (Ord. passed 12- -1986)
§ 157.122 SIZE.
   A required off-street loading berth shall be at least ten feet in width by
at least 50 feet in length, exclusive of aisle and maneuvering space and shall
have vertical clearance of at least 15 feet.
(1981 Code, Art. XI, A2) (Ord. passed 12- -1986)
§ 157.123 ACCESS.
   Each required off-street loading berth shall be designed with appropriate
means of vehicular access to a street or alley in a manner which will least
interfere with traffic movements and shall be subject to approval of the
Village Engineer.
(1981 Code, Art. XI, A3) (Ord. passed 12- -1986)
§ 157.124 SURFACING.
   All open off-street loading berths shall be improved with a compacted
macadam base not less than seven inches thick, or equal, surfaced with not less
than two inches of asphaltic-concrete or one comparable all-weather dustless
material.
(1981 Code, Art. XI, A4) (Ord. passed 12- -1986)
§ 157.125 REPAIR AND SERVICE.
   No storage of any kind for motor vehicle repair work or service of any kind
shall be permitted within any required loading berth.
(1981 Code, Art. XI, A5) (Ord. passed 12- -1986)
Penalty, see § 157.999
§ 157.126 SPACES ALLOWED.
   Space allowed to any off-street loading berth shall not, which so allocated,
be used to satisfy the space requirements for any off-street parking facilities
or portions thereof.
(1981 Code, Art. XI, A6) (Ord. passed 12- -1986)
§ 157.127 REQUIRED LOADING BERTHS.
   For the uses listed, loading berths shall be provided as specified:
   (A)   Auditoriums, banks, business and professional office, public
administration buildings, bowling alleys, hospitals, schools, colleges,
sanitariums and other similar institutional uses, and hotels or private clubs
and lodges, for such a building containing 10,000 to 100,000 square feet of
floor area: one loading berth. For each additional 100,000 square feet of floor
area or fraction thereof in a building: one additional loading berth.
   (B)   Manufacturing, fabricating assembly, disassembly, warehousing storing,
cleaning, servicing, testing and repairing establishments, for such a building
containing 5,000 to 40,000 square feet of floor area: one loading berth, plus
one additional loading berth for each additional 40,000 square feet of floor
area or fraction thereof.
   (C)   Retail stores, furniture and appliance stores, household equipment and
furniture stores, repair shops, wholesale stores and establishments handling
the sale and consumption of food on the premises, loading berths in accordance
with the following schedule:
 
Square Feet of Floor Area Minimum Number
5,000 to 10,000           1
10,000 to 25,000          2
25,000 to 40,000          3
40,000 to 100,000         4
NOTE TO TABLE:
For each additional, 100,000 square feet of floor area or fractional thereof
in such a building, one additional loading berth.
 
   (D)   Theaters, for such a building containing 8,000 to 25,000 square feet
of floor area: one loading berth. For each additional 50,000 square feet of
floor area or fraction thereof: one additional loading berth. Additional
loading berth or berths, as determined by the Building Inspector.
   (E)   Off-street loading berths shall be provided in accordance with
requirements determined by the Village Board of Trustees, based upon
requirements heretofore set forth for the most similar use.
(1981 Code, Art. XI, A7) (Ord. passed 12- -1986)
OFF-STREET PARKING
§ 157.140 REQUIREMENT.
   (A)   Any off-street parking space in connection with existing buildings or
structures, on the effective date of this chapter, shall not be removed,
enlarged or altered, except in conformance with the requirements of this
chapter.
   (B)   In connection with any building or structure which is to be erected or
substantially altered and which requires off-street parking space, there shall
be provided off-street parking space in accordance with regulations set forth
hereinafter.
(1981 Code, Art. XI, B) (Ord. passed 12- -1986)
§ 157.141 USE.
   Except as may otherwise be provided for the parking of trucks or for special
uses required accessory off-street parking facilities, required as accessory to
uses listed herein, shall be solely for the parking of passenger automobiles,
patrons, occupants or employees.
(1981 Code, Art. XI, B1) (Ord. passed 12- -1986)
§ 157.142 LOCATION.
   Parking spaces required for single or two-family dwelling units shall be
located on the same lot as the dwelling served. Parking spaces required for all
other use, except uses in the B-1 districts, which are established after the
effective date of this chapter, shall be located on the same lot as the use
served. Uses, other than single-family dwellings, which are in existence on the
effective date of this chapter and which are subsequently altered or enlarged
and new uses in the B-1 districts may be served in accordance with requirements
of this chapter, by parking facilities located on land other than the lot on
which the building or use served is located; provided, the facilities are
located within 300 feet walking distance from the main entrance to the use
served.
(1981 Code, Art. XI, B2) (Ord. passed 12- -1986)
§ 157.143 COMPUTATION.
   The determination of the number of off-street parking spaces required by
this chapter results in a requirement of a fractional space, any fraction of
one-half or less may be disregarded, while a fraction in excess of one-half
shall be counted as one parking space.
(1981 Code, Art. XI, B3) (Ord. passed 12- -1986)
§ 157.144 COLLECTIVE PROVISIONS FOR NON-RESIDENTIAL USES.
   Off-street parking facilities for separate uses may be provided collectively
if the total number of spaces so provided is not less than the sum of the
separate requirements of each such use and if all regulations governing the
location of accessory parking spaces in relation to the use served are
observed. But no parking space, or portion thereof, shall serve as the required
space for more than one use unless otherwise authorized in accordance with this
chapter.
(1981 Code, Art. XI, B4) (Ord. passed 12- -1986)
§ 157.145 REPAIR AND SERVICE.
   No motor vehicle repair work of any kind shall be permitted in parking lots.
No gasoline or motor oil shall be sold in conjunction with any accessory
parking facilities unless the facilities are located within a completely
enclosed building, in which case gasoline and motor oil may be sold within the
building to the uses of the facilities; provided that, no advertising sign is
visible form outside the building; and provided further, that all gasoline
pumps shall be effectively screened from view of the street.
(1981 Code, Art. XI, B5) (Ord. passed 12- -1986)
Penalty, see § 157.999
§ 157.146 SIZE.
   (A)   A required off-street parking space shall be at least nine feet in
width and at least 18 feet in length, exclusive of access drives, aisles,
ramps, columns and office or work area.
   (B)   The space shall have vertical clearance of at least seven feet.
(1981 Code, Art. XI, B6) (Ord. passed 12- -1986)
§ 157.147 ACCESS.
   (A)   Each required off-street parking space shall open directly upon an
aisle or a driveway of the width and design as to provide safe and efficient
means of vehicular access to the parking space.
   (B)   (1)   All off-street parking facilities shall be provided with
appropriate means of vehicular access to a street a alley or driveway in a
manner which will least interfere with traffic movements.
      (2)   A parking area containing four or more parking spaces shall have
vehicular access to it over a street, alley or driveway, containing ail-
weather, hard-surfaced pavement and the location and route of access to a
parking area shall be identified. No driveway across public property shall have
a width exceeding 24 feet, exclusive of curb returns.
(1981 Code, Art. XI, B7) (Ord. passed 12- -1986)
Cross-reference:
   Waiver of development regulations for paving, see §
157.193
§ 157.148 YARDS; LOCATION.
   Off-street parking spaces may be located in yards, except required front
yards and side yards adjoining a street.
(1981 Code, Art. XI, B8) (Ord. passed 12- -1986)
§ 157.149 DESIGN AND MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   Open and enclosed parking spaces. Accessory parking spaces, located on
the same lot as occupied by the use served, may be open to the sky or enclosed
in a building. Accessory parking spaces, located elsewhere than on the same lot
occupied by the use, shall be open to the sky.
   (B)   Surfacing. All open off-street parking areas shall be improved with a
compacted macadam base, or equal, not less than four inches thick surfaced with
asphaltic concrete or comparable hard-surfaced, all-weather, dustless material
as approved by the village.
   (C)   Screening and landscaping. All open automobile parking areas
containing more than four parking spaces shall be effectively screened on each
side adjoining or fronting on any residential or institutional property by a
wall or fence not less than five feet high or more than six feet high, or a
densely-planted compact hedge not less than five feet in height; and wheelstops
of masonry, steel, or heavy timber, shall be placed not nearer than five feet
from the street line in districts where a front yard is not required or from
side lot lines.
   (D)   Lighting. Illumination of an off-street parking area shall be arranged
so as not to reflect rays of light into adjacent residential districts and
street. All lighting shall be extinguished not later than 30 minutes after the
close of business of the use being served, except as may be otherwise
authorized by the Village Board of Trustees.
(1981 Code, Art. XI, B9) (Ord. passed 12- -1986)
Cross-reference:
   Waiver of development regulations for paving, parking lot lighting and
parking lot landscaping, see §
157.193
§ 157.150 REQUIRED SPACES.
   Off-street parking spaces accessory to designated uses shall be provided as
follows:
   (A)   Family dwellings:
      (1)   Single-family dwellings: at least one parking space.
      (2)   Two-family dwellings: at least one parking space for each dwelling
unit.
      (3)   Multiple-family dwellings: at least one and three-fourths parking
spaces for each dwelling unit.
   (B)   Hotels: at least one parking space for each lodging room.
   (C)   Private clubs and lodges: at least two parking spaces and one parking
space for each seven seats in accordance with design capacity of the main
meeting room.
   (D)   Motels and tourist courts: at least one parking space for each
dwelling unit and one parking space for each lodging room.
   (E)   Schools:
      (1)   Schools, elementary or junior high: private or public: at least one
parking space for each faculty member and other full-time employees.
      (2)   High schools, private or public: at least one parking space of
design capacity for each seven students.
      (3)   School and institutional auditoriums: at least one parking space
for each two persons employed on the premises and one additional parking space
for each five seats or for each 90 inches of seating space in the maize
auditorium or assembly hall.
   (F)   Churches: at least one parking space for each five seats or 90 inches
of seating space in the main auditorium.
   (G)   Theaters: at least one parking space for each five seats in the
theater.
   (H)   Hospitals: at least one parking space for each three hospital beds,
plus one parking space for each four employees other than doctors, plus one
parking space for each two doctors assigned to the staff.
   (I)   Libraries and museums: at least one parking space for each 1,000
square feet of floor area.
   (J)   Recreational buildings or community centers: at least one parking
space shall be provided for each three employees, plus spaces in adequate
number as determined by the Village Board of Trustees to serve the visiting
public.
   (K)   Medical and dental clinics: at least three parking spaces for each
examining or treatment room, plus one for each doctor and employee in the
building.
   (L)   Public utility and public service uses: at least one parking space for
each three employees, plus spaces in adequate number as determined by the
Village Board of Trustees to serve the visiting public.
   (M)   Establishments handling the sale and consumption on the premises of
food and refreshment: at least one parking space for each 150 square feet of
floor area.
   (N)   Bowling alleys: at least seven parking spaces for each alley, plus
such additional spaces as may be required herein for affiliated uses such as
restaurants and the like.
   (O)   Banks: at least one parking space for each 300 square feet of floor
area.
   (P)   Business and professional offices or public administration buildings:
at least one parking space for each 250 square feet of floor area.
   (Q)   Automobile service stations: at least one parking space for each
employee, plus two for each services stall.
   (R)   Furniture and appliance stores, motor vehicle sales, wholesale stores,
stores for repair of household equipment or furniture: at least one parking
space for each 600 square feet of floor area.
   (S)   Undertaking establishments and funeral parlors: at least ten parking
spaces for each chapel or parlor, plus one parking space for each funeral
vehicle maintained on the premises.
   (T)   Retail stores: at least one parking space for each 200 square feet of
floor area.
   (U)   Manufacturing, fabricating and processing plants not engaged in retail
trade: at least one parking space for each two employees as related to the
working period when the maximum number of employees are employed on the
premises.
   (V)   Warehouse and storage establishments: at least one off-street parking
space for each employee as related to the working period when the maximum
number of employees are employed on the premises.
   (W)   Other uses: parking spaces on the same basis as required herein for
the most similar use as determined by the Village Board of Trustees.
   (X)   Adult-use cannabis dispensing organizations and medical cannabis
dispensaries: at least one parking space for each 150 square feet of gross
floor area; minimum of 20 spaces must be provided.
(1981 Code, Art. XI, B10) (Ord. passed 12- -1986; Am. Ord. 20-04, passed 2-25-
2020)
TOWERS; PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
§ 157.165 PURPOSE.
   In order to accommodate the communication needs of residents and business
while protecting the public health, safety and general welfare of the
community, the Village Board of Trustees finds that these regulations are
necessary in order to:
   (A)   Facilitate the provision of wireless telecommunication services to the
residents and businesses of the village;
   (B)   Minimize adverse visual effects of towers through careful design and
siting standards;
   (C)   Avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from tower failure
through structural standards and setback requirements; and
   (D)   Maximize the use of existing and approved towers and buildings to
accommodate new wireless telecommunication antennas in order to reduce the
number of towers needed to seine the community.
(1981 Code, Art. XIII, a) (Ord. passed 12- -1986)
§ 157.166 TOWERS IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.
   Towers shall be allowed and shall be permitted uses only in the following
residentially-zoned areas.
   (A)   Towers supporting amateur radio antennas and conforming to all
applicable provisions of this chapter shall be allowed only in the rear yard of
residentially zoned-parcels.
   (B)   Towers supporting commercial antennas and conforming to all applicable
provisions of this chapter shall he allowed only in the following residentially
zoned locations:
      (1)   Church sites, when camouflaged as steeples or bell towers;
      (2)   Park sites, when compatible with the nature of the park; and
      (3)   Government, school, utility and institutional sites.
(1981 Code, Art. XIII, b) (Ord. passed 12- -1986)
§ 157.167 TOWERS IN NON-RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.
   Towers shall be allowed in non-residential zoning districts as special uses
subject to the requirements of this subchapter.
(1981 Code, Art. XIII, c) (Ord. passed 12- -1986)
§ 157.168 CO-LOCATION REQUIREMENTS.
   All commercial wireless telecommunications towers erected, constructed or
located within the village shall comply with the following requirements.
   (A)   A proposal for a new commercial wireless telecommunication service
tower shall not be approved unless the Village Board of Trustees finds that the
telecommunications equipment planned for the proposed tower cannot be
accommodated on an existing or approved tower or building within a one-mile
search radius (one-half mile search radius for towers under 120 feet in height,
one-quarter mile search radius for towers under 80 feet in height) of the
proposed tower due to one or more of the following reasons:
      (1)   The planned equipment would exceed the structural capacity of the
existing or approved tower or building, as documented by a qualified and
licensed professional engineer, and the existing or approved tower cannot be
reinforced modified, or replaced to accommodate planned or equivalent equipment
at a reasonable cost;
      (2)   The planned equipment would cause interference materially impacting
the usability of other existing or planned equipment at the tower or building
as documented by a qualified and licensed professional engineer and the
interference cannot be prevented at a reasonable cost;
      (3)   Existing or approved towers and buildings within the search radius
cannot accommodate the planned equipment at a height necessary to function
reasonably as documented by a qualified and licensed professional engineer;
and/or
      (4)   Other unforeseen reasons that make it infeasible to locate the
planned telecommunications equipment upon an existing or approved tower or
building.
   (B)   (1)   Any proposed commercial wireless telecommunication service tower
shall be designed, structurally, electrically and, in all respects, to
accommodate both the applicant’s an and comparable antennas for at least two
additional users if the tower is over 100 feet in height or for at least one
additional user if the tower is over 60 feet in height.
      (2)   Towers must be designed to allow for future rearrangement of
antennas upon the tower and to accept antennas mounted at varying heights.
(1981 Code, Art. XIII, d) (Ord. passed 12- -1986)
§ 157.169 CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS.
   All towers erected, constructed or located within the village, and all
wiring, therefore, shall comply with the requirements set forth in Chapter 151
of this code of ordinances.
(1981 Code, Art. XIII, e) (Ord. passed 12- -1986)
§ 157.170 TOWER AND ANTENNA DESIGN REQUIREMENTS.
   Proposed or modified towers and antennas shall meet the following design
requirements.
   (A)   Towers and antennas shall be designed to blend into the surrounding
environment through the use of color and camouflaging architectural treatment,
except in instances where the color is dictated by federal or state authorities
such as the Federal Aviation Administration.
   (B)   Commercial wireless telecommunications service towers shall be of a
monopole design unless the Village Board determines that an alternative design
would better blend into the surrounding environment.
(1981 Code, Art. XIII, f) (Ord. passed 12- -1986)
§ 157.171 SETBACKS.
   Towers shall conform with each of the following minimum setback
requirements.
   (A)   Towers shall meet the setbacks of the underlying zoning district with
the exception of industrial zoning districts, where towers may encroach into
the rear setback area; provided that, the rear property line abuts another
industrially zoned property and the tower does not encroach upon any easements.
   (B)   Towers shall be set back from the public rights-of-way by a minimum
distance equal to one-half of the height of the tower, including all antennas
and attachments, but in no event in front of the front building line of the
zoning lot.
   (C)   Towers shall not be located between a principal structure and a public
street, with the following exceptions:
      (1)   In industrial zoning districts, towers may be placed within a side
yard abutting an internal industrial street.
      (2)   On sites adjacent to public streets on all sides, towers may be
placed within a side yard abutting a local street.
   (D)   A tower’s setback may be reduced or its location in relation to a
public street varied at the sole discretion of the Village Board of Trustees,
to allow the integration of a tower into an existing or proposed structure such
as a church steeple, light standard, power line support device or similar
structure.
   (E)   Towers erected on any protected residential parcel, as defined in §
157.092, are also subject to the setback provisions of the zoning
classification.
(1981 Code, Art. XIII, g) (Ord. passed 12- -1986)
§ 157.172 HEIGHT.
   All proposed towers shall meet the height restrictions set forth in §
157.092.
(1981 Code, Art. XIII, h) (Ord. passed 12- -1986)
§ 157.173 LIGHTING.
   Towers shall not be illuminated by artificial means and shall not display
strobe lights unless the lighting is specifically required by the Federal
Aviation Administration or other federal or state authority for a particular
tower. When incorporated into the approved design of the tower, light fixtures
used to illuminate ball fields, parking lots or similar areas may be attached
to the tower.
(1981 Code, Art. XIII, i) (Ord. passed 12- -1986)
§ 157.174 SIGNS AND ADVERTISING.
   The use of any portion of a tower for signs other than warning or equipment
information signs is prohibited.
(1981 Code, Art. XIII, j) (Ord. passed 12- -1986)
Penalty, see § 157.999
§ 157.175 ACCESSORY UTILITY BUILDINGS.
   All utility buildings and structures accessory to a tower shall be
architecturally designed to blend in with the surrounding environment and shall
meet the minimum setback requirements of the underlying zoning district.
Ground-mounted equipment shall be screened from view by suitable vegetation,
except where a design of non-vegetative screening better reflects and
complements the architectural character of the surrounding neighborhood,
(1981 Code, Art. XIII, k) (Ord. passed 12- -1986)
§ 157.176 ABANDONED OR UNUSED TOWERS OR PORTIONS OF TOWERS.
   Abandoned or unused towers or portion of towers shall be removed as follows.
   (A)   All abandoned or unused towers and associated facilities shall be
removed within 12 months of the cessation of operations at the site unless a
time extension is approved by the Building Inspector. A copy of the relevant
portions of a signed lease which requires the applicant to remove the tower and
associated facilities upon cessation of operations at the site shall be
submitted at the time of application. In the event that a tower is not removed
within 12 months of the cessation of operations at a site, the tower and
associated facilities may be removed by the village and the costs of removal
assessed against the property.
   (B)   Unused portions of towers above a manufactured connection shall be
removed within six months of the time of antenna relocation. The replacement of
portions of a tower previously removed requires the issuance of a new
conditional use permit.
(1981 Code, Art. XIII, l) (Ord. passed 12- -1986)
§ 157.177 ANTENNAS MOUNTED ON ROOFS AND THE LIKE.
   (A)   The placement of wireless telecommunication antennas on roofs, walls
and existing towers may be approved by the Building Inspector, provided the
antennas meet the requirements of this chapter, after submittal of:
      (1)   A final site and building plan of this chapter; and
      (2)   A report prepared by a qualified and licensed professional engineer
indicating the existing structure or tower’s suitability to accept the antenna,
and the proposed method of affixing the antenna to the structure.
   (B)   Complete details of all fixtures and couplings and the precise point
of attachment shall be indicated.
(1981 Code, Art. XIII, m) (Ord. passed 12- -1986)
§ 157.178 INTERFERENCE WITH PUBLIC SAFETY TELECOMMUNICATIONS.
   No new or existing telecommunications service shall interfere with public
safety telecommunications. All applications for new service shall be
accompanied by an inter-modulation study which provides a technical evaluation
of existing and proposed transmissions and indicates all potential interference
problems. Before the introduction of new service or changes in existing
service, telecommunication providers shall notify the village at least ten
calendar days in advance of the changes and allow the village to monitor
interference levels during the testing process.
(1981 Code, Art. XIII, n) (Ord. passed 12- -1986)
§ 157.179 ADDITIONAL SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS.
   In addition to the information required elsewhere in this chapter,
development applications for towers shall include the following supplemental
information:
   (A)   A report from a qualified and licensed professional engineer which:
      (1)   Describes the tower height and design including a cross section and
elevation;
      (2)   Documents the height above grade for all potential mounting
positions for co-located antennas and the minimum separation distances between
antennas;
      (3)   Describes the tower’s capacity, including the number and type of
antennas that it can accommodate;
      (4)   Documents what steps the applicant will take to avoid interference
with established public safety telecommunications;
      (5)   Includes an engineer’s stamp and registration number; and
      (6)   Includes other information necessary to evaluate the request.
   (B)   For all commercial wireless telecommunication service towers, a letter
of intent committing the tower owner and his or her successors to allow the
shared use of the tower if an additional user agrees in writing to meet
reasonable terms and conditions for shared use.
   (C)   Before the issuance of a building permit, the following supplemental
information shall be submitted:
      (1)   Proof that the proposed tower complies with regulations
administered by Federal Aviation Administration; and
      (2)   A report from a qualified and licensed professional engineer which
demonstrates the tower’s compliance with the aforementioned structural and
electrical standards.
(1981 Code, Art. XIII, o) (Ord. passed 12- -1986)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT GENERALLY
§ 157.190 ORGANIZATION.
   The administration of this chapter is hereby vested in three offices of the
government of the village as follows:
   (A)   Building Inspector;
   (B)   Zoning Board of Appeals; and
   (C)   Plan Commission.
(1981 Code, Art. XII, A) (Ord. passed 12- -1986)
§ 157.191 BUILDING INSPECTOR.
   (A)   Creation. In the village, there shall be an appointed village official
known as the Building Inspector with the authority, responsibility and duties
as set forth in this chapter and other ordinances and codes of the village that
may exist from time to time.
   (B)   Duties of Building Inspector.
      (1)   Determine conformance of application of building hermits with
regulations of this chapter and make and maintain records thereof;
      (2)   Issue certificate of occupancy and make and maintain records
thereof;
      (3)   Conduct inspections of buildings, structures and use of land to
determine compliance with the terms of this chapter;
      (4)   Maintain permanent and current records of this chapter including,
but not limited to all maps, amendments and special uses, variations, appeals
and applications therefor and designate on the zoning district map each
amendment and special use, in addition to such records which the village is
required to keep;
      (5)   Receive all matters to come before the Zoning Board of Appeals and
assign a consecutive number for identification in the order in which they are
received and insofar as is practicable place diem on the agenda of the Zoning
Board of Appeals in the numerical order in which they are received;
      (6)   Initiate, direct and review, from time to time, a study of the
provisions of this chapter and make written reports of recommendations to the
Plan Commission not less frequently than once each year; and
      (7)   Issue permits for erection of temporary structures in accordance
with regulations of the Building Code.
   (C)   Occupancy certificates.
      (1)   Any land, vacant on the effective date of this chapter, and any
buildings, structure or addition or major alteration thereto, constructed after
the effective date of this chapter shall not be used or occupied until a
certificate of occupancy has been issued by the Building Inspector. No new use
shall be made of any land, building or structure until a certificate of
occupancy has been issued.
      (2)   Every application for a building permit shall be deemed to be an
application for an occupancy certificate. Every application for an occupancy
certificate for a new use of land or existing building or structure where no
building permit is required shall be made to the Building Inspector.
      (3)   (a)   An occupancy certificate shall be issued only after the
Building Inspector had inspected the premise and finds:
            1.   It to be in compliance with all applicable regulations of the
zoning district in which it is located; and
            2.   The use of a building or structure is in conformance with the
plans and specification for which the building permit was issued.
         (b)   The Building Inspector may issue only one temporary occupancy
certificate for each application for a building permit as follows:
            1.   For a period not to exceed six mouths from the date of its
issuance and with provisions, if required, for an extension of not more than a
total of three additional months; and
            2.   The portion of land, building or structure for which the
temporary occupancy certificate is issued has been completed and meets the
requirements as set forth hereunder and the remaining portion of the land,
building or structure is in the process of completion.
         (c)   Every certificate of occupancy shall be dated, shall state that
the use or occupancy complies with the provisions of this chapter and shall be
signed by the Building Inspector.
         (d)   The occupancy certificate shall be issued, or written notice
shall be given to the applicant specifying the reasons why a temporary or
permanent certificate cannot be issued not later than 14 days after the
Building Inspector is notified, in writing, that the building or premises are
ready for occupancy.
(1981 Code, Art. XII, B) (Ord. passed 12- -1986)
§ 157.192 FEES.
   An application for a variation, amendment or special use shall be filed and
accompanied by a fee payable to the Village Treasurer as set forth in the
village schedule of fees.
(1981 Code, Art. XII, B) (Ord. passed 12- -1986; Am. Ord. 87-01, passed 12-21-
1987)
§ 157.193 WAIVER OF DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS BY VILLAGE BOARD OF TRUSTEES.
   (A)   Following a determination by the Village Board that a particular
development and/or use would not endanger the health, safety and welfare of
area residents, the Village Board is empowered to waive the following
development regulations:
      (1)   Paving. Permission may be given for a crushed stone base or asphalt
shavings in lieu of permanent roadway or parking lot construction, provided
however, that all required off-street parking is provided for, including
handicapped parking; and that steps are taken to control dust and other
particulates from the parking surface. This standard applies also to driveway
access to the site, pursuant to §§
157.147 and
157.149.
      (2)   Curb and gutter. Permission may be given for waiver of the
requirement for installation of curb and gutter, provided however, that the
developer take all steps necessary to comply with all applicable storm water
drainage requirements, pursuant to §
57.101(F).
      (3)   Parking lot lighting. Provided that no activity is scheduled or
planned to take place after dusk, the developer is not obligated to construct
parking lot lighting so long as the proposed use remains a temporary use as
allowed by the Village Board, pursuant to §
157.149.
      (4)   Parking lot landscaping. Permission may be given for waiver of the
requirement of parking lot landscaping, including placement of tree and
shrubbery, pursuant to §
157.149.
   (B)   The developer is required to otherwise conform to all other aspects of
the village development regulations, including utilization of public water and
sewer. No septic facilities are allowed.
   (C)   TEMPORARY shall mean for a period of time not to exceed 12 months. At
the conclusion of the 12-month period, developers are obligated to:
      (1)   Remove the temporary use and restore the property to its pre-use
condition;
      (2)   Install all improvements as may otherwise be required; or
      (3)   Seek an extension of the temporary status from the Village Board,
with the extension not to exceed an additional 12 months.
   (D)   The Village Board may impose such additional standards and
requirements as it feels necessary to minimize the impact of the waiver of the
permanent development requirements.
(Ord. 08-52, passed 9-8-2008)
Cross-references:
   Off-street parking regulations, see §§
157.140 through
157.150
   Planned Traditional Neighborhood Development, see §
157.244
ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
§ 157.205 MEMBERSHIP.
   A Zoning Board of Appeals is hereby established and its membership shall be
as set forth in
Chapter 150, Planning and Zoning Commission.
(1981 Code, Art. XII, C1) (Ord. passed 12- -1986; Am. Ord. 01-05, passed 6-4-
2001)
§ 157.206 JURISDICTION.
   (A)   The Board shall hear and decide all application for appeals and for
the types of authorized variations as hereinafter set forth in the manner
prescribed by standards and other regulations herein set forth.
   (B)   All meetings of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be held at the call
of the Chairperson, the Village President or the Board of Trustees and at the
time as the foregoing may determine. All meetings of the Zoning Board of
Appeals shall be held as the Chairperson shall determine when there are pending
matters for an agenda. In all official proceedings the Chairperson or in his or
her absence the acting Chairperson of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall have
the power to administer oaths and to compel, by subpoena, the attendance and
testimony of witnesses and the production of books and papers. The Zoning Board
of Appeals shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each
member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such
fact, and shall also keep records of its hearings and other official actions. A
copy of every rule or regulation, every appeal, variation and every
recommendation, order, requirement, decision or determination of the Zoning
Board of Appeals shall be filed immediately in the office of the Village Clerk
and shall be a public record. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall adopt its own
rules and procedures, not in conflict with this chapter or with applicable
state statutes and all hearings shall be open to the public.
(1981 Code, Art. XII, C2) (Ord. passed 12- -1986)
§ 157.207 POWERS; APPEALS; VARIATION PROCEDURE.
   (A)   (1)   The Planning, Zoning, and Historic Commission shall hear and
decide appeals from an administrative order, requirement or determination made
by the Building Inspector under this chapter or under the Building Code or
Subdivision Code.
      (2)   An appeal may be taken to the Planning, Zoning, and Historic
Commission by any person, firm or corporation, or by any office, department,
board, bureau or commission, aggrieved by an administrative order, requirement,
decision or determination under this chapter by the Building Inspector.
      (3)   An appeal shall be filed with the Village and promptly referred to
the Planning, Zoning, and Historic Commission for processing in accordance with
the requirements of Illinois Statutes.
   (B)   (1)   Action by the Planning, Zoning, and Historic Commission
regarding processing variation requests.
         (a)   The Planning, Zoning, and Historic Commission shall hear and
issue recommendations to the Board of Trustees on variation requests. The
Planning, Zoning, and Historic Commission shall not recommend the adoption of a
proposed variation until after it finds that the adoption of the variation is
in the public interest and is not solely for the interest of the applicant. The
Planning, Zoning, and Historic Commission may recommend the adoption of a
variation as set forth within this chapter.
         (b)   A concurring vote of a majority of those members present at the
meeting with a minimum of three concurring votes shall be required to recommend
granting or denying an application for a variation.
         (c)   The report to the Village Board of the proceedings shall contain
the number of Commissioners present and names of those voting for or against
the motion.
      (2)   Action by the President and Board of Trustees.
         (a)   The President and the Board of Trustees, upon receiving the
recommendations of the Zoning Board of Appeals, may grant or deny any proposed
variation in accordance with applicable state statutes or may refer it back to
the Planning, Zoning, and Historic Commission for further consideration.
         (b)   If an application for a proposed variation is not acted upon
finally by the President and Board of Trustees within six months of the date
upon which the application is received by the President and Board of Trustees,
it shall be deemed to have been denied.
      (3)   Authorized variations.
         (a)   The Planning, Zoning, and Historic Commission shall hold the
public hearing and issue a recommendation on authorized variations of the
provisions of this chapter in harmony with its general purpose and intent, and
shall recommend them only in the specific instances where there are practical
difficulties or particular hardship in the way of carrying out the strict
letter of the regulations of this chapter.
         (b)   Any person, firm or corporation owning or having an interest in
a lot or the Board of Trustees may apply for a variation.
      (4)   Processing application for variation:
         (a)   The applicant shall provide an application for a variation
request with the village on an application prescribed by the village, in a form
acceptable to the Village Board. The application shall be accompanied by such
plans or data, or both, as specified by the village, and shall include a
statement, in writing, by the applicant and adequate evidence showing that the
proposed variance/variation will conform to the standards set forth herein for
variations.
         (b)   The village, at the applicant’s expense shall give notices of
the public hearing as follows:
            1.   To the persons to whom the current real estate tax bills are
sent, if any, as shown on the record of the local real estate tax assessor of
all properties lying within 250 feet of the property line of the lot/PIN for
which the variation is sought.
            2.   All notices shall be in writing and shall give the time,
place, and purpose of the public hearing and shall be mailed not more than 30
days nor less than 15 days in advance of the hearing. The notice shall be sent
by First-Class mail, properly addressed as shown on the tax assessor's rolls
and with sufficient postage affixed thereon. The applicant shall file a sworn
affidavit with copies of the notices with the village showing the names and
addresses of all notices sent. The affidavit shall be conclusive presumption of
giving of the notices.
            3.   A notice of the time and place of the public hearing will be
published in a newspaper of general circulation in the village at least 15 days
and no greater than 30 days prior to the hearing. Such notice shall contain the
address or location of the property where the request is sought, as well as a
brief description of the nature of the request.
            4.   The village, at the applicant's expense, shall post and
maintain on forms no smaller than 11 inches by 17 inches on a white background
for a period of not less than ten days prior to the hearing the notice thereof
as furnished by the village. The notice showing the time, place, and purpose of
the public hearing shall be posted on the property for which the variance and/
or special use is sought as follows:
               a.   On an improved and/or unimproved lot: A visible sign not
more than 15 feet from the front lot line.
            5.   Upon receipt in proper form of the application referred to
above, the Planning, Zoning, and Historic Commission shall hold at least one
public hearing on the proposed variation. However, the Planning, Zoning, and
Historic Commission may continue from time-to-time the hearing without further
notices being published.
         (c)   Within 45 days after the close of the public hearing, the
Planning, Zoning, and Historic Commission shall make written findings of fact,
when required, and shall submit the same, together with its recommendations to
the Village President and Board of Trustees. The recommendation shall be
consistent with the purpose and intent of this chapter and shall specify, in a
conclusion or statement, any stipulations, restrictions or conditions on the
variation, which the Commission deems necessary to assure compliance with this
chapter and the protection of the public health, safety, comfort, morals or
welfare. The Planning, Zoning, and Historic Commission shall not recommend that
a variation be approved unless it finds that the proposed variation conforms to
the standards set forth both in this chapter and, if any, in the district
regulations.
   (C)   (1)   The Planning, Zoning, and Historic Commission shall make
variation findings- of-fact based upon the evidence presented to it in each
specific case with respect to the following:
         (a)   The property in question cannot yield a reasonable return if
permitted to be used only under the conditions allowed by the regulations in
that zoning district;
         (b)   The plight of the owner is due to unique circumstances; and
         (c)   The variation, if granted, will not alter the essential
character of the locality.
      (2)   For the purpose of supplementing the above findings-of-fact
standards, the Planning, Zoning, and Historic Commission, in making its
decision whenever they are practical difficulties or particular hardship, shall
also take into consideration the extent to which the following facts favorable
to the applicant, have been established by the evidence that:
         (a)   The particular physical surroundings, shape or topographical
conditions of the specific property involved would bring a particular hardship
upon the owner as distinguished from a mere inconvenience if the regulations
were strictly enforced;
         (b)   The conditions upon which the petition for variation is based
would not be applicable generally to other properly within the same zoning
classification;
         (c)   The purpose of the variation is not based exclusively upon a
desire to make more money out of the property;
         (d)   The alleged difficulty or hardship has not been created by any
person presently having an interest in the property;
         (e)   The granting of the variation will not be detrimental to the
public welfare or injurious to other property or improvements in the
neighborhood in which the property is located; or
         (f)   The proposed variation will not impair an adequate supply of
light and air to adjacent property or substantially increase the danger of fire
or otherwise endanger the public safety or substantially diminish or impair
property values within the neighborhood.
      (3)   The Planning, Zoning, and Historic Commission may require such
conditions and restrictions upon the premises benefitted by a variation as may
be necessary to comply with the standards set forth in this section or reduce
or minimize the injurious effect of the variation upon other property in the
neighborhood and to implement the general purpose and intent of this chapter.
(1981 Code, Art. XII, C3) (Ord. passed 12- -1986; Am. Ord. 90-10, passed 6-4-
1990; Am. Ord. 05-16, passed 8-1-2005; Am. Ord. 22-11, passed 4-4-2022; Am.
Ord. 24-34, passed 10-7-2024)
PLAN COMMISSION
§ 157.220 CREATION.
   The Plan Commission of the Village of East Dundee is hereby established and
its membership shall be as set forth in Chapter 150, Planning and Zoning
Commission.
(1981 Code, Art. XII, D) (Ord. passed 12- -1986)
§ 157.221 JURISDICTION.
   The Plan Commission shall have the jurisdiction to:
   (A)   To hear and report findings and recommendations to the President and
Board of Trustees on all applications for amendments and special use permits in
the manner prescribed by standards and other regulations set forth herein;
   (B)   To initiate, direct and review, from time to time, studies of the
provisions of this chapter and to make reports of its recommendations to the
President and Board of Trustees not less frequently than once each year; and
   (C)   To hear and decide all matters upon which it is required to pass under
this chapter.
(1981 Code, Art. XII, D1) (Ord. passed 12- -1986)
§ 157.222 MEETINGS AND RULES.
   (A)   All meetings of the Plan Commission shall be held at the call of the
Chairperson, the Village President or Board of Trustees and at such time as the
foregoing may determine. All meetings of the Plan Commission shall be held as
the Chairperson shall determine where there are pending matters for an agenda.
   (B)   In all official proceedings, the Chairperson or, in his or her
absence, the acting Chairperson of the Plan Commission shall have the power to
administer oaths and to compel by subpoena the attendance and testimony or
witnesses and the production of books and papers.
   (C)   (1)   The Plan Commission shall keep minutes of its proceedings,
showing the vote of each member upon each question or, if absent or failing to
vote, indicating the fact, and shall also keep records of its hearings and
other official actions.
      (2)   A copy of every rule or regulations, every appeal, variation and
every recommendation, order, requirement, decision or determination of the Plan
Commission shall be filed immediately in the office of the Village Clerk and
shall be a public record.
   (D)   The Plan Commission shall adopt is own rules and procedures, not in
conflict with this chapter or within applicable Illinois Statutes.
   (E)   All hearings shall be open to the public.
(1981 Code, Art. XII, D2) (Ord. passed 12- -1986)
§ 157.223 AMENDMENTS.
   (A)   Amendments may be proposed by the President and Board of Trustees, the
Plan Commission, Zoning Board of Appeals, Village Administrator, any property
owner or interested person or organization and shall be referred to as the
applicant.
   (B)   (1)   The applicant shall provide a proposal for an amendment with the
Village. The proposal shall be accompanied by such plans or data, or both, as
specified by the Plan Commission and shall include a statement, in writing, by
the applicant and adequate evidence showing that the proposed amendment will
conform to the standards set forth herein for amendments.
      (2)   The village at the applicant's expense shall give notices of the
public hearing as follows:
         (a)   To the persons to whom the current real estate tax bills are
sent, if any, as shown on the record of the local real estate tax assessor of
all lots lying within 250 feet of the property line of the lot for which the
amendment is sought.
         (b)   All notices shall be in writing and shall give the time, place
and purpose of the hearing and shall be mailed not more than 30 days, nor less
than 15 days, in advance of the hearing. The notice shall be sent by mail,
properly addressed as shown on the Tax Assessor’s rolls and with sufficient
postage affixed thereon with return receipt requested. The applicant shall file
a sworn affidavit with copies of the notices with the village showing the names
and addresses of all notices the applicant has sent. The affidavit shall be
conclusive presumption of giving of the notices.
      (3)   The village at the applicant's expense shall cause a notice of
time, place and propose of the hearing to be published in a newspaper of
general circulation within the village not more than 30 days, nor less than 15
days, in advance of the hearing.
      (4)   The village at the applicant's expense shall post and maintain on
forms no smaller than 11 inches by 17 inches on a white background for a period
of not less than ten days prior to the hearing the notice thereof as furnished
by the Village Clerk. The notice showing the time, place and purpose of the
hearing shall be posted on the property for which the amendment is sought as
follows:
         (a)   On an unimproved lot: not more than 15 feet from the front lot
line and not less than four feet above and not more than six feet above the
ground and placed in a manner as to be unobscured from the street.
         (b)   On an improved lot: on the front entrance door of the
improvement thereon or placed in a similar manner as for an unimproved lot.
      (5)   Supplemental or additional notices may be distributed, published or
posted as the Plan Commission may, by rule, prescribe from time to time.
   (C)   Upon receipt of the application, or proposal, and statement referred
to above, the Plan Commission shall hold at least one public hearing on the
proposed amendment. However, the Plan Commission may continue from time to time
the hearing without further notices being published.
   (D)   Within 45 days after the close of the hearings on a proposed text or
zoning amendment, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall make written
findings of fact, when required, and shall submit same, together with its
recommendations to the President and Board of Trustees. When the purpose and
effect of the proposed amendment is to change the zoning classification of
particular property, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall make findings
based upon the evidence presented to it in each specific case with respect to
the following matters:
      (1)   Existing uses of property within the general area of the property
in question;
      (2)   The zoning classification of property within the general area of
the property in question;
      (3)   The suitability of the property in question to the uses permitted
under the existing zoning classification; and
      (4)   The trend of development, if any, in the general area of the
property in question, including changes, if any, which have taken place since
the day the property in question was placed in its present zoning
classification.
   (E)   (1)   Action by Plan Commission.
         (a)   The Plan Commission shall not recommend the adoption of a
proposed amendment until after it finds that the adoption of the amendment is
in the public interest and is not solely for the interest of the applicant. The
Plan Commission may recommend the adoption of an amendment changing the zoning
classification of the property in question to any other zoning classification
         (b)   A concurring vote of a majority of those members present at the
meeting with a minimum of three concurring votes shall be required to recommend
granting or denying an application for an amendment.
         (c)   Report to the Village Board shall contain number present and
names of those voting for or against the motion.
      (2)   Action by the President and Board of Trustees.
         (a)   The President and Board of Trustees, upon receiving the
recommendations of the Plan Commission, may grant or deny any proposed
amendment in accordance with applicable Illinois Statutes or may refer it back
to the Plan Commission for further consideration.
         (b)   If an application for a proposed amendment is not acted upon
finally by the President and Board of Trustees within six months of the date
upon which the application is received by the President and Board of Trustees,
it shall be deemed to have been denied.
(1981 Code, Art. XII, D3) (Ord. passed 12- -1986; Am. Ord. 14-26, passed 9-15-
2014; Am. Ord. 22-11, passed 4-4-2022; Am. Ord. 22-43, passed 8-22-2022)
§ 157.224 SPECIAL USES.
   (A)   Purpose.
      (1)   The development and execution of this chapter is based upon the
division of the village into districts, within which districts the use of land
and buildings and the bulk and location of buildings and structures in relation
to the land are substantially uniform.
      (2)   It is recognized, however, that there are certain uses which,
because of their unique characteristics, cannot be properly classified in any
particular district or districts without consideration, in each case, of the
impact of those uses upon neighboring land and of the public need for the
particular use of the particular location.
      (3)   The special uses fall into two categories:
         (a)   Uses publicly operated or traditionally affected with a public
interest; or
         (b)   Uses entirely private in character, but of such an unusual
nature that their operation may give rise to unique problems with respect to
their impact upon neighboring property or public facilities.
   (B)   Initiation. Any person having a freehold interest in land, a
possessory interest entitled to exclusive possession, a contractual interest
which may become a freehold interest or an exclusive possessory interest and
which is specifically enforceable, may file an application to use the land for
one or more of the special uses provided for in this chapter in the zoning
district in which the land is located.
   (C)   Processing application for special use.
      (1)   The applicant shall provide an application for a special use with
the village on an application prescribed by the village and in a form
acceptable to the Village Board. The application shall be accompanied by such
plans or data, or both, as specified by the village, and shall include a
statement, in writing, by the applicant and adequate evidence showing that the
proposed special use will conform to the standards set forth herein for special
uses.
      (2)   The village, at the applicant’s expense, shall give notices of the
public hearing as follows:
         (a)   To the persons to whom the current real estate tax bills are
sent, if any, as shown on the record of the local real estate tax assessor of
all properties lying within 250 feet of the property line of the property for
which the special use is sought.
         (b)   All notices shall be in writing and shall give the time, place
and purpose of the public hearing and shall be mailed not more than 30 days nor
less than 15 days in advance of the hearing. The notice shall be sent by First-
Class mail, properly addressed as shown on the tax assessor’s rolls and with
sufficient postage affixed thereon. The applicant shall file a sworn affidavit
with copies of the notices with the village showing the names and addresses of
all notices sent. The affidavit shall be conclusive presumption of giving of
the notices.
         (c)   The notice of the time and plane of the public hearing will be
published in a newspaper of general circulation in the village at least 15 days
and no greater than 30 days prior to the hearing. Such notice shall contain the
address or location of the property where the request is sought, as well as a
brief description of the nature of the request.
         (d)   The village, at the applicant's expense, shall post and maintain
on forms no smaller than 11 inches by 17 inches on a white background for a
period of not less than ten days prior to the hearing the notice thereof as
furnished by the village. The notice of the public hearing shall be posted on
the property for which the special use is sought as follows:
            1.   On an improved and/or unimproved lot: A visible sign not more
than 15 feet from the front lot line.
         (e)   Upon receipt in proper form of the application referred to
above, the Planning, Zoning, and Historic Commission shall hold at least one
public hearing on the proposed special use. However, the Planning, Zoning, and
Historic Commission may continue from time-to-time the hearing without further
notices being published.
      (3)   Within 45 days after the close of the public hearing, the Planning,
Zoning, and Historic Commission shall make written findings of fact, when
required, and shall submit same, together with its recommendations to the
Village President and Board of Trustees. The recommendation shall be consistent
with the purpose and intent of this chapter and shall specify, in a conclusion
or statement, any stipulations, restrictions or conditions, including but not
limited to the operation of the special use, which the Commission deems
necessary to assure compliance with this chapter and the protection of the
public health, safety, comfort, morals or welfare. The Planning, Zoning, and
Historic Commission shall not recommend that a special use be approved unless
it finds that the proposed special use conforms to the standards set forth both
in this chapter and, if any, in the district regulations.
      (4)   A concurring vote of a majority of those members present at the
meeting with a minimum of three concurring votes shall be required to recommend
granting or denying an application for a special use. The report to the Village
Board of the proceedings shall contain the number of Commissioners present and
names of those voting for or against the motion.
      (5)   The Planning, Zoning, and Historic Commission shall make special
use findings of fact based upon the evidence presented to it in each specific
case with respect to the following:
         (a)   The special use will not be injurious to the use and enjoyment
of other property in the immediate vicinity for the purposes already permitted,
nor substantially diminish and impair property values within the neighborhood.
         (b)   The establishment of the special use will not impede the normal
and orderly development and improvement of the surrounding property for uses
permitted in the district.
         (c)   Adequate utilities, access roads, drainage or necessary
facilities have been or will be provided.
         (d)   Adequate measures have been or will be taken to provide ingress
and egress so designed as to minimize traffic congestion in the public streets.
         (e)   The special use shall, in all other respects, conform to the
applicable regulations of the district in which it is located, except as such
regulations may, in each instance, be modified by the President and Board of
Trustees pursuant to the recommendations of the Planning, Zoning, and Historic
Commission.
   (D)   The Planning, Zoning, and Historic Commission may recommend that there
be in part of the area of a planned development and for the duration of the
development, specified uses not permitted by the use regulations of the
distract in which the development is located, provided that the Plan Commission
shall find that:
      (1)   The uses permitted by the exceptions are necessary or desirable and
are appropriate with respect to the primary propose of the development;
      (2)   The uses permitted by the exception are not of such a nature or so
located as to exercise a detrimental influence on the surrounding neighborhood;
      (3)   Not more than 20% of the ground area or of the gross floor area of
the development shall be devoted to the uses permitted by the exception;
      (4)   In an industrial planned development, the additional uses allowed
by exception shall conform with the performance standards of the district in
which the development is located; and
      (5)   The use exceptions so allowed are reflected by the appropriate
zoning district symbols and so recorded on the zoning district map.
   (E)   The Planning, Zoning, and Historic Commission may recommend that there
be in a planned development exceptions to the bulk regulations set forth herein
the district regulations applicable to the district in which the planned
development is located, provided that the Planning, Zoning, and Historic
Commission shall find:
      (1)   The exception shall be solely for the purpose of promoting a
unified site plan no less beneficial to the residents or occupants of the
development as well as the neighboring property than would be obtained by the
bulk regulations of this chapter for buildings developed on separate lots;
      (2)   The overall floor area ratio, when applicable, would not exceed by
more than 15% the floor area ratio regulation of this chapter for the district
in which it is located;
      (3)   In the part of the planned development containing only residential
uses, the minimum lot area per dwelling unit may be less than required by
district regulations applicable to the district in with the planned development
is located, provided there is contained within the planned development
permanent open areas having sufficient area to maintain at least the required
lot area per dwelling for the district where it is located, when related to the
total area within the planned development exclusive of areas in rights-of-way
of thoroughfares, streets and alleys; (The open areas shall be perpetuated, by
properly recorded covenants extending over the life of the planned development,
for use only by the residents of the planned development or dedicated to the
village for park, playground or other open public uses.)
      (4)   In part of a planned development devoted to residential uses, the
Plan Commission may recommend and the President and Board of Trustees may
approve access to a dwelling by a driveway or pedestrian walk easement; off-
street parking facilities for the dwelling when located not more than 180 feet
from the dwelling sewed; and spacing between buildings of lesser widths or
depths than required by district regulations for the district in which the
planned development is located provided;
      (5)   The protective covenants are recorded which perpetuate during the
period of the special use, access easements and off-street parking spaces for
use by the residents of the dwellings served;
      (6)   The spacing between buildings shall be consistent with the
application of recognized site planning principles for securing a unified
development and due consideration is given to the openness normally afforded by
intervening streets and alleys; (Spacing between principal buildings within a
part of a planned development where subsequent transfer of ownership is
contemplated shall be equivalent to such spacing as would be required between
buildings by district regulations for the district in which it is located.)
      (7)   The yards along the periphery of the development shall be not less
in width or depth than required for permitted uses in the district regulations
applicable to the district in which the planned development is located.
   (F)   Action by the President and Board of Trustees.
      (1)   Prior to the granting of any special use, the President and Board
of Trustees shall stipulate such conditions and restrictions upon the
establishment, location, construction, maintenance and operation of the special
use as deemed necessary for the protection of the public interest and to secure
compliance with the standards and requirements specified in this subchapter.
The Building Inspector or village police officer may issue violation notices
upon receiving competent evidence that a violation of the conditions of a
special use has occurred. In all cases in which special uses are granted, if
any of the conditions approved with the special use are alleged to have been
violated, the village may revoke the special use or order abatement of the
violation. All revocation proceedings will be administered through the
village's administrative adjudication procedure in accordance with the
provisions of
Chapter 36 of this code. The property owner and/or special use permit holder
shall be afforded an opportunity to testify, present witnesses, and offer
evidence relevant to the issue at the hearing. The administrative hearing
officer shall also hear evidence from the village relevant to the issue.
      (2)   The President and Board of Trustees may grant or deny any
application for a special use permit after receiving the recommendations of the
Planning, Zoning, and Historic Commission, including the stipulations of
additional conditions and guarantees, when they are deemed necessary for the
protection of the public interest.
      (3)   No application for a special use which has been denied wholly or in
part by the President and Board of Trustees shall be resubmitted for a period
of six months from the date of the order or denial.
      (4)   In any case, where a special use permit has been granted and a
building permit has not been obtained within 18 months after the date of
granting thereof, then without further action by the Plan Commission and the
President and Board of Trustees, the special use permit approval shall
automatically be terminated and cancelled and be null and void. In the event
that an occupancy certificate is not issued within five years after the special
use permit has been granted, the special use permit shall automatically
terminate.
(1981 Code, Art. XII, D4) (Ord. passed 12- -1986; Am. Ord. 24-33, passed 10-7-
2024; Am. Ord. 24-34, passed 10-7-2024)
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT
§ 157.240 PURPOSE; INTENT.
   (A)   Purpose.
      (1)   Planned Unit Developments are unique and differ substantially from
conventional subdivisions and therefore require administrative processing as
"special uses" under this title. Planned Unit Developments are a complex type
of special use, potentially consisting of various land uses and design
elements, requiring the establishment of more specific procedures, standards
and exceptions from the strict application of the zoning district regulations
to guide the recommendations of the Planning and Zoning Commission and the
action of the Village Board.
      (2)   The purpose of this chapter, therefore, is to provide for an
alternative zoning procedure under which land can be developed or redeveloped
with innovation, increased amenities and creative environmental and
architectural design than would be possible to achieve under the otherwise
standard zoning district regulations while being in general compliance with the
planning objectives and intent of the zoning ordinance. Under this procedure,
well planned residential, industrial/manufacturing, commercial and other types
of land uses, individually or in combination, may be developed with design
flexibility allowing for full utilization of the topographical and
environmental characteristics of the site.
      (3)   Planned Unit Developments must have an approved development plan
which provides for a unified design, contiguity between various elements and be
environmentally compatible with the surrounding area. There should be an
increased benefit upon the health, safety and general welfare of the public and
developments built in conformity with the underlying district regulations. If
building density is increased above densities allowable by the zoning district
in which the use would be permitted on a particular portion of a PUD; then the
amount of open space, retention of existing vegetation, buffer areas, new
landscape, public commons, community open space, and parks shall be evaluated
for proportionate increase for the remainder of the PUD.
   (B)   Intent. The Planned Unit Development is not intended to be a mechanism
solely used for the allowance of increased densities or as a means of
circumventing the bulk regulations or zoning standards under this title; rather
a Planned Unit Development shall generally provide attributes in excess of
conventional village zoning, building and other land use requirements such as,
but not limited to the following:
      (1)   Providing a maximum choice of the overall living environment
through a variety of type, design and layout of residential structures,
commercial and industrial buildings, office and research uses and public
facilities.
      (2)   Demonstrating excellence in environmental design and the mitigation
of land use factors or impacts.
      (3)   Promoting a more useful pattern of dedicated open space and
recreation areas incorporated as part of the development plan and that is
compatible with the immediate vicinity.
      (4)   Provide public access and pedestrian connectivity via bicycle/
recreational paths, sidewalks and/or alternative modes of transportation.
      (5)   Providing and or preserving substantial landscaping with emphasis
given to streetscape areas, buffer zones, and the provision of significant
landscaping (in terms of size of landscape areas and quantity and quality of
landscape materials) within the developed portions of the site.
      (6)   Incorporating a consistent architectural theme which is unique to
the specific site and surrounding community through the use of building
materials, signage and way-finding standards as well as design elements.
Generic corporate architecture and big box designs are strongly discouraged but
not prohibited. Uses should be designed according to the limitation of the site
rather than the removal of the limitations. Specific design details such as
roof parapets, architectural details, varying roof heights, pitches and
materials and building colors and materials should be addressed.
      (7)   Retain, utilize and incorporate historic features on the project
site into the overall project design, if physically and economically feasible;
and/or
      (8)   Promote and strengthen the economic vitality and enhance the
aesthetic qualities of unified large-scale commercial developments.
      (9)   Encourage high-quality planned industrial park environments and
well-designed business centers for single or multiple-tenant facilities.
      (10)   Provide/enhance regional public infrastructure such as roadways,
water/sanitary service, stormwater management objectives.
(Ord. 97-19, passed 9-2-1997; Am. Ord. 06-03, passed 2-6-2006; Am. Ord. 14-27,
passed 9-15-2014)
§ 157.241 AUTHORITY.
   (A)   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall review and recommend
approval, approval with modification or denial of applications for Planned Unit
Developments. The Village Board shall have final decision to approve, approve
with modification, or deny applications for Planned Unit Developments.
   (B)   The procedures set forth in this chapter shall apply to all Planned
Unit Developments.
   (C)   Planned Unit Developments may be allowed in each of the zoning
districts in the Village of East Dundee only as a special use as prescribed in
§
157.086 and approved pursuant to the procedures set forth in §
157.224.
   (D)   Bulk regulations set forth in the zoning ordinance shall not apply to
Planned Unit Developments; provided, however, that the off-street parking and
loading regulations set forth in §§
157.120 through
157.150 of this title shall apply to all Planned Unit Developments.
(Ord. 14-27, passed 9-15-2014)
§ 157.242 DEFINITION AND SIZE LIMITATIONS.
   (A)   A Planned Unit Development is a tract of land which is developed as a
unit under single ownership or control, which includes two or more principal
buildings, and which is at least two acres in area, and Planned Unit
Developments in manufacturing districts which shall be at least two acres in
area.
   (B)   All land area within a Planned Unit Development must be contiguous;
provided that properties separated by highways, streets, public ways, railroads
or other public utility right-of-ways may be deemed contiguous for the purpose
of qualifying as a Planned Unit Development. Pursuant to the procedures set
herein, the establishment of a Planned Unit Development shall be applicable to
the addition of property to an existing Planned Unit Development.
(Ord. 14-27, passed 9-15-2014)
§ 157.243 PROCEDURES FOR ESTABLISHMENT.
   (A)   Planned Unit Development applications shall be made as hereinafter
provided and shall be accompanied by the required plats and documents. Detailed
plans, drawings and other information as specified in this subchapter shall be
required at the time of the various phases, meetings and hearings as detailed
herein. Each stage shall be reviewed and certified by the appropriate village
department as being in accordance with the Planned Unit Development
requirements before proceeding to the next stages. The approval process shall
include the following stages:
      (1)   Pre-application conference. Introductory meeting held with village
staff as set forth in §
157.244 of this chapter.
      (2)   Concept PUD plan review. An informal review of overall concept
conducted by the Village Board to provide constructive feedback to petitioner
of plan as set forth in §
157.245 of this chapter.
      (3)   Preliminary PUD plat. First, a technical review of detailed plans
by various village departments is held; a public hearing is then conducted by
the Planning and Zoning Commission; and final determination is made by the
Village Board, as set forth in §
157.246 of this chapter.
      (4)   Final PUD plat. First, a review by village staff to determine that
the final plat substantially conforms to the approved preliminary plat and
thereafter final determination made by the Village Board, as set forth in §
157.247 of this chapter.
   (B)   The final two stages of the PUD process, preliminary PUD plat and
final PUD plat, may be submitted and reviewed concurrently, as determined by
the Planning and Zoning Commission, based upon the following criteria:
      (1)   The PUD plan forwards the goals of the village's planning
objectives and official plans, including but not limited to, the Comprehensive
Plan and the Downtown Rehabilitation Plan.
      (2)   The PUD plan requires limited variances from the use or bulk
regulations of the conventional/underlying zoning district in which it is to be
located.
      (3)   The benefit of the PUD plan shall forward or exceed the goals of
the stated development standards and regulations of village ordinances, which
include but are not limited to, the Building Code, Subdivision Code, Floodplain
Regulations, and Sign Code.
(Ord. 97-19, passed 9-2-1997; Am. Ord. 05-06, passed 2-7-2005; Am. Ord. 06-03,
passed 2-6-2006; Am. Ord. 14-27, passed 9-15-2014)
§ 157.244 PRE-APPLICATION CONFERENCE.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of the pre-application conference is to provide
information, guidance and assistance to the applicant before preparation of the
concept plan so that the applicant may receive informal input on:
      (1)   Whether the proposed Planned Unit Development will be in conformity
with the planning and other development goals and the policies of the Village
of East Dundee.
      (2)   Whether the existing zoning and land use in the general area of the
Planned Unit Development is appropriate for a Planned Unit Development.
   (B)   Procedure. Prior to filing an application for approval of a Planned
Unit Development, the petitioner shall be required to contact the Village
Administrator or his or her designee to arrange an informal pre-application
meeting with village staff and its consultants.
      (1)   The pre-application conference is mandatory and shall be held with
staff, but is at no charge to the petitioner. At such conference, the applicant
shall provide information relating to the following:
         (a)   The location of the proposed Planned Unit Development;
         (b)   The land use types and approximate area of proposed land uses;
         (c)   A list of any and all exceptions to the zoning ordinance and
subdivision regulations requested; and
         (d)   Other information pertinent to the proposed Planned Unit
Development.
      (2)   The pre-application conference shall be an informal communication
and discussion of the proposed Planned Unit Development, and no commitments
shall be given, nor shall statements or opinions of the village staff and its
consultants be deemed binding.
      (3)   Staff shall review and provide input on the proposal's
compatibility with the Comprehensive Plan and the goals and policies for
planning of the village and advise the applicant on the information, documents,
exhibits, and drawings on the proposal that should be included in the
application to the village for a Planned Unit Development.
(Ord. 97-19, passed 9-2-1997; Am. Ord. 06-03, passed 2-6-2006; Am. Ord. 14-27,
passed 9-15-2014)
§ 157.245 CONCEPT PUD PLAN REVIEW.
   (A)   Purpose. The presentation of a concept PUD plan is optional. The
purpose of the concept PUD plan is to enable the applicant to obtain the
informal feedback from the village staff and the Village Board regarding the
overall project concept, density and dwelling unit or land use type prior to
spending considerable time and expense in the preparation of detailed
preliminary PUD plans.
   (B)   Procedure. Not less than 45 days before the next available Village
Board meeting, the applicant shall submit to the Village for review the
conceptual Planned Unit Development plan. The submittal shall consist of 20
paper copies folded to fit in a ten-inch by 13-inch envelope and two electronic
copies of the following documentation:
      (1)   A completed notarized application form, two originals and the
remainder photocopies.
      (2)   The application shall be accompanied by the appropriate filing fee.
      (3)   An aerial photograph exhibit of the property taken within the last
two years. The aerial photograph exhibit shall be one inch equals 100 scale,
but no less than one inch equals 400 and shall include the following:
         (a)   Title or name of the proposed Planned Unit Development.
         (b)   Outline of property boundaries.
         (c)   Adjacent area within one-fourth mile of property.
      (4)   A zoning plat including a legal description of the property with
total property acreage notated to be included in the Planned Unit Development.
      (5)   A written explanation of the general character of the proposed
Planned Unit Development that shall include the following:
         (a)   A description of all proposed land uses (including open space)
with percentages of each use;
         (b)   Projected densities and housing type for each residential use;
         (c)   A description of the development standards and design criteria
applicable to the proposed Planned Unit Development;
         (d)   An outline describing why the property should be developed as a
Planned Unit Development;
         (e)   Identification of the conventional zoning classification
allowing the uses for each land use type included and compatibility to the
future land use designation for the property in the village's official
Comprehensive Plan;
         (f)   Identification of existing uses and zoning of adjacent
properties to the Planned Unit Development;
         (g)   A list of requested exceptions to applicable village ordinances
and codes.
      (6)   A written description of general site information that should
include, but shall not be limited to, the following, if known or available:
         (a)   Existing site conditions.
         (b)   Environmental characteristics.
         (c)   Availability of community facilities and utilities.
         (d)   Existing covenants.
      (7)   A conceptual Planned Unit Development sketch or land plan. The
sketch or land plan shall provide sufficient detail to demonstrate the physical
relationship between the existing land condition, surrounding land uses and the
proposed Planned Unit Development, and shall include the following:
         (a)   North arrow (true meridian), scale and date of preparation.
         (b)   Name and address of the site planner, or engineer who prepared
the plan.
         (c)   Name of property owner.
         (d)   Name of petitioner/developer.
         (e)   Proposed name of the Planned Unit Development.
         (f)   Location map showing the location of the Planned Unit
Development within or proximity to the corporate boundaries.
         (g)   Boundary and/or property lines of proposed development and
dimensions of the lots into which the property is proposed to be subdivided.
         (h)   Proposed land uses, and total acreage and percent of the site
devoted to each land use including minimum and average lot sizes and proposed
dedication of land for school and park sites, if applicable.
   (C)   Review by village staff. The Plan Council shall conduct an informal
review of the conceptual Planned Unit Development plan and supporting
documentation to determine if the proposed development meets general code
standards.
   (D)   Village Board review. The Village Board shall conduct an informal
review of the conceptual Planned Unit Development plan and supporting
documentation and provide the applicant with general comments on the following:
      (1)   Compatibility of the proposal with the transportation plan, zoning
ordinance, subdivision ordinance and land use planning goals and objectives of
the village.
      (2)   Appropriateness of the proposed land uses.
      (3)   General layout of open space, streets, parking areas, lots and
buildings.
      (4)   Other information the Village Board would recommend be prepared for
the preliminary Planned Unit Development plan phase.
(Ord. 97-19, passed 9-2-1997; Am. Ord. 06-03, passed 2-6-2006; Am. Ord. 14-27,
passed 9-15-2014)
§ 157.246 PRELIMINARY PUD PLAT.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of the preliminary PUD plat submission is to
obtain approval from the village that the plans the applicant intends to
prepare and follow are acceptable as a preliminary PUD plat, and that any final
plans will be approved provided they substantially conform to the preliminary
Planned Unit Development plat. Approval of the preliminary Planned Unit
Development plat shall not constitute authority to proceed with construction of
any improvements but rather an approval of the general features of the plans as
a basis for preparing the final plans.
   (B)   Procedure. Not less than 45 days before the Planning and Zoning
Commission meeting, the applicant shall file an application with the Clerk's
Office for preliminary Planned Unit Development plat approval. The applicant
shall submit 20 paper copies folded to fit in a ten-inch by 13-inch envelope
and two electronic copies of the following documentation:
      (1)   A completed notarized application form, two originals and the
remainder photocopies.
      (2)   The application shall be accompanied by the appropriate filing
fees.
      (3)   Disclosure of beneficiaries form and statement of present and
proposed ownership of all land within the development.
      (4)   An aerial photograph exhibit of the property taken within the last
two years of the adjacent area within one-fourth mile of property. The aerial
photograph exhibit shall be one inch equals 100 hundred scale, but no less than
one inch equals 400.
      (5)   Written explanation of the character of the Planned Unit
Development and the reasons why it has been planned to vary from the village's
zoning ordinance regulations. This explanation shall detail how the proposed
Planned Unit Development meets the objectives of all official plans which
affect the subject property.
      (6)   Preliminary Planned Unit Development plat. The plat shall be a
detailed plan which includes at a minimum, the following information:
         (a)   Title notation stating "Preliminary Plat" or "Preliminary Plan".
         (b)   North arrow, scale (not less than one inch equals 100 feet) and
date of preparation.
         (c)   Name and address of the site planner, engineer or surveyor who
prepared the plan.
         (d)   Name of property owner.
         (e)   Name of petitioner/developer.
         (f)   Proposed name of the Planned Unit Development or subdivision
name, which shall not duplicate the name of any plat previously recorded in
Cook and Kane Counties.
         (g)   Location map showing the general area of the Planned Unit
Development within or proximity to the corporate boundaries.
         (h)   Legal description prepared by a registered land surveyor.
         (i)   Boundary linesbearings and distances.
         (j)   Site data, including, as applicable:
            1.   Current zoning classification.
            2.   Total area of property in square feet and acreage, and
percentage of each proposed land use.
            3.   Square footage and percent of site coverage with buildings.
            4.   Square footage and percent of site coverage with impervious
surfaces.
            5.   Square footage and percent of site covered dedicated to common
open space such as storm water management systems, landscaping and buffers,
parks, trail corridors and recreational areas.
            6.   Total number of off-street parking and loading spaces provided
and method used to calculate the number of required spaces for each land use.
            7.   Total number of buildings.
            8.   Total number of residential dwelling units by type, and the
number of bedrooms in each dwelling unit type.
            9.   Gross floor area for all non-residential buildings/uses.
            10.   Gross and net densities for the overall Planned Unit
Development and for each land use.
               a.   Residential density. Provide information on the density of
residential uses, including dwelling units per acre, dwelling units per net
acre; gross and net residential density (dwelling units per acre of land
devoted to residential sectors of the PUD; gross being all land, net being
gross acres minus land used for public or common usage). Information should
also be provided for each unit in the Planned Unit Development, if applicable.
               b.   Non-residential intensity. Provide information on the type
and amount of non-residential uses including building locations, sizes, floor
area ratio, building height, the amount and location of common open space.
            11.   Minimum, maximum and average lot sizes.
            12.   Percent of lot coverage for all uses except detached single-
family and duplex.
         (k)   Depiction of lots.
            1.   Residential lots shall depict approximate lot dimensions;
building footprints for all multi-family and single-family attached structures;
and dimensioned required yard setbacks.
            2.   Non-residential lots shall depict building footprints and
dimensioned setbacks. Information regarding purpose/use and height of non-
residential buildings shall also be provided.
         (l)   Existing zoning and land use of adjacent property within 500
feet of all sides of the site.
         (m)   Other conditions of adjoining landowners of unplatted land;
subdivision plat name, recording date and number of adjoining platted land;
actual direction and gradient of ground slope, including any embankments or
retaining walls; character and location of major buildings, railroads, power
lines and towers.
         (n)   Municipal limits.
         (o)   School district boundaries.
         (p)   Existing easementslocation, width and purpose.
         (q)   Location of existing streets in, and adjacent to, the property
including: street name, right-of-way width, existing and proposed center lines,
pavement type, walks, trails, curbs, gutters, culverts, and the like.
         (r)   Proposed public improvements such as highways and other major
improvements planned by public authorities for future construction on or near
the property.
         (s)   Existing utilities on, and adjacent to, the property including:
location, size and invert elevation of sanitary and storm sewers; location and
size of water mains; location of gas lines, fire hydrants, electric and
telephone lines (above and below ground) and street lights; direction and
distance to, and size of nearest water mains and sewers adjacent to the
property showing invert elevations.
         (t)   Ground elevations on the property and on the first 50 feet of
all adjacent parcels showing a minimum of one foot contours for land which
slopes less than .5% along with all breaks in grades, and all drainage channels
or swales, and at selected points not more than 100 feet apart in all
directions; for land that slopes more than .5% showing a minimum of two-foot
contours. Any land within the 100-year floodplain, as determined by the Village
Engineer or an outside consultant, shall also be shown.
         (u)   Subsurface conditions on the property shall be shown, if deemed
required by the Village Engineer or an outside consultant. This includes the
location and results of tests made to subsurface soil, rock and groundwater
conditions, depth to groundwater, unless testpits are dry at a depth of 15
feet; location and results of a soil percolation test if individual sewage
disposal systems are proposed.
         (v)   Water courses, marshes, rock outcrop, wooded areas, existing
vegetation, isolated trees four inches or more in diameter at breast height,
existing structures and other significant features.
         (w)   Location of all proposed off-street parking and loading areas,
including dimensions of parking spaces, drive aisles and loading zones.
         (x)   Configuration of all land proposed as open space including storm
water management areas, parks, buffers, and trail corridors.
         (y)   All sites to be conveyed, dedicated, or reserved for parks,
school sites, public buildings, and similar public and quasi-public uses.
         (z)   Pedestrian and/or bicycle circulation systems.
         (aa)   Limits of jurisdictional and non-jurisdictional wetlands.
         (bb)   Any other data reasonably necessary to provide an accurate
overview of the proposed development.
      (7)   Preliminary landscape plan indicating the name, variety, size,
location and quantities of plant material for all common and dedicated areas
including parkways, buffer areas, storm water basins, wetlands, entry areas,
medians, and parking lot islands. The landscape plan shall also depict
permanent signs and street fixtures, and a detail plan of landscaping for a
typical building area.
      (8)   Preliminary engineering plan which shall be drawn on a print of the
proposed land use plan. The proposed plan shall illustrate an appropriate
location and dimensions of all sanitary sewers, storm sewers, and water lines
for all proposed land uses, drainage ditches, culverts and storm water
retention/detention areas, as well as all utility easements, and be accompanied
with:
         (a)   A feasibility report or statement from the sanitary district
attesting to the capability of the existing sewer system and wastewater
treatment facility to service the proposed development.
         (b)   Preliminary stormwater report.
         (c)   Preliminary mass grading plan.
         (d)   Traffic analysis or study, prepared by a transportation engineer
or planner, which analyzes the impact caused by the Planned Unit Development on
the street and highway systems.
      (9)   Architectural drawings. Preliminary architectural drawings for all
primary buildings and accessory buildings shall be submitted which include:
         (a)   Typical elevations (front, rear and side) for proposed
residential and nonresidential buildings, which identify materials and color
styling proposed for all elements of the building.
         (b)   Proposed building heights.
         (c)   Roof plan for all nonresidential structures, which shows the
proposed location of all roof mounted mechanical equipment.
      (10)   Development plan schedule indicating:
         (a)   Stages in which the project will be built, with emphasis on
area, density, use of public facilities, and open space to be developed with
each stage.
         (b)   Each stage as a separate unit. The unit shall be described and
mapped on the project. Overall design of each unit shall be shown on the plan
and through supporting graphic materials.
         (c)   Dates for beginning and completion of each stage.
      (11)   The Planning and Zoning Commission or Village Board may require
preparation and submittal, at the petitioner's expense, of the following for
review and evaluation:
         (a)   Fiscal impact study, detailing the estimated cost which the
Planned Unit Development will have on all taxing bodies, and anticipated
revenues to such taxing bodies which will be realized from each phase of
development. Information shall include detailed estimates on:
            1.   Expected population of the development;
            2.   Impact on service and/or operating costs to be incurred by
each taxing body as a result of the development;
            3.   Any major capital investments required, in part or in whole,
by each taxing body due to the development.
         (b)   Proposed covenants, conditions and restrictions and/or homeowner
association bylaws.
         (c)   Environmental analysis or study, prepared by an environmental
specialist, which analyzes the major impacts the Planned Unit Development may
have on the environment including, but not limited to, the effects on discrete
ecosystems, deteriorated air quality in the immediate vicinity and along
arterial and collector roadways leading to the Planned Unit Development from a
specified distance determined by the Village Engineer or consultant; any
deterioration in the groundwater or surface water quality; effect on sensitive
land areas such as floodplains, wetlands, forests, aquifer recharge areas,
historic buildings or structures, prairie landscapes, and mineral resource
reserves.
         (d)   Market study indicating the extent of market demand for the uses
proposed in the Planned Unit Development including an analysis of demographics,
sales potentials, competitive alignment, an assessment of the market share or
opportunity gaps, and marketing positioning of each component of the Planned
Unit Development.
   (C)   Planning and Zoning Commission review. Upon receipt of all the
required submittals, the Clerk's Office shall distribute copies of the
application and supporting documentation to members of the Planning and Zoning
Commission, The Planning and Zoning Commission shall conduct a public hearing
in accordance with Illinois Compiled Statutes. After the close of the public
hearing, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall recommend to the Village
Board approval or denial of the preliminary Planned Unit Development plat. The
recommendation may include conditions of approval intended to be incorporated
into final plans and supporting documentation.
(Ord. 97-19, passed 9-2-1997; Am. Ord. 06-03, passed 2-6-2006; Am. Ord. 14-27,
passed 9-15-2014)
§ 157.247 FINAL PUD PLAT.
   (A)   Purpose. A final plat for the Planned Unit Development, suitable for
recording with either the Cook County or Kane County Recorder of Deeds, shall
be prepared by the petitioner for consideration and approval by the village.
The purpose of the final PUD plat submission is to designate and depict with
particularity the land subdivided into lots, whether conventional or otherwise,
common open space and building areas. The final plat shall also designate and
limit the specific internal uses of buildings, structures, and uses of land, as
well as provide any additional information or details required by the Village
Board when approving the final PUD plat.
   (B)   Procedure. Not less than 45 days before a meeting of the Village
Board, the applicant shall file an application with the Clerk's Office for
final Planned Unit Development plat approval. The applicant shall submit 20
paper copies folded to fit in a ten-inch by 13-inch envelope and two electronic
copies of the following documentation:
      (1)   A completed notarized application form, two originals and the
remainder photocopies.
      (2)   The application shall be accompanied by the appropriate filing
fees.
      (3)   Final Planned Unit Development plat. The plat shall be a detailed
plan which includes, at a minimum, the following information:
         (a)   An accurate legal description of the entice area under the
immediate development within the Planned Unit Development.
         (b)   A subdivision plat of all subdivided lands in the same form and
meeting all the requirements of the Subdivision Code.
         (c)   An accurate legal description of each separate unsubdivided use
area, including common open space.
         (d)   Designation of exact location of all buildings to be
constructed, and a designation of the specific internal uses to which each
building shall be put, including construction details.
         (e)   Illustrate center line elevations, pavement type, curbs,
gutters, culverts, and the like, and a proposed street numbering designation
shall also be furnished for each building.
         (f)   Construction plans detailing the design, construction or
installation of site amenities; including buildings, landscaping, storm water
detention facilities and other site improvements.
         (g)   Certificates, seals, and signatures required for the dedication
of land and recording of the document.
         (h)   Tabulations on each separate unsubdivided use area, including
land area, number of buildings, and number of dwelling units per acre.
         (i)   Construction schedule. A final construction schedule indicating:
            1.   Stages in which the project will be built, with emphasis on
area, density, use of public facilities, and open space to be developed with
each stage.
            2.   Each stage as a separate unit. The unit shall be described and
mapped on the project. Overall design of each unit shall be shown on the plan
and through supporting graphic materials.
            3.   Dates for beginning and completion of each stage.
      (4)   Common open space documents. All common open space, at the
discretion of the Village Board, shall be:
         (a)   Conveyed to a village or public corporation, or conveyed to a
not-for-profit corporation or entity established for the purpose of benefitting
the owners and residents of the Planned Unit Development or adjoining property
owners of any one or more of them. All lands conveyed hereunder shall be
subject to the right of the grantee or grantees to enforce maintenance and
improvement of the common open space; or
         (b)   Guaranteed by a restrictive covenant describing the open space
and its maintenance and improvement, running with the land for the benefit of
residents of the Planned Unit Development or adjoining property owners and/or
both.
         (c)   Such documents shall also provide that the village shall have
the right, but not the obligation, to perform necessary maintenance of the
common open space, and shall have the authority to place a lien against the
individually-owned property in the Planned Unit Development for the costs
thereof.
      (5)   Public and quasi-public facilitiesguarantee of performance. All
public and quasi-public facilities and improvements made necessary as a result
of the Planned Unit Development, including but not limited to, parks, schools,
recreational areas, etc., shall guarantee the completion of such, as set forth
in the Subdivision Code, except where varied by the approved final plat.
      (6)   Final covenants, conditions and restrictions and/or homeowner
association bylaws.
      (7)   Delinquent taxes. A certificate shall be furnished from the County
Tax Collector that no delinquent taxes exist and that all special assessments
constituting a lien on the whole, or any part, of the property of the Planned
Unit Development have been paid.
(Ord. 97-19, passed 9-2-1997; Am. Ord. 06-03, passed 2-6-2006; Am. Ord. 14-27,
passed 9-15-2014)
§ 157.248 AMENDMENTS OR MINOR REVISIONS TO PUD.
   After the approval of the final Planned Unit Development plat by the Village
Board, the use of land, construction, location of buildings and structures in
the Planned Unit Development shall be developed in accordance with such
approved plans, rather than by any other provisions of the zoning ordinance.
Any changes, modifications or alterations to the approved final Planned Unit
Development plat shall be considered either a minor or a major modification.
   (A)   No changes may be made to the approved final Planned Unit Development
plat unless approved by the village. The nature of the requested change, either
minor or major, to the Planned Unit Development will be determined by the
Village Administrator, or designee, as follows:
      (1)   Minor changes. Minor changes to the final PUD plat are
modifications or revisions that do not alter the overall intent of the PUD.
Minor changes may be approved by the Village Administrator, or designee if the
proposed modification does not result in any of the following:
         (a)   An increase or decrease in overall density greater than 5%.
         (b)   An increase or decrease in the mixture of residential dwelling
unit types greater than 5%.
         (c)   An increase or decrease in area for any land use or land use
mixture greater than 5%.
         (d)   An increase or decrease in total number of parking spaces
greater than 5%.
         (e)   Any reduction in area of common open space, landscaping or
buffering, particularly when reduced below the minimum standard prescribed in §
157.250 (Development Standards and Design Criteria).
         (f)   Any significant changes in building layout, orientation or
height of buildings.
         (g)   A change in the functional classification of a roadway.
         Minor changes not approved by the Village Administrator may be
appealed by the applicant or property owner to the Village Board without review
and recommendation by the Planning and Zoning Commission, unless the Village
Board refers the request for a minor change to the Planning and Zoning
Commission for review and recommendation.
      (2)   Major changes. Major changes to the final PUD plat are
modifications which alter the concept or intent of the approved PUD exceeding
the criteria set forth constituting a minor change. Major changes to the final
PUD plat shall be subject to review and recommendation by the Planning and
Zoning Commission with final approval or denial determined by the Village
Board.
   (B)   Application for PUD modification or changes. For any modifications or
changes resulting in an amendment to an approved final PUD plat, the applicant
shall submit a revised plat and supporting data with an application for a major
or minor change to the Clerk's Office in accordance with the following:
      (1)   The title of the plat shall indicate the nature of the change.
      (2)   If a major change, the revised plat and supporting data with an
application shall be submitted to the Clerk's Office not less than 45 days
before the Planning and Zoning Commission meeting.
   (C)   Notice for major changes to PUD plat. The notice for a major change to
an approved final PUD plat shall conform to the requirements of §
157.247.
   (D)   All approved major or minor changes to an approved final PUD plat
shall be recorded with the county and shall be binding on the applicants, their
successors, grantees and assigns and shall govern the development of the PUD,
as set forth therein.
(Ord. 97-19, passed 9-2-1997; Am. Ord. 06-03, passed 2-6-2006; Am. Ord. 14-27,
passed 9-15-2014)
§ 157.249 CONDITIONS FOR APPROVAL.
   The Planning and Zoning Commission may recommend approval of a special use
for Planned Unit Development or amendments to the preliminary or final Planned
Unit Development plat for the proposed development or amendment upon
considering the following:
   (A)   In what respect does the design of the Planned Unit Development meet
the requirements and design standards of the development standards and design
criteria?
   (B)   The extent to which the proposed plan deviates and/or requires waivers
of the bulk regulations in the zoning ordinance and how the modifications in
design standards from the subdivision control regulations fulfill the intent of
those regulations.
   (C)   The extent of public benefit produced by the Planned Unit Development,
such as but not limited to, the adequacy of common open space and/or public
recreational facilities provided; sufficient control over vehicular traffic;
provision of public services; provision and protection of the reasonable
enjoyment of the land.
   (D)   The relationship and compatibility, beneficial or adverse, of the
Planned Unit Development to the adjacent properties and nearby land uses.
   (E)   The extent to which the Planned Unit Development fulfills the
objectives of the future planning objectives or other planning policies of the
village.
   (F)   The Planning and Zoning Commission finds that the Planned Unit
Development satisfactorily meets the standards for special use as defined in §
157.224.
(Ord. 97-19, passed 9-2-1997; Am. Ord. 05-06, passed 2-7-2005; Am. Ord. 06-03,
passed 2-6-2006; Am. Ord. 14-27, passed 9-15-2014)
§ 157.250 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS AND DESIGN CRITERIA.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish and provide a
comprehensive set of standards and guidelines in which Planned Unit
Developments are designed. While specific recommendations for development and
design are provided, flexibility is also encouraged through guidelines which
enable individual developments to be distinct from one another while
maintaining the inherent character of the village.
   (B)   Applicability. These standards and established criteria shall apply to
all newly constructed buildings and sites within a Planned Unit Development.
Each proposed development will be evaluated on its compliance with the
established regulations/guidelines contained herein.
   (C)   Density. The density, minimum lot size and minimum setback dimension
for each use proposed within a PUD shall be determined by the conventional
zoning classification which would permit the proposed use unless a variance is
specifically requested as part of the special use request.
   (D)   Use regulations. Planned Unit Developments may be comprised of a
single-type of land use or a mixture of land uses when applicable and when
different intensity of land uses are appropriately buffered or separated.
      (1)   Uses proposed shall be consistent with those listed as allowable
uses in the respective zoning districts.
      (2)   Uses listed as special uses in the zoning district in which the
development is located may be allowed.
   (E)   The Planning and Zoning Commission may recommend and the Village Board
may approve access to a dwelling by a driveway or pedestrian walk easement. Off
street parking facilities for such dwelling shall be located not more than 200
feet from the dwelling served.
   (F)   The Planning and Zoning Commission also may recommend and the Village
Board may approve yards of lesser widths or depths than required for permitted
uses in the zoning classification which the planned development is including,
provided:
      (1)   Those protective covenants are recorded with perpetual access
easements and off street parking spaces for use by the residents of the
dwellings served.
      (2)   That spacing between buildings shall be consistent with the
application of recognized site planning principles for securing a unified
development and that due consideration is given to the openness normally
afforded by intervening streets and alleys.
      (3)   The yards for principal buildings along the periphery of the
development shall be not less in width or depth than required for permitted
uses in the district in which the planned unit development is included and the
plan is developed to afford adequate protection to neighboring properties, i.e.
fire protection and sufficient area needed for utility easements, as
recommended by the Planning and Zoning Commission and approved by the Village
Board.
(Ord. 97-19, passed 9-2-1997; Am. Ord. 05-06, passed 2-7-2005; Am. Ord. 06-03,
passed 2-6-2006; Am. Ord. 14-27, passed 9-15-2014)
§ 157.251 REQUIRED LAND DEDICATIONS.
   All plats are required to provide for such dedicated lands for parks and
school sites as mandated by
Chapter 155 of this code.
(Ord. 97-19, passed 9-2-1997; Am. Ord. 06-03, passed 2-6-2006; Am. Ord. 14-27,
passed 9-15-2014)
§ 157.252 FEES.
   The Village Board shall establish a schedule of fees, charges and expenses
for occupancy permits, appeals, applications and amendments for special use,
and other matters pertaining to this chapter. The schedule of fees shall be
filed in the Clerk's Office and may be altered or amended only by the Village
Board. Until all applicable fees, charges and expenses have been paid in full,
no action shall be taken on any application or appeal.
(Ord. 14-27, passed 9-15-2014)
§ 157.253 SEVERABILITY.
   Each section, clause and provision of this chapter shall be considered as
separable, and the invalidity of one or more shall not have any effect upon the
validity of other sections, clauses or provisions.
(Ord. 14-27, passed 9-15-2014)
§ 157.254 EFFECTIVE PERIOD OF PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT.
   (A)   The Planned Unit Development shall be constructed in a timely manner.
The Planned Unit Development shall be subject to revocation under the following
conditions:
      (1)   Final plat approval does not occur within 12 months from the date
of approval of the preliminary plat of a planned unit development.
      (2)   Construction does not commence and proceed within three years from
the date of approval of the final plat of a Planned Unit Development.
      (3)   The Village Board may extend the time limits for final plat
approval for no more than two 12-month periods. Commencement for construction
may also be extended by the Village Board in one year increments.
   (B)   The owner of the parcel of land on which the Planned Unit Development
is to be constructed may apply for the revocation of the Planned Unit
Development at any time prior to the commencement of construction. In the event
a change in circumstances occurs or additional information is received by the
village which substantially affects the approved final plat prior to the
commencement of construction, the village may consider revocation. In such an
event, the village shall give the owner no less than 30 days prior notice, in
writing, of a hearing to consider the revocation of the approval of the Planned
Unit Development.
   (C)   The Village Board shall consider, but not be limited to, the following
standards in the review of the status of the project construction to determine
whether there is reasonable cause for delay:
      (1)   The original program of development with regard to market demand
for the components included in the final plan;
      (2)   Conditions in the real estate finance market;
      (3)   General economic conditions in the local area, state or region;
      (4)   The ability and purposefulness of development operations for the
Planned Unit Development; and
      (5)   Laws, ordinances or other regulations that may have affected timely
development of the project.
   (D)   Upon consideration of the findings by the Village Board regarding the
standards in §
157.253(C), the Village Board shall decide whether:
      (1)   To revoke those portions of the Planned Unit Development for which
construction has not begun;
      (2)   To extend the time allotted for construction to commence based upon
a revised schedule of construction; or
      (3)   To require special changes in the Planned Unit Development as a
condition of a time extension, whereby such changes shall be deemed a "major
change" to the Planned Unit Development.
   (E)   Upon revocation of a Planned Unit Development, the parcel of land
shall conform to the permitted uses and other regulations of the underlying
zoning district of which it is a special use unless an amendment or other
special use is initiated by the Village Board or is applied for by the owner of
the parcel of land on which the Planned Unit Development was to be constructed
and granted by the Village Board.
(Ord. 97-19, passed 9-2-1997; Am. Ord. 06-03, passed 2-6-2006; Am. Ord. 14-27,
passed 9-15-2014)
LANDSCAPE WASTE COMPOST FACILITIES; PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
§ 157.265 SCOPE; APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   All landscape waste compost facilities shall be permitted by the
Illinois Environmental Agency and a copy of that permit shall be filed with the
village.
   (B)   Permitted landscape waste compost facilities are subject to the
minimum performance standards in §
157.267, the location standards in §
157.268, the additional operating standards and requirements in §§
157.269 through
157.278, and the end-product quality standards of §§
157.279 through
157.284.
   (C)   Landscape waste compost facilities shall comply with all regulations
of Title 35, Subtitle G, Chapter I, Subchapter i, Part 830 of the Illinois
Administrative Code adopted by reference.
(Ord. 14-21, passed 7-21-2014)
§ 157.266 DEFINITIONS.
   Unless otherwise provided the definitions in Section 3 of the Environmental
Protection Act (ILCS Ch. 415, Act 5, § 3) and Section 830.102 of Title 35 of
the Illinois Administrative Code are hereby adopted by reference in these
performance standards and the following terms shall have the meanings as
ascribed below:
   ACT. The Illinois Environmental Protection Act (ILCS Ch. 415, Act 5)
including any amendments thereto.
   AGENCY. The Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
   BOARD. The Illinois Pollution Control Board as defined in the Act.
   MUNICIPALITY. The Village of East Dundee.
(Ord. 14-21, passed 7-21-2014)
§ 157.267 MINIMUM PERFORMANCE STANDARDS AND REPORTING REQUIREMENTS FOR
LANDSCAPE WASTE COMPOST FACILITIES.
   All landscape waste compost facilities subject to these performance
standards and shall comply with the following requirements:
   (A)   The composting material shall not contain any domestic sewage, sewage
sludge or septage.
   (B)   Any bulking agent used which is otherwise a waste as defined at
Section 3.53 of the Act (ILCS Ch. 415, Act 5, § 3.53), other than landscape
waste, may only be used as authorized by the Agency in writing or by permit.
   (C)   The operator shall take specific measures to control odors and other
sources of nuisance so as not to cause or contribute to a violation of the Act
or these performance standards. Specific measures an operator should take to
control odor include but are not limited to: adherence to the contents of the
odor minimization plan required at division (E). Specific measures an operator
should take to control other sources of nuisance include preventative measures
to control litter, vectors, and dust and noise generated from truck or
equipment operation.
   (D)   The operator shall have available for inspection a plan for the
intended purposes of end-product compost and a contingency plan for handling
end-product compost and composting material that does not meet the general use
compost standards set forth in §
157.281. Such a plan may include, but is not limited to, consideration of the
following: on-site usage; identification of potential buyers including but not
limited to gardeners, landscapers, vegetable farmers, turf growers, operators
of golf courses, and ornamental crop growers; maintaining consistent product
quality for such factors as stability, color, texture, odor, pH, and man-made
inerts; and removal of end-product compost that cannot be used in the expected
manner because it does not meet the general use compost standards. (Section
22.33(a)(4) of the Act (ILCS Ch. 415, Act 5, § 22.33(a)(4).)
   (E)   The operator shall have a plan for minimizing odors. The plan must
include:
      (1)   Specifications of a readily-available supply of bulking agents,
additives or odor control agents;
      (2)   Procedures for avoiding delay in processing and managing landscape
waste during all weather conditions;
      (3)   Methods for taking into consideration the following factors prior
to turning or moving composting material:
         (a)   Time of day;
         (b)   Wind direction;
         (c)   Percent moisture;
         (d)   Estimated odor potential; and
         (e)   Degree of maturity.
   (F)   Landscape waste must be processed within five days after receipt into
windrows or other piles which promote proper conditions for composting.
Incoming leaves, brush or woody landscape waste may be stored in designated
areas for use as a carbon source and bulking agent, rather than being processed
into windrows or other piles.
   (G)   The facility must be designed and constructed so that runon is
diverted around the composting area. The runoff from the facility resulting
from precipitation less than or equal to the ten- year, 24-hour precipitation
event must be controlled so as not to cause or contribute to a violation of the
Act (ILCS Ch. 415, Act 5).
   (H)   The facility must be constructed and maintained to have an accessible
clear space between windrows or other piles, suitable for housekeeping
operations, visual inspection of piling areas and fire fighting operations.
   (I)   The operator shall post permanent signs at each entrance, the text of
which specifies in letters not less than three inches high:
      (1)   The name and mailing address of the operation;
      (2)   The operating hours;
      (3)   Materials which can be accepted; and
      (4)   The statement, "COMPLAINTS CONCERNING THIS FACILITY CAN BE MADE TO
THE FOLLOWING PERSONS, followed by the name and telephone number of the
operator, and the name and telephone number of the Bureau of Land, Illinois
Environmental Protection Agency, Springfield, Illinois.
   (J)   General use compost, if offered for sale or use, must meet the
performance standards set forth in §
157.281.
   (K)   Reporting requirements.
      (1)   The operator of any facility required, pursuant to 35 Ill. Adm.
Code 831, to have a permit shall submit a written annual statement to the
village, on a form provided by the Agency, on or before April 1 of each year
that includes:
         (a)   An estimate of the amount of material, in tons, received for
composting in the previous calendar year (Section 39(m) of the Act (ILCS Ch.
415, Act 5, § 39(m));
         (b)   An estimate of the amount and disposition of compost material
(i.e., end-product compost, chipped/shredded brush) in the previous calendar
year; and
         (c)   A composting facility financial assurance plan compliance
certification from the Agency.
   (L)   Closure.
      (1)   Unless otherwise authorized in a facility permit, all landscape
waste, composting material, end-product compost, and additives must be removed
from the facility within 180 days following the beginning of closure.
      (2)   An operator of a facility regulated under this subchapter shall
close the facility in a manner which:
         (a)   Minimizes the need for further maintenance; and
         (b)   Controls, minimizes or eliminates the release of landscape
waste, landscape waste constituents, landscape waste leachate, and composting
constituents to the groundwater or surface waters or to the atmosphere to the
extent necessary to prevent threats to human health or the environment.
      (3)   By April 1 of the year following completion of closure, the
operator of a facility required to report shall file a report with the village
verifying that closure was completed in accordance with this division (L) in
the previous calendar year.
   (M)   Odor complaints.
      (1)   For every odor complaint received, the operator shall:
         (a)   Record and report to the village within 24 hours after receiving
the complaint, the date and time received, the name of complainant, the address
and phone number of complainant, if volunteered upon request, and the name of
the personnel receiving the complaint.
         (b)   Record the date, time, and nature of any action taken in
response to an odor complaint, and report such information to the village
within seven days after the complaint.
(Ord. 14-21, passed 7-21-2014)
§ 157.268 LOCATION STANDARDS FOR LANDSCAPE WASTE COMPOST FACILITIES.
   (A)   All landscape waste compost facilities shall comply with the
following:
      (1)   The composting area of the facility must include a setback of at
least 200 feet from the nearest potable water supply well. (Section 39(m) of
the Act (ILCS Ch. 415, Act 5, § 39(m).)
      (2)   The composting area of the facility must be located outside the
boundary of the ten-year floodplain or the site shall be floodproofed. (Section
39(m) of the Act (ILCS Ch. 415, Act 5, § 39(m).)
      (3)   The composting area of the facility must be located so as to
minimize incompatibility with the character of the surrounding area, including
that the composting area shall be located at least one-eighth mile from the
nearest residence (other than a residence located on the same property as the
facility). (Section 39(m) of the Act (ILCS Ch. 415, Act 5, § 39(m).) In
addition, the composting area shall be located at least one-eighth mile from
the property line of each of the following:
         (a)   Facilities that primarily serve to house or treat people that
are immunocompromised or immunosuppressed, such as cancer or AIDS patients;
people with asthma, cystic fibrosis, or bioaerosol allergies; or children under
the age of one year;
         (b)   Primary and secondary schools and adjacent areas that the school
uses for recreation; and
         (c)   Any facility for child care licensed under Section 3 of the
Child Care Act of 1969 (ILCS Ch. 225, Act 10, § 3); preschools; and adjacent
areas that the facility or preschool uses for recreation.
      (4)   If, at the time the facility permit application is deemed complete
by the Agency pursuant to 35 Ill. Adm. Code 832, the composting area of the
facility is located within one-quarter mile of the nearest off-site residence
or within one-half mile of the nearest platted subdivision containing a
residence, or if more than ten residences are located within one-half mile of
the boundaries of the facility, in order to minimize incompatibility with the
character of the surrounding area, landscape waste must be processed by the end
of the operating day on which the landscape waste is received into windrows,
other piles or a contained composting system providing proper conditions for
composting.
      (5)   The composting area of the facility must be designed to prevent any
compost material from being placed within five feet of the water table, to
adequately control runoff from the site, and to collect and manage any
landscape waste leachate that is generated on the site. (Section 39(m) of the
Act (ILCS Ch. 415, Act 5, § 39(m).) Compliance with the water table distance
requirement may be demonstrated by either of the following means:
         (a)   Using published water table maps or other published
documentation to establish the location of the water table in relation to site
elevation; or
         (b)   Actual measuring of the water table elevation at least once per
month for three consecutive months.
      (6)   The facility must meet all requirements under the Wild and Scenic
Rivers Act (16 USC 1271 et seq.).
      (7)   The facility must not restrict the flow of a 100-year flood, result
in washout of landscape waste from a 100-year flood, or reduce the temporary
water storage capacity of the 100-year floodplain, unless measures are
undertaken to provide alternative storage capacity, such as lagoons, holding
tanks, or provision of drainage around structures at the facility.
      (8)   The facility must not be located in any area where it may pose a
threat of harm or destruction to the features for which:
         (a)   An irreplaceable historic or archaeological site has been listed
pursuant to the National Historic Preservation Act (16 USC 470 et seq.) or the
Illinois Historic Preservation Act (ILCS Ch. 20, Act 3410);
         (b)   A natural landmark has been designated by the National Park
Service or the Illinois State Historic Preservation Office; or
         (c)   A natural area has been designated as a Dedicated Illinois
Nature Preserve pursuant to the Illinois Natural Areas Preservation Act (ILCS
Ch. 525, Act 30).
      (9)   The facility must not be located in any area where it may
jeopardize the continued existence of any designated endangered species, result
in the destruction or adverse modification of the critical habitat for such
species, or cause or contribute to the taking of any endangered or threatened
species of plant, fish or wildlife listed pursuant to the Endangered Species
Act (16 USC 1531 et seq.) or the Illinois Endangered Species Protection Act
(ILCS Ch. 520, Act 10).
   (B)   A facility's compliance with the location standards set forth in
division (A) of this section shall be determined at the time described below:
      (1)   At the time that a complete permit application for a new or
expanded facility is filed with the Agency under 35 Ill. Adm. Code 832; or
      (2)   For a facility that is not required to obtain a permit under
Section 21(d) of the Act (ILCS Ch. 415, Act 5, § 21(d)), at the time that
construction of the new or expanded facility begins.
(Ord. 14-21, passed 7-21-2014)
§ 157.269 ADDITIONAL STORMWATER AND LANDSCAPE WASTE LEACHATE CONTROLS AT
PERMITTED LANDSCAPE WASTE COMPOST FACILITIES.
   All permitted landscape waste compost facilities must comply with the
following:
   (A)   Stormwater or other water which comes into contact with landscape
waste received, stored, processed or composted, or which mixes with landscape
waste leachate, must be considered landscape waste leachate and must be
collected and reused in the process, properly disposed of off-site, or treated
as necessary prior to discharge off-site to meet applicable standards of 35
Ill. Adm. Code Subtitle C.
   (B)   Ponding of landscape waste leachate within the facility must be
prevented, except to the extent done by design and approved in the facility
permit.
   (C)   Soil surfaces used for composting must be allowed to dry periodically
in order to promote aerobic conditions in the soil subsurface.
(Ord. 14-21, passed 7-21-2014)
§ 157.270 ADDITIONAL OPERATING STANDARDS FOR PERMITTED LANDSCAPE WASTE COMPOST
FACILITIES.
   All permitted landscape waste compost facilities must comply with the
following operating standards:
   (A)   Composting process.
      (1)   All permitted landscape waste compost facilities must meet the
following composting process standards:
         (a)   Landscape waste must be processed within 24 hours after receipt
at the facility into windrows, other piles or a contained composting system
providing proper conditions for composting. Incoming leaves, and brush or woody
landscape waste, may be stored in designated areas for use as a carbon source
and bulking agent, if so provided as a permit condition, rather than being
processed in windrows or other piles.
         (b)   Unless the facility is designed for anaerobic composting, the
operator shall take measures to adjust the oxygen level, as necessary, to
promote aerobic composting. Aeration intensity must be altered to suit the
varying oxygen requirements that different landscape wastes may have.
         (c)   The operator shall take measures to maintain the moisture level
of the composting material within a range of 40% to 60% on a dry weight basis.
         (d)   The staging area must be adequate in size and design to
facilitate the unloading of landscape waste from delivery vehicles and the
unobstructed maneuvering of vehicles and other equipment.
         (e)   Neither landscape waste nor composting material may be mixed
with end-product compost ready to be sold or offered for use. This prohibition
shall not apply to the use of end-product compost as an amendment to composting
material.
         (f)   The facility must have sufficient equipment and personnel to
process incoming volumes of landscape waste accepted within the time frames
required in this section, and sufficient capacity to handle projected incoming
volumes of landscape waste.
         (g)   The operator shall obtain written authorization from the Agency
to use any additive, other than water, prior to its use. Unless otherwise
authorized any additive, or combination of additives, other than water, must
not exceed 10%, by volume, of the composting material.
      (2)   An operator of a permitted landscape waste compost facility using
an open composting process shall turn each windrow or other pile at least four
times per year and not less than once every six months. This provision does not
apply to composting systems designed for anaerobic conditions.
      (3)   An operator of a permitted landscape waste compost facility using a
contained composting process shall have mechanisms to control moisture, air
flow and air emissions. These mechanisms must be operated and maintained
throughout the landscape waste composting process as specified in any permit
required pursuant to 35 Ill. Adm. Code 831.
      (4)   Operators of permitted facilities required to process composting
material to further reduce pathogens shall comply with the applicable thermal
processing requirement among the following:
         (a)   If the facility uses a windrow composting process, during a 15
consecutive day period the temperature throughout each windrow must be
maintained at 55 degrees Celsius or greater and, during the same period, each
windrow must be turned a minimum of five times;
         (b)   If the facility uses an aerated static pile composting process,
the composting material must be covered with six to 12 inches of insulating
material, and the temperature throughout each pile material must be maintained
at 55 degrees Celsius or greater for three consecutive days; and
         (c)   If the facility uses an in-vessel composting process, the
temperature of the composting material throughout the mixture must be
maintained at 55 degrees Celsius or greater for three consecutive days.
   (B)   Composting surface.
      (1)   Open composting processes.
         (a)   Composting areas must be:
            1.   Located on relatively impermeable soils, as demonstrated by
actual measurement;
            2.   Located on a base with resistance to saturated flow equivalent
to the resistance of relatively impermeable soil; or
            3.   Subject to an early detection and monitoring program, pursuant
to division (M)(3) of this section.
         (b)   The composting surface must be constructed and maintained to
allow:
            1.   Diversion of runon waters away from the landscape waste and
compost;
            2.   Management of runoff waters and landscape waste leachate; and
            3.   Facility operation during all weather conditions.
         (c)   The surface of the landscape waste composting area of the
facility must be sloped at 2% or greater unless an alternative water management
system to promote drainage and to prevent surface water ponding is approved in
the facility permit.
      (2)   Contained composting processes.
         (a)   Composting areas at facilities at which composting material or
leachate comes into contact with an open surface must be:
            1.   Located on relatively impermeable soils, as demonstrated by
actual measurement;
            2.   Located on a base with resistance to saturated flow equivalent
to the resistance of relatively impermeable soil; or
            3.   Subject to an early detection and groundwater monitoring
program.
         (b)   The composting surface must support all structures and
equipment.
   (C)   Utilities. All utilities necessary for safe operation in compliance
with the requirements of this subchapter, including, but not limited to,
lights, power, water supply and communications equipment, must be available at
the facility at all times.
   (D)   Maintenance. The operator shall maintain and operate all systems and
related appurtenances and structures in a manner that facilitates proper
operations in compliance with the requirements of this subchapter. If a
breakdown of equipment occurs, standby equipment must be used or additional
equipment brought on site as necessary to comply with the requirements of this
subchapter and any pertinent permit conditions.
   (E)   Open burning. Open burning is prohibited except in accordance with 35
Ill. Adm. Code 200 through 245.
   (F)   Dust control. The operator shall implement methods for controlling
dust in accordance with Subparts B and K of 35 Ill. Adm. Code 212.
   (G)   Noise control. The facility must be designed, constructed, operated
and maintained so as not to cause or contribute to a violation of 35 Ill. Adm.
Code 900 through 905 or of Section 24 of the Act (ILCS Ch. 415, Act 5, § 24).
   (H)   Vector control. Insects, rodents, and other vectors must be controlled
so as not to cause or contribute to a violation of the Act (ILCS Ch. 415, Act
5).
   (I)   Fire protection. The operator shall institute fire protection measures
including, but not limited to, maintaining a supply of water and radio or
telephone access to the nearest fire department. Fire extinguishers must be
provided at two separate locations within the facility.
   (J)   Litter control. The operator shall control litter at the facility. At
a minimum:
      (1)   The operator shall patrol the facility daily to check for litter
accumulation. All litter must be collected in a secure container for later
disposal; and
      (2)   Litter must be confined to the property on which the facility is
located. At the conclusion of each day of operation, any litter strewn beyond
the confines of the facility must be collected and
disposed of at a facility approved to receive such waste in accordance with the
applicable Board regulations.
   (K)   Management of non-compostable wastes. The operator shall develop
management procedures for collection, containment and disposal of non-
compostable wastes received at the facility. Disposal must be at a facility
approved to receive such waste in accordance with applicable Board regulations
at 35 Ill. Adm. Code 810 through 815.
   (L)   Mud tracking. The operator shall implement measures, such as the use
of wheel washing units or rumble strips, to prevent tracking of mud by delivery
vehicles onto public roadways.
   (M)   Monitoring.
      (1)   At a minimum, for batch, windrow and pile systems:
         (a)   The temperature of each batch, windrow or pile of composting
material must be monitored on a weekly basis;
         (b)   The moisture level in each batch, windrow or pile of composting
material must be monitored once every two weeks; and
         (c)   For aerobic composting, the oxygen level of each batch, windrow
or pile of composting material must be monitored weekly.
      (2)   At a minimum, for in-vessel continuous feed systems:
         (a)   The temperature of the composting material must be monitored
daily;
         (b)   The moisture of the composting material must be monitored daily,
unless otherwise authorized by the Agency in a facility permit; and
         (c)   For aerobic composting by means of an in-vessel continuous feed
system, the oxygen level of the composting material must be monitored daily.
      (3)   Early detection and groundwater monitoring, if required pursuant to
§
157.270, shall be done in accordance with 35 Ill. Adm. Code 830, Appendix A.
(Ord. 14-21, passed 7-21-2014)
§ 157.271 OPERATING PLAN FOR PERMITTED LANDSCAPE WASTE COMPOST FACILITIES.
   All activities at a permitted facility associated with composting must be
conducted in accordance with an operating plan containing, at a minimum, the
following information:
   (A)   Designation of personnel, by title, responsible for operation, control
and maintenance of the facility;
   (B)   A description of the anticipated quantity and variation throughout the
year of waste to be received;
   (C)   Methods for measuring incoming waste;
   (D)   Methods to control the types of waste received, and methods for
removing, recovering and disposing of non-compostables;
   (E)   Methods to control traffic and to expedite unloading;
   (F)   Management procedures that will be used in composting, which must
include:
      (1)   A description of any treatment the wastes will receive prior to
windrowing (e.g., chipping, shredding) and the maximum length of time required
to process each day's receipt of waste into windrows;
      (2)   The specifications to which the windrows will be constructed
(width, height, and length) and calculation of the capacity of the facility;
      (3)   A list of additives, including the type, amount and origin, that
will be used to adjust moisture, temperature, oxygen transfer, pH, carbon to
nitrogen ratio, or biological characteristics of the composting material, and
rates and methods of application of such additives; and
      (4)   An estimate of the length of time necessary to complete the
composting process;
   (G)   Methods to minimize odors. The operating plan must include:
      (1)   A management plan for bad loads;
      (2)   A demonstration that the processing and management of anticipated
quantities of landscape waste can be accomplished during all weather
conditions;
      (3)   Procedures for receiving and recording odor complaints,
investigating immediately in response to any odor complaints to determine the
cause of odor emissions, and remedying promptly any odor problem at the
facility;
      (4)   Additional odor-minimizing measures, which may include the
following:
         (a)   Avoidance of anaerobic conditions in the composting material;
         (b)   Use of mixing for favorable composting conditions;
         (c)   Formation of windrows or other piles into a size and shape
favorable to minimizing odors; and
         (d)   Use of end-product compost as cover to act as a filter during
early stages of composting;
   (H)   Methods to control stormwater and landscape waste leachate;
   (I)   Methods to control noise, vectors and litter;
   (J)   Methods to control dust emissions, which must include:
      (1)   Consideration of the following factors prior to turning or moving
the composting material:
         (a)   Time of day;
         (b)   Wind direction;
         (c)   Percent moisture;
         (d)   Estimated emission potential; and
         (e)   Degree of maturity; and
      (2)   Maintenance of roads, wetting of roads, use of dust control agents,
or any combination of these methods;
   (K)   Methods for monitoring temperature, oxygen level and moisture level of
the composting material;
   (L)   Methods for adjusting temperature, oxygen level and moisture level of
the composting material;
   (M)   Recordkeeping and reporting procedures; and
   (N)   Methods to obtain composite samples and test end-product compost to
demonstrate compliance.
(Ord. 14-21, passed 7-21-2014)
§ 157.272 SALVAGING AT PERMITTED LANDSCAPE WASTE COMPOST FACILITIES.
   (A)   Salvaging operations at permitted landscape waste compost facilities
must not interfere with the operation of the landscape waste facility or result
in a violation.
   (B)   All salvaging operations must be performed in a safe and sanitary
manner in compliance with the requirements of these performance standards.
   (C)   Salvageable materials:
      (1)   May be accumulated on-site by the operator, provided they are
managed so as not to create a nuisance, harbor vectors, cause maiodors, or
create an unsightly appearance; and
      (2)   Must not be accumulated in a manner meeting the definition of a
waste pile.
(Ord. 14-21, passed 7-21-2014)
§ 157.273 ACCESS CONTROL AT PERMITTED LANDSCAPE WASTE COMPOST FACILITIES.
   The operator of a permitted landscape waste compost facility shall implement
controls to limit unauthorized access, in order to prevent random dumping and
to ensure safety at the facility.
(Ord. 14-21, passed 7-21-2014)
§ 157.274 LOAD CHECKING AT PERMITTED LANDSCAPE WASTE COMPOST FACILITIES.
   (A)   Each load received must be inspected, upon receipt, for its
acceptability at the facility and must be visually checked, prior to
processing, for noncompostable waste.
   (B)   The facility must reject unacceptable loads.
(Ord. 14-21, passed 7-21-2014)
§ 157.275 PERSONNEL TRAINING FOR PERMITTED LANDSCAPE WASTE COMPOST FACILITIES.
   (A)   The operator of a permitted landscape waste compost facility shall
provide training to all personnel prior to initial operation of a composting
facility. In addition, annual personnel training shall be provided, which must
include, at a minimum, a thorough explanation of the operating procedures for
both normal and emergency situations.
   (B)   New employees shall be trained, prior to participating in operations
at the facility, in facility operations, maintenance procedures, and safety and
emergency procedures relevant to their employment.
   (C)   The operator shall have personnel sign an acknowledgement stating that
they have received the training required pursuant to this section.
   (D)   The facility operating plan must be made available and explained to
all employees.
(Ord. 14-21, passed 7-21-2014)
§ 157.276 RECORDKEEPING FOR PERMITTED LANDSCAPE WASTE COMPOST FACILITIES.
   (A)   Copies of the facility permit, design plans, operating plan, and any
required reports must be kept at the facility, or at a definite location
specified in the operating plan or permit, so as to be available during
inspection of the facility by the village.
   (B)   The operator shall record the following information:
      (1)   The quantity of each load of landscape waste received;
      (2)   The origin, type and quantity of any additive accepted, when
received at the facility;
      (3)   The type and quantity of any additive used in the composting
process (water added during composting need not be quantified), as quantified
based on a monthly review of additives remaining;
      (4)   The dates of turning of each windrow or other pile;
      (5)   All monitoring data required pursuant to a facility permit;
      (6)   Conditions evaluated pursuant to §
157.271;
      (7)   For any odor complaint received, the information collected pursuant
to §
157.267(M);
      (8)   Details of all incidents that require implementation of the
facility's contingency plan, in accordance with §
157.277, and methods used to resolve them;
      (9)   Records pertaining to sampling and testing, as follows:
         (a)   Locations in the composting area from which samples are
obtained;
         (b)   Number of samples taken;
         (c)   Volume of each sample taken;
         (d)   Date and time of collection of samples;
         (e)   Name and signature of person responsible for sampling;
         (f)   Name and address of the laboratory receiving samples, if
applicable; and
         (g)   Signature of the person responsible for sample analysis.
      (10)   The daily quantity of each type of end-product compost removed
from the facility, according to the end-product compost classifications
provided in §§
157.279 through
157.284; and
      (11)   Verification that requisite personnel training has been done, in
accordance with §
157.275.
   (C)   The operator shall keep dated copies of the end-product compost
analyses required pursuant to §
157.282.
   (D)   The records required pursuant to this section shall be made available
during normal business hours for inspection and photocopying by the village and
Agency. Such records must be kept for a period of three years, subject to
extension upon written request by the village or Agency and automatic extension
during the course of any enforcement action relating to the facility. Records
must be sent to the village and Agency upon request.
(Ord. 14-21, passed 7-21-2014)
§ 157.277 CONTINGENCY PLAN FOR PERMITTED LANDSCAPE WASTE COMPOST FACILITIES.
   (A)   A contingency plan must be established, addressing the contingencies
set forth in §
157.267(C) and the following additional contingencies:
      (1)   Equipment breakdown;
      (2)   Odors;
      (3)   Unacceptable waste delivered to the facility;
      (4)   Groundwater contamination;
      (5)   Any accidental release of special waste; and
      (6)   Conditions such as fires, dust, noise, vectors, power outages and
unusual traffic conditions.
   (B)   The facility contingency plan must be available on-site and
implemented as necessary.
(Ord. 14-21, passed 7-21-2014)
§ 157.278 CLOSURE PLAN FOR PERMITTED LANDSCAPE WASTE COMPOST FACILITIES.
   (A)   A written closure plan must be developed which contains, at a minimum,
the following:
      (1)   Steps necessary for the premature final closure of the facility
under circumstances during its intended operating permit term when the cost of
closure would be the greatest;
      (2)   Steps necessary for, and a schedule for the completion of, the
routine final closure of the facility at the end of its intended operating
life; and
      (3)   Steps necessary to prevent damage to the environment during
temporary suspension of landscape waste acceptance if the facility permit
allows temporary suspension of landscape waste acceptance at the facility
without initiating final closure.
   (B)   Until completion of closure has been certified, the operator shall
maintain a copy of the closure plan at the facility or at a definite location,
specified in the facility permit, so as to be available during inspection of
the facility.
   (C)   An operator of a facility shall develop and file a revised closure
plan upon modification of the operations of the facility which affect the cost
of closure of the facility or any portion thereof, which include, but are not
limited to:
      (1)   A temporary suspension of landscape waste acceptance at the
facility; or
      (2)   An increase in the design capacity at the facility to process
landscape waste.
   (D)   The operator shall initiate implementation of the closure plan within
30 days following the beginning of closure.
   (E)   Not later than 30 days following the beginning of closure, the
operator shall post signs, easily visible at all access gates leading into the
facility. The text of such signs must read, in letters not less than three
inches high: "This facility is closed for all composting activities and all
receipt of landscape waste materials. No dumping allowed. Violators will be
prosecuted," Such signs must be maintained in legible condition until
certification of completion of closure is issued for the facility by the
Agency.
   (F)   Notice of closure. The operator shall send notice of closure to the
village within 30 days following the beginning of closure. A compost closure
report must be submitted to the village, on a form provided by the Agency,
which must cover the time elapsed since the end of the last annual report
period.
   (G)   Certificate of completion of closure.
      (1)   Upon completion of closure, the operator shall prepare and submit
to the village an affidavit, on a form provided by the Agency, stating that the
facility has been closed in accordance with the closure plan.
      (2)   Upon finding that the facility has been closed in accordance with
the closure plan, the Agency shall issue a certificate of completion of closure
and shall terminate the facility permit.
(Ord. 14-21, passed 7-21-2014)
§ 157.279 QUALITY OF END-PRODUCT COMPOST: SCOPE AND APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   End-product compost used as daily cover or vegetative amendment in the
final layer of a landfill is exempt from the requirements set forth in this
subchapter. (Section 22.33(c) of the Act (ILCS Ch. 415, Act 5, § 22.33(c).)
   (B)   The provisions set forth in §§
157.280,
157.281, and
157.283 apply to all end-product compost subject to this subchapter.
   (C)   In addition, the provisions set forth in §§
157.282 and
157.284 apply to all end-product compost derived from landscape waste and
subject to this subchapter.
(Ord. 14-21, passed 7-21-2014)
§ 157.280 COMPOST CLASSES.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, end-product compost must be classified
in the following manner:
   (A)   General use compost. End-product compost which meets the standards set
forth in §
157.281.
   (B)   Designated use compost. End-product compost which does not qualify as
general use end-product compost, Designated use compost must be used only as
daily cover or vegetative amendment in the final layer at a landfill. (Section
22.33(c) of the Act (ILCS Ch. 415, Act 5, §§ 22.33(c).)
(Ord. 14-21, passed 7-21-2014)
§ 157.281 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS FOR GENERAL USE COMPOST.
   General-use compost:
   (A)   Must be free of any materials which pose a definite hazard to human
health due to physical characteristics, such as glass or metal shards;
   (B)   Must not contain man-made materials larger than four millimeters in
size exceeding 1% of the end-product compost, on a dry weight basis;
   (C)   Must have a pH between 6.5 and 8.5;
   (D)   Must have reached stability;
   (E)   Must not exceed, on a dry weight basis, the inorganic concentrations
set forth in Table A of Subpart F of Part 830, Title 35 of the Illinois
Administrative Code; and
   (F)   Must not contain fecal coliform populations that exceed 1,000 MPN per
gram of total solids (dry weight basis), or Salmonella species populations that
exceed three MPN per four grams of total solids (dry weight basis).
(Ord. 14-21, passed 7-21-2014)
§ 157.282 TESTING REQUIREMENTS FOR END-PRODUCT COMPOST DERIVED FROM LANDSCAPE
WASTE.
   (A)   Operators shall perform testing to demonstrate compliance with the
standards set forth in §
157.281(B) through (E). Such testing must be done in accordance with the
methods set forth in Appendix B of Subpart F of Part 830, Title 35 of the
Illinois Administrative Code, except that an alternative method or methods may
be used to demonstrate compliance with any of these standards, if approved in
writing by the Agency.
   (B)   Operators of facilities which are authorized to use an additive
pursuant to §
157.270(A)(1)(g) which may cause an exceedence of §
157.281(F) shall test for pathogens using the method set forth in Appendix B of
Subpart F of Part 830, Title 35 of the Illinois Administrative Code, except
that an alternative method or methods may be used to demonstrate compliance
with any of these standards, if approved in writing by the Agency.
   (C)   End-product compost derived from landscape waste must be tested for
the parameters set forth in §
157.281 at a frequency of:
      (1)   Once every 5,000 cubic yards of end-product compost transported
off-site; or
      (2)   Once per year, if less than 5,000 cubic yards of end-product
compost are transported off-site per year.
(Ord. 14-21, passed 7-21-2014)
§ 157.283 SAMPLING METHODS.
   Sample collection, preservation, and analysis must be done in a manner which
assures valid and representative results. A composite sample must be prepared
by one of the following methods:
   (A)   Twelve grab samples, each 550 milliliters in size, must be taken from
the end-product compost at the facility, in the following manner:
      (1)   Four grab samples from points both equidistant throughout the
length and at the center of the windrow or other pile, at a depth not less than
one meter from the surface of the windrow or other pile;
      (2)   Four grab samples from points both equidistant throughout the
length and one- quarter the width of the windrow or other pile, at a depth not
less than half the distance between the surface and the bottom of the windrow
or other pile; and
      (3)   Four grab samples from points both equidistant throughout the
length and one- eighth the width of the windrow or other pile, at a depth not
less than half the distance between the surface and the bottom of the windrow
or other pile.
      (4)   The twelve grab samples must be thoroughly mixed to form a
homogenous composite sample. Analyses must be of a representative subsample.
The sample holding times, sample container types and minimum collection volumes
listed in Table B of Subpart F of Part 830, Title 35 of the Illinois
Administrative Code shall apply; or
   (B)   Sampling methods set forth in Test Methods for Evaluating Solid Waste,
Physical/Chemical Methods (SW-846), incorporated by reference at 35 Ill. Adm.
Code 157.103.
(Ord. 14-21, passed 7-21-2014)
§ 157.284 OFF-SPECIFICATION COMPOST.
   End-product compost derived from landscape waste which does not meet the
standards for general use compost set forth in this subchapter must be further
managed as landscape waste or as designated use compost.
(Ord. 14-21, passed 7-21-2014)
§ 157.285 NOTICES; VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   Notice to person responsible. Whenever the code official determines
that there has been a violation of §§
157.265 through
157.284 or has grounds to believe that a violation has occurred, notice shall
be given in the manner prescribed in division (B) below, and to the person
responsible for the violation.
   (B)   Form of notice. Such notice shall be in writing, include a description
of the real estate sufficient for identification, include a statement of the
violation or violations, include a correction order allowing a reasonable time
to make the repairs and improvements required to bring the property, structure
or use into compliance with the provisions of this code. The reasonable time to
correct the alleged violation(s) shall be for not less than 60 days unless in
the opinion of the code official or the Village President and Board of Trustees
there is imminent danger of failure or collapse of a building or structure, or
when any structure or part of a structure has fallen and life is endangered by
the occupancy of the structure or when there is actual or potential danger due
to explosive fumes or vapors or the presence of toxic fumes, gases or
materials, or operation of defective or dangerous equipment.
   (C)   Method of service. Such notice shall be deemed to be properly served
to the responsible party if a copy thereof is:
      (1)   Delivered personally;
      (2)   Sent by certified mail addressed to the last known address; or
      (3)   If the notice is returned showing that the letter was not
delivered, a copy thereof shall be posted in a conspicuous place in or about
the structure or property affected by such notice.
   (D)   Prosecution of violation. Any person failing to comply with a notice
of violation or order shall be deemed guilty of a quasi-criminal offense and
the violation shall be deemed a strict liability offense including but not
limited to the filing of a complaint in the village's administrative
adjudication system.
   (E)   Abatement of violation. The imposition of penalties in a quasi-
criminal proceeding shall not preclude the Village Attorney, with direction
from the Village President and Board of Trustees, from instituting appropriate
action to restrain, correct or abate a violation or stop an illegal act,
conduct, business or utilization of the premises.
   (F)   Violation penalties. Any person who shall violate a provision of §§
157.265 through
157.284, or fail to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof,
shall be prosecuted within the limits provided by state law or village
ordinance. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served
shall be deemed a separate offense.
(Ord. 14-21, passed 7-21-2014)
OPERATING STANDARDS FOR GENERAL AND CLEAN CONSTRUCTION OR DEMOLITION DEBRIS
FILL OPERATIONS
§ 157.300 SCOPE; APPLICABILITY.
   This subchapter applies to all clean construction or demolition debris
(CCDD) fill operations that are required to be permitted pursuant to Section
22.51 of the Act (ILCS Ch. 415, Act 5), other than CCDD fill operations
permitted pursuant to 35 Ill. Adm. Code 807 or 811 through 814, and to all
uncontaminated soil fill operations that are required to be registered pursuant
to Section 22.51a of the Act (ILCS Ch. 415, Act 5, § 22.51a).
(Ord. 14-20, passed 7-21-2014)
§ 157.301 DEFINITIONS.
   Except as stated in this section, or unless a different meaning of a word or
term is clear from the context, the definition of words or terms shall be the
same as that applied to the same words or terms in the Environmental Protection
Act (ILCS Ch. 415, Act 5) or Section 1100.103 of Title 35, Subtitle J, Chapter
I, Part 1100 of the Illinois Administrative Code hereby adopted by reference in
these performance standards and the following terms shall have the meanings as
ascribed below:
   ACT. The Illinois Environmental Protection Act (ILCS Ch. 415, Act 5)
including any amendments thereto.
   AGENCY. The Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
   BOARD. The Illinois Pollution Control Board as defined in the Act.
   MUNICIPALITY. The Village of East Dundee.
(Ord. 14-20, passed 7-21-2014)
§ 157.302 PROHIBITIONS.
   (A)   No person shall conduct any CCDD fill operation in violation of the
Act (ILCS Ch. 415, Act 5) or any regulations or standards adopted by the Board.
(ILCS Ch. 415, Act 5, § 22.51(a))
   (B)   CCDD fill operations must not accept waste for use as fill.
   (C)   CCDD fill operations must not be located inside a setback zone of a
potable water supply well. (See Section 3.160(b)(i) of the Act (ILCS Ch. 415,
Act 5, § 3.160(b)(i).)
   (D)   No person shall use soil other than uncontaminated soil as fill
material at a CCDD fill operation. (ILCS Ch. 415, Act 5, § 22.51(g)(1))
   (E)   No person shall use construction or demolition debris other than CCDD
as fill material at a CCDD fill operation. (ILCS Ch. 415, Act 5, § 22.51(g)(2))
   (F)   Except as provided in 35 Ill. Adm. Code 1100.212, no person shall use
painted clean construction or demolition debris (painted CCDD) as fill material
at a CCDD fill operation.
   (G)   CCDD fill operations must not accept uncontaminated soil with pH
outside the range of 6.25 to 9.0.
(Ord. 14-20, passed 7-21-2014)
§ 157.303 SURFACE WATER DRAINAGE.
   (A)   Runoff from filled areas.
      (1)   All discharges of runoff from filled areas to waters of the state
must be permitted by the Agency to the extent required under 35 Ill. Adm. Code
309.
      2)   All surface water control structures must be operated until the
final cover is placed and the vegetative or other cover meeting the
requirements of 35 Ill. Adm. Code 1100.208 provides erosional stability.
   (B)   Diversion of runoff from unfilled areas.
      (1)   Runoff from unfilled areas must be diverted around filled areas to
the greatest extent practical.
      (2)   Diversion facilities must be constructed to prevent runoff from the
ten-year, 24-hour precipitation event from entering filled areas.
      (3)   Runoff from unfilled areas which becomes commingled with runoff
from filled areas must be handled as runoff from filled areas in accordance
with division (A).
      (4)   All diversion structures must be designed to have flow velocities
that will not cause erosion and scouring of the natural or constructed lining
(i.e., the bottom and sides) of the diversion channel and downstream channels.
      (5)   All diversion structures must be operated until the final cover is
placed and the vegetative or other cover meeting the requirements of 35 Ill.
Adm. Code 1100.208 provides erosional stability.
(Ord. 14-20, passed 7-21-2014)
§ 157.304 ANNUAL FACILITY MAP.
   The owner or operator must submit an annual facility map with the annual
report to the village and Agency each calendar year by the date specified in
the Agency permit. The map must have a scale no smaller than one inch equals
200 feet, show the horizontal extent of filled areas as of the date of the map,
and show the same information as required for facility plan maps.
(Ord. 14-20, passed 7-21-2014)
§ 157.305 OPERATING STANDARDS.
   (A)   Placement of fill material. Fill material must be placed in a safe
manner that protects human health and the environment in conformance with the
provisions of the Act (ILCS Ch. 415, Act 5) and the regulations adopted under
the Act.
   (B)   Size and slope of working face. The working face of the fill operation
must be no larger than is necessary, based on the terrain and equipment used in
material placement, to conduct operations in a safe and efficient manner in
conformance with the provisions of the Act and the regulations adopted under
the Act.
   (C)   Equipment. Equipment must be maintained and available for use at the
facility during all hours of operation, so as to achieve and maintain
compliance with the requirements of the Act.
   (D)   Utilities. All utilities, including but not limited to heat, lights,
power, and communications equipment, necessary for safe operation in compliance
with the requirements of the Act must be available at the facility at all
times.
   (E)   Maintenance. The owner or operator must maintain and operate all
systems and related appurtenances and structures in a manner that facilitates
proper operations in compliance with the Act.
   (F)   Dust control. The owner or operator must implement methods for
controlling dust so as to minimize off-site wind dispersal of particulate
matter.
   (G)   Noise control. The facility must be designed, constructed, and
maintained to minimize the level of equipment noise audible outside the site.
The facility must not cause or contribute to a violation of the Board's noise
regulations or Section 24 of the Act (ILCS Ch. 415, Act 5, § 24).
   (H)   Fill elevation. The owner or operator must not place CCDD used as fill
higher than the highest point of elevation existing prior to the filling
immediately adjacent to the fill area. (ILCS Ch. 415, Act 5, § 3.160(b))
   (I)   Mud tracking. The owner or operator must implement methods to minimize
tracking of mud by hauling vehicles onto public roadways.
   (J)   Odor and nuisance. The fill operation must not cause foul odors or
other nuisance.
(Ord. 14-20, passed 7-21-2014)
§ 157.306 CERTIFICATIONS; LOAD CHECKING.
   (A)   The owner or operator must do all of the following activities and
document all the activities for all CCDD and uncontaminated soil accepted for
use as fill material:
      (1)   For all soil, including soil mixed with CCDD, obtain:
         (a)   A certification from the source site owner or source site
operator that the site is not a potentially impacted property and is presumed
to be uncontaminated soil, and soil pH is within the range of 6.25 to 9.0. A
certification under this division (A)(1)(a) must include soil pH testing
results to show that the soil pH is within the range of 6.25 to 9.0. If soil is
consolidated from more than one source site, a certification must be obtained
from each source site owner or source site operator; or
         (b)   A certification from a PE or PG that the soil is uncontaminated
soil, and the soil pH is within the range of 6.25 to 9.0. A certification under
this division (A)(1)(b) must include analytical soil testing results to show
that soil chemical constituents comply with the maximum allowable
concentrations established pursuant to Subpart F of Part 100, Subtitle J of
Title 35 of the Illinois Administrative Code, and the soil pH is within the
range of 6.25 to 9.0.
      (2)   Certifications required under division (A)(1)(a) and (A)(1)(b) must
be on forms and in a format prescribed by the Agency and a copy filed with the
village.
      (3)   Routine inspections.
         (a)   An inspector designated by the facility must inspect every load
before its acceptance at the facility utilizing an elevated structure, a
designated ground level inspection area, or another acceptable method as
specified in the Agency permit. In addition to a visual inspection, the
inspector must use an instrument with a photo ionization detector utilizing a
lamp of 10.6 eV or greater or an instrument with a flame ionization detector,
or other monitoring devices approved by the Agency, to inspect each load. All
instruments shall be interpreted based on the manufacturer's margin of error.
Any reading in excess of background levels using any of these instruments must
result in the rejection of the inspected load. In addition, any reading in
excess of background levels on any monitoring device used by the Agency during
an Agency inspection must result in the rejection of the inspected load.
         (b)   Cameras or other devices may be used to record the visible
contents of shipments. Where such devices are employed, their use should be
designated on a sign posted near the entrance to the facility.
      (4)   Random inspections.
         (a)   In addition to the inspections required under division (A)(3),
an inspector designated by the facility must conduct a discharge inspection of
at least one randomly selected load delivered to the facility each day. The
driver of the randomly selected load must be directed to discharge the load at
a separate, designated location within the facility. The inspector must conduct
an inspection of the discharged material that includes, but is not limited to,
additional visual inspection and additional instrument testing using the
instruments required under division (A)(3). All instruments shall be
interpreted based on the manufacturer's margin of error. Any reading in excess
of background levels using any of these instruments must result in the
rejection of the inspected load. In addition, any reading in excess of
background levels on any monitoring device used by the Agency during an Agency
inspection must result in the rejection of the inspected load.
         (b)   Cameras or other devices may be used to record the visible
contents of shipments. Where such devices are employed, their use should be
designated on a sign posted near the entrance to the facility.
      (5)   Documentation of inspection results. The documentation for each
inspection must comply with the requirements of the Agency.
         (a)   The date and time of the inspection, the date the CCDD or
uncontaminated soil was received, the weight or volume of the CCDD or
uncontaminated soil, the name of the hauler, the name of the hauling firm, the
vehicle identification number or license plate number, the source site owner
and source site operator, and the location of the site of origin of the CCDD or
uncontaminated soil;
         (b)   The results of the routine inspection required under division
(A)(3) of this section, including, but not limited to, the monitoring
instruments used, whether the load was accepted or rejected, and for rejected
loads the reason for the rejection;
         (c)   The results of any random inspection required under division (A)
(4) of this section, including, but not limited to, the monitoring instruments
used, whether the load was accepted or rejected, and for rejected loads the
reason for the rejection; and
         (d)   The name of the inspector.
      (6)   Rejection of loads.
         (a)   If material other than CCDD or uncontaminated soil is found or
suspected, the owner or operator must reject the load and present the driver of
the rejected load with written notice of the following:
            1.   That only CCDD or uncontaminated soil is accepted for use as
fill at the facility;
            2.   The reasons for rejections of the load, that the material must
not be taken to another fill operation, except as provided in the Act (ILCS Ch.
415, Act 5) or the material must be disposed of at a permitted landfill;
            3.   That, for all inspected loads, the owner or operator is
required to record and make available for Agency and village inspection, at a
minimum, the date and time of the inspection, the weight or volume of the CCDD
or uncontaminated soil, the name of the hauler, the name of the hauling firm,
the vehicle identification number or license plate number, the source site
owner and source site operator, and the location of the site of origin of the
fill; and
            4.   That a load rejected from a fill operation may be accepted by
the same fill operation or another fill operation if the requirements of the
Act are satisfied.
         (b)   The owner or operator must ensure the cleanup, transportation,
and proper disposal of any material other than CCDD or uncontaminated soil that
remains at the facility after the rejection of a load.
      (7)   The owner or operator must take special precautionary measures
prior to accepting loads from persons or sources found or suspected to be
responsible for sending or transporting material other than CCDD or
uncontaminated soil to the facility. The special precautionary measures may
include, but are not limited to, communication with the source site owner or
source site operator of the CCDD or uncontaminated soil, communication with the
PE or PG certifying pursuant to the Act, questioning the driver about the load
prior to its discharge, and increased visual inspection and instrument testing
of the load.
      (8)   If material other than CCDD or uncontaminated soil is discovered to
be improperly accepted or deposited at the facility, the owner or operator must
remove and properly dispose of the material.
      (9)   The owner or operator must ensure that all appropriate facility
personnel are properly trained in the identification of material that is not
CCDD or uncontaminated soil.
      (10)   All field measurement activities relative to equipment and
instrument operation, calibration and maintenance and data handling shall be
conducted in accordance with the following:
         (a)   Test Methods for Evaluating Solid Waste, Physical/Chemical
Methods" (SW-846), Vol. One, Ch. One (Quality Control), incorporated by
reference at 35 Ill. Adm. Code 1100.104;
         (b)   The equipment or instrument manufacturer's or vendor's published
standard operating procedures; or
         (c)   Other operating procedures specified in the Agency permit for
CCDD facility or approved by the Agency in writing for an uncontaminated soil
fill operation.
   (C)   Documentation required under this section must be kept for a minimum
of three years at the facility or in some alternative location specified in the
Agency permit for CCDD facility, or approved by the Agency in writing for an
uncontaminated soil fill operation. Documentation relating to an appeal,
litigation or other disputed claim must be maintained until at least three
years after the date of the final disposition of the appeal, litigation, or
other disputed claim. The documentation must be available for inspection and
copying by the Agency and by units of local government upon request during
normal business hours.
   (D)   For painted CCDD to be accepted for use as fill material in accordance
with §
157.309, the owner or operator of the CCDD fill operation must:
      (1)   Obtain a certification from a PE or PG that the painted CCDD
satisfies the requirements of §
157.309. The certification required under this division (D)(1) must be on forms
and in a format prescribed by the Agency. Documentation required by §
157.309 must be attached to the certification form.
      (2)   Comply with the load checking requirements.
      (3)   Comply with the document retention requirements for the PE or PG
certification and the attached documentation required under §
157.309.
(Ord. 14-20, passed 7-21-2014)
§ 157.307 SALVAGING.
   (A)   All salvaging operations must in no way interfere with the fill
operation, result in a violation, or delay the construction of final cover.
   (B)   All salvaging operations must be performed in a safe manner in
compliance with the requirements of the Act (ILCS Ch. 415, Act 5).
   (C)   Salvageable materials:
      (1)   May be accumulated onsite by an owner or operator, provided they
are managed so as not to create a nuisance, harbor vectors, cause foul odors,
or create an unsightly appearance; and
      (2)   May not be accumulated at the facility for longer than one year
unless a longer period of time is allowed under the Act or is specified in the
Agency permit.
(Ord. 14-20, passed 7-21-2014)
§ 157.308 BOUNDARY CONTROL.
   (A)   Unauthorized vehicular access to the working face of all units and to
all other areas within the boundaries of the facility must be restricted.
   (B)   A permanent sign must be posted at the entrance to the facility or
each unit stating that only CCDD or uncontaminated soil is accepted for use as
fill.
(Ord. 14-20, passed 7-21-2014)
§ 157.309 USE OF PAINTED CCDD AS FILL MATERIAL.
   (A)   For purposes of this section, uncontaminated broken concrete without
protruding metal bars, bricks, rock, stone, or reclaimed or other asphalt
pavement that has been painted (painted CCDD) may be used as fill material at a
CCDD fill operation if it is evaluated analytically under the supervision of a
PE or PG and if all requirements of this section are satisfied. Acceptance or
management of painted CCDD for any purpose other than use as fill material at a
CCDD fill operation must be in accordance with applicable law and may require
permits or beneficial use determinations from the Agency. Such other purposes
include, but are not limited to, processing of painted CCDD for reuse.
      (1)   The PE or PG must determine, on a site-specific basis, the number
and location of paint samples that will provide a representative analysis of
paint from the painted CCDD to be used as fill material.
      (2)   The PE or PG must obtain paint samples consisting of representative
paint chips or scrapings that include all layers of paint in the area sampled
and that minimize the amount of substrate in the sample.
      (3)   Paint samples must be analyzed for arsenic, cadmium, chromium
(total), lead, mercury and zinc (contaminants of concern) using the TCLP or
SPLP extraction test analytical procedures in accordance with Methods 1311 and
1312, respectively, in "Test Methods for Evaluating Solid Wastes, Physical/
Chemical Methods," USEPA Publication No. SW-846.
         (a)   Paint samples must not be composited for analysis, and
analytical results from paint samples must not be averaged.
         (b)   All quantitative analyses of paint samples must be completed by
an accredited laboratory in accordance with the requirements of 35 Ill. Adm.
Code 186 and the scope of the accreditation.
         (c)   Documentation of any chemical analysis must include, but is not
limited to:
            1.   Chain of custody control;
            2.   A copy of the lab analysis;
            3.   Accreditation status of the laboratory performing the
analysis; and
            4.   Certification by an authorized agent of the laboratory that
the analysis has been performed in accordance with 35 Ill. Adm. Code 186, the
Agency's rules for the accreditation of environmental laboratories and the
scope of the accreditation.
      (4)   For painted CCDD to be used as fill material, analytical results
for each paint sample must not exceed the chemical-specific Class I groundwater
quality standard at 35 Ill. Adm. Code 620.410 for any contaminant of concern
identified in division (A)(3) of this section.
   (B)   Notwithstanding division (A) of this section, broken concrete, asphalt
pavement, and other roadway CCDD with pavement markings, including but not
limited to striping, may be used as fill material at a CCDD fill operation
provided that:
      (1)   The pavement markings comply with IDOT specifications for pavement
markings; and
      (2)   The CCDD is accompanied by a PE or PG certification, on forms
prescribed by the Agency, affirming that the pavement markings comply with IDOT
specifications for pavement markings found at Section 1095 of IDOT's "Standard
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction".
(Ord. 14-20, passed 7-21-2014)
§ 157.310 UNCONTAMINATED SOIL FILL OPERATIONS: PROHIBITIONS.
   (A)   No person shall conduct any uncontaminated soil fill operation in
violation of the Act (ILCS Ch. 415, Act 5) or any regulations or standards
adopted by the Board.
   (B)   No person shall use soil other than uncontaminated soil as fill
material at an uncontaminated soil fill operation. (ILCS Ch. 415, Act 5. §
22.51a(b))
   (C)   Uncontaminated soil fill operations must not accept waste for use as
fill.
   (D)   Uncontaminated soil fill operations must not accept CCDD for use as
fill.
   (E)   Uncontaminated soil fill operations must not be located inside a
setback zone of a potable water supply well.
   (F)   Uncontaminated soil fill operations must not accept uncontaminated
soil with pH outside the range of 6.25 to 9.0.
(Ord. 14-20, passed 7-21-2014)
§ 157.311 UNCONTAMINATED SOIL FILL OPERATING STANDARDS.
   Uncontaminated soil fill operations are subject to all of the standards and
requirements of §§
157.303 through
157.308 with the exception of §
157.304.
(Ord. 14-20, passed 7-21-2014)
§ 157.312 COMPLIANCE WITH RULES.
   A general or clean construction or demolition debris facility shall comply
with all the applicable regulations of Title 35, Subtitle J, Chapter I, Part
1100 and Title 35, Subtitle G, Chapter I, Subchapter I, Part 807 of the
Illinois Administrative Code adopted herein by reference.
(Ord. 14-20, passed 7-21-2014)
§ 157.313 FACILITIES ACCEPTING EXCLUSIVELY GENERAL CONSTRUCTION OR DEMOLITION
DEBRIS FOR TRANSFER, STORAGE, OR TREATMENT.
   (A)   Facilities accepting exclusively general construction or demolition
debris for transfer, storage, shall be located in accordance with the village's
zoning requirements and shall be located so that no part of the facility
boundary is closer than 1,320 feet from the nearest property zoned for
primarily residential use.
   (B)   An owner or operator of a facility accepting exclusively general
construction or demolition debris for transfer, storage, or treatment shall:
      (1)   Within 48 hours after receipt of the general construction or
demolition debris at the facility, sort the general construction or demolition
debris to separate the recyclable general construction or demolition debris,
recovered wood that is processed for use as fuel, and general construction or
demolition debris that is processed for use at a landfill from the non-
recyclable general construction or demolition debris that is to be disposed of
or discarded.
      (2)   Transport off site for disposal, in accordance with all applicable
federal, state, and village requirements within 72 hours after its receipt at
the facility, all non-usable or non-recyclable general construction or
demolition debris that is not recyclable general construction or demolition
debris, recovered wood that is processed for use as fuel, or general
construction or demolition debris that is processed for use at a landfill.
      (3)   Limit the percentage of incoming non-recyclable general
construction or demolition debris to 25% or less of the total incoming general
construction or demolition debris, so that 75% or more of the general
construction or demolition debris accepted, as calculated monthly on a rolling
12-month average, consists of recyclable general construction or demolition
debris, recovered wood that is processed for use as fuel, or general
construction or demolition debris that is processed for use at a landfill
except that general construction or demolition debris processed for use at a
landfill shall not exceed 35% of the general construction or demolition debris
accepted on a rolling 12-month average basis. The percentages in this division
(B)(3) shall be calculated by weight, using scales located at the facility that
are certified under the Weights and Measures Act.
      (4)   Within six months after its receipt at the facility, transport:
         (a)   All non-putrescible recyclable general construction or
demolition debris for recycling or disposal; and
         (b)   All non-putrescible general construction or demolition debris
that is processed for use at a landfill to a municipal solid waste landfill
unit for use or disposal.
      (5)   Within 45 days after its receipt at the facility, transport:
         (a)   All putrescible or combustible recyclable general construction
or demolition debris (excluding recovered wood that is processed for use as
fuel) for recycling or disposal;
         (b)   All recovered wood that is processed for use as fuel to an
intermediate processing facility for sizing, to a combustion facility for use
as fuel, or to a disposal facility; and
         (c)   All putrescible general construction or demolition debris that
is processed for use at a landfill to a municipal solid waste landfill unit for
use or disposal.
      (6)   Employ tagging and recordkeeping procedures to (i) demonstrate
compliance with this section and (ii) identify the source and transporter of
material accepted by the facility.
      (7)   Control odor, noise, combustion of materials, disease vectors,
dust, and litter.
      (8)   Control, manage, and dispose of any storm water runoff and leachate
generated at the facility in accordance with applicable federal, state, and
local requirements.
      (9)   Control access to the facility.
      (10)   Comply with all applicable federal, state, or village requirements
for the handling, storage, transportation, or disposal of asbestos-containing
material or other material accepted at the facility that is not general
construction or demolition debris.
      (11)   Submit to the Agency and village at least 30 days prior to the
initial acceptance of general construction or demolition debris at the
facility, on forms provided by the Agency, the following information:
         (a)   The name, address, and telephone number of both the facility
owner and operator;
         (b)   The street address and location of the facility;
         (c)   A description of facility operations;
         (d)   A description of the tagging and recordkeeping procedures the
facility will employ to (i) demonstrate compliance with this section and (ii)
identify the source and transporter of any material accepted by the facility;
         (e)   The name and location of the disposal sites to be used for the
disposal of any general construction or demolition debris received at the
facility that must be disposed of;
         (f)   The name and location of an individual, facility, or business to
which recyclable materials will be transported;
         (g)   The name and location of intermediate processing facilities or
combustion facilities to which recovered wood that is processed for use as fuel
will be transported; and
         (h)   Other information as specified on the form provided by the
Agency.
      (12)   On or after August 24, 2009 (the effective date of Public Act 96-
611), obtain a permit issued by the Agency prior to the initial acceptance of
general construction or demolition debris at the facility.
      (13)   When any of the information contained or processes described in
the initial notification form submitted to the Agency under division (B)(11) of
this section changes, the owner and operator shall submit an updated form
within 14 days of the change.
   (C)   For purposes of this section, the term RECYCLABLE GENERAL CONSTRUCTION
OR DEMOLITION DEBRIS means general construction or demolition debris that has
been rendered reusable and is reused or that would otherwise be disposed of or
discarded but is collected, separated, or processed and returned to the
economic mainstream in the form of raw materials or products. RECYCLABLE
GENERAL CONSTRUCTION OR DEMOLITION DEBRIS does not include (i) general
construction or demolition debris processed for use as fuel, incinerated,
burned, buried, or otherwise used as fill material or(ii) general construction
or demolition debris that is processed for use at a landfill.
   (D)   For purposes of this section, TREATMENT means processing designed to
alter the physical nature of the general construction or demolition debris,
including but not limited to size reduction, crushing, grinding, or
homogenization, but does not include processing designed to change the chemical
nature of the general construction or demolition debris.
   (E)   For purposes of this section, RECOVERED WOOD THAT IS PROCESSED FOR USE
AS FUEL means wood that has been salvaged from general construction or
demolition debris and processed for use as fuel, as authorized by the
applicable state or federal environmental regulatory authority, and supplied
only to intermediate processing facilities for sizing, or to combustion
facilities for use as fuel, that have obtained all necessary waste management
and air permits for handling and combustion of the fuel.
   (F)   For purposes of this section, NON-RECYCLABLE GENERAL CONSTRUCTION OR
DEMOLITION DEBRIS does not include recovered wood that is processed for use as
fuel or general construction or demolition debris that is processed for use at
a landfill.
   (G)   Recyclable general construction or demolition debris, recovered wood
that is processed for use as fuel, and general construction or demolition
debris that is processed for use at a landfill shall not be considered as
meeting the 75% diversion requirement for purposes of division (B)(3) of this
section if sent for disposal at the end of the applicable retention period.
   (H)   For the purposes of this section, GENERAL CONSTRUCTION OR DEMOLITION
DEBRIS THAT IS PROCESSED FOR USE AT A LANDFILL means general construction or
demolition debris that is processed for use at a municipal solid waste landfill
unit as alternative daily cover, road building material, or drainage structure
building material in accordance with the municipal solid waste landfill unit's
waste disposal permit issued by the Agency under the Act (ILCS Ch. 415, Act 5).
   (I)   For purposes of the 75% diversion requirement under division (B)(3) of
this section, owners and operators of facilities accepting exclusively general
construction or demolition debris for transfer, storage, or treatment may
multiply by two the amount of accepted asphalt roofing shingles that are
transferred to a facility for recycling in accordance with a beneficial use
determination issued under Section 22.54 of the Act (ILCS Ch. 415, Act 5, §
22.54). The owner or operator of the facility accepting exclusively general
construction or demolition debris for transfer, storage, or treatment must
maintain receipts from the shingle recycling facility that document the amounts
of asphalt roofing shingles transferred for recycling in accordance with the
beneficial use determination. All receipts must be maintained for a minimum of
three years and must be made available to the Agency for inspection and copying
during normal business hours.
(Ord. 14-20, passed 7-21-2014)
§ 157.314 NOTICES; VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   Notice to person responsible. Whenever the code official determines
that there has been a violation of §§
157.300 through
157.313 or has grounds to believe that a violation has occurred, notice shall
be given in the manner prescribed in division (B) and to the person responsible
for the violation.
   (B)   Form of notice. Such notice shall be in writing, include a description
of the real estate sufficient for identification, include a statement of the
violation or violations, include a correction order allowing a reasonable time
to make the repairs and improvements required to bring the property, structure
or use into compliance with the provisions of this subchapter. The reasonable
time to correct the alleged violation(s) shall be for not less than 60 days
unless in the opinion of the code official or the Village President and Board
of Trustees there is imminent danger of failure or collapse of a building or
structure, or when any structure or part of a structure has fallen and life is
endangered by the occupancy of the structure or when there is actual or
potential danger due to explosive fumes or vapors or the presence of toxic
fumes, gases or materials, or operation of defective or dangerous equipment.
   (C)   Method of service. Such notice shall be deemed to be properly served
to the responsible party if a copy thereof is:
      (1)   Delivered personally;
      (2)   Sent by certified mail addressed to the last known address; or
      (3)   If the notice is returned showing that the letter was not
delivered, a copy thereof shall be posted in a conspicuous place in or about
the structure or property affected by such notice.
   (D)   Prosecution of violation. Any person failing to comply with a notice
of violation or order shall be deemed guilty of a quasi-criminal offense and
the violation shall be deemed a strict liability offense including but not
limited to the filing of a complaint in the village's administrative
adjudication system.
   (E)   Abatement of violation. The imposition of penalties in a quasi-
criminal proceeding shall not preclude the Village Attorney, with direction
from the Village President and Board of Trustees, from instituting appropriate
action to restrain, correct or abate a violation or stop an illegal act,
conduct, business or utilization of the premises.
   (F)   Violation penalties. Any person who shall violate a provision of §§
157.300 through
157.313, or fail to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof,
shall be prosecuted within the limits provided by state law or village
ordinance. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served
shall be deemed a separate offense.
(Ord. 14-20, passed 7-21-2014)
§ 157.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates, disobeys, omits neglects
or refuses to comply with or who resists the enforcement of any of the
provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be fined not less than $25,
nor more than $500, for each offense.
   (B)   Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a
separate offense.
   (C)   The Building Inspector is hereby designated and authorized to enforce
this chapter.
(1981 Code, Art. XII, F) (Ord. passed 12- -1986; Am. Ord. 06-03, passed 2-6-
2006)
CHAPTER 158: MINIMUM LANDSCAPING, SCREENING AND TREE PRESERVATION STANDARDS
Section.
   
158.01   Purpose and scope
   
158.02   Definitions
   
158.03   Plan requirements
   
158.04   Landscape requirements
   
158.05   Tree preservation
   
158.06   Guide for landscape plan review
   
158.07   Variations
   
Appendix: Diagrams
§ 158.01 PURPOSE AND SCOPE.
   (A)   These standards are established to create attractive and harmonious
landscape, screening and tree preservation standards for the development of
property in the village. The intent of the required plan review is to ensure
that the village remains attractive, safe and comfortable. This chapter shall
govern all developments except detached single and attached two-family
residential subdivisions.
   (B)   Parkway trees along all public streets shall be provided in all new
developments including detached single and attached two-family residential
subdivisions in accordance with the requirements set forth in the village
Forestry Standards and Specifications for the village.
   (C)   The goals of these landscaping standards are to minimize the harmful
impact of noise created by vehicular traffic in areas of new development, to
reduce the negative impact of wind which spreads dust and debris across non-
landscaped areas, to control the intrusion of excess artificial lighting at
night by lighting fixtures and automobile traffic, to reduce the excessive heat
generated by large areas of pavement, and to provide a portion of the
development with a pervious surface which will allow for a moderate amount of
percolation of storm water into the ground.
   (D)   In the event an interpretation of this chapter is necessary, the
Village Board shall make such interpretation and may secure professional advice
from an Illinois registered landscape architect.
(Ord. 05-02, passed 1-18-2005)
§ 158.02 DEFINITIONS.
   The definitions noted below apply uniquely to this chapter.
   EXTERIOR PARKWAY. The unpaved portion of the public street right-of-way in
front of a property, located between the edge of pavement or back of curb and
the sidewalk (see Diagram 1 of the Appendix).
   FOUNDATION AREA. The ground area immediately adjacent to a building on all
sides thereof. Foundation areas extend a minimum of five feet in all directions
from the foundation of the building (see Diagram 2 of the Appendix).
   INTERIOR LANDSCAPE AREA. The open space area behind and between buildings on
a site with multiple structures, excluding the interior parkway, foundation
area and perimeter landscape area.
   INTERIOR PARKWAY. A landscaped open space area extending from the right-of-
way line to the closest site improvement, a minimum of ten feet from all street
rights-of-way (see Diagram 1 of the Appendix).
   LANDSCAPED OPEN SPACE. Land covered by trees, shrubs, turf grasses, or
ground cover impervious surfaces, such as buildings, parking lots, walkways, or
patios are not considered landscaped open space.
   PERIMETER LANDSCAPE AREA. An area around the periphery or outer perimeter of
a property which does not front on a public road (see Diagrams 1 and 2 of the
Appendix). The perimeter landscape area extends from the property line to the
nearest building face, parking area, or access drive, exclusive of the
foundation area and the interior parkway.
   PROTECTED TREE. An existing tree with a trunk diameter of six inches or
greater which will remain after construction representative examples of which
are listed in §
158.06, Table 3. The final determination of whether an existing tree is a
protected tree hereunder shall be subject to review by the village.
(Ord. 05-02, passed 1-18-2005)
§ 158.03 PLAN REQUIREMENTS.
   The following shall establish the standards for the preparation and
submission of required plans for landscape, screening and tree preservation.
   (A)   Landscape plan required. A landscape plan approved by the village
staff on the basis of the standards set forth in this chapter shall be required
for all projects requiring site plan review and/or a special use permit.
   (B)   Content of landscape plan. All landscape plans shall be prepared by an
Illinois registered landscape architect and shall include or have attached
thereto the following information:
      (1)   North arrow, scale, name and address of preparer.
      (2)   The location and dimensions of all existing and proposed buildings,
structures, parking lots and driveways, roadways and rights-of-way, sidewalks,
bicycle paths, ground signs, refuse disposal areas, fences, free-standing
electrical equipment, light fixtures, other surface utility structures, and
other free-standing structural features, tot lots and other recreational or
amenity facilities, setbacks and easements. The landscape plan shall be drawn
at a scale not smaller than one inch equals 20 feet (1" = 20'). Street
plantings as required by the subdivision control ordinance can be drawn at the
scale of the engineering drawings.
      (3)   The location, quantity and size of all trees, shrubs and ground
cover with both the scientific and common names shall be listed. The height and
trunk diameter of existing trees and the height and coverage of existing shrubs
will be shown.
      (4)   Existing and proposed contours, including the location of all
proposed berming, at a one foot contour interval. Also included shall be the
location, extent and general elevations of all storm water detention or
retention areas and drainage ways.
      (5)   (a)   The designation, location, type and size of all existing
trees four inches and larger in diameter measured one foot above natural grade.
Any trees to be removed should be clearly identified with their replacement
shown. Trees measuring between two and one-half inches and four inches in
diameter which will be used to meet landscape requirements shall also be
indicated.
         (b)   Where existing trees are grouped in a dense cluster, an overall
tree mass may be measured for size and variety in tabular form without a
specific delineation of the location of individual trees. If this technique is
used, trees identified as "protected trees" must be tagged on-site and
identified on the plan in tabular form. The sum of all such protected trees may
then be used to meet site landscape requirements. The provisions to be
implemented for preserving existing trees should be specified on the landscape
plan. If required for reasons of clarity, this information may be placed on an
additional illustration or prepared as a tree protection plan.
      (6)   Details of all fences and walls proposed to be constructed on the
site.
      (7)   Elevations, cross-sections and other site construction details
determined to be necessary by the village. Maximum allowable finished lawn or
mowable slope for any landscaped area will be 3:1.
   (C)   Timing of landscape improvements.
      (1)   All required landscaping shall be installed prior to the issuance
of a certificate of occupancy. The best times for planting in this area are
early spring and early fall, normally between the dates of April 15 to June 15
and August 30 to October 30. Plants installed in the summer must provide for
adequate irrigation methods to reduce the risk of dehydration.
      (2)   If weather conditions or other circumstances beyond the owner's or
developer's control prevent installation of all or portions of the landscape
materials and all other requirements for the issuance of a certificate of
occupancy have been met, a letter of credit or a performance guarantee approved
by the Village Attorney to insure completion of the approved landscaping shall
be filed with the Village Treasurer. The amount of the performance guarantee
and the required completion date shall be approved by the Village Administrator
based on a cost estimate for the approved landscaping plan remaining to be
completed prepared by an Illinois registered landscape architect engaged by the
owner/developer. If such a letter of credit or performance guarantee has
already been submitted for the proposed landscape improvements, the Village
Board may permit the developer to extend the performance guarantee for an
additional period of time acceptable to the Village Board.
(Ord. 05-02, passed 1-18-2005)
§ 158.04 LANDSCAPE REQUIREMENTS.
   The following shall establish standards for the landscape improvements
required to be installed as part of the development of new buildings,
structures and uses of land governed by this chapter:
   (A)   General landscape standards. Every development shall provide
sufficient landscaping so that:
      (1)   Neighboring properties are shielded from the negative air
pollution, dust, debris, artificial light, noise and visual influence of that
development;
      (2)   The development is shielded from the negative impacts of adjacent
uses.
      (3)   The appearance and desirability of the development contributes to
the overall attractiveness and economic health of the village.
   (B)   Minimum landscaped open space. For each parcel of land to be
developed, the minimum landscaped open space shall comply with standards
established in division (D) of this section. In zoning districts for which no
minimum landscaped open space requirements are specified, a minimum of 15% of
the total parcel shall be devoted to landscaped open space area. Division (D)
of this section details landscape requirements for various portions of the
total landscaped open space.
   (C)   Flexibility in the administration of required landscape standards. 
      (1)   To meet the objectives outlined in division (D) of this section,
the following landscape requirements are hereby established. These standards
provide specific requirements for site landscaping. However, the village
recognizes that, because of the wide variety of types of developments and the
relationships between them, some flexibility in applying standards set forth in
division (D) of this section are appropriate as long as the intent of specified
requirements are met. Any deviation from the requirements of any specific
chapter shall require a variation, which must be approved by the Village Board.
      (2)   Whenever the village allows or requires deviation from the
requirements set forth in this chapter, it shall enter on the face of the
landscape plan the reasons for allowing or requiring deviation from the
requirements set forth herein. The maximum amount of any deviation or variation
will be 20%.
   (D)   Types of landscaped areas. 
      (1)   This chapter regulates landscaping of five distinct areas of a
parcel as follows:
         (a)   Interior parkways;
         (b)   Perimeter areas;
         (c)   Foundation areas;
         (d)   Parking lots; and
         (e)   Site interiors.
      (2)   Diagrams 1, 2 and 3 of the Appendix provide graphic illustrations
of each area. Each area shall be landscaped in accordance with the following
criteria:
         (a)   Interior parkway landscaping.
            1.   All interior parkways shall be planted by the owner or
developer in all zoning districts as identified in the following table:
Table 1
Interior Parkway Requirements
Zoning Classification Minimum Interior Parkway (feet)
Table 1
Interior Parkway Requirements
Zoning Classification                      Minimum Interior Parkway (feet)
R-4 Attached Dwellings Exceeding Two Units 10
R-5 Multi-Family Residence                 10
B-1 Downtown Business                      Considered on case-to-case basis
B-2 Local Business                         10
B-3 Service Business                       10
B-4 Heavy Service Business                 30
O-D Office District                        30
M-1 Limited Manufacturing District         10
PUD Planned Unit Development               10 - 100
 
Note: Property zoned PUD shall meet or exceed perimeter screening required of
the most appropriate standard zoning district as determined by the Village
Administrator.
            2.   Except for access drives, interior parkways shall be
landscaped as follows:
               a.   One tree per 30 feet of street frontage shall be provided.
At least 50% of the required trees shall be large deciduous or evergreen trees
as identified in the recommended trees, shrubs and ground cover list in §
158.06, Table 3. Tree type may vary depending on design intent. However, as a
general rule, monoculture of an individual tree specie is discouraged. A
grouping of three to five trees of the same species alternating between
different specie groups will ensure the best protection from plant material
diseases.
               b.   In addition, shrub planting shall screen the parking area
from the roadway. This shrub planting shall be a minimum of three feet in
height and be located within the interior parkway. A maximum of 25% of the
parking lot frontage may be left unscreened to permit design flexibility (see
Diagram 4 in the Appendix). However, when the landscape plan indicates a single
row of shrubs, the entire parking lot frontage shall be screened. The remainder
of the interior parkway shall be planted with ground cover, flowers, or grass.
         (b)   Perimeter landscape area.
            1.   The appropriateness of proposed perimeter landscaping will
depend upon the relationship between the proposed use of the property and
adjacent properties. Three types of perimeter screening have been defined. The
particular type of screening that will be required shall depend upon the
relationship of the proposed land use and the adjacent land use. Type 1
screening shall generally be required between residential and nonresidential
uses. Type 2 perimeter landscape screening shall generally be required to
provide screening of parking areas between adjacent nonresidential uses. Type 3
perimeter landscape screening shall generally be required between low and high
density residential areas.
            2.   Tables 2A and 2B shall be used to determine the requirements
for perimeter screening between uses. Where the adjacent property has already
been developed, the required screening shall be governed by the existing use.
Table 2A details screening and buffering requirements where the adjacent
property has been developed. In cases where a mixed use development exists on
the adjacent parcel, the predominate use on that site shall determine the
required screening.
            3.   Table 2B shall be used to determine required screening where
the adjacent property is undeveloped. Current zoning shall determine the
appropriate screening treatment. The comprehensive plan shall be used to
determine the anticipated use and the resulting screening requirements for
adjoining properties not annexed to the village at the present time.
Table 2A Perimeter Screening Requirements (Adjacent to an Existing Use)
                                 Adjacent Property Existing Use
Proposed Use Res. Res. MF/Office Commercial Industrial          Public
Table 2A Perimeter Screening Requirements (Adjacent to an Existing Use)
                                       Adjacent Property Existing Use
Proposed Use       Res. Res. MF/Office Commercial Industrial          Public
Single or 2-Family 4    4    4         4          4                   4
Res., Detached
Multi-Family       3    4    4         4          1                   4
Residence
Office             1    2    2         2          2                   2
Commercial         1    1    2         2          2                   2
Industrial         1    1    2         2          2                   2
Public             2    2    2         2          2                   2
Screening (Diagram 4)
1. Type 1
2. Type 2
3. Type 3
4. No screening required
When a proposed use is adjacent to a property zoned PUD, the Village
Administrator shall determine appropriate screening required based on the
most appropriate standard zoning district.
 
 
Table 2B Perimeter Screening Requirements (Adjacent to Undeveloped
Property)
                                      Adjacent Property
                                      Existing Use
Proposed Use        E R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 R-5 M-1           O-D B-1 B-2 B-3 B-4
Single or 2- Family 4 4   4   4   4   4   4             4   4   4   4
Res., Detached
Multi-Family        3 3   3   3   4   4   4             4   4   4   4
Residence
Table 2B Perimeter Screening Requirements (Adjacent to Undeveloped Property)
                               Adjacent Property Existing
                               Use
Proposed Use E R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 R-5 M-1                    O-D B-1 B-2 B-3 B-4
Table 2B Perimeter Screening Requirements (Adjacent to Undeveloped Property)
                               Adjacent Property Existing
                               Use
Proposed Use E R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 R-5 M-1                    O-D B-1 B-2 B-3 B-4
Commercial   1 1   1   1   1   2   2                      2   2   2   2
Industrial   1 1   1   1   1   1   2                      2   2   2   2
Public       2 2   2   2   2   2   2                      2   2   2   2   2
Screening (Diagram 4)
1. Type 1
2. Type 2
3. Type 3
4. No screening required
When a proposed use is adjacent to a property zoned PUD, the Village
Administrator shall determine appropriate screening required based on the
most appropriate standard zoning district.
 
            4.   Minimum perimeter landscape requirements shall be as follows:
               a.   Type 1 screening. Type 1 perimeter landscape requirements
are designed to provide a substantial buffer between uses. Where Type 1
screening is required on Table 2A or 2B, one of the following three buffering
alternatives shall be required. The property owner may select the buffering
alternative which best meets the configuration of the site and the proposed
development. All fences, walls and hedges shall comply with village
requirements before approval.
                  i.   Alternate A: The buffering area shall be a minimum of
eight feet in width. An opaque brick or other approved masonry wall six feet
high shall be constructed along the entire perimeter, excluding area within the
required front yard setback. The wall may be continued within the front yard
provided the height is reduced to three feet. If the proposed use is for a
mining operation or for related building or structure for screening, crushing,
mining, washing or storage, the required masonry wall shall be eight feet high.
In addition, four inch caliper deciduous trees in a quantity equal to one tree
per 50 feet of perimeter length shall be provided. Tree spacing shall be
determined by tree species and design considerations.
                  ii.   Alternate B: A minimum 12 foot buffer area shall be
required for this alternative. A fence of wood or other approved material six
feet high and at least 75% opaque shall be constructed along the entire
perimeter, excluding area within the required front yard setback. The fence may
be continued within the front yard provided the height is reduced to three
feet. If the proposed use is for a mining operation or for related building or
structure for screening, crushing, mining, washing or storage, the required
masonry wall shall be eight feet high. In addition, one shrub per ten feet long
of perimeter length shall be planted within the buffer area. Deciduous trees
with a three inch caliper shall be provided in a quantity equal to one tree per
40 feet of perimeter length. Tree location shall be determined by tree species
and design considerations.
                  iii.   Alternate C: A minimum 25 foot buffer area shall be
required. A berm at least three feet in height with undulating top and sides,
with a maximum three to one (3:1) slope, shall be constructed along the entire
perimeter. Breaks in the berm may be provided to accommodate drainage. The berm
shall be planted with one shrub per ten feet of perimeter length four feet or
greater in height to provide screening along at least 75% of the perimeter
length. Trees with a two and one-half inch caliper shall be provided in a
quantity equal to one tree per 40 feet of perimeter length. Tree spacing shall
be determined by tree species and design considerations. Up to 25% of the
required trees in this screening alternative may be small deciduous trees (crab
apples, service berries etc.) with a two inch caliper or six foot height.
               b.   Type 2 screening. Type 2 perimeter landscape screening is
generally required between adjacent non-residential uses to screen parking
areas from adjacent uses. Where a parking lot will be placed along a perimeter
such that parked cars will face the abutting property, shrubs and trees shall
be required. Shrubs shall be provided along at least 50% of the length of the
parking areas. Where parking will be placed adjacent to a residential use,
shrub screening shall be continuous along the entire parking area and a minimum
of six feet high. Shrubs shall be a minimum of three feet in height when
screening a parking lot from adjacent non-residential uses. Trees shall be
provided in a quantity equal to one large deciduous tree per 40 feet of parking
lot length. Tree spacing shall be determined by tree species and design
considerations. Up to 25% of the required trees in this screening shall be
continuous along the entire parking area and a minimum of six feet high. Shrubs
shall be a minimum of three feet in height when screening a parking lot from
adjacent non-residential uses. Up to 25% of the required trees in this
screening alternative may be small deciduous trees (Crab apples, etc.). If the
proposed use is for a mining operation or for related building or structure for
screening, crushing, mining, washing or storage, an eight foot high fence or
wall shall be provided along the perimeter in lieu of parking lot screening.
               c.   Type 3 screening. Type 3 perimeter landscape screening is
generally required between low and high density residential areas. Where a Type
3 screen is required according to Table 1, berming, trees and shrubs shall be
provided to create a visual separation between properties. Appropriate berm
height will depend on the width of the landscape area, with no berm having a
slope greater than three to one (3:1). A minimum of 60% of the length of the
perimeter shall be planted with two foot shrubs that will reach a height of at
least six feet. Trees shall be required in a quantity equal to one tree per 40
feet of lot line length. Tree spacing shall be determined by tree species and
design considerations. Up to 25% of the required trees in this screening
alternative may be small deciduous trees (crab apples, etc.).
         (c)   Foundation area landscaping. A minimum five foot wide landscape
area is required adjacent to all building walls (exclusive of driveways, access
walks, and service and delivery areas). Planting should emphasize ground plane
transitions and softening large expanses of building walls, when possible,
accenting building entrances and architectural features, and screening
mechanical equipment. Where extended roofs or canopies are used to provide a
covered walkway adjacent to a building, foundation plantings are not required.
However, landscaping is recommended to separate vehicular areas from buildings.
         (d)   Parking lot landscaping. Landscaping shall be required within
all parking lots containing 20 or more parking spaces to meet the following
standards:
            1.   There shall be a minimum seven foot wide (measured from back
of curb) curbed planting island at the end of every parking row. The depth of
the planting island shall be equal to the depth of the parking stalls.
            2.   To break up long expanses of parking rows, landscape islands
are required. One of the following three alternatives shall be used to divide
rows of ten or more parking spaces.
               a.   Alternative A. A continuous curbed landscape island between
rows may be provided in lieu of full stall planting islands between parking
bays. Where such a continuous island is provided, it shall be a minimum of
eight feet in width measured back to back of curbs and shall contain a minimum
of one tree for every ten parking spaces (see Diagram 6 in Appendix).
               b.   Alternative B. A maximum of ten parking spaces will be
permitted in any length of parking bay between planting islands. A curbed
island at least seven feet wide and as deep as the parking stalls shall be
provided to divide the bay length. There shall be a minimum of two large
deciduous trees per island. Tree branching shall start no less than six feet
above the pavement measured from pavement level.
               c.   Alternative C. Smaller curbed islands at the head of and
between parking stalls may be permitted. If smaller curbed planting islands are
appropriate, they shall be a minimum of six and one-half feet by six and one-
half feet, measured from back of curb to back of curb and shall be provided at
the rate of two small islands for every full size island required in
Alternative B. The parking stall width adjacent to the small islands shall be
increased to a minimum width of 11 feet. There shall be a minimum of one large
deciduous tree per island. Branching shall start no less than six feet above
the pavement measured from pavement level.
            3.   In addition to required trees, an appropriate planting of
shrubs, ground cover plants, flowers, sodded lawn and mulch shall be provided
within all landscape islands. To insure visibility, shrubs shall not exceed a
mature height of 30 inches above pavement on landscape islands at the end of
parking rows (see Diagrams 7 and 8 in the Appendix).
         (e)   Site interior landscaping.
            1.   On parcels with more than one structure, the open space
between buildings shall be appropriately landscaped to provide:
               a.   Screening of adjacent dwelling units.
               b.   Screening and shading to improve energy efficiency.
               c.   A visually appealing living environment.
            2.   The planting of trees is the most effective means of defining
and enhancing open space areas. As the appropriate quantity and location of
trees will be dependent upon the site and building configuration of individual
developments, each project will be evaluated independently. However, open space
areas within the interior of a site should generally contain a minimum of one
tree per 5,000 square feet of open space.
            3.   Other landscape features, including shrubs, flowers, ground
cover, grasses, and berming should be used as appropriate to enhance the
overall appearance and function of the open space area.
   (E)   Landscape design requirements. Functional activities within and
adjoining the development site must be considered in the design of landscape
improvements, including consideration of the following:
      (1)   Service area screening. All service areas shall be screened from
view through the use of evergreen plant materials, masonry walls or fences
compatible with the proposed building design.
         (a)   Trash dumpsters and other waste receptacles or equipment shall
be screened with three sided brick or other approved masonry walls being a
minimum of six feet in height and not less than one foot above the height of
the proposed trash containers and other storage devices with a solid,
attractive single or double access gate of the required height on the remaining
side as access to the trash facility. The trash enclosure shall be designed to
complement the architectural character and features of the principal building
on the site.
         (b)   All utility equipment (meters, transformers, boxes, pedestals,
etc.) shall be provided with appropriate planting screens. A note which
specifies that all equipment will be screened will be required when the
location of the equipment is not available. All dish antennas shall be screened
from view of adjoining properties and abutting streets by an opaque wall,
fence, hedge or berm.
         (c)   All garage doors and loading areas shall be screened so as not
to be visible from adjoining rights-of-way and property zoned for any
residential use.
         (d)   All outdoor storage facilities for fuel, raw materials, building
products and construction equipment within 500 feet of a residential district,
or within view of an adjacent roadway, shall be effectively screened and
enclosed by a solid wall or fence at least eight feet in height. If materials
to be stored outdoors are in excess of eight feet in height, then landscape
screening shall be provided in addition to the fence or wall installed along
the outside perimeter of the fence or wall, equal or exceeding the height of
the materials to be stored outdoors.
      (2)   Intersection visibility.
         (a)   Landscaping must be designed and installed to minimize potential
obstruction of critical sight lines.
         (b)   Landscape planting shall be so designed as to avoid obstruction
of a motorist's vision at the intersections of outlet access drives and ring
roads, access roads, or municipal streets.
         (c)   Unobstructed visibility between two feet and six feet above the
height of the paved surface of the access road must be maintained at all
intersections. To maintain this visibility, no shrubs or other landscape
material which will reach a mature height greater than two feet shall be
permitted within ten feet of the right-of-way of a primary thoroughfare, or
five feet from the right-of-way of a lesser roadway, for a distance of 40 feet
from the right-of-way intersection (see Diagram 9 in the Appendix). Trees are
allowed in these critical visibility areas if the lowest branching begins not
less than six feet above the pavement.
      (3)   Parking area island planters. All parking area island planters
should be over-excavated to a minimum depth of two feet for their entire width
and length, backfilled with an appropriate mix of topsoil, peat moss and
nutrients to replace the excavated material, and shall be compacted, leaving a
crowned or mounded top a minimum of six inches above the curb bordering the
planter island.
      (4)   Berming. Berming shall not exceed a maximum slope of three to one
(3:1) when mowing maintenance will be required.
      (5)   Mulching. Mulch materials shall be shredded bark or other organic
material best suited for the village. Lava rock or large diameter (1 ½ inch
diameter plus) bark chips ("chunk bark") are not acceptable. Gravel and stone
mulches are not permitted, unless specifically approved in writing by the
village. Mulch beds shall extend a minimum of two feet beyond the center of a
shrub and/or tree.
      (6)   Wood fence requirements. All wood fences proposed to be used to
meet perimeter screening requirements shall be of red cedar, redwood, cypress,
or other approved decay-resistant treated wood, at least six feet high, and of
solid construction. Wood fences shall not be less than 75% opaque, with all
supporting posts exposed to the lot interior. Stockade-type fences are not
permitted.
(Ord. 05-02, passed 1-18-2005)
§ 158.05 TREE PRESERVATION.
   An existing tree survey is required in order to preserve specimen trees and
forested areas throughout the village:
   (A)   (1)   To encourage the preservation of existing trees, tree planting
requirements for new developments will be reduced based on the number and size
of existing trees that are so protected as to assure their survival. The
following table outlines a credit system whereby protected trees are credited
against the total number of trees required for a development:
 
   Existing Tree Diamet   Credit Applied to New Tree Planting Requirement
2 ½" or less             No credit
2 ½" - 4"                1.0
4 ½" - 7"                2.0
7 ¼"- 15 ¾"             3.0
16" or more               5.0
 
      (2)   Tree diameters shall be measured 12 inches above natural grade, the
total credit shall be rounded down to the nearest whole number.
      (3)   Existing multi-stemmed plant material will be reviewed by the
village on a case-by-case basis.
   (B)   Should any required tree designated for preservation in the landscape
plan die or be removed within 18 months of issuance of certificate of
occupancy, the owner or developer shall replace it with three inch minimum
caliper trees in proportion to the tree credit originally granted. (For
example, assume a 15 inch diameter tree was proposed for preservation and
credit was given to the property owner exempting the planting of three new
trees. If this tree should later die, then three inch caliper trees shall be
planted to replace the 15 inch tree.)
   (C)   Guide for protecting existing trees. To better ensure the survival of
existing trees, the developer should implement the following guidelines:
      (1)   Protect trees with a minimum three foot high construction fence
during the entire construction period. Fencing should be placed at or beyond
the dripline of protected trees. Where this is not feasible, fencing should be
a minimum of ten feet from the center of any given tree in all directions.
Bright colored plastic fencing is preferred.
      (2)   Do not permit the soil around existing trees to be compacted by
heavy equipment. Do not pile dirt or other materials beneath the crown of
trees.
      (3)   Keep fires or other sources of heat well clear of existing trees.
      (4)   Repair damaged roots and branches immediately. Exposed roots should
be covered with topsoil to a depth that matches soil coverage prior to
disturbance. Whenever roots are destroyed, a proportional amount of branches
must be pruned so the tree does not transpire more water than it takes in.
Injured trees must be thoroughly watered during the ensuing growing year.
      (5)   Prune all existing trees surrounded by paving to prevent
dehydration.
      (6)   The existing elevations around protected trees should be maintained
to the fullest extent possible. Where grade changes of four inches or more are
required within the dripline of a protected tree, low retaining walls or other
appropriate tree protection techniques should be used to insure the long-term
health of the tree.
(Ord. 05-02, passed 1-18-2005)
§ 158.06 GUIDE FOR LANDSCAPE PLAN REVIEW.
   The following guidelines shall be considered in reviewing the design and
implementation of landscape plans in conjunction with review of site plans and
special use permits.
   (A)   Standards for plant materials. Materials planted in any development
shall comply with the following requirements:
      (1)   The quality of plant material selected shall meet or exceed the
guidelines in the latest edition of the American Standard of Nursery Stock
published by the American Association of Nurserymen unless otherwise indicated.
      (2)   No artificial plants of any type shall be used to meet the
requirements of this chapter in any landscape area within the parcel.
      (3)   Minimum sizes for plant materials at time of installation for all
landscape areas shall be as follows:
         (a)   Deciduous trees shall be a minimum size of two and one-half
inches caliper when installed. Evergreen trees shall be a minimum six feet in
height when installed.
         (b)   Deciduous shrubs (other than dwarf varieties) shall be a minimum
of 36 inches in height at time of installation if used as a perimeter screen
planting, and 30 inches in height for all other installations. Dwarf varieties,
evergreen shrubs, and plants normally measured by spread shall be a minimum of
24 inches in both height and spread.
         (c)   Ground cover shall be planted at a minimum of 12 inches on
center to ensure that complete coverage can be obtained within two years after
date of installation.
         (d)   Flower beds are encouraged and shall be mass planted in
acceptable areas to create color, texture and interest.
      (4)   Property owners shall be responsible for maintaining all
landscaping shown on the approved landscape plan throughout the life of the
development. All dead plants shall be replaced with plants that meet the
original requirements. The plant replacement shall be completed in the next
horticulturally advisable planting season for the species being replaced after
the village staff has notified the owner that replacement is necessary. Annual
flower beds shall be replanted each year with flowers adapted to the village's
climatic conditions.
   (B)   Guide for planting trees. The trees recommended in division (D) of
this section have minimal maintenance requirements. However, all trees must
receive a certain degree of care, especially during and immediately after
planting. To protect an investment in new trees, the owner or developer should
ensure that proper horticultural techniques are followed. The following
recommendations are provided as a guide for tree planting based on current
horticultural practice.
      (1)   The best times for planting are early spring and early fall. Plants
planted in the summer run the risk of dehydration if not properly irrigated.
      (2)   Plant trees and shrubs at least three feet from the back of curb
along head-in parking spaces to prevent damage from car overhangs. Mulch, lawn
or planted ground cover shall be utilized in this three foot area. Aligning
trees with the stripes between parking stalls will further help avoid damage.
      (3)   Dig tree pits at least one foot wider than the root ball.
      (4)   Especially in areas where construction activity has compacted the
soil, the bottom of the pit should be scarified or loosened with a pick ax or
shovel.
      (5)   After a pit is dug, observe subsurface drainage conditions. Where
poor drainage exists, special provisions should be made to ensure proper
drainage around the tree.
      (6)   Backfill should include a proper mix of soil, peat moss, and
nutrients. All roots must be completely covered. Backfill should be thoroughly
watered as it is placed around the roots.
      (7)   Plants should remain plumb and level. Newly planted trees may be
supported with stakes and ties to hold it firmly in place. Remove stakes and
ties after one year.
      (8)   Spread at least three inches of mulch over plant beds in order to
retain moisture and keep down weeds. A three inch saucer should be provided to
form a basin around the trunk of the tree. This saucer helps catch and retain
moisture.
      (9)   The lower trunks of new trees may be wrapped with burlap or paper
to prevent evaporation and sun scald. The wrapping should remain on the tree
for a least one year.
      (10)   Conscientious post-planting care, especially watering, pruning and
fertilizing, is a must for street and parking lot trees. Branches of new trees
may be reduced by as much as one-third to prevent excessive evaporation.
   (C)   Guide for planting shrubs. Shrubs planted for screening purposes
should be given a proper growing environment. Many of the guidelines for tree
planting listed in division (B) of this section also apply to shrubs. However,
because specific requirements vary considerably between shrub types, this
guideline does not attempt to specify the needs of all shrubs.
   (D)   Lists of recommended trees, shrubs and ground cover. The following
list indicates plantings which will meet the landscape requirements of the
village. The lists are by no means comprehensive and are intended merely to
suggest the types of flora which would be appropriate for these purposes.
Plants were selected for inclusion on these lists according to four principal
criteria: general suitablility for the climate and soil conditions of this
area, ease of maintenance, tolerance of urban conditions, and availability from
area nurseries.
 
TABLE 3 RECOMMENDED TREES, SHRUBS AND GROUND COVER
Botanical Name Common Name
TABLE 3 RECOMMENDED TREES, SHRUBS AND GROUND COVER
Botanical Name                     Common Name
(1) Small deciduous trees
Malus species                      Crabapple
Carpinus caroliniana               American Hornbeam
Cercis canadensis                  Eastern Redbud
Cornus mas                         Flowering Dogwood
Cornus alternifolia                Pagoda Dogwood
Crataegus species                  Hawthorn (Thornless)
Magnolia x soulangiana             Saucer Magnolia
Amelanchier x grandiflora          Apple Serviceberry
Pyrus calleryana                   Callery Pear
Syringa reticulata                 Japanese Tree Lilac
(2) Large evergreen trees
Botanical Name                     Common Name
Picea abies                        Norway Spruce
Picea pungens                      Colorado Spruce
Picea glauca                       White Spruce
Pinus strobus                      Eastern White Pine
Pinus nigra                        Austrian Pine
(3) Large deciduous trees
Botanical Name                     Common Name
Acer platanoides                   Norway Maple
Acer rubrum                        Red Maple
Acer saccharum                     Sugar Maple
Corylus colurna                    Turkish Filbert
Ginkgo biloba (male only)          Ginkgo or Maidenhair Tree
Gleditsia triacanthos inermis      Thornless Honeylocust
Quercus rubra                      Red Oak
Quercus alba L.                    White Oak
Tilia cordata                      Littleleaf Linden
Tilia tomentosa                    Silver Linden
(4) Small evergreen shrubs
Botanical Name                     Common Name
Pinus mugo                         Mugo Pine
Thuja species                      Arborvitae (Globe, Little Gem, etc.)
Juniperus species                  Juniper (Armstrong, Pfitzer, etc.)
Taxus species                      Yew
Buxus microphylla                  Boxwood
Picea abies 'Nidiformus'           Bird's Nest Spruce
(5) Large evergreen shrubs          
Botanical Name                     Common Name
Thuja occidentalis 'Techny'        Techny Arborvitae
Juniperus                          Upright Juniper
Taxus cuspidata 'Hicksii'          Hick's Yew
(6) Large deciduous shrubs
Botanical Name                     Common Name
Acer ginnala 'Compactum'           Compact Amur Maple
Aesculus parvilflora               Bottlebrush Buckeye
Berberis thunbergii                Japanese Barberry
Chionanthus virginicus             White Fringetree
Euonymus alatus
Forsythia species                  Forsythia
Cotinus coggygria                  Smokebush
Cotoneaster lucidus                Hedge Cotoneaster
Hamamelis virginiana               Common Witch Hazel
Rhanmnus frangula 'Asplenifolia'   Cutleaf Glossy Buckthorn
Spiraea x vanhouttei               Vanhoutte Spirea
Cornus species                     Dogwood
Syringa Species                    Lilac
Myrica pennsylvanica               Bayberry
Viburnum dentatum                  Arrowood Viburnum
Viburnum lantana                   Wayfaringtree Viburnum
Viburnum opulus                    European Cranberrybush Viburnum
Viburnum sieboldii                 Siebold Viburnum
Viburnum trilobum                  American Cranberrybush
(7) Small deciduous shrubs
Botanical Name                     Common Name
Berberis thunbergii 'Crim. Pig.'   Crimson Pigmy Barberry
Forsythia x intermedia 'Arn. Dwf.' Arnold Dwarf Forsythia
Spirea x bumalda                   Bumalda Spirea (also Anthony Waterer,
                                   Frobelii and Gold Flame)
Euonymus alatus 'Compacta'         Dwarf Burningbush
Ribes alpinum 'Green Mound'        Green Mound Alpine Currant
Potentilla fruticosa               Bush Cinquefoil
Viburnum carlesii 'Compactum'      Compact Koreanspice Viburnum
Viburnum opulus 'Compactum'        Compact Cranberrybush Viburnum
(8) Ground covers
Botanical Name                     Common Name
Euyonumus fortunei 'Coloratus'     Purpleleaf Wintercreeper
Hedera helix 'Thorndale'           Thorndale English Ivy
Pachysandra terminalis             Japanese Pachysandra
Vinca minor                        Periwinkle
Ajuga reptans                      Ajuga
 
Notes:
   Trees listed in italics are recommended for use as street trees or in
parking areas. Refer to "Village Forest Standards and Specifications" under
SECTION 900 of the village's "SPECIFICATIONS, STANDARDS, AND DETAILS".
   Trees used in parking areas and as street trees shall be of a fruitless
species.
   All listed small deciduous and evergreen shrubs except Potentilla fruticosa
are suitable for low screening applications.
(Ord. 05-02, passed 1-18-2005)
§ 158.07 VARIATIONS.
   The Zoning Board of Appeals shall have the jurisdiction to hold public
hearings and offer recommendations to the Village Board of Trustees concerning
variations of this Chapter 158 in accordance with the procedures in Chapter 157
of this code. The Village Board of Trustees may grant variations from the
requirements of this Chapter
158 after a public hearing is held by the Zoning Board of Appeals and upon
receipt of a recommendation from the Zoning Board of Appeals.
(Ord. 22-48, passed 11-7-2022)
APPENDIX: DIAGRAMS
Diagram (Click on the number to view the PDF file)
   1   Exterior Parkway
      Interior Parkway
      Perimeter Landscape Area
   2   Foundation Area
      Perimeter Landscape Area
      Landscaped Island Within Parking Area
   3   Interior Parkway
      Site Interior
   4   Frontage Adjacent to Parking Area
   5   Type 1 Screening
      Alternate A -- 100% Opaque Wall and Large Trees
      Alternate B -- 75% Opaque Wall, Shrubs and Large Trees
      Alternate C -- Shrubs, Berming, and Large Trees
   6   Parking Lot Landscaping
      Alternate A -- Continuous Curbed Island
      Alternate B -- Curbed Island (7' Minimum Width)
      Alternate C -- Smaller Curbed Islands
   7, 8   Parking Lots; Shrub, Ground Cover, Flowers, etc. (30" Maximum Height)
and Trees
   9   Intersection Visibility
CHAPTER 159: DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES
Section
   
159.01   Title
   
159.02   Findings and purpose
   
159.03   Applicability
   
159.04   Definitions
   
159.05   General procedures for development impact fees
   
159.06   Use of development impact fees
   
159.07   Effect of development impact fees on zoning and subdivision
regulations
   
159.08   Development impact fees as additional and supplemental requirement
   
159.09   Land in lieu of development impact fees
   
159.10   Establishment of development impact fee schedule
   
159.11   Amendment procedures
§ 159.01 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known, cited and referred to as the "Development
Impact Fee Ordinance" and may be cited herein as this chapter.
(Ord. 05-17, passed 8-15-2005)
§ 159.02 FINDINGS AND PURPOSE.
   (A)   It is declared to be the policy of the village that the provision of
various public facilities and services required to serve new development is
subject to the control of the village in accordance with the comprehensive plan
of the village for the orderly, planned, efficient, and economical development
of the village.
   (B)   New developments cause and impose increased and excessive demands upon
public facilities and services that are specifically and uniquely attributable
to those new developments.
   (C)   Planning projections indicate that new development shall continue and
shall place ever-increasing demands on public facilities and services.
   (D)   Development potential and property values are influenced and affected
by village policy as expressed in the comprehensive plan and as implemented by
the village zoning ordinance.
   (E)   To the extent that new developments place demands upon public
facilities and services that are specifically and uniquely attributable to such
developments, those demands should be satisfied by requiring that the new
developments creating the demands pay the cost of meeting the demands.
   (F)   The Village Board of Trustees, after careful consideration, hereby
finds and declares that imposition of development impact fees upon new
developments to finance specified public facilities and services, the demand
for which is created by such developments within the village, is in the best
interests of the general welfare of the village and its residents, is
equitable, and does not impose an unfair burden on such developments.
Therefore, the Village Board of Trustees deems it necessary and desirable to
adopt this chapter as herein set forth.
(Ord. 05-17, passed 8-15-2005)
§ 159.03 APPLICABILITY.
   This chapter requires payment of development impact fees, payable at the
time of issuance of a building permit, in an amount equal to the proportionate
share of the cost of the various public facilities and services required to
serve certain developments. This chapter shall apply to all fees and charges
imposed by the village to finance different types of capital improvements,
public facilities and public services, the need for which is created by new
development.
(Ord. 05-17, passed 8-15-2005)
§ 159.04 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   The language in the text of this chapter shall be interpreted in
accordance with the following rules of construction:
      (1)   The singular number includes the plural number, and the plural the
singular;
      (2)   The word "shall" is mandatory; the word "may" is permissive; and
      (3)   The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter.
   (B)   The following words and phrases shall, for the purposes of this
chapter, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this division,
except when the context otherwise indicates.
      ADMINISTRATIVE FEE. A special and additional fee imposed pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter that constitutes the village's estimate of the costs
and expenses that it incurs in administering this chapter for each development,
including, without limitation, staff time, attorney fees, and other third party
consultant fees and costs.
      BEDROOM. Any room in a dwelling unit that is suitable for sleeping
purposes, is greater than 100 square feet in floor area, and is not a living
room, dining room, kitchen, or bathroom.
      BUILDING PERMIT. The permit issued by the village for the construction,
reconstruction, alteration, addition, repair, placement, removal or demolition
of or to a building or structure within the corporate limits of the village.
      BUILDING SITE. An area of land designed, intended or used as a location
for a structure.
      CAPITAL BUDGET. The portion of the village's annual budget devoted to the
funding of capital improvement projects.
      CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT. Land, facilities, projects or equipment for purposes
of constructing or improving public facilities, including without limitation,
newly constructed buildings; newly constructed structural improvements to
buildings and permanent additions to buildings; systems that are being
installed within newly constructed buildings or within permanent additions to
buildings (including, but not limited to, electrical systems, plumbing systems,
fire protection systems, and heating, ventilation, and air conditioning
systems); additions to or replacements of systems within existing buildings to
the extent necessary to meet the demands of development; grading, landscaping,
seeding, and planting of shrubs and trees on sites and adjacent ways; and
retaining walls and parking lots on sites; furnishing and installing for the
first time fixed flagpoles, gateways, fences, and underground storage tanks
that are not part of building service systems; and demolition work; for
transportation and transit, including without limitation, streets, street
lighting and traffic-control devices and supporting improvements, roads,
overpasses, bridges and related facilities; storm drainage facilities; for
parks and recreational improvements; for acquisition of open space; for public
safety, including police and jail facilities; for public buildings of all
kinds; and any other capital project identified in the village's capital
improvement plan. Capital improvement also includes the design, engineering,
inspection, testing, planning, legal, land acquisition and all other costs
associated with construction of a public facility.
      CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT PROGRAM. A multi-year plan of any public facility or
service that: projects, for a planning period of at least five years, the need
for capital improvements within the service area served by the public body;
sets forth a schedule for the construction, acquisition or leasing of the
capital improvements to meet the projected need; indicates the size and general
location of the needed capital improvements; identifies the estimated costs of
constructing, acquiring, or leasing the needed capital improvements; and sets
forth the anticipated funding sources and funds to be received by the public
body (including, but not limited to, funds that will be received from the sale
of existing capital improvements) for the construction, acquisition, or leasing
of the needed capital improvements.
      CODE. The East Dundee Code of Ordinances, as amended.
      COLLECTION. The point at which the development impact fee is actually
paid to the village.
      COMMERCIAL. A use of property for purposes other than residential.
      COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. The official plan for the development of the village
adopted by the Village Board of Trustees.
      COST. Expenditures incurred or estimated to be incurred to fund a capital
improvement project. These costs include, without limitation, acquisition of
land, construction of improvements, equipping of facilities, and
administrative, engineering, architectural, and legal expenses incurred in
connection therewith.
      DETENTION AREA. A dry-bottom area of land which provides for the
temporary storage of stormwater runoff.
      DEVELOPER. The person undertaking a development, which may, for purposes
of this chapter include, without limitation, the owner as well as the
subdivider of the land on which the development is to take place.
      DEVELOPMENT. Any of the following activities: any subdivision of land;
any re-subdivision or modification of an existing subdivision; any planned unit
development; any modification of an existing planned unit development; or any
construction, reconstruction, alteration, addition, repair, or placement of or
to a building, that requires the issuance of a building permit.
      DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEE. A monetary exaction imposed by the village
pursuant to this chapter as a condition or in connection with approval of a new
development project for the purpose of financing, defraying or reimbursing all
or a portion of the costs incurred by the village for public facilities.
      DISBURSEMENT STATEMENT. That certain statement entered into between the
village and each public body, individually, for any development for which the
public body desires to receive development impact fees.
      DWELLING UNIT. Shall have the meaning ascribed to it in the Zoning Code.
      GROSS ACREAGE. The entire area of a parcel of real property or a building
site expressed in acres or portions thereof.
      IMPOSE. To determine that a particular new development project is subject
to collection of a development impact fee as a condition of development
approval.
      INTERGOVERNMENTAL AGREEMENT. That certain master agreement to be entered
into between the village and each public body, individually, that affirms each
public body's acknowledgment that this chapter shall control the collection and
distribution of development impact fees, or land in lieu of development impact
fees, and that creates the responsibility for each public body to fully
indemnify the village in connection with its administration of this chapter.
      LOT. Shall have the meaning ascribed to it in the Zoning Code.
      NON-RESIDENTIAL NEW DEVELOPMENT PROJECT. All development other than
residential development projects. For purposes of this chapter:
         (a)   GENERAL COMMERCIAL shall mean those types of uses as permitted
within the commercial districts.
         (b)   LODGING shall mean hotel, motel, timeshare, bed and breakfast or
similar lodging uses as permitted within the commercial district.
      MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT PROJECT. A residential development
project in which a duplex dwelling, a group dwelling or a multiple dwelling is
constructed, as those terms are defined in the Zoning Code.
      PERSON. Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
organization or business, or charitable trust.
      PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT. Shall have the same meaning ascribed to it in
the Zoning Code.
      PROPORTIONATE SHARE. The cost of a public facility or service
specifically and uniquely attributable to a development, after the
consideration of the generation of additional demand from the development, and
any appropriate credits for contribution of money, dedication of land, or taxes
dedicated for such projects.
      PUBLIC FACILITY. Necessary public services that are permanent additions
to the village's assets, that are primarily financed by long-term debt
instruments and not from the village's annual operating budget, and which
include design, construction, or purchase of land, buildings and facilities.
      RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT. Any development, as defined in this chapter,
that is used, or is designed or intended to be used, entirely or in part, for
residential purposes, and contemplates, or results in, a net increase in the
number of lots, dwelling units, or bedrooms over that which previously existed
on the property on which the development is, or is to be, located.
      RETENTION AREA. A wet-bottom area of land, which provides for the
temporary storage of stormwater runoff.
      SERVICE STANDARD. The existing level of service delivery associated with
a public facility for which a development impact fee shall be required.
      SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING. Shall have the same meaning as set forth in the
Zoning Code.
      SITE PLAN. A document prepared to scale indicating accurately the
dimensions and boundaries of a site; and showing the location of all proposed
buildings, structures, uses, and principal site development features for a
parcel of land.
      SITES. Lands that are: leased or owned, or to be leased or owned, by a
public body; and used, to be used, or capable of being used for any purposes of
the public body.
      SPECIFICALLY AND UNIQUELY ATTRIBUTABLE. An identifiable portion of the
need contained in the needs assessment for additional public facilities.
      SQUARE FOOTAGE. The net floor area included within the surrounding
exterior walls of a building or portion thereof, exclusive of vents, shafts,
courts, and either private or public garages meant for specific storage of
vehicles.
      SUBDIVISION. Shall have the meaning ascribed to it in the Subdivision
Ordinance.
      SUBDIVISION AGREEMENT. An agreement, entered into between a developer and
the village, approving and governing the subdivision of land pursuant to the
Subdivision Ordinance.
      SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE.  
Chapter 155 of this Code, regulating the processes and design standards
applicable to the division of land within the village, as the same has been,
and may from time to time hereafter be, amended.
      TABLE OF ESTIMATED ULTIMATE POPULATION PER DWELLING UNIT. The most
current version of the population projection table, by dwelling unit type and
age categories.
      VILLAGE. The Village of East Dundee.
      VILLAGE BOARD OF TRUSTEES. The Board of Trustees of the Village of East
Dundee.
      WETLAND. An area that is inundated or saturated by surface water or
groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under
normal circumstances does support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted
for life in saturated soil conditions.
      ZONING ORDINANCE.  
Chapter 157 of this Code, regulating the use of land within the village, as the
same has been, and may from time to time hereafter be, amended.
(Ord. 05-17, passed 8-15-2005)
§ 159.05 GENERAL PROCEDURES FOR DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES.
   (A)   Needs assessment. Before or in conjunction with the adoption of
development impact fees, the village shall conduct a needs assessment for
public facilities which are to be funded with the development impact fees. The
needs assessment shall:
      (1)   Determine and distinguish between existing deficiencies and
projected new development needs.
      (2)   Inventory existing public facilities.
      (3)   Identify the level of service standard applicable to each of the
inventoried public facilities.
      (4)   Identify the level of service standards upon which the development
impact fee is to be based.
   (B)   Imposition, calculation and collection of development impact fees and
administrative fees.
      (1)   The village shall impose development impact fees as a condition of
approval of all new development projects.
      (2)   Development impact fees shall be imposed prior to issuance of any
building permit.
      (3)   Development impact fees shall be determined using the values
contained in the impact fee schedules.
      (4)   The following fees shall be collected by the village, or, for fire
impact fees, by the East Dundee and Countryside Fire Protection District if
authorized in an intergovernmental agreement between the village and the East
Dundee and Countryside Fire Protection District, prior to issuing any building
permit for a development: development impact fees, in the amount calculated and
due pursuant to this chapter; and administrative fees, in the amount set forth
in the annual fee resolutions.
   (C)   Transfer of funds to accounts. 
      (1)   Upon receipt of the applicable development impact fees and
administrative fee, the Village Building Department shall forward such fees to
the Village Finance Department. The administrative fee shall be deposited into
the village's general fund. The development impact fees shall be deposited and
disbursed as set forth in this chapter.
      (2)   Establishment and maintenance of accounts.
         (a)   The Village Finance Department shall establish an account in a
bank authorized to receive deposits of the village's funds.
         (b)   The development impact fee deposited in the account shall be
used solely for the purposes specified in this chapter.
         (c)   The Village Finance Department shall maintain and keep adequate
financial records for each such account, which shall show the source and
disbursement of all revenues, and which shall account for all moneys received.
   (D)   Disbursement of funds.
      (1)   Development impact fees may be expended only for the uses set forth
in §
159.06 of this Code.
      (2)   Development impact fees may be used to repay the village if the
village constructs the public facilities using other funding resources, and may
be used to pay the principal, interest and other costs of bonds, notes and/or
other obligations issued or undertaken by or on behalf of the village to
finance such public facilities' capital improvements.
      (3)   Where a development impact fee is not used for the purpose for
which it was imposed or collected, such development impact fee shall be
refunded pursuant to this chapter. The refund shall be paid to the party who
owns the property at the time the refund is made.
   (E)   Waiver of development impact fee. The Village Board of Trustees may
waive from development impact fee programs particular types and locations of
development that are determined to serve an over-riding public interest,
provided, however, that the waiver does not result in an increase in the
development impact fee for other properties in the village.
(Ord. 05-17, passed 8-15-2005; Am. Ord. 20-34, passed 9-14-2020)
§ 159.06 USE OF DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES.
   Development impact fees paid pursuant to this chapter shall be restricted to
use solely and exclusively for paying the cost of public facilities and
services, whether payment is made directly therefor, or as a pledge against
bonds, revenue certificates, or other obligations of indebtedness.
(Ord. 05-17, passed 8-15-2005)
§ 159.07 EFFECT OF DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES ON ZONING AND SUBDIVISION
REGULATIONS.
   This chapter shall not affect, in any manner, the permissible use of
property, density of development, design, and improvement standards and
requirements; or any other aspect of the development of land or provision of
public improvements subject to the zoning and subdivision regulations or other
applicable regulations of the village, which shall be operative and remain in
full force and effect without limitation with respect to all such development.
(Ord. 05-17, passed 8-15-2005)
§ 159.08 DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES AS ADDITIONAL AND SUPPLEMENTAL REQUIREMENT.
   Development impact fees are additional and supplemental to, and not in
substitution of, any other requirements imposed by the village on the
development of land or the issuance of building permits. In no event shall a
property owner be obligated to pay for public facilities in an amount in excess
of the amount calculated pursuant to this chapter; but, provided that a
property owner may be required to pay, pursuant to village ordinances,
regulations or policies, for other public facilities in addition to the
development impact fees for public facilities as specified herein.
(Ord. 05-17, passed 8-15-2005)
§ 159.09 LAND IN LIEU OF DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES.
   (A)   Each public body may make a request in writing to the Village Board of
Trustees to allow for a donation of land in lieu of development impact fees
related to any development. Such a request shall specifically itemize the
public body's reasons for requesting land in lieu of development impact fees.
   (B)   Upon receipt of a request from a public body for land in lieu of
development impact fees, the Village Board of Trustees shall consider and
perform an analysis of such request, and make a determination thereon by
resolution duly adopted. The resolution shall be based upon a review of the
triennial needs assessment on file with the Village Clerk for the public body
making the request, as well as the following factors: other developments
occurring in the prior year within the surrounding area of the development,
public facilities actually constructed and servicing the surrounding area of
the development, changing public facility needs and capacity at existing public
facilities servicing the surrounding area of the development, and such other
factors as the Village Board of Trustees may deem to be relevant.
   (C)   Requests of land in lieu of development impact fees shall be made
specifically for the construction of public facilities or expansion of public
facilities on adjacent parcels.
   (D)   A developer that provides land in lieu of development impact fees
shall still be required to pay the administrative fee required by this chapter.
(Ord. 05-17, passed 8-15-2005)
§ 159.10 ESTABLISHMENT OF DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEE SCHEDULE.
   The development impact fee schedule shall be calculated in accordance with
the methodologies and findings of the Development Impact Fee Study conducted by
Teska Associates, Inc., Evanston, Illinois.
PROPOSED IMPACT FEE SCHEDULE - Option A (revised 8/15/05)
LAND USE Administrative Public Works Police Impact TOTAL MUNICIPAL TOTAL FIRE
         Impact Fee     Impact Fee   Fee           IMPACT FEE      IMPACT FEE
             Administrative Public Works Police     TOTAL         TOTAL FIRE
LAND USE     Impact Fee     Impact Fee   Impact Fee MUNICIPAL     IMPACT FEE
                                                    IMPACT FEE
RESIDENTIAL
Single
Family
(detached)
             $505 per       $586 per     $486 per   $1,577 per    $363 per
   2 bedrodwelling unit  dwelling     dwelling   dwelling unit dwelling unit
                            unit         unit
             $505 per       $586 per     $486 per   $1,577 per    $363 per
   3 bedrodwelling unit  dwelling     dwelling   dwelling unit dwelling unit
                            unit         unit
             $505 per       $586 per     $486 per   $1,577 per    $363 per
   4 bedrodwelling unit  dwelling     dwelling   dwelling unit dwelling unit
                            unit         unit
             $505 per       $586 per     $486 per   $1,577 per    $363 per
   5 bedrodwelling unit  dwelling     dwelling   dwelling unit dwelling unit
                            unit         unit
Townhouse
             $505 per       $258 per     $486 per   $1,249 per    $363 per
   1 bedrodwelling unit  dwelling     dwelling   dwelling unit dwelling unit
                            unit         unit
             $505 per       $258 per     $486 per   $1,249 per    $363 per
   2 bedrodwelling unit  dwelling     dwelling   dwelling unit dwelling unit
                            unit         unit
             $505 per       $258 per     $486 per   $1,249 per    $363 per
   3 bedrodwelling unit  dwelling     dwelling   dwelling unit dwelling unit
                            unit         unit
             $505 per       $258 per     $486 per   $1,249 per    $363 per
   4 bedrodwelling unit  dwelling     dwelling   dwelling unit dwelling unit
                            unit         unit
Multiple
Family
(Condo/Apts)
             $505 per       $258 per     $486 per   $1,249 per    $363 per
   1 bedrodwelling unit  dwelling     dwelling   dwelling unit dwelling unit
                            unit         unit
             $505 per       $258 per     $486 per   $1,249 per    $363 per
   2 bedrodwelling unit  dwelling     dwelling   dwelling unit dwelling unit
                            unit         unit
             $505 per       $258 per     $486 per   $1,249 per    $363 per
   3 bedrodwelling unit  dwelling     dwelling   dwelling unit dwelling unit
                            unit         unit
COMMERCIAL   $1,183 per     $ 0 per acre $2,631 per $3,814 per    $2,581 per
             acre                        acre       acre          acre
INDUSTRIAL   $978 per acre  $780 per     $1,907 per $3,665 per    $1,222 per
                            acre         acre       acre          acre
(Ord. 05-17, passed 8-15-2005)
§ 159.11 AMENDMENT PROCEDURES.
   Periodically, the Village Administrator or his or her designee shall report
to the Village Board of Trustees, prior to the Village Board of Trustee's
adoption of the budget and revisions for the next fiscal year, with:
recommendations for amendments to this chapter; and proposals for changes to
development impact fee rates and schedules.
(Ord. 05-17, passed 8-15-2005)
CHAPTER 160: PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT COSTS
Section
   
160.01   Findings
   
160.02   Trust and agency account
   
160.03   Deposit requirements
   
160.04   Invoices
   
160.05   Refunds
   
160.06   Copy of provisions to petitioner
§ 160.01 FINDINGS.
   (A)   Certain costs are necessarily incurred by the village in processing
building permits, petitions for annexation, disconnections, rezoning,
variances, planned unit developments, subdivisions, site plans and other land
use matters (the development petition), including, but not limited to, staff
costs and fees of planning consultants, engineers, attorneys, building
officials, environmental consultants, and other consultants, as well as other
expenses of the village related to the development petition such as mailing,
photocopying, telephone, publication, recording and other out of pocket costs
(collectively "development costs").
   (B)   The Village Board has determined that development costs should be
borne by the person filing a development petition ("petitioner") rather than
the taxpayers of the village.
(Ord. 17-50, passed 10-2-2017)
§ 160.02 TRUST AND AGENCY ACCOUNT.
   (A)   The village shall establish a trust and agency account (also known as
an escrow account):
      (1)   For the purpose of accounting for development costs and
reimbursement for such costs with sub-accounts for each separate petitioner;
and
      (2)   For the purpose of accounting for other deposits being held in
trust from time to time.
   (B)   Such trust and agency accounts shall be subject to audit as in the
case of all other accounts and funds of the village but shall not be part of
the budget process of the village.
(Ord. 17-50, passed 10-2-2017)
§ 160.03 DEPOSIT REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Initial deposit. Whenever the village is asked to consider a
development petition and it is estimated by the Village Administrator or
designee that the development costs shall exceed $1,000, the Village
Administrator or designee shall prior to the time when the village incurs any
expense for staff or consultants establish the initial deposit and a minimum
balance in the trust and agency account of the village (the "initial deposit").
Before any expenses for consultant and out of pocket costs are incurred by the
village, the petitioner shall pay to the village's Finance Director the amount
of such initial deposit.
   (B)   Second and subsequent deposits. The petitioner is responsible for
maintaining the minimum balance in the trust and agency account as established
by the Village Administrator or designee at time of initial deposit.
   (C)   Failure to make deposits. In the event that the petitioner fails to
promptly make the required payments of the initial deposit, the second deposit
or any subsequent deposit, the village may advise all consultants to the
village to cease performing any services and incurring any costs relative to
the development petition, and the village may postpone or cancel any scheduled
hearings, meetings or considerations of the pending development petition.
   (D)   Waiving fees. The Village Administrator shall have the right to waive
staff cost or other costs if by doing so it benefits the village.
(Ord. 17-50, passed 10-2-2017)
§ 160.04 INVOICES.
   Copies of all invoices submitted to the village by its consultants shall be
provided to the petitioner. Any questions as to such invoices must be raised by
the petitioner within 14 days after transmittal of the invoices to the
petitioner, and in the absence of such questions within such time, the invoices
shall be conclusively deemed acceptable to the petitioner.
(Ord. 17-50, passed 10-2-2017)
§ 160.05 REFUNDS.
   Whenever it appears that there will not be further development costs
incurred relative to a petitioner, the balance in such petitioner's trust and
agency account will be refunded to the petitioner within 30 days.
(Ord. 17-50, passed 10-2-2017)
§ 160.06 COPY OF PROVISIONS TO PETITIONER.
   At the time that the amount of initial deposit is established, the
petitioner shall be provided with a copy of this chapter and shall deliver to
the village a signed statement acknowledging receipt of a copy of this chapter
and agreeing to make the required deposits.
(Ord. 17-50, passed 10-2-2017)
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
Table
   
I.   STREETS
   
II.   SPECIAL USES AND VARIANCES
   
III.   AGREEMENTS
   
IV.   ANNEXATIONS
TABLE I: STREETS
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No.   Date Passed Description
                       Changing the names of streets: North Street, between
                       King William and 2nd Street, to Adams Street; South
                       Street, from Water Street running east, to Hill Street;
                       Duncan Avenue, south end of village, to Elgin Avenue;
73-7       4-16-1973   First Avenue, from Edwards South, to Elgin Avenue; North
                       Lake Parkway, from Wilmette to Center, to Bonnie Dundee
                       Road; East River Road to Dundee Avenue; Route 63, from
                       Higgins to Barrington Avenue, to Penny Avenue; River
                       Street, west of railroad between Barrington and
                       Railroad, to Meier Avenue
00-05      3-6-2000    Changing the name of Guth Street, north of the permanent
                       closure gate, to Greenwood Avenue
                       Vacating a portion of Valley View Road and conveying all
03-10      7-7-2003    its right, title, and interest to Community School
                       District 300 of Cook, DeKalb, Kane, and McHenry Counties
                       Changing the name of Bramer Avenue to Bramer Street;
05-09      2-21-2005   First Street to E. 1st Street; Second Street to E. 2nd
                       Street; Third Street to E. 3rd Street; Fourth Street to
                       E. 4th Street.
08-18      5-5-2008    Vacating a portion of the right-of-way near Ravine.
08-43      7-21-2008   Vacating a portion of the right-of-way commonly known as
                       Maiden Lane
10-04      2-1-2010    Repealing Ord. 99-25 which authorized closing of Guth
                       Street to through traffic
                       Authorizing transfer of jurisdiction of Frontage Road
10-05      2-1-2010    (from IL. Route 68 to Vista Lane and from IL Route 25 to
                       Balmoral Drive) from IDOT to the village
10-33      6-21-2010   Approving water main easement located at 14N837 on Route
                       25
11-05      2-7-2011    Vacating a portion of Valley View Road
11-14      3-21-2011   Vacating a portion of Lake Shore Drive and Summit Avenue
                       to 520 North VanBuren
                       Authorizing transfer of jurisdiction of Frontage Road
11-17      3-21-2011   (from IL. Route 68 to Vista Lane and from IL. Route 25
                       to Balmoral Drive) from IDOT to the village
11-49      11-17-2011  Approving utility easement located at 14N963 on Route 25
                       (Torco/PIMA property)
11-55      12-19-2011  Approving utility easement located at 14N679 on Route 25
12-04      2-27-2012   Approving utility easement located at 14N915 on Route 25
12-06      2-27-2012   Approving utility easement located at 14N897 on Route 25
12-07      2-27-2012   Approving utility easement located at 14N881 on Route 25
12-08      2-27-2012   Approving utility easement located at 14N859 on Route 25
                       Approving easements for stormwater detention and
12-21      4-16-2012   management facilities to Gardiner Senior Apartments,
                       L.P.
12-84      11-5-2012   Approving a public utility easement to Commonwealth
                       Edison, AT&T, and Comcast in River Haven
14-02      1-13-2014   Approving a plat of dedication for a portion of Meier
                       Street
15-10      3-16-2015   Vacating a portion of the Barrington Avenue right-of-way
15-19      4-6-2015    Vacating a portion of the public right-of-way of
                       Crabtree Road
15-33      7-20-2015   Approving a grant for public roadway and subsurface and
                       grading facilities
17-06      6-6-2017    Vacating a portion of the public right-of-way of Robert
                       Avenue
18-36      10-15-2018  Vacating a portion of the Barrington Avenue right-of-way
                       and a plat of vacation
                       Changing the name of Plate Drive East of the east right-
19-08      3-18-2019   of-way line of Christina Drive, for a distance of 300
                       feet, to Rena Road
                       Accepting public improvements in the vicinity of 1030
Res. 01-23 1-23-2023   East Main Street, including rights-of-way and water main
                       within the utility easement
25-17      4-21-2025   Approving the dedication of a portion of 215 Barrington
                       Avenue and a plat of dedication
25-18      4-21-2025   Approving the vacation of a portion of the Barrington
                       Avenue right-of-way and a plat of vacation
                        
TABLE II: SPECIAL USES AND VARIANCES
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/16574ba874f17dfbd958615eed907c929c4100f2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7683.jpg]Publisher's Note: This Table has been AMENDED by new
legislation (Ord. 25-39, adopted 8-4-2025). The text of the amendment will be
incorporated below when the ordinance is codified.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/16574ba874f17dfbd958615eed907c929c4100f2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7683.jpg]Publisher's Note: This Table has been AMENDED by new
legislation (Ord. 25-41, adopted 8-4-2025). The text of the amendment will be
incorporated below when the ordinance is codified.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/16574ba874f17dfbd958615eed907c929c4100f2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7683.jpg]Publisher's Note: This Table has been AMENDED by new
legislation (Ord. 25-46, adopted 10-6-2025). The text of the amendment will be
incorporated below when the ordinance is codified.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/16574ba874f17dfbd958615eed907c929c4100f2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7683.jpg]Publisher's Note: This Table has been AMENDED by new
legislation (Ord. 25-47, adopted 10-20-2025). The text of the amendment will be
incorporated below when the ordinance is codified.
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
02-12    8-5-2002    Granting variation for the property commonly known as 421
                     East Main Street
02-13    8-5-2002    Granting variation for the property commonly known as 105
                     North Street
02-15    9-3-2002    Granting a special use for the property commonly known as
                     211 Barrington Avenue
02-19    11-18-2002  Granting a variance for the property commonly known as 325
                     Elgin Avenue
03-04    3-17-2003   Granting a special use for the sale of motor vehicles for
                     the property commonly known as 33W026 Richardson Road
                     Granting a variation to reduce on-site vehicle parking and
03-07    5-19-2003   a special use for fuel and food sales for the property
                     commonly known as 305 East Main Street
03-13    8-4-2003    Granting a variation to allow a porch to be extended for
                     the property commonly known as 434 Barrington Avenue
03-17    10-6-2003   Granting a variation to construct a garage for the
                     property commonly known as 104 South Van Buren
                     Granting a special use to use the principle structure for
03-23    11-3-2003   children's day school and church/school youth
                     instructional classes for the property commonly known as
                     407 Johnson Street
03-29    12-15-2003  Granting a variation to permit a home addition for the
                     property commonly known as 628 Deer Path Lane
                     Granting a variation to build across a platted lot line
04-03    2-16-2004   for the property commonly known as 207 South Van Buren
                     Street
                     Granting a variation to locate a sign three feet off the
04-07    4-5-2004    property line for the property commonly known as 8 South
                     River Street
04-12    5-3-2004    Granting a variation to build a single-family house for
                     the property commonly known as 806 Bannock Road
04-25    7-6-2004    Granting a conditional use for Lots 33, 34, 35, and 36 in
                     Fox River Bluffs, Unit 7
04-27    8-2-2004    Granting a variation for 110 North Street
04-38    11-15-2004  Granting a zoning variation for 311 Elgin Avenue
04-39    11-15-2004  Granting a zoning variation for 202 North Street
05-07    2-21-2005   Granting a zoning variation for 702 Water Street
05-19    9-6-2005    Granting a zoning variation for North Gate Manor
                     Subdivision
05-24    10-17-2005  Granting a special use as a B-4 Automotive Service
                     District Planned Development for 1077 East Main Street
05-27    11-7-2005   Granting a zoning variation for 891 Richardson Road
05-28    11-7-2005   Granting a special use for an automobile and truck repair
                     facility for 891 Richardson Road
06-15    5-15-2006   Granting a special use for a pet crematory for 1078 C Rock
                     Road
06-44    10-2-2006   Granting a variance in sign requirements for the property
                     commonly known as 1077 E. Main Street
                     Granting a variance for the maximum height requirements
06-45    10-16-2006  for an accessory building for the property commonly known
                     as 316 Hillside Lane
                     Granting a variance in the required front yard setback for
06-50    11-6-2006   an off-street parking lot on property commonly known as 17
                     Railroad Street
07-34    6-4-2007    Granting a variance from the front yard setback for the
                     property commonly known as 100 Crabtree Road
07-38    8-6-2007    Granting a special use for the property commonly known as
                     310 N. River Street
07-43    10-15-2007  Approving a variation for the property commonly known as
                     253 Fallbrook Court
07-46    11-19-2007  Approving a variation for the property commonly known as
                     7-11 Jackson Street
08-02    1-22-2008   Approving a variation for the property commonly known as
                     102 S. VanBuren Street
08-29    6-16-2008   Approving a variation for the property commonly known as
                     507 Rock Road
08-30    6-16-2008   Approving a variation for the property commonly known as
                     507 Rock Road
08-31    6-16-2008   Granting a special use for the property commonly known as
                     507 Rock Road
08-45    8-4-2008    Approving a variation for the property commonly known as
                     315 Barrington Avenue
08-46    8-4-2008    Granting a special use for the property commonly known as
                     315 Barrington Avenue
08-47    8-4-2008    Approving variations for the property commonly known as
                     315 Barrington Avenue
08-48    8-4-2008    Approving a resubdivison for the property commonly known
                     as 315 Barrington Avenue
08-49    8-4-2008    Granting a special use for the undeveloped property at the
                     southeast corner of Route 25 and Route 68
08-50    8-4-2008    Approving variations for the undeveloped property at the
                     southeast corner of Route 25 and Route 68
                     Approving temporary installation of a dune buggy dirt
08-53    9-8-2008    track for the property located north of Route 72 and east
                     of Route 25
                     Approving the temporary waiver of provisions of 157.149
08-54    9-8-2008    for the property located on the north side of Route 72,
                     west of Commonwealth Drive
                     Approving a variation and plat approval for the
09-03    1-20-2009   undeveloped property at the southeast corner of Route 25
                     and Route 68
09-26    9-8-2009    Granting a special use for the property commonly known as
                     302 Main Street
10-01    1-4-2010    Approving variations for the property commonly known as
                     324 Johnson Street
10-10    3-15-2010   Granting a special use for the property commonly known as
                     610 South Dundee Avenue
10-28    5-17-2010   Granting a special use for the property commonly known as
                     450-495 Dundee Avenue
10-29    5-17-2010   Granting a variance for the property commonly known as
                     450-495 Dundee Avenue
10-43    9-20-2010   Approving resubdivision of Lot 2 at the Dundee Gateway
                     Subdivision
10-44    9-20-2010   Granting a special use for the property commonly known as
                     Lot 2 on Route 25 south of Thornton Oil Gas Station
10-46    10-4-2010   Waiving development regulations for property located on
                     the north side of Route 72, west of Christina Drive
10-48    10-18-2010  Granting a special use for the property commonly known as
                     601 Dundee Avenue
11-06    2-7-2011    Granting a variance for the property commonly known as 100
                     Dundee Avenue
11-31    6-20-2011   Granting a special use for property commonly known as Rock
                     Road Business Park
11-34    8-1-2011    Granting a variance for the property commonly known as 460
                     Dundee Avenue
11-35    8-1-2011    Granting a variance for the property commonly known as 535
                     Dundee Avenue
11-39    8-15-2011   Approving the temporary use of property located north of
                     Route 72 and Christina Drive
11-42    9-19-2011   Granting special uses for property commonly known as
                     14N963 Illinois Route 25
                     Approving a variance for the property commonly known as
12-15    3-12-2012   River Haven of East Dundee Subdivision at the northwest
                     corner of Route 72 and 25
12-24    5-21-2012   Approving a variance for the property commonly known as
                     J.D. Byrider property at 750 Dundee Avenue
12-25    5-21-2012   Approving a variance for the property commonly known as
                     J.D. Byrider property at 750 Dundee Avenue
12-36    6-30-2012   Granting special uses for the property commonly known as
                     the GAT Guns property at 14N915 Illinois Route 25
12-45    6-30-2012   Granting special uses for the property commonly known as
                     14N859 Illinois Route 25
                     Granting special uses for the property commonly known as
12-49    6-30-2012   Pampered Pet Services Resort & Spa, Inc., at 14N837
                     Illinois Route 25
12-61    8-20-2012   Granting a special use for property located at 220 South
                     Dundee Avenue
12-74    9-17-2012   Granting a special use for property located at 1051 East
                     Main Street
12-81    11-5-2012   Approving variances for property located at 305 East Main
                     Street
12-82    11-5-2012   Approving variances for property commonly known as 1077
                     East Main Street
12-83    11-5-2012   Approving variances for property located at 302 East Main
                     Street
                     Approving a variation for the property commonly known as
13-17    5-6-2013    River Haven of East Dundee Subdivision at Route 25 North
                     of Route 72
13-21    5-6-2013    Approving a temporary installation of a dirt track for the
                     property located north of Route 72 and East of Route 25
                     Amending the compliance date in Ordinance 13-21, approving
13-38    9-16-2013   a temporary installation of a dirt track for the property
                     located north of Route 72 and East of Route 25
14-32    10-20-2014  Granting sign variances for the property located at 611
                     East Main Street (Summit Square)
14-34    11-3-2014   Approving a fence height and location variance for the
                     property located at 412 Fallbrook Drive
15-36    7-20-2015   Waiving development regulations for a portion of the Rock
                     Road Industrial Park.
15-37    8-10-2015   Waiving development regulations for the northeast corner
                     of Terra Business Park.
15-39    8-17-2015   Granting a side and rear yard variance for the property at
                     310 East First Street.
                     Granting a height and building separation variance for the
15-49    12-14-2015  detached garage on the property at 442 Lakeshore Drive,
                     East Dundee, Illinois.
15-50    12-14-2015  Denying a height variance for the property at 110 North
                     River Street.
16-15    5-16-2016   Granting a side yard variance for the property at 3
                     Wenholz Avenue.
16-19    6-6-2016    Granting a rear yard variance for the property at 469 East
                     Main Street.
                     Granting a special use permit to allow operation as a
16-34    12-19-2016  motor vehicle dealer of used automobiles at 164 Dundee
                     Avenue (Neodina property).
17-04    2-6-2017    Granting a variance to the subdivision regulations and
                     approval the final plat of Pal Group Industrial Park.
17-05    2-6-2017    Approving a special use for a gun shop on the property
                     located at 555 Plate Drive, Unit 11.
17-18    4-10-2017   Granting variances for the proposed speedway fueling
                     center to be located at Christina Drive and Route 72.
                     Granting variances from the sign regulations and waivers
17-26    5-15-2017   from landscaping requirements for the property located at
                     Christina Drive and Route 72 for a speedway fueling
                     center.
                     Granting a variance from the sign regulations for the
17-29    5-15-2017   property located at 900 Christina Drive (Enterprise
                     Leasing Company of Chicago, LLC).
                     Granting a variance to subdivision plat requirements and
17-33    6-19-2017   the width of right- of-ways for the subdivision of part of
                     Lot 5 of the Terra Business Park.
17-49    10-2-2017   Approving a special use for a vehicle towing establishment
                     on the property located at 1079 Rock Road.
18-07    5-7-2018    Granting a variance from the sign chapter for the property
                     located at 160 Dundee Avenue (Mobile Gas Station).
                     Approving a special use for a gun shop and indoor shooting
18-14    7-9-2018    range establishment on the property located at 200
                     Christina Drive.
                     Approving a variance from the subdivision chapter
18-15    7-9-2018    requiring parkway trees for Lot 5 of the Terra Business
                     Park.
                     Approving a variance from the zoning chapter requiring the
18-16    7-9-2018    front yard setback for Lot 2 in resubdivision of Lot 5 of
                     Terra Business Park.
18-20    8-20-2018   Approving a variation for lot size for the property at 811
                     E. Main Street.
18-21    8-20-2018   Approving a variation for building height for the property
                     at 811 E. Main Street.
                     Approving a variation from the subdivision chapter
18-22    8-20-2018   requiring lots to have full frontage abutting a publicly
                     dedicated street for the property at 811 E. Main Street.
                     Approving a variation from the subdivision chapter
                     requiring that no development activity occur within 75
18-23    8-20-2018   feet from the ordinary high water mark of streams, lakes
                     and ponds, the edge of wetlands or within a designated
                     depressional area for the property at 811 E. Main Street.
                     Approving a variation from the landscaping chapter
18-24    8-20-2018   requiring landscape islands for more than ten parking
                     spaces in a row for the property at 811 E. Main Street.
                     Approving a special use permit for a child care center in
19-02    1-7-2019    the B-3 General Service Business District in the property
                     located at 460 Dundee Avenue.
                     Approving a sign variation for the height and width of a
19-09    3-18-2019   development identification sign for the property at 200
                     Christina Drive.
                     Approving a sign variation for the setback of a
19-10    3-18-2019   development identification sign for the property at 200
                     Christina Drive.
19-19    4-15-2019   Granting development waivers for 601 Dundee Avenue (Santa
                     s Village Splash Structure).
                     Approving temporary parking use and temporarily waiving
20-15    5-18-2020   certain development regulations for the Pal Land II, LLC,
                     property south of Penny Road and east of Morning Side
                     Lane.
20-18    5-18-2020   Approving variations for lot size, floor area ratio, and
                     building height for the property at 855 E. Main Street.
                     Approving a variation from the landscaping chapter
20-19    5-18-2020   requiring landscape islands for more than ten parking
                     spaces in a row for the property at 855 E. Main Street.
                     Approving variations for cul-de-sac, sanitary sewer,
20-25    6-15-2020   paving storage yard, storage yard screening, parking
                     islands, and garage door screening for the Altorfer CAT
                     development project at 1030 Main Street.
                     Approving a variation for a front yard setback for an
20-29    7-13-2020   accessory structure in the E - Estate District at 509
                     Maxwelton.
                     Approving variations for loading berths, interior parkway
20-45    12-14-2020  landscaping and perimeter landscaped areas for the
                     proposed building at 250 Patricia Lane.
                     Approving a sign variation to allow for two wall signs and
21-08    3-15-2021   three freestanding signs for Altorfer Cat at 1030 East
                     Main Street.
21-10    4-5-2021    Approving a sign variation to allow for one wall sign for
                     Chicago Nut & Bolt at 145 Prairie Lake Road.
21-18    5-3-2021    Approving a sign variation to allow for four wall signs
                     for Yulivan Holdings LLC at 110 Prairie Lake Road.
21-21    5-17-2021   Approving the final plat of Patricia Lane Resubdivision.
                     Approving a special use permit for a used motor vehicle
21-22    5-17-2021   dealer in the B-3 General Service Business District for
                     the property located at 212 - 214 Dundee Avenue.
                     Approving a special use permit for a childcare center in
21-23    6-7-2021    the B-3 General Service Business District for the property
                     located at 460 Dundee Avenue.
                     Approving a variation requiring that a side yard abutting
                     a street is not to be less than 30 feet in depth to allow
21-24    6-7-2021    for the side yard to be one foot in depth in the R-
                     2 Single Family District for the property located at 511
                     Barrington Avenue.
                     Approving a special use permit for a game room (for an axe
21-28    9-13-2021   throwing lounge) in the B-1 Service Business District for
                     the property located at 315 Fourth Street.
                     Approving a special use permit for a banquet hall in the
21-29    9-13-2021   B-3 General Service Business District for the property
                     located at 485 Dundee Avenue.
                     Approving variations for front yard, side yards, building
21-33    10-18-2021  height, driveway, landscaping, interior parkway, and
                     parking islands for Lot 10 and Lot 11 in the Rock Road
                     Business Park in the M-1 manufacturing district.
                     Approving a special use permit for outside vehicle and
21-34    10-18-2021  equipment parking and storage for Plote Properties in the
                     M-1 manufacturing district.
                     Approving variations for off-street parking, parking area
21-35    10-18-2021  screening and landscaping, illumination of off-site
                     parking area, and curb and gutter for Plote Properties in
                     the M-1 manufacturing district.
                     Amending the special use permit for a gun shop granted in
                     Ordinance 12-36, to grant a special use permit for the
22-14    4-18-2022   accessory uses of firearm coating, refinishing, adding
                     accessories and general modifications for the property
                     located at 970 Dundee Avenue.
22-21    5-2-2022    Waiving certain development regulations with respect to
                     the Pal Land II LLC property.
                     Granting a special use permit for outside vehicle and
22-26    6-6-2022    equipment parking and storage for 507 Rock Road LLC in the
                     M-1 manufacturing district.
                     Granting variations for off-street parking paving and
22-27    6-6-2022    parking area screening and landscaping, for 507 Rock Road
                     Drive in the M-1 manufacturing district.
22-42    8-22-2022   Granting a special use permit for maternity group home for
                     the property commonly known as 516 East Main Street.
                     Granting variations for required loading berths and
22-47    10-17-2022  landscape requirements for 1011 East Main Street in the M-
                     1 manufacturing district.
                     Granting variations for sign height, width, thickness and
22-52    12-5-2022   setback for Lot 5 in Patricia Lane Resubdivision in the M-
                     1 manufacturing district.
                     Granting a special use permit for outside vehicle and
22-53    12-5-2022   equipment parking and storage for 590 Healy Road in the M-
                     1 manufacturing district.
                     Granting variations to required off-street parking paving
22-57    12-19-2022  and required lighting illumination for 590 Healy Road in
                     the M-1 manufacturing district.
                     Granting a special use permit for outside vehicle and
23-02    1-23-2023   equipment parking and storage for 590 Healy Road in the M-
                     1 manufacturing district.
23-09    2-20-2023   Granting a special use permit for an indoor mall for 535
                     Dundee Avenue in the B-3 business district.
                     Granting a special use permit for crushing and recycling
23-12    3-6-2023    of concrete and asphalt and resale of the material for a
                     portion of the property located at 590 Healy Road in the
                     M-1 manufacturing district.
23-16    4-17-2023   Granting a special use permit for tattooing for 324 North
                     River Street in the B-1 downtown business district.
                     Granting a special use permit allowing biochar operations
23-30    6-26-2023   at 569 Rock Road Drive in the M-2 limited manufacturing
                     district.
                     Granting a special use permit for a package liquor store
23-42    9-18-2023   at 210 Penny Avenue, Units G and H, in the B-2 community
                     business district.
                     Granting a special use permit for a restaurant with live
23-52    12-4-2023   entertainment for the property located at 325 Meier Avenue
                     in the B-1 downtown business district.
                     Granting a special use permit for a restaurant with live
23-53    12-4-2023   entertainment for the property located at 311 Barrington
                     Avenue in the B-1 downtown business district.
                     Granting a special use permit for a tavern with live
23-54    12-4-2023   entertainment for the property located at 314 N. River
                     Street in the B-1 downtown business district.
                     Granting a special use permit for a restaurant with live
23-55    12-4-2023   entertainment for the property located at 501-503 Dundee
                     Avenue in the B-3 service business district.
                     Granting a special use permit for a banquet hall for the
24-03    1-22-2024   property located at 201 Christina Drive, Units A and B in
                     the M-1 limited manufacturing district.
                     Granting an extension of a special use permit for crushing
24-09    3-4-2024    and recycling concrete and asphalt and resale of the
                     material for a portion of the property located at 590
                     Healy Road.
24-13    4-15-2024   Granting a special use permit for tattooing as a special
                     use located in the B-3 service business district.
                     Granting variation regarding the maximum square feet
24-14    4-15-2024   allowed for a business establishment identification wall
                     sign located at 535 Dundee Avenue located in the B-
                     3 general service business district.
                     Extending the term of a special use permit for outside
                     vehicle and equipment parking and storage on the south
24-15    4-15-2024   portion of the property of the future Heinz Road Extension
                     located at 590 Healy Road in the M-1 manufacturing
                     district.
                     Granting a special use permit for a commercial parking lot
24-21    6-3-2024    for the properties located at 309 Jackson Street and 304
                     Hill Street.
                     Granting variations regarding the number of wall signs
                     allowed for each business and the maximum square feet
24-26    7-15-2024   allowed for a business establishment identification wall
                     sign located at 107 Water Street in the B-1 business
                     district.
24-44    12-2-2024   Granting a special use permit for a 24-hour vehicle
                     parking and storage facility at 900 Christina Drive.
                     Granting variances regarding the driveway width and
24-45    12-2-2024   screening and landscaping of off-street parking for the
                     facility located at 900 Christina Drive in the M-
                     1 manufacturing district.
                     Granting a waiver of development regulations regarding the
24-46    12-2-2024   surfacing of off-street parking for the facility located
                     at 900 Christina Drive in the M-1 manufacturing district.
                     Granting a special use permit for a 24-hour vehicle
25-05    1-13-2025   parking and storage facility on certain unincorporated
                     parcels located to the south of Higgins Road (Route 72)
                     and west of Beverly Road upon annexation.
                     Granting a special use permit for mineral extraction and
25-06    1-13-2025   batch operations-related uses on certain unincorporated
                     parcels located to the south of Higgins Road (Route 72)
                     and west of Beverly Road upon annexation.
                     Granting variations regarding paving, screening, and
                     illumination of off-street parking areas on certain
25-07    1-13-2025   unincorporated parcels located to the south of Higgins
                     Road (Route 72) and west of Beverly Road upon annexation
                     (Plote Investments LLC).
                     Granting a variation regarding fence height requirements
25-13    3-17-2025   for 304 Hill Street and 309 Jackson Street located in the
                     B-1 downtown business district.
                    
 
TABLE III: AGREEMENTS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/16574ba874f17dfbd958615eed907c929c4100f2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7683.jpg]Publisher's Note: This Table has been AMENDED by new
legislation (Ord. 25-42, adopted 8-4-2025). The text of the amendment will be
incorporated below when the ordinance is codified.
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. Date   Description
No.  Passed
85-  6-17-  Agreement between the village and the owner of the shopping center,
11   1985   Special Service Area number One, for handicapped parking areas
06-  6-19-  Awarding a contract to Meyer Signs, in connection with the replacement
20   2006   of the East Dundee community events sign
07-  4-2-   Authorizing the execution of a competitive video service agreement
17   2007   between the village and AT&T Illinois
08-  3-17-  Authorizing an extension to the cable television franchise agreement
08   2008   with Comcast of Northern Illinois, Inc. and the village
08-  9-29-  Approving a redevelopment agreement between the village, Cook and Kane
58   2008   Counties and S & R Associates of Dundee, LLC
10-  1-19-  Approving membership in the Illinois Municipal League Risk Management
02   2010   Association and authorizing execution of an intergovernmental
            cooperation agreement
10-  2-16-  Authorizing execution of the Illinois Municipal League Risk Management
06   2010   Association Minimum/ Maximum Contribution Agreement
10-  4-29-  Approving a development agreement between the Village of East Dundee,
15   2010   Cook and Kane Counties and Dmyterko & Wright Development, LTD
10-  5-17-  Approving redevelopment agreement between Village of East Dundee, Cook
23   2010   and Kane Counties and VCNA Prairie
10-  9-7-   Repealing Ord. 09-18 authorizing the loan agreement for the village to
40   2010   borrow funds from the Public Water Supply Loan Program
10-  9-7-   Authorizing loan agreement for village to borrow funds from the Public
41   2010   Water Supply Loan Program
11-  1-3-   Authorizing execution of the Illinois Municipal League Risk Management
01   2011   Association Normal Contribution Agreement
11-  2-14-  Approving redevelopment agreement between Village of East Dundee and
09   2011   Tovar Snow Professionals
11-  4-11-  Approving redevelopment agreement between Village of East Dundee and
20   2011   Iceberg Development Group
11-  5-16-  Approving redevelopment agreement between Village of East Dundee ad
28   2011   Cozzi Discount Grocers, LLC (River Valley Shopping Center)
11-  6-6-   Approving redevelopment agreement between Village of East Dundee and SV
29   2011   (East Dundee), LLC
11-  7-21-  Approving redevelopment agreement between Village of East Dundee, Cook
33   2011   and Kane Counties and 7 Hills Healthcare Center, P.C.
11-  10-17- Approving redevelopment agreement between Village of East Dundee and
48   2011   Cozzi Discount Grocers, LLC (River Valley Shopping Center)
11-  11-21- Authorizing execution of the Illinois Municipal League Risk Management
50   2011   Association Normal Contribution Agreement
12-  1-30-  Approving redevelopment agreement between Village of East Dundee, CBJB,
01   2012   LLC and Made to Measure, LLC
12-  2-27-  Approving agreement relating to the redevelopment of 750 Dundee Avenue
12   2012
12-  6-30-  Authorizing the execution of a Memorandum of Understanding between the
30   2012   Village of East Dundee and the Max McGraw Wildlife Foundation
12-  10-1-  Approving a redevelopment agreement by and between the Village of East
80   2012   Dundee, Kane and Cook Counties, and GAT Properties LLC
12-  11-14- Approving the amended and restated development agreement with Pal Land,
86   2012   LLC
12-  11-19- Authorizing the execution of the Illinois Municipal League Risk
89   2012   Management Association Normal Contribution Agreement
13-  5-15-  Authorizing a redevelopment agreement by and between the Village of
14   2013   East Dundee, Cook and Kane Counties, and Piemonte’s Dundee Chevrolet,
            Inc.
13-  7-8-   Approving a lease agreement between the village and Save-A-Vet NFP,
22   2013   Inc.
13-  7-15-  Approving redevelopment agreement by and between the Village of East
24   2013   Dundee, Kane and Cook Counties, and Insurance Auto Auction
13-  8-19-  Approving redevelopment agreement by and between the Village of East
32   2013   Dundee, and Pampered Pets Services Resort & Spa, Inc.
13-  8-19-  Approving a redevelopment agreement for the East Dundee Downtown
33   2013   Redevelopment Project Area
13-  11-18- Authorizing the execution of the Illinois Municipal League Risk
41   2013   Management Association Normal Contribution Agreement
13-  11-18- Approving a lease agreement for William C. Bartels Park with the Dundee
44   2013   Township Park District
13-  12-2-  Approving a redevelopment agreement by and between the Village of East
49   2013   Dundee, Cook and Kane Counties, and the Anvil Club, East Dundee
13-  12-16- Approving a redevelopment agreement by and between the Village of East
50   2013   Dundee, Cook and Kane Counties, and Otto Engineering, Inc.
13-  12-16- Approving a lease agreement between the village and DeLoris Doederlein
55   2013
14-  3-3-   Approving a redevelopment agreement by and between the Village of East
05   2014   Dundee, Cook and Kane Counties and Dundee-Velazquez, LLC
14-  7-21-  Approving a redevelopment agreement for the development of the downtown
17   2014   district by and between the Village of East Dundee, Cook and Kane
            Counties, and Otto Engineering, Inc.
14-  7-21-  Approving a housing development agreement by and between the Village of
18   2014   East Dundee and River Haven Place, LP
14-  7-21-  Approving a redevelopment agreement by and between the Village of East
19   2014   Dundee and Gardiner Senior Apartments, LP
14-  10-20- Approving a redevelopment agreement by and between the Village of East
31   2014   Dundee and SV (East Dundee), LLC
14-  11-10- Approving a redevelopment agreement for the development of 455 East
37   2014   Main Street by and between the Village of East Dundee, Cook and Kane
            Counties, and SAAV Realty, Inc. and Green Bean, Inc.
            Approving a first amendment to the redevelopment agreement for the
14-  11-17- development of 455 East Main Street by and between the Village of East
40   2014   Dundee, Cook and Kane Counties, and SAAV Realty, Inc. and Green Bean,
            Inc.
15-  1-20-  Approving a first amendment to the redevelopment agreement for the
02   2015   redevelopment of the downtown district by and between the Village of
            East Dundee and Otto Engineering, Inc.
15-  1-20-  Approving a redevelopment agreement for the redevelopment of 207
03   2015   Barrington Avenue by and between the Village of East Dundee, Cook and
            Kane Counties, and 207 Barrington Avenue LLC
15-  2-16-  Approving a redevelopment agreement for the redevelopment of 185 Penny
06   2015   Avenue by and between the Village of East Dundee, Cook and Kane
            Counties, and MKM Hasselbring Family, LLC
15-  2-23-  Approving a revised redevelopment agreement for the redevelopment of
08   2015   207 Barrington Avenue by and between the Village of East Dundee, Cook
            and Kane Counties, and 207 Barrington Avenue LLC
15-  3-9-   Approving a water tower lease agreement with Chicago SMSA Limited
09   2015   Partnership d/b/a Verizon Wireless (Illinois Route 68 - Dundee Road)
            Approving a redevelopment agreement for the redevelopment of 10 North
15-  3-16-  River Street and 310 Jackson Street by and among the Village of East
11   2015   Dundee, Cook and Kane Counties, and Big Kahuna Corporation d/b/
            a Bandito Barney’s
15-  6-1-   Approving an amendment and restatement of redevelopment agreements by
27   2015   and between the Village of East Dundee, Cook and Kane Counties and Otto
            Engineering, Inc.
15-  7-20-  Approving a redevelopment agreement for the redevelopment of 110 North
34   2015   River Street, East Dundee, Cook and Kane Counties, Illinois.
15-  7-20-  Authorizing the execution of a commercial sales contract for the
35   2015   purchase of a certain portion of 6112 E. Main Street, East Dundee,
            Illinois.
15-  10-19- Approving a redevelopment agreement for the redevelopment of 611 East
45   2015   Main Street, units 111 and 301 East Dundee, Illinois.
15-  11-18- Approving an amendment to the lease agreement with Chicago SMSA Limited
47   2015   Partnership doing business as Verizon Wireless.
16-  3-7-   Approving a redevelopment agreement between the Village of East Dundee,
06   2016   Cook and Kane Counties, Illinois, and VCNA Prairie, LLC, a Delaware
            Limited Liability Company.
16-  3-28-  Authorizing the execution of a real estate purchase and sale agreement
11   2016   for the purchase of 110 North River Street, East Dundee, Illinois.
16-  7-18-  Approving a redevelopment agreement of 311 Barrington Avenue and
24   2016   repealing Ordinances 15-46 and 16-02.
16-  8-15-  Approving economic incentive agreement (Trot-N-Tot Toys, Inc.).
26   2016
16-  9-6-   Approving first amendment to redevelopment agreement of 185 Penny
29   2016   Avenue.
16-  9-6-   Approving a redevelopment agreement with Cucci Auto Group, LLC for
30   2016   property at 800 Dundee Avenue.
17-  3-6-   Amending the Route 68 West Redevelopment Project Area.
12   2017
17-  3-20-  Providing for feasibility study and report with respect to designation
15   2017   of a certain area as a redevelopment project area (Penny Ave. TIF).
17-  4-17-  Approving a development agreement between Village of East Dundee, Cook
21   2017   and Kane Counties and Speedway, LLC for the development of Lot 5 in
            Terra Business Park.
17-  5-1-   Approving employment agreement for Village Administrator.
24   2017
17-  5-15-  Approving amendment and restated redevelopment agreement between
28   2017   village and Pal Land, LLC.
17-  6-5-   Approving a redevelopment agreement between the village, Kane and Cook
31   2017   Counties, Illinois and Billitteri Enterprises, LLC.
17-  7-17-  Approving a redevelopment agreement for the redevelopment of 215
36   2017   Barrington Avenue.
17-  9-11-  Approving an amendment to the amendment and restatement of
45   2017   redevelopment agreements by and between the village, Cook and Kane
            Counties, Illinois and Otto Engineering, Inc.
17-  9-11-  Approving a first amendment to the redevelopment agreement by and
48   2017   between the village, Cook and Kane Counties, Illinois and Cucci Auto
            Group, LLC.
17-  12-18- Approving a second development agreement by and between the village and
57   2017   Pal Land, LLC.
18-  7-9-   Authorizing a development agreement by and between the village and 811
13   2018   Main St. Apts, LLC.
18-  9-10-  Authorizing a first amendment to development agreement by and between
33   2018   the village and 811 Main St Apts, LLC.
19-  5-20-  Authorizing an agreement terminating the redevelopment agreement by and
20   2019   between the village and Cucci Auto Group, LLC, as amended.
19-  10-21- Cook and Kane Counties, Illinois, approving the issuance of a TIF note
31   2019   to Pal Land, LLC.
19-  10-21- Cook and Kane Counties, IL, approving the issuance of a TIF note to Pal
32   2019   Land, LLC.
20-  3-2-   Authorizing a development agreement by and between the village, Cook
05   2020   and Kane Counties, and 811 Main St Apts, LLC, for 855 E. Main Street.
21-  1-4-   First amendment to the development agreement by and between the
02   2021   village, Cook and Kane Counties, and 811 Main St Apts LLC (855 E. Main
            Street Development).
21-  4-19-  Cook and Kane Counties, Illinois, approving the issuance of a TIF note
16   2021   to Pal Land, LLC.
21-  4-19-  Cook and Kane Counties, Illinois, approving the issuance of a TIF note
17   2021   to Pal Land, LLC.
21-  5-17-  First amendment to the development agreement by and between the
20   2021   village, Cook and Kane Counties, and Speedway LLC for the development
            of part of Lot 5 in Terra Business Park (Speedway LLC).
21-  6-21-  Authorizing a multi-county municipality intergovernmental agreement
25   2021   between the village and the Metropolitan Water Reclamation District of
            Greater Chicago.
            Authorizing a development agreement by and between the village, Cook
21-  9-13-  and Kane Counties, Chicago Title Land Trust Company, as successor
30   2021   trustee under its land trust numbered 11-5651, and HS Development AM,
            LLC (High Street Logistics Development).
21-  12-6-  Approving an employment agreement with the Village Administrator.
39   2021
22-  3-7-   Approving an assignment and assumption agreement regarding the
08   2022   redevelopment agreement by and between the village and Pampered Pet
            Services Resort & Spa, Inc.
22-  5-2-   Authorizing a first amendment and restated development agreement by and
20   2022   between the village and PAL Land LLC.
22-  11-7-  Authorizing a real estate purchase and sale agreement with the Dundee
50   2022   Township Foundation, Inc. for 611 East Main Street, Units 113, 121 and
            122.
22-  12-5-  Authorizing a real estate purchase agreement with Maiden Industrial LLC
51   2022   for 7 Maiden Lane.
22-  12-5-  Approving issuance of a TIF note to Pal Land, LLC (Route 25 TIF
54   2022   district).
22-  12-5-  Approving issuance of a TIF note to Pal Land, LLC (Christina Drive TIF
55   2022   district).
23-  2-20-  Authorizing a real estate purchase agreement with Anjum Shiekh for 2-
07   2023   4 N. Van Buren Street.
23-  4-17-  Authorizing a real estate purchase agreement with Haeger Industries,
17   2023   Inc. for property at the northwest corner of South Van Buren Street and
            Maiden Lane.
23-  6-26-  Amending Ordinance No. 23-17.
27   2023
23-  10-16- Authorizing a real estate donation agreement for a parking lot next to
47   2023   110 Railroad Street.
23-  10-16- Authorizing a real estate sale agreement and purchase of real property
48   2023   and lease back of property at 110 Railroad Street.
23-  12-4-  Authorizing a real estate sale agreement and purchase of real property
51   2023   at 304 Hill Street and 309 Jackson Street.
24-  6-24-  Approving the issuance of a TIF note to Pal Land, LLC (Christina Drive
23   2024   TIF district).
24-  6-24-  Approving the issuance of a TIF note to Pal Land, LLC (Route 25 TIF
24   2024   district).
24-  7-15-  Authorizing execution of a contract for sale of vacant land and
25   2024   purchase of real property at 106 S. River.
            Authorizing easement agreements for permanent public utility and
24-  7-15-  drainage easements and temporary construction easement agreements at
27   2024   107 N. Van Buren Street, 308 Hill Street, 311 Jackson Street and 102
            and 104-106 N. River Street.
25-  3-17-  Authorizing execution of a purchase and sale agreement for the
12   2025   acquisition of real property at 120 E. Railroad Street (gravel lot).
25-  4-21-  Approving a second amendment to the employment agreement for the
23   2025   Village Administrator.
           
 
 
TABLE IV: ANNEXATIONS
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
03-03    3-17-2003   Annexation of certain property commonly known as 33W026
                     Richardson Road, East Dundee, IL
06-30    8-21-2006   Annexing certain territory commonly known as the Family
                     Video Property, 6.56 acres
                     Annexation of certain property described as part of the
06-38    9-18-2006   west half of Section 24, Township 42 North, Range 8 East
                     of the Third Principal Meridian
10-34    6-21-2010   Annexation of property commonly known as 32W819 Dundee
                     Road
11-40    9-19-2011   Authorizing annexation agreement between Village of East
                     Dundee and Pima Illinois, LLC
11-41    9-19-2011   Annexation of property commonly known as 14N963 Route 25
12-33    6-30-2012   Annexing a portion of the Max McGraw Wildlife Foundation
                     property located on Illinois Route 25
12-35    6-30-2012   Annexing certain property commonly known as the GAT Guns
                     property at 14N915 Illinois Route 25
12-38    6-30-2012   Annexing certain property commonly known as 14N897
                     Illinois Route 25
12-41    6-30-2012   Annexing certain property commonly known as 14N881
                     Illinois Route 25
12-44    6-30-2012   Annexing certain property commonly known as 14N859
                     Illinois Route 25
12-48    6-30-2012   Annexing certain property commonly known as 14N837
                     Illinois Route 25
12-51    6-30-2012   Annexing certain property commonly known as 14N679
                     Illinois Route 25
12-62    8-20-2012   Annexing certain property commonly known as 14N806 and
                     14N808 Illinois Route 25
                     Authorizing annexation agreement with Chicago Title Land
20-22    6-1-2020    Trust Company, Trust Nos. 8002350431 and 8002350432 and
                     Altofer, Inc.
                     Annexing approximately 38.5 acres of property on the south
20-23    6-1-2020    side of Illinois Route 72 in the vicinity of Christina
                     Drive
22-35    8-8-2022    Annexing certain real property described as Lots 31
                     through 39 in Ringl's River Gardens Addition
25-03    1-13-2025   Annexing Plote Property located south of Higgins Road
                     (Route 72) and west of Beverly Road
25-08    1-13-2025   Annexing certain property located south of Higgins Road
                     (Route 72) and west of Beverly Road
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Illinois Compiled Statutes of 2002
References to 1981 Code
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO ILLINOIS COMPILED STATUTES OF 2002
ILCS Section Code Section
ILCS Section                              Code Section
Chapter 5, Act 70, § 1.01                10.04
Chapter 5, Act 70, § 1.02                10.04
Chapter 5, Act 70, § 1.03                10.04
Chapter 5, Act 70, § 1.04                10.04
Chapter 5, Act 70, § 1.05                10.02
Chapter 5, Act 70, § 1.07                10.02
Chapter 5, Act 70, § 1.08                10.02
Chapter 5, Act 70, § 1.09                10.04
Chapter 5, Act 70, § 1.10                10.02
Chapter 5, Act 70, § 1.11                10.04
Chapter 5, Act 70, § 1.12                10.02
Chapter 5, Act 70, § 1.15                10.02
Chapter 5, Act 70, § 1.16                10.02
Chapter 5, Act 70, § 1.17                10.02
Chapter 5, Act 70, § 1.20                10.02
Chapter 5, Act 70, § 1.24                10.02
Chapter 5, Act 70, § 1.28                10.02
Chapter 5, Act 70, § 1.29                10.02
Chapter 5, Act 70, § 2                   10.04
                                          30.05,
Chapter 5, Act 120, §§ 1 et seq.        32.09,
                                          32.11
Chapter 5, Act 120, § 1.05(b)            32.09,
                                          32.11
Chapter 5, Act 430, §§ 1-1 et seq.      31.04
Chapter 5, Act 430, § 5-15               31.04
Chapter 5, Act 430, § 5-65               34.84
Chapter 5, Act 430, §§ 10-10 - 10-40    31.04
Chapter 5, Act 430, § 15-10              34.83
Chapter 5, Act 430, § 50-5               31.04
Chapter 5, Act 430, § 70-5               31.04
Chapter 5, Act 430, § 70-5(a)            31.04
Chapter 5, Act 430, § 70-5(c)            31.04
Chapter 20, Act 1605                      137.02
Chapter 20, Act 1605, §§ 1 et seq.      137.02
Chapter 20, Act 1605, § 7.12             137.02
Chapter 20, Act 2910, §§ 0.01 et seq.   138.02
Chapter 20, Act 3125, § 15               151.002,
                                          151.012
                                          33.01,
                                          33.03,
Chapter 20, Act 3305, §§ 1 et seq.      33.04,
                                          33.09,
                                          33.12
Chapter 20, Act 3305, § 7                116.05
Chapter 20, Act 3410                      157.268
Chapter 30, Act 40 §§ 1 et seq.         53.003
                                          51.16,
Chapter 30, Act 550, § 3                 53.011,
                                          155.095
Chapter 35, Act 145, § 1                 35.06
Chapter 35, Act 145, §§ 1 et seq.       35.06
Chapter 35, Act 145, § 2                 35.10
Chapter 35, Act 505, §§ 1 et seq.       35.18
Chapter 35, Act 630, §§ 1 et seq.       115.077
Chapter 35, Act 638, §§ 1 et seq.    35.05
Chapter 50, Act 45, §§ 1 et seq.        55.06,
                                          55.07
Chapter 50, Act 105, § 4.1            31.03
Chapter 50, Act 710                       138.02
Chapter 55, Act 5, § 3-9005              138.02
                                          10.02,
Chapter 65, Act 5                         115.077,
                                          152.03
Chapter 65, Act 5, § 1-1-1 et seq.       30.06
Chapter 65, Act 5, § 1-1-2               10.02
Chapter 65, Act 5, § 1-2-1               10.99,
                                          111.99
Chapter 65, Act 5, § 1-2-1.1             10.99
Chapter 65, Act 5, §§ 1-2.1-1 et seq.   36.01
Chapter 65, Act 5, § 3.1-10-25           31.20
Chapter 65, Act 5, § 3.1-15-25           31.02
Chapter 65, Act 5, § 8-2-9.1             31.20
Chapter 65, Act 5, § 8-2-9.2             31.20
Chapter 65, Act 5, § 8-2-9.3             31.20
Chapter 65, Act 5, § 8-5-1               35.15
Chapter 65, Act 5, § 8-11-1              35.03,
                                          35.09
Chapter 65, Act 5, § 8-11-1 - 8-11-5     35.09
Chapter 65, Act 5, § 8-11-17 (repealed)  35.04
Chapter 65, Act 5, § 8-11-23             35.16
Chapter 65, Act 5, § 8-11-24             35.19
Chapter 65, Act 5, § 10-2.1-8            32.07
Chapter 65, Act 5, §§ 11-12-4 et seq.   155.030
Chapter 65, Act 5, § 11-20-11            95.07
Chapter 65, Act 5, § 11-20-12            95.07
Chapter 65, Act 5, §§ 11-74.3 et seq,   35.11
Chapter 65, Act 5, §§ 11-74.3-1 et seq. 35.11
Chapter 65, Act 5, § 11-139-8            51.39,
                                          53.064
Chapter 70, Act 1205, §§ 1-1 et seq.    116.05
Chapter 70, Act 2405, § 6.1              53.090
Chapter 205, Act 5, § 5g                 137.01,
                                          137.02
Chapter 205, Act 205, § 7008             137.01,
                                          137.02
Chapter 205, Act 305, § 42.7             137.01,
                                          137.02
Chapter 210, Act 45, §§ 1-101 et seq.   133.001
Chapter 220, Act 5, §§ 1-101 et seq.    35.14
Chapter 220, Act 5, § 2-202              115.077
                                          35.14,
Chapter 220, Act 5, § 3-105              59.03, 
                                          132.02
Chapter 220, Act 5, § 3-119              132.02
Chapter 220, Act 5, § 9-221              115.077
Chapter 220, Act 5, § 9-222              115.077
Chapter 220, Act 5, § 9-222.1            115.077
Chapter 220, Act 5, § 13-202             132.02
Chapter 220, Act 5, § 13-212             132.02
Chapter 220, Act 5, § 16-102             59.21
Chapter 220, Act 5, § 16-108.5(i)        59.21
Chapter 220, Act 5, § 21-201             54.02
Chapter 220, Act 5, § 21-301             55.02,
                                          55.03
Chapter 220, Act 5, § 21-401             54.02,
                                          55.01
Chapter 220, Act 5, § 21-401(b)(6)       55.02
Chapter 220, Act 5, § 21-801             55.01
                                          56.01,
Chapter 220, Act 5, § 22-501             56.03,
                                          56.99
Chapter 220, Act 50, §§ 1 et seq.       54.16
Chapter 220, Act 65, § 4                 54.05
Chapter 225, Act 10, § 3                 157.268
Chapter 225, Act 225, §§ 1 et seq.      53.047 ,
                                          58.004
Chapter 225, Act 440, §§ 1 et seq.      156.03
Chapter 225, Act 447, § 5-5              138.02
Chapter 230, Act 10, §§ 1 et seq.       137.02
Chapter 230, Act 15, §§ 1 et seq.       137.02
Chapter 230, Act 20, §§ 1 et seq.       137.02
Chapter 230, Act 25, §§ 1 et seq.       137.02
Chapter 230, Act 30, §§ 1 et seq.       137.02
Chapter 230, Act 40                       123.07,
                                          137.02
                                          116.05,
Chapter 230, Act 40, §§ 1 et seq.       123.01,
                                          137.01,
                                          137.04
Chapter 230, Act 40, § 1                 116.05
Chapter 230, Act 40, § 5                 123.02
Chapter 230, Act 40, § 65                37.01,
                                          123.06
Chapter 235, Act 5                        116.05
                                          116.01,
Chapter 235, Act 5, §§ 1-1 et seq.      116.05,
                                          116.99 ,
                                          123.02
Chapter 235, Act 5, § 1-3.02             116.05
Chapter 235, Act 5, § 1-3.23             116.01
Chapter 235, Act 5, § 2-1                116.03
                                          116.30 -
Chapter 235, Act 5, § 6-16               116.36,
                                          116.99
Chapter 235, Act 5, § 6-16.1             116.30
Chapter 235, Act 5, § 6-25               116.08
Chapter 235, Act 5, § 6-28.5             116.50
Chapter 235, Act 5, § 6-28.8             116.05
Chapter 235, Act 5, § 7-1                116.05
Chapter 235, Act 5, § 7-9                116.11
Chapter 325, Act 5, § 4                  133.001
Chapter 410, Act 82, §§ 1 et seq.       139.01
                                          35.16,
                                          122.01,
                                          122.02,
                                          122.03,
Chapter 410, Act 130, §§ 1 et seq.      122.08,
                                          133.063,
                                          133.064,
                                          133.103,
                                          157.071
                                          35.16,
                                          122.01,
                                          122.02,
Chapter 410, Act 705, §§ 1 et seq.      122.03,
                                          133.063,
                                          133.064,
                                          133.103,
                                          157.071
                                          52.02,
                                          157.003,
                                          157.065,
                                          157.266,
                                          157.267,
Chapter 415, Act 5                        157.270,
                                          157.300 -
                                          157.302,
                                          157.305 -
                                          157.307,
                                          157.310,
                                          157.313
                                          50.31,
Chapter 415, Act 5, §§ 1 et seq.        53.084,
                                          58.004
Chapter 415, Act 5, § 3                  157.266
Chapter 415, Act 5, § 3.21               50.31
Chapter 415, Act 5, § 3.32               50.30
Chapter 415, Act 5, § 3.45               50.31
Chapter 415, Act 5, § 3.53               50.30,
                                          157.267
Chapter 415, Act 5, § 3.83               50.30,
                                          50.31
Chapter 415, Act 5, § 3.150              157.003
Chapter 415, Act 5, § 3.155              157.003
Chapter 415, Act 5, § 3.160(a)           157.003
Chapter 415, Act 5, § 3.160(b)           157.305
Chapter 415, Act 5, § 3.160(b)(i)        157.302
Chapter 415, Act 5, § 3.270              157.003
Chapter 415, Act 5, § 3.330              157.003
Chapter 415, Act 5, § 3.360              136.01,
                                          136.02
Chapter 415, Act 5, § 3.500              157.003
Chapter 415, Act 5, §§ 14 et seq.       58.004
Chapter 415, Act 5, § 21(d)              157.268
Chapter 415, Act 5, § 22.33(a)(4)        157.267
Chapter 415, Act 5, § 22.33(c)           157.279,
                                          157.280
Chapter 415, Act 5, § 22.38              157.003
Chapter 415, Act 5, § 22.51(a)           157.302
Chapter 415, Act 5, § 22.51(g)(1)        157.302
Chapter 415, Act 5, § 22.51(g)(2)        157.302
Chapter 415, Act 5, § 22.51a             157.300
Chapter 415, Act 5, § 22.51a(b)          157.310
Chapter 415, Act 5, § 22.54              157.313
Chapter 415, Act 5, § 24                 157.270,
                                          157.305
Chapter 415, Act 5, § 39(m)              157.267,
                                          157.268
                                          50.30,
                                          50.32,
Chapter 415, Act 5, § 39.2               50.35,
                                          157.003,
                                          157.065
Chapter 415, Act 5, § 39.2(a)            50.35
Chapter 415, Act 5, § 39.2(b)            50.34
Chapter 415, Act 5, § 39.2(e)            50.35
Chapter 415, Act 105, § 3                136.01
Chapter 415, Act 105, § 4                136.02
Chapter 415, Act 105, § 5                136.03
Chapter 415, Act 105, § 6                136.04
                                          136.02 -
Chapter 415, Act 105, § 8                136.04,
                                          136.07
Chapter 415, Act 105, § 9                136.05
Chapter 415, Act 105, § 10               136.06
Chapter 430, Act 65, §§ 0.01 - 16.3     Ch. 138
Chapter 505, Act 100, § 2                93.02
Chapter 520, Act 10                       157.268
Chapter 525, Act 30                       157.268
Chapter 605, Act 5, §§ 1-101 et seq.    54.02 ,
                                          59.21
Chapter 615, Act 5                        152.01
Chapter 615, Act 5, §§ 11-12-1 - 11-12-1150.03
Chapter 625, Act 5                        70.01
Chapter 625, Act 5, § 1 et seq.          70.06
Chapter 625, Act 5, §§ 1-100 et seq.    136.01
Chapter 625, Act 5, § 1-179              134.01
Chapter 625, Act 5, § 1-188              10.02
Chapter 625, Act 5, § 3-413(a), (b), (f) 37.01
Chapter 625, Act 5, § 3-702              36.15
Chapter 625, Act 5, § 3-708              36.15
Chapter 625, Act 5, § 6-101              36.15,
                                          37.01
Chapter 625, Act 5, § 6-112              37.01
Chapter 625, Act 5, § 6-116              37.01
Chapter 625, Act 5, § 6-204              36.01
Chapter 625, Act 5, § 6-303              36.15
Chapter 625, Act 5, § 6-306.5            36.03,
                                          36.10
Chapter 625, Act 5, §§ 11-208 et seq.   70.02
Chapter 625, Act 5, § 11-208.3           36.03
Chapter 625, Act 5, § 11-306             36.07,
                                          36.14
Chapter 625, Act 5, § 11-501             36.15
Chapter 625, Act 5, § 11-1404            70.06
Chapter 625, Act 5, Chapter 12            37.01
Chapter 625, Act 5, § 13-111             37.01
Chapter 625, Act 5, § 15-102             37.01
Chapter 625, Act 5, § 15-107             37.01
Chapter 625, Act 5, § 15-109             37.01
Chapter 625, Act 5, § 15-109.1           37.01
Chapter 625, Act 5, § 18b-101            123.02
Chapter 625, Act 5, § 18c-7201           59.21
Chapter 625, Act 5, § 20-204             70.01
Chapter 720, Act 5, §§ 2.05 et seq.     130.006
Chapter 720, Act 5, § 3-1                130.020
Chapter 720, Act 5, § 3-2                130.021
Chapter 720, Act 5, § 3-3                130.022
Chapter 720, Act 5, § 3-4                130.023
Chapter 720, Act 5, § 4-1                130.035
Chapter 720, Act 5, § 4-2                130.036
Chapter 720, Act 5, § 4-3                130.037
Chapter 720, Act 5, § 4-4                130.038
Chapter 720, Act 5, § 4-5                130.039
Chapter 720, Act 5, § 4-6                130.040
Chapter 720, Act 5, § 4-7                130.041
Chapter 720, Act 5, § 4-8                130.042
Chapter 720, Act 5, § 4-9                130.043
Chapter 720, Act 5, § 5-1                130.055
Chapter 720, Act 5, § 5-2                130.056
Chapter 720, Act 5, § 5-3                130.057
Chapter 720, Act 5, § 5-4                130.058
Chapter 720, Act 5, § 5-5                130.059
Chapter 720, Act 5, § 6-1                130.070
Chapter 720, Act 5, § 6-2                130.071
Chapter 720, Act 5, § 6-3                130.072
Chapter 720, Act 5, § 6-4                130.073
Chapter 720, Act 5, § 7-1                130.085
Chapter 720, Act 5, § 7-2                130.086
Chapter 720, Act 5, § 7-3                130.087
                                          130.085,
Chapter 720, Act 5, § 7-4                130.086,
                                          130.087,
                                          130.088
Chapter 720, Act 5, § 7-5                130.089
Chapter 720, Act 5, § 7-6                130.090
Chapter 720, Act 5, § 7-7                130.091
Chapter 720, Act 5, § 7-8                130.092
Chapter 720, Act 5, § 7-9                130.093
Chapter 720, Act 5, § 7-10               130.094
Chapter 720, Act 5, § 7-11               130.095
Chapter 720, Act 5, § 7-12               130.096
Chapter 720, Act 5, § 8-1                130.110
Chapter 720, Act 5, § 8-2                130.111
Chapter 720, Act 5, § 8-3                130.112
Chapter 720, Act 5, § 8-4                130.113
Chapter 720, Act 5, § 8-5                130.114
Chapter 720, Act 5, § 8-6                130.115
Chapter 720, Act 5, §§ 11-6 - 11-22     111.28,
                                          111.49
Chapter 720, Act 5, § 11-20              133.003
Chapter 720, Act 5, § 11-21              133.004
Chapter 720, Act 5, § 11-30              133.002
Chapter 720, Act 5, § 12-1               132.01
Chapter 720, Act 5, § 12-2               132.02
Chapter 720, Act 5, § 12-3               132.03
Chapter 720, Act 5, § 12-5               132.04
Chapter 720, Act 5, § 12-5.1             132.05
Chapter 720, Act 5, § 12-12              133.002
Chapter 720, Act 5, § 12C-35             132.06
Chapter 720, Act 5, §§ 15-1 - 15-9      131.01
                                          36.15,
Chapter 720, Act 5, § 16-1               36.17,
                                          131.15
Chapter 720, Act 5, § 16-2               131.16
Chapter 720, Act 5, § 16-3               131.17
Chapter 720, Act 5, § 16-5               131.19
Chapter 720, Act 5, § 16-6               131.20
Chapter 720, Act 5, § 16-25              36.15
Chapter 720, Act 5, § 16D-2              137.01
Chapter 720, Act 5, § 17-1               133.015
Chapter 720, Act 5, § 17-2               133.016
Chapter 720, Act 5, § 17-5               133.018
                                          36.17,
Chapter 720, Act 5, § 21-1               131.02,
                                          131.04
Chapter 720, Act 5, § 21-3               131.03
Chapter 720, Act 5, § 24-1               36.15
Chapter 720, Act 5, § 24-1(a)            138.01
Chapter 720, Act 5, § 24-1(a)(7)         138.02
Chapter 720, Act 5, § 24-1(e)            138.01
Chapter 720, Act 5, § 24-1.9             138.01
Chapter 720, Act 5, § 24-2(a)            138.02
Chapter 720, Act 5, § 24-2(a-5)          138.02
Chapter 720, Act 5, § 24-2(a-6)          138.02
Chapter 720, Act 5, § 24-2(b)            138.02
Chapter 720, Act 5, § 24-2(d)            138.02
Chapter 720, Act 5, § 24-2(g)            138.02
Chapter 720, Act 5, § 24-2(g-6)          138.02
Chapter 720, Act 5, § 24-2(h)            138.02
Chapter 720, Act 5, § 24-2(i)            138.02
Chapter 720, Act 5, § 24-3.1             36.15,
                                          138.03
Chapter 720, Act 5, § 24-6               138.04
Chapter 720, Act 5, § 24.8-0.1           132.02
Chapter 720, Act 5, § 25-1               133.080
Chapter 720, Act 5, § 26-1               133.001
Chapter 720, Act 5, § 28-1               137.02
Chapter 720, Act 5, § 28-1(a)(4)         137.02
Chapter 720, Act 5, § 28-2               137.01
Chapter 720, Act 5, § 28-2(a)(1)-(a)(4)  137.01
Chapter 720, Act 5, § 28-3               137.03
Chapter 720, Act 5, § 28-5(a),(b)        137.04
Chapter 720, Act 5, § 31-1               135.01
Chapter 720, Act 5, § 31-8               135.02
Chapter 720, Act 5, § 32-9               135.03
Chapter 720, Act 5, § 36-1               36.15
Chapter 720, Act 545, §§ 0.01 - 7       Ch. 138
Chapter 720, Act 550, §§ 1 et seq.      133.063,
                                          133.103
Chapter 720, Act 550, § 1                36.15,
                                          133.060
Chapter 720, Act 550, § 2                133.061
Chapter 720, Act 550, § 3                133.062
Chapter 720, Act 550, § 4                133.063
Chapter 720, Act 550, § 5                133.064
Chapter 720, Act 550, § 6                133.065
Chapter 720, Act 550, § 7(b)             133.066
Chapter 720, Act 550, § 8(a)             133.067
Chapter 720, Act 570, § 100              36.15
Chapter 720, Act 600, §§ 2 et seq.      157.003
Chapter 725, Act 5, § 112A- 3            131.03
Chapter 725, Act 5, § 112A- 14(b)        131.03
Chapter 725, Act 210, §§ 1 et seq.      138.02
Chapter 740, Act 174, § 15(a), (b)       34.83
Chapter 745, Act 10, § 2-201             34.40
Chapter 775, Act 5, §§ 3-101 et seq.    157.030
Chapter 775, Act 5, § 6-101              34.83
Chapter 805, Act 105, § 101.80(m)        116.05
Chapter 815, Act 318, §§ 1 et seq.      157.003
Chapter 820, Act 130, §§ 1 et seq.      34.25
Chapter 820, Act 320, §§ 1 et seq.      31.05
                                          
 
REFERENCES TO 1981 CODE
1981 Code Section 2003 Code Section
1981 Code Section 2003 Code Section
3.01              31.15
3.02              31.16
3.03              31.01
3.04              31.17
3.05              31.18
3.06              31.19
3.07              32.01
3.08              32.02
3.09              32.03
3.10              32.04
3.11              32.05
3.12              31.02
3.14              32.07
3.15              32.08
4.01              34.01
4.02              34.02
4.03              34.03
4.04              34.04
4.05              34.05
4.06              34.06
4.07              34.07
5.01              91.01
5.02              91.02
5.03              91.03
5.04              91.04
5.05              91.05
5.06              91.06
5.07              91.07
5.08              91.08
5.09              91.09
5.10              91.10
5.11              91.11
5.12              91.12
5.13              91.13
5.14              91.14
5.15              91.15
5.16              91.16
5.17              91.17
6.01              51.01
6.02              51.02
6.03              51.03
6.04              51.15
6.05              51.16
6.06              51.17
6.07              51.18
6.08              51.19
6.09              51.20
6.10              51.21
6.11              51.35
6.12              51.36
6.13              51.37
6.14              51.38
6.15              51.39
6.16              51.40
6.17              51.41
6.19              51.99
10.01             33.01
10.02             33.02
10.03             33.03
10.04             33.04
10.05             33.05
10.06             33.06
10.07             33.07
10.08             33.08
10.09             33.09
10.10             33.10
10.11             33.11
10.12             33.12
10.13             33.13
12.01             93.01
12.02             93.02
12.03             93.03
12.04             93.04
12.05             93.05
12.06             93.06
12.07             93.07
12.08             93.99
12.09             93.09
12.10             93.10
12.11             93.11
13.01             50.01
13.02             50.02
13.03             50.03
13.04             50.04
13.05             50.05
13.06             50.06
13.08             50.99
14.04             92.05
14.20             92.04
15.01             90.01
15.03             90.03
15.04             90.04
15.05             90.05
                  90.06,
15.06             90.07,
                  90.08
15.07             90.09
15.08             90.13
15.09             90.14
15.10             90.15
15.11             90.16
18.1.01           115.001
18.1.02           115.002
18.1.03           115.003
18.1.04           115.004
18.1.05           115.005
18.1.06           115.006
18.1.07           115.007
18.1.08           115.999
18.1.09           115.999
18.2.01           115.020
18.2.02           115.021
18.2.03           115.022
18.3.01           115.035
18.3.02           115.036
18.3.03           115.037
18.3.04           115.038
18.3.05           115.039
18.3.06           115.040
18.3.07           115.041
18.3.08           115.042
18.3.09           115.043
18.3.10           115.044
18.3.11           115.045
18.3.12           115.046
18.3.13           115.047
18.3.14           115.048
18.3.15           115.049
18.3.16           115.050
18.4.01           115.060
18.4.02           115.061
18.4.03           115.062
18.4.04           115.063
18.4.05           115.064
18.4.06           115.065
18.4.07           115.066
18.4.08           115.067
18.4.09           115.068
18.4.10           115.069
18.4.11           115.070
18.4.12           115.071
18.4.13           115.072
18.4.14           115.073
18.4.15           115.074
18.4.16           115.075
18.4.17           115.076
18.6.01           115.090
18.6.02           115.091
18.6.03           115.092
18.6.04           115.093
18.6.05           115.094
18.6.06           115.095
18.6.07           115.096
18.6.08           115.097
18.6.09           115.098
18.7.01           115.110
18.7.02           115.111
18.7.03           115.112
18.7.04           115.113
18.7.05           115.114
18.7.06           115.115
18.7.07           115.116
18.7.08           115.117
18.7.09           115.118
18.7.10           115.119
18.7.11           115.120
18.7.12           115.121
18.7.13           115.122
18.7.14           115.123
18.7.15           115.124
18.7.16           115.125
18.7.17           115.126
18.7.18           115.127
18.7.19           115.128
18.7.20           115.129
18.7.21           115.130
18.7.22           115.131
18.7.23           115.132
18.7.24           115.133
18.7.25           115.134
18.7.26           115.135
18.7.27           115.136
18.8.01           115.150
18.8.02           115.151
18.8.03           115.152
18.8.04           115.153
18.8.05           115.154
18.8.06           115.155
18.8.07           115.156
18.8.08           115.157
18.8.09           115.158
18.8.10           115.159
18.8.11           115.160
18.8.12           115.161
18.8.13           115.162
18.8.14           115.163
18.8.15           115.164
18.8.16           115.165
18.8.17           115.166
20.01             95.01
20.02             95.02
20.03             95.03
20.04             95.04
20.05             95.05
20.06             95.06
20.07             95.07
20.08             95.08
20.09             95.99
22.101            155.001
22.102            155.002
22.103            155.003
22.104            155.004
22.105            155.005
22.106            155.006
22.107            155.007
22.108            155.008
22.109            155.009
22.201            155.025
22.202            155.026
22.203            155.027
22.204            155.028
22.205            155.029
22.206            155.030
22.218            154.032
22.219            154.033
22.220            154.034
22.221            154.035
22.222            154.036
22.301            155.045
22.302            155.046
22.303            155.047
22.304            155.048
22.305            155.049
22.306            155.050
22.307            155.051
22.308            155.052
22.309            155.053
22.310            155.054
22.311            155.055
22.401            155.070
22.402            155.071
22.403            155.072
22.404            155.073
22.405            155.074
22.406            155.075
22.407            155.076
22.408            155.077
22.409            155.078
22.410            155.079
22.501            155.095
22.502            155.096
22.503            155.097
22.504            155.098
22.505            155.099
24.01             151.001
24.05             151.003
24.06             151.004
24.07             151.005
24.08             151.006
24.09             151.007
24.10             151.008
29.01             156.01
29.02             156.02
29.03             156.03
29.04             156.04
29.05             156.05
29.06             156.06
29.07             156.99
30.01             152.01
30.02             152.02
30.03             152.04
30.04             152.03
30.05             152.05
30.06             152.06
30.07             152.06
30.08             152.06
30.09             152.07
30.10             152.08
30.11             152.09
30.12             152.10
30.13             152.99
30.14             152.11
32.01             112.01
32.02             112.02
32.03             112.03
32.04             112.04
34.01             112.15
34.02             112.16
34.03             112.17
34.04             112.18
34.05             112.19
34.07             112.21
34.08             112.22
34.09             112.23
34.10             112.24
34.11             112.25
34.12             112.26
35.01             114.15
35.02             114.25
35.03             114.26
35.04             114.27
35.05             114.28
35.06             114.29
35.07             114.30
35.08             114.31
35.09             114.32
35.10             114.33
35.11             114.33
35.12             114.45
35.13             114.46
35.14             114.47
35.15             114.48
35.16             114.49
35.17             114.99
36.01             116.01
36.02             116.02
36.03             116.03
36.04             116.04
36.05             116.05
36.06             116.06
36.07             116.07
36.08             116.08
36.09             116.09
36.10             116.10
36.11             116.11
36.12             116.99
37.01             35.01
37.02             35.02
37.03             35.03
37.04             35.04
37.04             35.08
37.05             35.05
37.06             35.06
39.01             153.01,
                  153.02
39.02             153.03
39.03             153.16,
                  153.17
                  153.35 -
39.04             153.41,
                  153.99
41.01             70.01
41.02             70.02
41.03             70.03
41.04             70.04
41.05             70.05
41.06             70.99
42.01, 1-1        130.001
42.01, 1-2        130.002
42.01, 1-3        130.003
42.01, 1-4        130.004
42.01, 1-5        130.005
42.02             130.006
42.03, 3-1        130.020
42.03, 3-2        130.021
42.03, 3-3        130.022
42.03, 3-4        130.023
42.04, 4-1        130.035
42.04, 4-2        130.036
42.04, 4-3        130.037
42.04, 4-4        130.038
42.04, 4-5        130.039
42.04, 4-6        130.040
42.04, 4-7        130.041
42.04, 4-8        130.042
42.04, 4-9        130.043
42.05, 5-1        130.055
42.05, 5-2        130.056
42.05, 5-3        130.057
42.05, 5-4        130.058
42.05, 5-5        130.059
42.06, 6-1        130.070
42.06, 6-2        130.071
42.06, 6-3        130.072
42.06, 6-4        130.073
42.07, 7-1        130.085
42.07, 7-2        130.086
42.07, 7-3        130.087
42.07, 7-4        130.088
42.07, 7-5        130.089
42.07, 7-6        130.090
42.07, 7-7        130.091
42.07, 7-8        130.092
42.07, 7-9        130.093
42.07, 7-10       130.094
42.07, 7-11       130.095
42.07, 7-12       130.096
42.07, 7-13       130.097
42.07, 7-14       130.098
42.08, 8-1        130.110
42.08, 8-2        130.111
42.08, 8-3        130.112
42.08, 8-4        130.113
42.08, 8-5        130.114
42.08, 8-6        130.115
42.12, 12-1       132.01
42.12, 12-2       132.02
42.12, 12-3       132.03
42.12, 12-5       132.04
42.12, 12-5.1     132.05
42.12, 12-10      132.06
42.13             132.20 -
                  132.23
42.15, 15-1       131.01
42.15, 15-2       131.01
42.15, 15-3       131.01
42.15, 15-4       131.01
42.15, 15-5       131.01
42.15, 15-6       131.01
42.15, 15-7       131.01
42.15, 15-8       131.01
42.15, 15-9       131.01
42.16, 16-1       131.15
42.16, 16-2       131.16
42.16, 16-3       131.17
42.16, 16-5       131.19
42.16, 16-6       131.20
42.17, 17-1       133.015
42.17, 17-2       133.016
42.17, 17-4       133.017
42.17, 17-5       133.018
42.19             133.030
42.19, 19-1       133.999
42.20             131.50
42.20, 20-2       131.51
42.20, 20-3       131.52
42.20, 20-5       131.53
42.23, 23-701     133.060
42.23, 23-702     133.061
42.23, 23-703     133.062
42.23, 23-704     133.063
42.23, 23-705     133.064
42.23, 23-706     133.065
42.23, 23-707     133.066
42.23, 23-708     133.067
42.24, 24-7       138.12
42.24, 24-8       138.05
42.25, 25-1       133.080
42.30, 30-2       134.01
42.30, 30-3       134.02
42.30, 30-4       134.03
42.30, 30-5       134.04
42.30, 30-6       134.05
42.30, 30-8       134.06
50.01             111.01
50.02             111.15
50.03             111.16
50.04             111.17
50.05             111.18
50.06             111.19
50.07             111.20
50.08             111.21
50.09             111.22
50.10             111.23
50.11             111.45
50.12             111.24
50.13             111.25
50.14             111.26
50.15             111.27
50.16             111.46
50.17             111.47
50.18             111.28
50.19             111.28
50.20             111.48
50.21             111.29
50.22             111.30
50.23             111.31
50.24             111.32
50.25             111.33
50.26             111.49
50.27             111.50
50.28             111.02
50.29             111.03
50.30             111.99
Art. I            157.001
Art. II           157.002
Art. III          157.003
Art. IV, A        157.004
Art. VI, A        157.015
Art. VI, B        157.016
Art. VI, C        157.017
Art. VI, D        157.018
Art. VI, E        157.019
Art. VII, A       157.030
Art. VII, B       157.031
Art. VII, C       157.032
Art. VII, D       157.033
Art. VII, E       157.034
Art. VII, F       157.035,
                  157.036
Art. VII, H       157.037
Art. VIII, A      157.050
Art. VIII, B      157.051
Art. VIII, C      157.052
Art. VIII, D      157.053
Art. VIII, E      157.054
Art. VIII, F      157.055
Art. IX, A        157.065
Art. IX, B        157.066
Art. IV, C        157.080
Art. IV, D        157.081
Art. IV, E        157.082
Art. IV, F        157.083
Art. IV, G        157.084
Art. IV, H        157.085
Art. IV, I        157.086
Art. IV, J        157.087
Art. IV, K        157.088
Art. IV, L        157.089
Art. IV, M        157.090
Art. IV, N        157.091
Art. IV, O        157.092
Art. V, A         157.105
Art. V, B         157.106
Art. V, C         157.107
Art. V, D         157.108
Art. V, E         157.109
Art. V, F         157.110
Art. XI, A        157.120
Art. XI, A1       157.121
Art. XI, A2       157.122
Art. XI, A3       157.123
Art. XI, A4       157.124
Art. XI, A5       157.125
Art. XI, A6       157.126
Art. XI, A7       157.127
Art. XI, B        157.140
Art. XI, B1       157.141
Art. XI, B2       157.142
Art. XI, B3       157.143
Art. XI, B4       157.144
Art. XI, B5       157.145
Art. XI, B6       157.146
Art. XI, B7       157.147
Art. XI, B8       157.148
Art. XI, B9       157.149
Art. XI, B10      157.150
Art. XII, A       157.190
Art. XII, B       157.191,
                  157.192
Art. XII, C1      157.205
Art. XII, C2      157.206
Art. XII, C3      157.207
Art. XII, D       157.220
Art. XII, D1      157.221
Art. XII, D2      157.222
Art. XII, D3      157.223
Art. XII, D4      157.224
Art. XII, F       157.999
Art. XIII, a      157.165
Art. XIII, b      157.166
Art. XIII, c      157.167
Art. XIII, d      157.168
Art. XIII, e      157.169
Art. XIII, f      157.170
Art. XIII, g      157.171
Art. XIII, h      157.172
Art. XIII, i      157.173
Art. XIII, j      157.174
Art. XIII, k      157.175
Art. XIII, l      157.176
Art. XIII, m      157.177
Art. XIII, n      157.178
Art. XIII, o      157.179
                  
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
59-2     3-16-1959   72.01
63-8     7-1-1963    72.01
67-10    8-21-1967   72.01
67-14    9-5-1967    72.01
73-7     4-16-1973   T.S.O. I
77-13    11-21-1977  Ch. 71, Sch. II
                     70.01 -
80-20    - -1980     70.05,
                     70.99
81-15    11-2-1981   72.01
82-11    4-19-1982   72.01
82-18    9-7-1982    72.01
83-11    6-20-1983   72.01
83-18    9-6-1983    Ch. 71, Sch. IV;
                     72.01
83-23    12-5-1983   32.07
84-02    4-2-1984    31.16
84-3     5-21-1984   34.05
84-10    6-18-1984   116.06,
                     116.07
84-11    6-18-1984   72.01
85-4     3-18-1985   72.01
85-6     4-15-1985   30.03
85-10    6-3-1985    72.01
85-11    6-17-1985   T.S.O. III
85-18    11-18-1985  Ch. 71, Sch. IV
85-19    12-2-1985   155.003
86-08    4-21-1986   72.01
86-15    4-21-1986   72.01
86-16    4-28-1986   31.17
86-18    4-28-1986   32.03
86-18    5-19-1986   31.02
86-27    10-6-1986   Ch. 71, Sch. III;
                     72.01
                     157.001 -
                     157.004,
                     157.015 -
                     157.019,
                     157.030 -
                     157.037,
                     157.050 -
                     157.055,
                     157.065,
                     157.066,
                     157.080 -
                     157.092,
                     157.105 -
        12- -1986   157.110,
                     157.120 -
                     157.127,
                     157.140 -
                     157.150,
                     157.165 -
                     157.179,
                     157.190 -
                     157.192,
                     157.205 -
                     157.207,
                     157.220 -
                     157.224,
                     157.999
87-10    4-20-1987   116.08
87-19    7-6-1987    Ch. 71, Sch. IV
87-21    9-21-1987   151.006
87-23    11-2-1987   Ch. 71, Sch. IV
87-24    12-7-1987   157.034
87-26    12-7-1987   116.01
87-01    12-21-1987  157.192
                     157.051,
87-28    12-21-1987  157.053,
                     157.087,
                     157.091
99-02    3-21-1988   72.01
88-06    5-16-1988   Ch. 71, Sch. III
88-12    9-19-1988   Ch. 71, Sch. IV
                     155.001 -
                     155.009,
                     155.025 -
                     155.030,
88-15    11-7-1988   155.045 -
                     155.055,
                     155.070 -
                     155.079,
                     155.095 -
                     155.099
88-16    11-7-1988   Ch. 71, Schs. I -
                     IV
89-14    8-21-1989   133.001,
                     133.999
89-16    9-5-1989    72.01
89-77    9-5-1989    116.07
89-20    9-18-1989   116.04
                     152.01 -
90-5     - -         152.11,
                     152.99
90-9     5-7-1990    157.031
90-10    6-4-1990    157.207
90-10    10-15-1990  157.066
90-16    8-6-1990    Ch. 71, Sch. III
90-19    1-15-1990   157.030
90-19    10-15-1990  157.037,
                     157.055
                     156.01 -
90-20    10-15-1990  156.06,
                     156.99
                     116.30 -
91-10    7-22-1991   116.37,
                     116.99
91-11    9-16-1991   72.01
91-14    11-18-1991  72.01
92-3     3-18-1992   153.99
92-06    7-6-1992    35.02
92-9     9-21-1992   153.39,
                     153.99
92-11    10-19-1992  70.05
92-12    11-16-1992  72.01
93-9     9-20-1993   91.11
93-10    10-4-1993   155.072,
                     155.073
93-13    10-18-1993  93.99
93-17    11-15-1993  93.06
93-21    12-20-1993  116.08
                     116.04,
94-02    2-22-1994   116.07,
                     116.10,
                     116.99
94-10    6-6-1994    116.04
94-16    7-5-1994    30.03
                     31.02,
                     31.03,
                     31.15 -
94-17    7-5-1994    31.17,
                     32.03,
                     32.07,
                     32.08
94-19    9-6-1994    116.02
94-20    9-19-1994   72.01
                     35.01 -
94-21    9-19-1994   35.03,
                     35.05,
                     35.06
94-22    9-19-1994   116.02
                     116.01,
94-25    10-17-1994  116.03,
                     116.08
94-31    11-7-1994   155.095
94-33    12-5-1994   133.030,
                     133.999
94-35    12-19-1994  151.008
95-03    2-6-1995    155.056
95-06    2-6-1995    70.03
02-02    2-20-1995   51.38
95-5     4-15-1995   31.18
95-09    2-20-1995   51.17,
                     51.37
95-16    8-7-1995    Ch. 71, Sch. V
95-19    9-5-1995    116.11
95-21    10- -1995   157.052
95-22    10-2-1995   72.01
95-29    12-8-1995   33.01 -
                     33.13
96-02    1-2-1996    32.04
96-03    1-16-1996   93.99, 94.03
96-03    2-21-1996   156.99
96-06    2-19-1996   Ch. 71, Sch. III
96-07    2-19-1996   153.16
                     153.38,
96-07    2-21-1996   153.39,
                     153.99
                     Ch. 71, Schs. II,
96-08    3-4-1996    IV;
                     72.01
96-09    3-18-1996   155.072
96-10    3-18-1996   156.07
96-16    4-29-1996   31.18
96-17    7-5-1996    31.15,
                     31.18
                     90.01 ,
                     90.03 -
96-18    9-3-1996    90.09,
                     90.13 -
                     90.16
96-18    5-19-1996   32.05
96-19    5-19-1996   31.17,
                     32.05
96-20    11-4-1996   157.019
96-22    11-18-1996  32.04
97-02    2-3-1997    156.03
                     133.095 -
97-06    5-5-1997    133.098,
                     133.999
97-13    6-16-1997   116.04
                     157.003,
                     157.240,
97-19    9-2-1997    157.243 -
                     157.251,
                     157.254
97-26    10-6-1997   Ch. 71, Sch. I
97-29    1-12-1997   157.052
97-35    12-15-1997  35.04
97-36    12-15-1997  115.090 -
                     115.098
97-37    12-15-1997  115.077
98-01    2-2-1998    157.003
                     157.034,
                     157.035,
98-10    5-4-1998    157.052,
                     157.054,
                     157.055,
                     157.066
98-18    10-5-1998   114.01,
                     114.02
                     31.02,
                     31.03,
                     31.15,
98-19    10-19-1998  31.19,
                     32.01 -
                     32.05,
                     32.07,
                     32.08
98-22    12-21-1998  151.006,
                     157.087
99-02    3-1-1999    157.035,
                     157.036
99-11    4-19-1999   155.072,
                     155.073
99-16    6-7-1999    116.06
                     58.001 -
                     58.006,
                     58.020 -
                     58.023,
                     58.035 -
                     58.038,
99-18    6-7-1999    58.050 -
                     58.055,
                     58.065 -
                     58.069,
                     58.080 -
                     58.083,
                     58.999
99-24    - -1999     157.066
99-33    10-4-1999   93.99
00-04    1-18-2000   116.05
00-05    3-6-2000    T.S.O. I
00-10    6-5-2000    156.03,
                     156.04
00-25    11-6-2000   50.03,
                     50.04
                     93.02,
00-29    12-18-2000  93.11,
                     93.99
01-01    3-5-2001    116.05
                     150.01 -
01-05    6-4-2001    150.05,
                     157.205
01-07    7-2-2001    116.05
01-13    8-20-2001   157.052
                     151.002 -
                     151.011,
2001-17  9-17-2001   151.013,
                     151.025 -
                     151.027
02-02    4-1-2002    51.21,
                     51.99
02-10    7-1-2002    72.01
02-12    8-5-2002    T.S.O. II
02-13    8-5-2002    T.S.O. II
02-15    9-3-2002    T.S.O. II
02-16    10-21-2002  92.04
02-17    10-21-2002  150.20
02-19    11-18-2002  T.S.O. II
03-01    1-21-2003   31.20
03-03    3-17-2003   T.S.O. IV
03-04    3-17-2003   T.S.O. II
03-05    4-21-2003   34.30
03-07    5-19-2003   T.S.O. II
03-08    6-2-2003    151.010
03-10    7-7-2003    T.S.O. I
03-11    7-21-2003   Adopting Ordinance
03-12    7-21-2003   34.30
03-13    8-4-2003    T.S.O. II
03-15    8-4-2003    133.001
03-17    10-6-2003   T.S.O. II
                     53.001 -
                     53.003,
                     53.010 -
                     53.014,
                     53.020 -
                     530.30,
03-19    10-20-2003  53.040 -
                     53.048,
                     53.060 -
                     53.067,
                     53.080 -
                     53.085,
                     53.090 -
                     53.099
03-20    10-20-2003  116.05
03-21    10-20-2003  51.37
03-22    10-20-2003  34.30
03-23    11-3-2003   T.S.O. II
03-24    11-3-2003   34.20
03-26    11-17-2003  51.19
03-28    12-1-2003   151.013
03-29    12-15-2003  T.S.O. II
                     157.033,
                     157.034,
04-01    1-5-2004    157.085,
                     157.107,
                     157.108
04-02    1-20-04     151.008
04-03    2-16-2003   T.S.O. II
04-05    3-15-2004   157.083
04-07    4-5-2004    T.S.O. II
04-09    4-19-2004   34.30
04-10    4-19-2004   52.01 -
                     52.03
                     116.03,
04-11    4-19-2004   116.05,
                     116.99
04-12    5-3-2003    T.S.O. II
04-13    5-3-2003    34.30
04-14    5-17-2004   31.04
                     157.033,
                     157.034,
04-15    5-17-2004   157.085,
                     157.107,
                     157.108
04-16    5-17-2004   157.083
04-17    5-17-2004   157.050,
                     157.065
04-18    6-7-2004    133.030
04-19    6-7-2004    Ch. 71, Sch. VI
04-20    6-7-2004    Ch. 71, Sch. II
04-21    6-7-2004    34.30
                     151.002,
                     151.008 -
                     151.010,
04-22    6-21-2004   151.013 -
                     151.015,
                     151.016,
                     151.025 -
                     151.027
04-23    6-21-2004   34.30
04-25    7-6-2004    T.S.O. II
04-27    8-2-2004    T.S.O. II
04-28    8-2-2004    116.05
04-29    8-2-2004    151.020
04-30    8-16-2004   70.06
04-31    9-7-2004    116.05
04-32    9-20-2004   155.072
04-33    9-20-2004   155.070
04-34    9-20-2004   91.04,
                     155.049
04-36    10-4-2004   34.30
04-37    11-1-2004   116.05
04-38    11-15-2004  T.S.O. II
04-39    11-15-2004  T.S.O. II
04-41    11-15-2004  Adopting Ordinance
04-43    12-20-2004  117.01 -
                     117.06
04-44    12-20-2004  157.015,
                     157.067
05-01    1-3-2005    32.07,
                     34.30
                     158.01 -
05-02    1-18-2005   158.06,
                     Appendix A
05-03    1-18-2005   34.30
05-04    2-7-2005    31.16
05-05    2-7-2005    34.30
                     157.243,
05-06    2-7-2005    157.249,
                     157.250
05-07    2-21-2005   T.S.O. II
                     10.01 -
05-08    2-21-2005   10.19,
                     10.99
05-09    2-21-2005   T.S.O. I
                     154.01 -
05-10    2-21-2005   154.10,
                     154.99
05-11    4-18-2005   34.30
05-15    8-1-2005    30.18
05-16    8-1-2005    157.207
05-17    8-15-2005   159.01 -
                     159.11
05-18    8-15-2005   30.19
05-19    9-6-2005    T.S.O. II
05-21    10-3-2005   30.20
05-24    10-17-2005  T.S.O. II
05-25    10-17-2005  116.05
05-26    11-7-2005   157.052
05-27    11-7-2005   T.S.O. II
05-28    11-7-2005   T.S.O. II
05-30    12-5-2005   30.22
05-33    12-19-2005  157.051
06-01    1-3-2006    34.30
06-02    1-3-2006    31.16
                     157.240,
06-03    2-6-2006    157.243 -
                     157.251,
                     157.254
06-04    2-6-2006    156.03,
                     156.04
06-07    3-20-2006   30.23
06-08    3-20-2006   34.01,
                     34.03
06-09    4-17-2006   34.40
06-10    4-17-2006   31.16
06-11    5-1-2006    35.09
06-12    4-17-2006   34.30
06-14    5-15-2006   157.066
06-15    5-15-2006   T.S.O. II
06-16    5-15-2006   34.30
06-17    6-5-2006    151.027
06-18    6-5-2006    116.05
06-19    6-19-2006   50.30 -
                     50.35
06-20    6-19-2006   T.S.O. III
06-22    6-19-2006   51.21
06-23    7-17-2006   156.02,
                     156.03
06-25    7-17-2006   116.05
06-30    8-21-2006   T.S.O. IV
06-33    8-21-2006   151.027
06-34    8-21-2006   116.05
06-35    8-21-2006   93.02
06-36    9-5-2006    35.09
06-38    9-18-2006   T.S.O. IV
                     151.002,
                     151.008 -
06-43    10-16-2006  151.010,
                     151.013,
                     151.016
06-44    10-2-2006   T.S.O. II
06-45    10-16-2006  T.S.O. II
                     156.02,
06-46    10-16-2006  156.03,
                     156.04
06-47    10-16-2006  51.37
06-48    10-16-2006  157.003
06-49    10-16-2006  157.051
06-50    11-6-2006   T.S.O. II
06-53    11-6-2006   152.02,
                     152.05
06-57    11-20-2006  50.08
07-01    1-8-2007    34.30
07-02    1-16-2007   157.106
07-03    1-16-2007   31.02
07-04    2-19-2007   51.21
07-05    2-19-2007   130.024
07-06    2-19-2007   34.30
07-07    2-19-2007   70.07
07-08    3-5-2007    30.20
07-09    3-19-2007   155.072
07-10    3-19-2007   35.07
07-11    3-19-2007   112.20
07-16    4-2-2007    30.01
07-17    4-2-2007    T.S.O. III
07-19    4-16-2007   51.38
07-20    4-16-2007   70.08
07-21    4-16-2007   34.30
07-22    5-7-2007    156.04
07-23    5-7-2007    156.03
07-25    5-7-2007    34.30
07-26    5-7-2007    112.04
07-27    5-7-2007    156.08
07-28    5-7-2007    34.30
07-29    5-7-2007    34.30
07-30    5-7-2007    34.30
07-31    5-7-2007    93.01
07-32    5-7-2007    133.001
07-33    5-14-2007   34.30
07-34    6-4-2007    T.S.O. II
07-35    6-18-2007   155.031
07-37    8-6-2007    70.08
07-38    8-6-2007    T.S.O. II
07-39    8-6-2007    34.30
07-43    10-15-2007  T.S.O. II
07-45    11-5-2007   156.03
07-46    11-19-2007  T.S.O. II
07-47    11-19-2007  50.02
07-48    11-19-2007  93.02
                     56.01 -
07-54    12-17-2007  56.03,
                     56.99
                     54.01 -
07-55    12-17-2007  54.22,
                     54.99
07-56    12-17-2007  55.01 -
                     55.07
                     57.001,
                     57.020 -
                     57.023,
                     57.030 -
                     57.037,
                     57.050,
                     57.051,
                     57.060 -
                     57.073,
07-57    12-17-2007  57.080 -
                     57.084,
                     57.100,
                     57.101,
                     57.110,
                     57.120 -
                     57.131,
                     57.140 -
                     57.146,
                     Appendix A
08-01    1-7-2008    93.08
08-02    1-22-2008   T.S.O. II
08-03    2-18-2008   139.01,
                     139.99
08-04    2-18-2008   34.30
08-07    3-3-2008    36.01 -
                     36.22
08-08    3-17-2008   T.S.O. III
08-09    3-17-2008   34.30
08-10    3-17-2008   116.05
08-11    3-17-2008   34.30
08-12    4-7-2008    116.05
08-13    4-7-2008    50.09
08-14    4-21-2008   34.30
08-15    4-21-2008   36.01 -
                     36.22
08-18    5-5-2008    T.S.O. I
08-19    5-5-2008    33.14
08-20    5-5-2008    33.15
08-21    5-5-2008    151.028
08-22    6-2-2008    157.050
08-23    6-2-2008    157.051,
                     157.052
08-25    6-16-2008   34.30
08-26    6-16-2008   34.30
08-27    6-16-2008   34.20
08-28    6-16-2008   Ch. 71, Sch. VI
08-29    6-16-2008   T.S.O. II
08-30    6-16-2008   T.S.O. II
08-31    6-16-2008   T.S.O. II
08-37    7-7-2008    35.10
                     133.100 -
08-38    7-7-2008    133.102,
                     133.999
08-39    7-7-2008    157.067
08-40    7-7-2008    157.003
08-41    7-21-2008   34.30
08-42    7-21-2008   34.30
08-43    7-21-2008   T.S.O. I
08-45    8-4-2008    T.S.O. II
08-46    8-4-2008    T.S.O. II
08-47    8-4-2008    T.S.O. II
08-48    8-4-2008    T.S.O. II
08-49    8-4-2008    T.S.O. II
08-50    8-4-2008    T.S.O. II
08-52    9-8-2008    157.193
08-53    9-8-2008    T.S.O. II
08-54    9-8-2008    T.S.O. II
08-55    9-22-2008   116.05
08-57    9-29-2008   35.11
08-58    9-29-2008   T.S.O. III
09-01    1-5-2009    116.05
09-02    1-5-2009    116.01
09-03    1-20-2009   T.S.O. II
09-04    1-20-2009   34.30
09-06    3-16-2009   50.03
09-07    4-20-2009   34.60
09-08    4-20-2009   34.50
09-09    4-20-2009   92.04
09-11    5-18-2009   32.07
09-12    6-15-2009   34.25
09-13    6-15-2009   31.16
09-14    6-15-2009   30.18
09-19    8-3-2009    116.05
09-20    8-3-2009    36.07
09-21    8-3-2009    53.062
09-22    8-3-2009    34.30
09-23    8-17-2009   116.05
09-26    9-8-2009    T.S.O. II
09-27    9-8-2009    157.052
09-29    9-21-2009   91.01
09-30    9-28-2009   35.11
09-31    10-19-2009  Ch. 71, Sch. IV
09-36    11-16-2009  116.05
09-39    12-7-2009   116.05
09-40    12-21-2009  Ch. 71, Sch. IV
10-01    1-4-2010    T.S.O. II
10-02    1-19-2010   T.S.O. III
10-04    2-1-2010    T.S.O. I
10-05    2-1-2010    T.S.O. I
10-06    2-16-2010   T.S.O. III
10-09    3-1-2010    34.30
10-10    3-15-2010   T.S.O. II
10-11    4-5-2010    150.20
10-12    4-5-2010    34.30
10-13    4-5-2010    34.30
10-15    4-19-2010   T.S.O. III
10-17    5-3-2010    32.07
10-18    5-3-2010    31.15
10-19    5-3-2010    31.01
10-20    5-3-2010    30.03
10-21    5-3-2010    150.01
10-22    5-3-2010    116.02
10-23    5-17-2010   T.S.O. III
10-28    5-17-2010   T.S.O. II
10-29    5-17-2010   T.S.O. II
10-30    5-17-2010   34.30
10-31    5-17-2010   34.30
10-32    5-17-2010   34.30
10-33    6-21-2010   T.S.O. I
10-34    6-21-2010   T.S.O. IV
10-35    7-6-2010    34.25
10-37    8-16-2010   34.20
10-38    8-16-2010   70.08,
                     157.051
10-39    9-9-2010    116.05
10-40    9-7-2010    T.S.O. III
10-41    9-7-2010    T.S.O. III
10-42    9-20-2010   34.30
10-43    9-20-2010   T.S.O. II
10-44    9-20-2010   T.S.O. II
10-45    10-4-2010   116.08
10-46    10-4-2010   T.S.O. II
10-48    10-18-2010  T.S.O. II
10-51    12-20-2010  70.09
11-01    1-3-2011    T.S.O. III
11-02    1-18-2011   36.07,
                     36.15
11-03    1-18-2011   34.30
11-04    2-7-2011    91.11
11-05    2-7-2011    T.S.O. I
11-06    2-7-2011    T.S.O. II
11-09    2-14-2011   T.S.O. III
11-10    2-22-2011   72.01
11-14    3-21-2011   T.S.O. I
11-15    3-21-2011   70.03
11-16    3-21-2011   70.03
11-17    3-21-2011   T.S.O. I
11-19    4-11-2011   35.11
11-20    4-11-2011   T.S.O. III
11-21    4-11-2011   150.20
                     157.003,
11-25    4-18-2011   157.053,
                     157.066,
                     157.067
                     118.01,
                     118.15 -
                     118.20,
11-27    5-16-2011   118.35 -
                     118.39,
                     118.45 -
                     118.49
11-28    5-16-2011   T.S.O. III
11-29    6-6-2011    T.S.O. III
11-30    6-6-2011    34.25
11-31    6-20-2011   T.S.O. II
11-32    7-11-2011   Adopting Ordinance
11-33    7-21-2011   T.S.O. III
11-34    8-1-2011    T.S.O. II
11-35    8-1-2011    T.S.O. II
11-39    8-15-2011   T.S.O. II
11-40    9-19-2011   T.S.O. IV
11-41    9-19-2011   T.S.O. IV
11-42    9-19-2011   T.S.O. II
11-44    10-17-2011  116.05
11-45    10-17-2011  34.30
11-46    10-17-2011  116.05
11-47    10-17-2011  116.05
11-48    10-17-2011  T.S.O. III
11-49    10-17-2011  T.S.O. I
11-50    11-21-2011  T.S.O. III
11-53    12-5-2011   116.05
11-54    12-19-2011  34.70
11-55    12-19-2011  T.S.O. I
11-56    12-12-2011  150.20
12-01    1-30-2012   T.S.O. III
12-04    2-27-2012   T.S.O. I
12-06    2-27-2012   T.S.O. I
12-07    2-27-2012   T.S.O. I
12-08    2-27-2012   T.S.O. I
12-09    2-27-2012   34.30
12-10    2-27-2012   34.30
12-11    2-27-2012   116.08
12-12    2-27-2012   T.S.O. III
12-15    3-12-2012   T.S.O. II
12-18    4-2-2012    30.18
12-21    4-16-2012   T.S.O. I
12-23    5-11-2012   34.25
12-24    5-21-2012   T.S.O. II
12-25    5-21-2012   T.S.O. II
12-27    6-18-2012   72.01
12-28    6-18-2012   53.015
12-29    6-18-2012   91.18
12-30    6-30-2012   T.S.O. III
12-33    6-30-2012   T.S.O. IV
12-35    6-30-2012   T.S.O. IV
12-36    6-30-2012   T.S.O. II
12-38    6-30-2012   T.S.O. IV
12-41    6-30-2012   T.S.O. IV
12-44    6-30-2012   T.S.O. IV
12-45    6-30-2012   T.S.O. II
12-46    6-30-2012   157.003,
                     157.053
12-48    6-30-2012   T.S.O. IV
12-49    6-30-2012   T.S.O. II
12-51    6-30-2012   T.S.O. IV
12-53    7-16-2012   93.11
12-54    7-16-2012   116.05
12-55    7-16-2012   116.08
12-56    7-16-2012   116.01
12-57    7-16-2012   116.05
12-58    7-16-2012   34.30
12-59    8-6-2012    32.04
12-60    8-6-2012    Adopting Ordinance
12-61    8-20-2012   T.S.O. II
12-62    8-20-2012   T.S.O. IV
12-73    9-4-2012    34.30
12-74    9-17-2012   T.S.O. II
12-76    9-17-2012   116.05
12-77    9-17-2012   34.20
                     137.01,
12-78    10-1-2012   137.02,
                     137.04
12-79    10-1-2012   35.12
12-80    10-1-2012   T.S.O. III
12-81    11-5-2012   T.S.O. II
12-82    11-5-2012   T.S.O. II
12-83    11-5-2012   T.S.O. II
12-84    11-5-2012   T.S.O. I
12-86    11-14-2012  T.S.O. III
12-89    11-19-2012  T.S.O. III
12-91    12-17-2012  116.08
13-01    1-7-2013    50.03
13-02    1-22-2013   Ch. 71, Sch. I
13-06    3-18-2013   34.25
13-07    3-18-2013   31.16
13-08    4-1-2013    157.003
13-09    4-1-2013    157.030 -
                     157.037
13-10    4-1-2013    157.050 -
                     157.055
13-11    4-1-2013    157.065 -
                     157.067
13-12    4-1-2013    157.065
13-14    5-15-2013   T.S.O. III
13-17    5-6-2013    T.S.O. II
13-21    5-6-2013    T.S.O. II
13-22    7-8-2013    T.S.O. III
13-23    7-8-2013    30.05 -
                     30.23
13-24    7-15-2013   T.S.O. III
13-28    8-19-2013   91.04
13-29    8-19-2013   110.01 -
                     110.17
                     36.01,
                     36.07,
                     36.09,
13-30    8-19-2013   36.10,
                     36.14,
                     36.23 -
                     36.26
13-31    8-19-2013   70.10
13-32    8-19-2013   T.S.O. III
13-33    8-19-2013   T.S.O. III
13-35    9-16-2013   34.30
13-36    9-16-2013   93.12
13-37    9-16-2013   53.02,
                     152.04
13-38    9-16-2013   T.S.O. II
13-39    10-21-2013  116.02 -
                     116.06
13-40    11-4-2013   Ch. 71, Sch. IV
13-41    11-18-2013  T.S.O. III
13-42    11-18-2013  Ch. 71, Sch. IV
13-43    11-18-2013  Ch. 71, Sch. VI
13-44    11-18-2013  T.S.O. III
13-45    11-18-2013  157.003,
                     157.065
13-46    12-2-2013   72.01
13-48    12-2-2013   116.05
13-49    12-2-2013   T.S.O. III
13-50    12-16-2013  T.S.O. III
13-51    12-16-2013  116.05
13-52    12-16-2013  51.17,
                     93.07
13-53    12-16-2013  34.30
13-54    12-16-2013  Ch. 71, Sch. I
13-55    12-16-2013  T.S.O. III
13-56    12-16-2013  72.99
14-01    1-13-2014   133.102,
                     133.103
14-02    1-13-2014   T.S.O. I
14-04    2-24-2014   93.08
14-05    3-3-2014    T.S.O. III
14-07    3-17-2014   34.25
14-09    4-7-2014    116.05
14-11    6-2-2014    116.05
14-14    7-7-2014    51.19
14-15    7-7-2014    34.30
14-16    7-21-2014   72.01
14-17    7-21-2014   T.S.O. III
14-18    7-21-2014   T.S.O. III
14-19    7-21-2014   T.S.O. III
                     157.065,
14-20    7-21-2014   157.300 -
                     157.314
                     157.065,
14-21    7-21-2014   157.265 -
                     157.285
14-25    8-18-2014   116.05
                     150.03,
14-26    9-15-2014   157.223,
                     157.240 -
                     157.254
                     155.004,
                     155.006,
                     155.007,
                     155.025 -
                     155.030,
                     155.045,
14-28    9-15-2014   155.046,
                     155.048,
                     155.049,
                     155.053,
                     155.076,
                     155.096,
                     155.099
14-30    10-13-2014  34.01
14-31    10-20-2015  T.S.O. III
14-32    10-20-2014  T.S.O. II
14-33    10-27-2014  30.13
14-34    11-3-2014   T.S.O. II
14-35    11-3-2014   93.08
14-37    11-10-2014  T.S.O. III
14-38    11-10-2014  31.17
14-39    11-17-2014  93.11,
                     93.99
14-40    11-17-2014  T.S.O. III
14-42    12-8-2014   116.05
15-02    1-20-2015   T.S.O. III
15-03    1-20-2015   T.S.O. III
15-05    2-16-2015   70.04,
                     72.01
15-06    2-16-2015   T.S.O. III
15-07    2-16-2015   116.05
15-08    2-23-2015   T.S.O. III
15-09    3-9-2015    T.S.O. III
15-10    3-16-2015   T.S.O. I
15-11    3-16-2015   T.S.O. III
15-12    3-16-2015   34.25
15-18    4-6-2015    72.01
15-19    4-6-2015    T.S.O. I
15-23    5-18-2015   116.05
15-24    5-18-2015   34.30
15-27    6-1-2015    T.S.O. III
15-29    6-15-2015   136.01
15-30    7-6-2015    119.01 -
                     119.04
15-31    7-6-2015    34.30
15-32    7-6-2015    110.12,
                     118.48
15-33    7-20-2015   T.S.O. I
15-34    7-20-2015   T.S.O. III
15-35    7-20-2015   T.S.O. III
15-36    7-20-2015   T.S.O. II
15-37    8-10-2015   T.S.O. II
15-38    8-17-2015   116.50 -
                     116.52
15-39    8-17-2015   T.S.O. II
15-40    9-21-2015   156.02
15-41    9-21-2015   92.06
15-42    9-21-2015   34.30
15-44    10-19-2015  116.05
15-45    10-19-2015  T.S.O. III
15-46    10-19-2015  T.S.O. III
15-47    11-18-2015  T.S.O. III
15-48    12-14-2015  157.003,
                     157.050
15-49    12-14-2015  T.S.O. II
15-50    12-14-2015  T.S.O. II
15-51    12-14-2015  70.11
16-02    1-19-2016   T.S.O. III
16-03    2-8-2016    116.05
16-04    3-7-2016    34.30
16-05    3-7-2016    156.02,
                     156.03
16-06    3-7-2016    T.S.O. III
16-07    3-4-2019    34.25
16-08    3-14-2016   34.30
16-09    3-21-2016   35.09
16-11    3-28-2016   T.S.O. III
16-13    4-25-2016   116.05,
                     151.027
16-14    4-25-2016   35.13
16-15    5-16-2016   T.S.O. II
16-16    5-16-2016   Ch. 71, Sch. IV;
                     72.01
16-17    6-6-2016    34.20
16-18    6-6-2016    116.05
16-19    6-6-2016    T.S.O. II
16-20    6-20-2016   31.21
16-21    6-20-2016   72.01
16-23    7-5-2016    72.01
16-24    7-18-2016   T.S.O. III
16-26    8-15-2016   T.S.O. III
16-28    8-15-2016   10.20
16-29    9-6-2016    T.S.O. III
16-30    9-6-2016    T.S.O. III
16-31    9-6-2016    116.05
16-33    12-5-2016   35.03,
                     35.14
16-34    12-19-2016  T.S.O. II
17-01    1-3-2017    35.12
17-03    2-6-2017    32.04
17-04    2-6-2017    T.S.O. II
17-05    2-6-2017    T.S.O. II
17-06    2-6-2017    T.S.O. I
17-08    2-6-2017    34.20
                     34.30,
17-09    2-6-2017    37.01,
                     70.05
                     37.01,
                     113.01 -
17-10    2-13-2017   113.03,
                     113.06 -
                     113.12
17-12    3-6-2017    T.S.O. III
17-13    3-7-2017    35.05
17-14    3-6-2017    116.05
17-15    3-20-2017   T.S.O. III
17-18    4-10-2017   T.S.O. II
17-21    4-17-2017   T.S.O. III
17-22    4-17-2017   30.01
17-24    5-1-2017    T.S.O. III
                     37.01,
17-25    5-1-2017    51.37,
                     53.062
17-26    5-15-2017   T.S.O. II
17-28    5-15-2017   T.S.O. III
17-29    5-15-2017   T.S.O. II
17-30    6-5-2017    34.25
17-31    6-5-2017    T.S.O. III
17-33    6-19-2017   T.S.O. II
17-34    6-19-2017   157.051
17-35    7-17-2017   110.18
17-36    7-17-2017   T.S.O. III
                     37.01,
17-40    8-7-2017    50.01 -
                     50.05
17-41    8-7-2017    50.10
                     37.01,
17-42    8-7-2017    120.01 -
                     120.07
                     121.01 -
17-44    8-21-2017   121.12,
                     121.99
17-45    9-11-2017   T.S.O. III
17-46    9-11-2017   116.05
17-48    9-11-2017   T.S.O. III
17-49    10-2-2017   T.S.O. II
17-50    10-2-2017   160.01 -
                     160.06
                     31.17,
17-52    11-6-2017   34.01,
                     34.03
17-53    11-20-2017  34.20
17-54    11-20-2017  151.002,
                     151.011
17-55    12-4-2017   116.05
17-56    12-11-2017  34.80 -
                     34.85
17-57    12-18-2017  T.S.O. III
17-58    12-18-2017  37.01,
                     156.08
17-59    12-18-2017  116.01,
                     116.05
18-01    2-5-2018    35.15
18-04    4-2-2018    151.006
                     37.01 ,
18-06    4-16-2018   50.01 -
                     50.05
18-07    5-7-2018    T.S.O. II
18-08    5-7-2018    37.01,
                     116.05
                     31.17,
18-09    5-21-2018   31.20,
                     34.05
18-10    6-18-2019   34.25
                     37.01,
18-11    6-18-2018   133.095 -
                     133.098
18-12    6-18-2018   37.01
18-13    7-9-2018    T.S.O. III
18-14    7-9-2018    T.S.O. II
18-15    7-9-2018    T.S.O. II
18-16    7-9-2018    T.S.O. II
                     51.16,
18-17    7-9-2018    53.011,
                     155.095
                     37.01,
18-18    7-16-2018   54.16,
                     59.01 -
                     59.21
18-20    8-20-2018   T.S.O. II
18-21    8-20-2018   T.S.O. II
18-22    8-20-2018   T.S.O. II
18-23    8-20-2018   T.S.O. II
18-24    8-20-2018   T.S.O. II
18-25    9-10-2018   116.05
18-33    9-10-2018   T.S.O. III
18-34    10-15-2018  37.01,
                     116.06
                     37.01,
18-35    10-15-2018  116.01,
                     116.05
18-36    10-15-2018  T.S.O. I
18-37    11-19-2018  116.05
19-01    1-7-2019    157.050
19-02    1-7-2019    T.S.O. II
19-03    1-21-2019   116.05
                     36.09,
19-04    2-4-2019    37.01,
                     93.99
19-06    2-18-2019   116.99
19-08    3-18-2019   T.S.O. I
19-09    3-18-2019   T.S.O. II
19-10    3-18-2019   T.S.O. II
19-15    4-15-2019   37.01
19-19    4-15-2019   T.S.O. II
19-20    5-20-2019   T.S.O. III
19-21    6-3-2019    34.25
                     154.01,
19-22    6-3-2019    154.02,
                     154.08
19-23    7-8-2019    133.096 -
                     133.098
19-24    7-8-2019    72.01
19-25    7-8-2019    151.011
19-26    7-22-2019   32.04,
                     32.07
19-27    8-5-2019    116.05,
                     137.02
19-28    8-19-2019   37.01
19-29    9-16-2019   35.16
19-30    9-16-2019   116.05,
                     116.11
19-31    10-21-2019  T.S.O. III
19-32    10-21-2019  T.S.O. III
19-33    10-21-2019  10.20,
                     37.01
19-35    11-4-2019   116.05
19-37    12-16-2019  37.01
19-38    12-16-2019  37.01
20-01    1-13-2020   35.16
                     122.01 -
                     122.10,
20-03    2-25-2020   133.063,
                     133.064,
                     133.100,
                     133.103
                     157.070 -
20-04    2-25-2020   157.074,
                     157.150
20-05    3-2-2020    T.S.O. III
20-07    3-23-2020   33.13
                     37.01,
20-09    4-20-2020   50.01 -
                     50.05
                     37.01,
20-12    5-4-2020    116.01,
                     116.05
20-13    5-4-2020    116.05
                     37.01,
20-14    5-4-2020    92.01 -
                     92.07
20-15    5-18-2020   T.S.O. II
20-16    5-18-2020   157.080
20-18    5-18-2020   T.S.O. II
20-19    5-18-2020   T.S.O. II
                     37.01,
20-20    5-18-2020   90.01 -
                     90.16
20-22    6-1-2020    T.S.O. IV
20-23    6-1-2020    T.S.O. IV
20-25    6-15-2020   T.S.O. II
20-26    6-15-2020   116.01,
                     116.05
20-29    7-13-2020   T.S.O. II
20-34    9-14-2020   159.05
20-44    12-14-2020  30.13
20-45    12-14-2020  T.S.O. II
21-02    1-4-2021    T.S.O. III
                     37.01,
21-03    1-18-2021   92.03,
                     92.05,
                     92.06
21-07    3-1-2021    116.05
21-08    3-15-2021   T.S.O. II
21-10    4-5-2021    T.S.O. II
21-11    4-5-2021    116.05
21-13    4-19-2021   34.100 -
                     34.103
21-16    4-19-2021   T.S.O. III
21-17    4-19-2021   T.S.O. III
21-18    5-3-2021    T.S.O. II
21-20    5-17-2021   T.S.O. III
21-21    5-17-2021   T.S.O. II
21-22    5-17-2021   T.S.O. II
21-23    6-7-2021    T.S.O. II
21-24    6-7-2021    T.S.O. II
21-25    6-21-2021   T.S.O. III
21-26    7-19-2021   116.05
21-27    8-2-2021    116.05
21-28    9-13-2021   T.S.O. II
21-29    9-13-2021   T.S.O. II
21-30    9-13-2021   T.S.O. III
21-31    10-4-2021   156.04
21-33    10-18-2021  T.S.O. II
21-34    10-18-2021  T.S.O. II
21-35    10-18-2021  T.S.O. II
21-36    10-18-2021  157.087
21-37    12-6-2021   116.05
21-39    12-6-2021   T.S.O. III
22-01    1-24-2022   153.17
22-02    1-24-2022   37.01
                     37.01,
                     116.01,
22-03    1-24-2022   116.04,
                     116.05,
                     116.08
22-04  1-24-2022   116.05
22-05    1-25-2022   116.05
22-07    3-7-2022    32.09
22-08    3-7-2022    T.S.O. III
22-09    3-7-2022    37.01,
                     116.04
22-10    4-4-2022    116.05
                     150.01,
22-11    4-4-222     157.207,
                     157.223
22-13    4-18-2022   157.050
22-14    4-18-2022   T.S.O. II
22-17    4-18-2022   35.05
22-18    4-18-2022   35.17
22-19    5-16-2022   37.01,
                     116.05
22-20    5-2-2022    T.S.O. III
22-21    5-2-2022    T.S.O. II
22-23    6-20-2022   116.05
22-24    6-20-2022   72.01
22-26    6-6-2022    T.S.O. II
22-27    6-6-2022    T.S.O. II
                     37.01,
                     51.38,
22-29    6-6-2022    51.39,
                     51.42,
                     53.063,
                     53.064
22-30    7-18-2022   116.05
                     37.01,
22-31    7-18-2022   116.04,
                     116.05,
                     116.08
22-32    7-18-2022   116.05
22-33    7-18-2022   151.006
22-34    7-18-2022   31.03
22-35    8-8-2022    T.S.O. IV
22-36    8-8-2022    30.13
                     37.01,
22-37    8-8-2022    70.06,
                     72.01
22-38    8-22-2022   116.05
22-39    8-22-2022   157.086
22-40    8-22-2022   157.003,
                     157.030
22-42    8-22-2022   T.S.O. II
22-43    8-22-2022   157.223
22-44    9-19-2022   157.003,
                     157.050
22-47    10-17-2022  T.S.O. II
22-48    11-7-2022   158.07
22-49    11-7-2022   116.04,
                     116.05
22-50    11-7-2022   T.S.O. III
22-51    12-5-2022   T.S.O. III
22-52    12-5-2022   T.S.O. II
22-53    12-5-2022   T.S.O. II
22-54    12-5-2022   T.S.O. III
22-55    12-5-2022   T.S.O. III
22-57    12-19-2022  T.S.O. III
23-01    1-23-2023   116.08
23-02    1-23-2023   T.S.O. II
                     37.01,
23-03    1-23-2023   116.04,
                     116.05,
                     116.08
23-04    1-23-2023   116.05
23-05    2-6-2023    70.04
23-06    2-6-2023    36.15
23-07    2-20-2023   T.S.O. III
23-08    2-20-2023   157.003,
                     157.050
23-09    2-20-2023   T.S.O. II
23-11    3-6-2023    116.05
23-12    3-6-2023    T.S.O. II
23-14    3-20-2023   120.01 -
                     120.07
23-15    3-20-2023   34.100 -
                     34.103
23-16    4-17-2023   T.S.O. II
23-17    4-17-2023   T.S.O. III
23-21    5-1-2023    111.02,
                     111.45
23-22    5-1-2023    157.050
                     157.003,
23-23    5-15-2023   157.050,
                     157.065
                     116.01,
23-24    5-15-2023   157.050,
                     157.065
23-25    5-15-2023   34.20
23-27    6-26-2023   T.S.O. III
23-28    6-26-2023   10.06
23-29    6-26-2023   116.05
23-30    6-26-2023   T.S.O. II
23-31    7-17-2023   116.05
23-33    7-17-2023   30.08,
                     30.18
23-34    8-7-2023    72.01
23-35    8-7-2023    31.05
23-36    8-7-2023    93.11
23-37    9-18-2023   116.10,
                     116.99
23-38    9-18-2023   120.04
23-39    9-18-2023   116.05
23-40    9-18-2023   30.05
23-41    9-18-2023   72.02
23-42    9-18-2023   T.S.O. II
23-44    9-18-2023   32.10
23-45    10-2-2023   37.01
23-47    10-16-2023  T.S.O III
23-48    10-16-2023  T.S.O III
23-51    12-4-2023   T.S.O III
23-52    12-4-2023   T.S.O II
23-53    12-4-2023   T.S.O II
23-54    12-4-2023   T.S.O. II
23-55    12-4-2023   T.S.O. II
23-56    12-18-2023  116.05
23-57    12-18-2023  37.01, Repeals 50.07
23-58    12-18-2023  35.17
                     150.01,
23-59    12-18-2023  150.02,
                     150.03, Repeals 153.15
24-02    1-22-2024   116.05
24-03    1-22-2024   T.S.O. II
24-04    2-5-2024    32.10
24-05    2-5-2024    116.05
24-06    2-19-2024   151.002
24-07    2-19-2024   37.01,
                     116.06
24-08    2-19-2024   157.050
24-09    3-4-2024    T.S.O. II
                     70.12,
24-11    3-18-2024   70.13,
                     Ch. 71, Scjh. VII
24-12    4-15-2024   116.05
24-13    4-15-2024   T.S.O. II
24-14    4-15-2024   T.S.O. II
24-15    4-15-2024   T.S.O. II
24-16    4-15-2024   30.20
24-17    5-6-2024    93.99
24-18    5-6-2024    32.09
24-21    6-3-2024    T.S.O. II
24-22    6-24-2024   121.09
24-23    6-24-2024   T.S.O III
24-24    6-24-2024   T.S.O III
24-25    7-15-2024   T.S.O III
24-26    7-15-2024   T.S.O. II
24-27    7-15-2024   T.S.O III
24-28    7-15-2024   34.20
24-29    8-19-2024   94.01,
                     151.002, Repeals 94.02 - 94.04, 151.014, 151.021
                     37.01,
                     113.01 -
24-31    9-23-2024   113.03,
                     113.06,
                     113.07, Repeals 113.04, 113.05, 120.08
24-32    9-23-2024   116.05
24-33    10-7-2024   36.09,
                     157.224
24-34    10-7-2024   157.207,
                     157.224
                     116.05,
24-35    10-7-2024   123.01 -
                     123.11, Repeals 137.05
24-36    10-21-2024  157.003,
                     157.065
24-38    12-2-2024   35.18
24-39    12-2-2024   35.19
                     37.01,
24-41    12-2-2024   70.11 -
                     70.14,
                     Ch. 71, Sch. VII
24-44    12-2-2024   T.S.O. II
24-45    12-2-2024   T.S.O. II
24-46    12-2-2024   T.S.O. II
24-47    12-16-2024  35.11
24-48    12-16-2024  37.01
25-01    1-13-2025   116.05
25-02    1-13-2025   116.05
25-03    1-13-2025   T.S.O. IV
25-05    1-13-2025   T.S.O. II
25-06    1-13-2025   T.S.O. II
25-07    1-13-2025   T.S.O. II
25-08    1-13-2025   T.S.O. IV
25-09    2-3-2025    37.01,
                     51.37
25-10    2-17-2025   94.01
25-12    3-17-2025   T.S.O III
25-13    3-17-2025   T.S.O. II
25-15    4-21-2025   150.20
                     151.002,
                     151.003,
                     151.005,
25-16    4-21-2025   151.006,
                     151.008 -
                     151.018,
                     151.021, Repeals 151.019
25-17    4-21-2025   T.S.O. I
25-18    4-21-2025   T.S.O. I
25-20    4-21-2025   116.05
25-21    4-21-2025   116.05
25-22    5-5-2025    Repeals 32.11
25-23    4-21-2025   T.S.O III
                    
 
 
