CITY CODE
of
EAST MOLINE, ILLINOIS
1974
Code current through:
Ord. 25-17, passed 12-1-2025
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
PREFACE
   This code of the City of East Moline, as supplemented, contains ordinances
up to and including ordinance 25-17, passed 12-1-2025. Ordinances of the City
adopted after said ordinance supersede the provisions of this code to the
extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent therewith. Consult the City
office in order to ascertain whether any particular provision of the code has
been amended, superseded or repealed.
      American Legal Publishing
      Cincinnati, Ohio
ORDINANCES PENDING CODIFICATION
Listed ordinances have been passed, but they have not been incorporated into
the code and they may not show the original ordinances in their entirety.
Please contact the office of the clerk if there are any questions concerning
the ordinances listed.
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE NO. 74-23
   AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING THE CITY CODE OF EAST MOLINE, ILLINOIS
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF EAST MOLINE,
ILLINOIS:
   SECTION 1. From and after the date of passage of this Ordinance, the City
Code of the City of East Moline, Illinois, prepared by Sterling Codifiers,
Inc., under the direction of the Governing Body of the City, containing all
ordinances of a general nature in effect at the time of such codification,
shall be accepted in all Courts without question as the Official Code and Law
of the City as enacted by the Mayor and City Council.
   SECTION 2. There is hereby adopted, as a method of perpetual codification,
the loose-leaf type of binding together with the continuous supplement service
provided by Sterling Codifiers, Inc., whereby each newly adopted ordinance of a
general and permanent nature amending, altering, adding to or deleting
provisions of the Official City Code is identified by the proper catchline and
is inserted in the proper place in each of the official copies. Each such new
provision shall become effective upon the passage of the ordinance and the
insertion of the proper replacement pages in the copies of the Code, three (3)
copies of which shall be maintained in the office of the City Clerk, certified
as to correctness and available for inspection at any and all times that said
office is regularly open.
   SECTION 3. All ordinances of a general nature included in this Official City
Code shall be considered as a continuation of said ordinance provision and the
fact that some provisions have been deliberately eliminated by the Governing
Body shall not serve to cause any interruption in the continuous effectiveness
of ordinances included in said Official City Code.
All ordinances of a special nature, such as tax levy ordinances, bond
ordinances, franchises, vacating ordinances and annexation ordinances shall
continue in full force and effect unless specifically repealed or amended by a
provision of the City Code. Such ordinances are not intended to be included in
this Official City Code.
   SECTION 4. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to
change or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of such Code, or
to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such
Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the City to be
misrepresented thereby.
Any person, firm or corporation violating this Section shall be punished as
provided in Section
1-4-1 of the City Code of East Moline, Illinois.
   SECTION 5. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are,
to the extent of such conflict, hereby repealed.
   SECTION 6. This Ordinance and the Code adopted by the same shall be in full
force and effect from and after its passage and approval in accordance with
law, as printed and published in book form by order of the Mayor and City
Council.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/f4ad9eca2d4148857eadc5eb589d10ae51e55e08/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3027.gif]
TITLE 1
ADMINISTRATIVE
CHAPTER 1
OFFICIAL CODE
SECTION:
1-1-1: Title
1-1-2: Acceptance
1-1-3: Amendments
1-1-4: Interpretations
1-1-5: Code Alteration
1-1-1: TITLE:
Upon adoption by the Council this City Code is hereby declared to be and shall
hereafter constitute the official City Code of the City of East Moline. This
City Code of Ordinances shall be known and cited as the East Moline City Code,
and it is hereby publisshed by authority of the Council and shall be kept up to
date as provided in Section
1-1-3 of this Chapter under the direction of the City Attorney, acting for said
City Council. Any reference to the number of any Section contained herein shall
be understood to refer to the position of the same number, its appropriate
Chapter and Title heading, and to the general penalty clause relating thereto,
as well as to the Section itself, when reference is made to this City Code by
title in any legal documents. (1974 Code)
1-1-2: ACCEPTANCE 1 :
This City Code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be
received without further proof in all courts and in all administrative
tribunals of this State as the ordinances of the City of general and permanent
effect, except the excluded ordinances enumerated in Section
1-2-1 of this Title. (1974 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/1-2-6.
1-1-3: AMENDMENTS:
Any ordinance amending this City Code shall set forth the Title, Chapter and
Section number of the Section or Sections to be amended, and this shall
constitute a sufficient compliance with any statutory requirement pertaining to
the amendment or revision by ordinance of any part of this City Code. All such
amendments or revisions by ordinance shall be immediately forwarded to the
codifiers and the said ordinance material shall be prepared for insertion in
its proper place in each copy of this City Code. Each such replacement page
shall be properly identified and shall be inserted in each individual copy of
the City Code within thirty (30) days from the date of its final passage. (1974
Code)
1-1-4: INTERPRETATIONS:
In the determination of the provisions of each Section of this Code the
following rules shall be observed:
   (A)   Intent To Defraud: Whenever an intent to defraud is required in order
to constitute an offense, it shall be sufficient if an intent appears to
defraud any person.
   (B)   Liability Of Employers And Agents: When the provisions of any Section
of this City Code prohibits the commission of an act, not only the person
actually doing the prohibited act or omitting the directed act, but also the
employer and all other persons concerned with or in aiding or abetting the said
person shall be guilty of the offense described and liable to the penalty set
forth. (1974 Code)
1-1-5: CODE ALTERATION:
It shall be deemed unlawful for any person to alter, change, replace or deface
in any way any Section or any page of this City Code in such a manner that the
meaning of any phrase or order may be changed or omitted. Replacement pages may
be inserted according to the official instructions when so authorized by the
City Council. The Clerk shall see that the replacement pages are properly
inserted in the official copies maintained in the office of the Clerk. Any
person having in his custody an official copy of this City Code shall make
every effort to maintain said Code in an up to date and efficient manner. He
shall see to the immediate insertion of new or replacement pages when such are
delivered to him or made available to him through the office of the City Clerk.
Said Code books, while in actual possession of officials and other interested
persons, shall be and remain the property of the City and shall be returned to
the office of the Clerk when directed so to do by order of the City Council.
(1974 Code)
CHAPTER 2
SAVING CLAUSE
SECTION:
1-2-1: Repeal Of General Ordinances
1-2-2: Public Utility Ordinances
1-2-3: Court Proceedings
1-2-1: REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES:
All general ordinances of the City passed prior to the adoption of this City
Code are hereby repealed, except such as are referred to herein as being still
in force or are by necessary implication herein reserved from repeal (subject
to the saving clauses contained in the following Section), from which are
excluded the following ordinances which are not hereby repealed: tax levy
ordinances; appropriation ordinances, ordinances relating to boundaries and
annexations; franchise ordinances and other ordinances granting special rights
to persons or corporations; contract ordinances and ordinances authorizing the
execution of a contract or the issuance of warrants; salary ordinances;
encroachment ordinances; ordinances establishing, naming or vacating streets,
alleys or other public places; improvement ordinances; bond ordinances;
ordinances relating to elections; ordinances relating to the transfer or
acceptance of real estate by or from the City; and all special ordinances.
(1974 Code)
1-2-2: PUBLIC UTILITY ORDINANCES:
No ordinance relating to railroads or railroad crossings with streets and other
public ways, or relating to the conduct, duties, service or rates of public
utilities shall be repealed by virtue of the adoption of this City Code or by
virtue of the preceding Section, excepting as this City Code may contain
provisions for such matters, in which case this City Code shall be considered
as amending such ordinance or ordinances in respect to such provisions only.
(1974 Code)
1-2-3: COURT PROCEEDINGS:
No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a former ordinance,
whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not, as to any offense
committed against such former ordinance or as to any act done, any penalty,
forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued or claim arising
under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any such offense
or act so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so
incurred or any right accrued or claim arising before the new ordinance takes
effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter shall conform to the
ordinance in force at the time of such proceeding, so far as practicable. If
any penalty, forfeiture or punishment be mitigated by any provision of a new
ordinance, such provision may be, by the consent of the party affected, applied
to any judgment announced after the new ordinance takes effect.
This Section shall extend to all repeals, either by express words or
implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making any new provisions
upon the same subject or in any other ordinance.
Nothing contained in this Chapter shall be construed as abating any action now
pending under or by virtue of any general ordinance of the City herein repealed
and the provisions of all general ordinances contained in this Code shall be
deemed to be continuing provisions and not a new enactment of the same
provision; nor shall this Chapter be deemed as discontinuing, abating,
modifying or altering any penalty accrued or to accrue, or as affecting the
liability of any person, firm or corporation, or as waiving any right of the
City under any ordinance or provision thereof in force at the time of the
adoption of this City Code. (1974 Code)
CHAPTER 3
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
1-3-1: Construction Of Words
1-3-2: Definitions, General
1-3-3: Catchlines
1-3-1: CONSTRUCTION OF WORDS:
Whenever any word in any Section of this City Code importing the plural number
is used in describing or referring to any matters, parties or persons, any
single matter, party or person shall be deemed to be included, although
distributive words may not have been used.
When any subject matter, party or person is referred to in this City Code by
words importing the singular number only, or the masculine gender, several
matters, parties or persons and females as well as males and bodies corporate
shall be deemed to be included; provided, that these rules of construction
shall not be applied to any Section of this City Code which contains any
express provision excluding such construction or where the subject matter or
context may be repugnant thereto. (1974 Code)
1-3-2: DEFINITIONS, GENERAL:
Whenever the following words or terms are used in this Code they shall have the
meanings herein ascribed to them, unless the context makes such meaning
repugnant thereto:
AGENT: A person acting on behalf of another.
CITY: The City of East Moline, Rock Island County, State of Illinois.
CODE: Unless otherwise specifically stated shall mean this City Code.
EMPLOYEES: Whenever reference is made in this Code to a City employee by title
only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words "of the City of
East Moline".
FEE: A sum of money charged by the City for the carrying on of a business,
profession or occupation.
FISCAL YEAR: The fiscal year for the City shall begin on the first day of May
of each year and end on the last day of April of the following year.
KNOWINGLY: Imports only a knowledge that the facts exist which brings the act
or omission within the provisions of this Code. It does not require any
knowledge of the unlawfulness of such act or omission.
LICENSE: The permission granted for the carrying on of a business, profession
or occupation.
MISDEMEANOR: Any offense deemed a violation of the provisions of this Code
which is a lesser offense than a felony as defined by State law.
NEGLIGENT: The word "negligent", as well as "neglect", "negligence" and
"negligently" imports a want of such attention to the nature of probable
consequences of the act or omission as a prudent man ordinarily bestows in
acting in his own concern.
NUISANCE: Anything offensive or obnoxious to the health and welfare of the
inhabitants of the City; or any act or thing repugnant to, or creating a hazard
to, or having a detrimental effect on the property of another person or to the
community.
OCCUPANT: The word "occupant" applied to a building or land shall include any
person who occupies the whole or any part of such building or land whether
alone or with others.
OFFENSE: Any act forbidden by any provision of this Code or the omission of any
act required by the provisions of this Code.
OFFICERS: Whenever reference is made in this Code to a City officer by title
only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words "of the City of
East Moline".
OFFICIAL TIME: Central Standard Time shall be the official time for the
transaction of City business; except from two o'clock (2:00) A.M. on the last
Sunday of April of each year, the official time shall be advanced one hour
until two o'clock (2:00) A.M. of the last Sunday in October, at which time the
official time shall return to Central Standard Time.
All clocks and other timepieces in or upon public buildings or other premises
maintained by or at the expense of the City shall be set and run at the
official time prescribed by this Section.
OPERATOR: The person who is in charge of any operation, business or profession.
OWNER: When applied to a building or land shall include any part owner, joint
owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or lessee of the whole or of a part of
such building or land.
PERSON: Shall include the singular and the plural and shall also mean and
include any person, firm, corporation, association, partnership or any other
form of association or organization.
PERSONAL PROPERTY: Shall include every description of money, goods, chattels,
effects, evidence of rights in action and all written instruments by which any
pecuniary obligation, right or title to property is created, acknowledged,
transferred, increased, defeated, discharged or diminished and every right or
interest therein.
RETAILER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate
to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things in small quantities
direct to the consumer.
RIGHT OF WAY: The privilege of the immediate use of the roadway or other
property.
STREET: Shall include alleys, lanes, courts, boulevards, public ways, public
squares, public places and sidewalks.
TENANT: As applied to a building or land, shall include any person who occupies
the whole or any part of such building or land whether alone or with others.
WHOLESALER: The word "wholesaler" and "wholesale dealer" as used in this Code,
unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate to the
sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things in quantity to persons who
purchase for the purpose of resale.
WILFULLY: The term "wilfully" when applied to the intent with which an act is
done or omitted, implies simply a purpose or willingness to commit the act or
make the omission referred to. It does not require any intent to violate law,
or to injure another, or to acquire an advantage.
WRITTEN, IN WRITING: May include printing and any other mode of representing
word and letters, but when the written signature of any person is required by
law to any official or public writing or bond required by law, it shall be in
the proper handwriting of such person, or in case he is unable to write, by his
proper mark. (M.C. 1962, secs. 11.902, 11.906; amd. 1974 Code)
1-3-3: CATCHLINES:
The catchlines of the several sections of this City Code are intended as mere
catchwords to indicate the content of the section and shall not be deemed or
taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor unless
expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections,
including the catchlines, are amended or re-enacted. (1974 Code)
CHAPTER 4
GENERAL PENALTY
SECTION:
1-4-1: General Penalty
1-4-2: License
1-4-3: Application
1-4-4: Liability Of Officers
1-4-5: Judiciary
1-4-1: GENERAL PENALTY:
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided, any person convicted of a violation of
any section or provision of this code shall be fined in a sum not less than
fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00).
Said violation shall be deemed a misdemeanor. Each day which such violation
occurs and continues shall constitute a separate violation.
   (B)   A penalty imposed for violation of an ordinance may include, or
consist of, a requirement that the defendant perform some reasonable public
service work such as, but not limited to, the picking up of litter in public
parks or along public highways or the maintenance of public facilities.
   (C)   Bail for all city ordinance offenses, punishable by fine not in excess
of seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00), shall be seventy five dollars
($75.00) cash. (Ord. 07-17, 10-1-2007)
1-4-2: LICENSE:
When a person is convicted of a violation of any section of this code, any
license previously issued to him by the city may be revoked by a court of
competent jurisdiction or by the city council. (1974 Code)
1-4-3: APPLICATION:
The penalty provided in this chapter shall be applicable to every section of
this code the same as though it were a part of each and every separate section.
Any person convicted of a violation of any section of this code where any duty
is prescribed or obligation imposed, or where any action which is of a
continuing nature is forbidden or declared to be unlawful, shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each
day such duty or obligation remains unperformed or such act continues, unless
otherwise specifically provided in this code.
In all cases where the same offense is made punishable or is created by
different clauses or sections of this code, the prosecuting officer may elect
under which to proceed; but not more than one recovery shall be had against the
same person for the same offense; provided, that the revocation of a license or
permit shall not be considered a recovery or penalty so as to bar any other
penalty being enforced.
Whenever the doing of any act or the omission to do any act constitutes a
breach of any section or provision of this code and there shall be no fine or
penalty specifically declared for such breach, the provisions of this chapter
shall apply and a separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day
during or on which a breach or violation occurs or continues. (1974 Code)
1-4-4: LIABILITY OF OFFICERS:
No provision of this code designating the duties of any officer or employee
shall be so construed as to make such officer or employee liable for any fine
or penalty provided for a failure to perform such duty, unless the intention of
the council to impose such fine or penalty on such officer or employee is
specifically and clearly expressed in the section creating the duty. (1974
Code)
1-4-5: JUDICIARY:
Administrative adjudication of violations of city ordinances:
   (A)   Purpose: The stated purpose of this section is to provide for fair and
efficient enforcement of city ordinances as may be allowed by law and directed
by ordinance, through an administrative adjudication of violations of such city
ordinances and establishing a schedule of fines and penalties, and authority
and procedures for collection of unpaid fines and penalties, pursuant to
authority granted to all municipalities under 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/
1-2.2.
   (B)   Creation: There is hereby established an executive department of the
municipal government to be known as the East Moline ordinance enforcement
department (hereinafter referred to as "EMOED") and to have the power to
enforce compliance with all municipal ordinances as from time to time
authorized by the city council, except for any offense under the Illinois
vehicle code or a similar offense that is a traffic regulation governing the
movement of vehicles and except for any reportable offense under section 6-204
of the Illinois vehicle code, other than a notice of violation pursuant to an
automated traffic law enforcement system which shall be enforced pursuant to
this section. The EMOED shall not prosecute building code violations that must
be adjudicated pursuant to 735 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3-101 et seq.,
which provides for prosecution by an administrative agency of the city. This
section may be enforced through the use of an administrative hearing officer
system created by intergovernmental agreement between the city and such other
governmental agencies as shall be parties to such agreement. The establishment
of the East Moline ordinance enforcement department does not preclude the mayor
and city council from using any other method to enforce ordinances of the city.
   (C)   Administrative Composition: The East Moline ordinance enforcement
department shall be composed of a hearing officer, and such support personnel
as shall be necessary to effect the purpose of this section, with the power and
authority as hereinafter set forth.
      1.   The hearing officer shall preside over all adjudicatory hearings and
shall have the following powers and duties:
         (a)   Hearing testimony and accepting evidence that is relevant to the
existence of the city code violation;
         (b)   Issuing subpoenas directing witnesses to appear and give
relevant testimony at the hearing, upon the request of the parties or their
representatives;
         (c)   Preserving and authenticating the record of the hearing and all
exhibits and evidence introduced at the hearing;
         (d)   Issuing and signing a written finding, decision and order
stating whether a city code violation exists; and
         (e)   Imposing penalties, sanctions or such other relief consistent
with applicable city code provisions and assessing costs upon finding a party
liable for the charged violation, except however, that in no event shall the
hearing officer have authority to impose a penalty of incarceration.
      2.   Prior to conducting administrative adjudication proceedings under
this section, the hearing officer shall have successfully completed a formal
training program which includes the following:
         (a)   Instruction on the rules of procedure of the administrative
hearings over which the hearing officer shall preside;
         (b)   Orientation to each subject area of the code violations that he/
she will adjudicate;
         (c)   Observation of administrative hearings; and
         (d)   Participation in hypothetical cases, including ruling on
evidence and issuing final orders.
In addition, a hearing officer must be an attorney, having been licensed to
practice law in the state of Illinois for at least three (3) years.
The mayor is hereby authorized to appoint persons to hold the position above
set forth, or as may be otherwise provided in the intergovernmental agreement
establishing the administrative hearing officer system.
   (D)   Procedure: The system of administrative adjudication of any city
ordinance violation authorized to be adjudicated hereunder, shall be in
accordance with the following procedures:
      1.   Violation notice of any ordinance violation shall be issued by
persons authorized under this code and shall contain information and shall be
certified and constitute prima facie evidence of the violation cited as
hereinafter set forth.
      2.   All full time police officers, the fire inspector or other
authorized firefighter, all building inspectors, animal control officers,
health inspectors and zoning enforcement officer, as well as other specifically
authorized individuals of any city department, shall have the authority to
issue violation notices.
      3.   Any individual authorized hereby to issue violation notices and who
detects an ordinance violation authorized to be adjudicated under this section
or a violation of any section of any city ordinance, is authorized to issue
notice of violation thereof and shall make service thereof as is hereinafter
set forth.
      4.   The violation notice shall contain, but shall not be limited to, the
following information:
         (a)   The name of the party violating the ordinance, if known.
         (b)   The date, time and place of the violation (date of issuance).
         (c)   The particular ordinance violated, and the type and nature of
the violation.
         (d)   Vehicle make and state registration number (if applicable).
         (e)   The names of the witnesses to the violation.
         (f)   The fine and any penalty which may be assessed for late payment.
         (g)   The signature and identification number of the person issuing
the notice.
         (h)   The date and location of the adjudicating hearing of ordinance
violations, the legal authority and jurisdiction under which the hearing is to
be held and the penalties for failure to appear at the hearing.
   (E)   Service:
      1.   Service of any violation notice shall be made by the person issuing
such notice:
         (a)   Handing the notice to the person responsible for the ordinance
violation;
         (b)   Handing the notice to the responsible person or leaving the
notice with any person twelve (12) years of age or older at the residence of
the responsible person;
         (c)   Mailing the notice by certified mail, return receipt requested,
to the person responsible for the ordinance violation; or
         (d)   Posting the notice upon the property where the violation is
found when the person is the owner or manager of the property.
      2.   The correctness of facts contained in any violation notice shall be
verified by the person issuing said notice by:
         (a)   Signing his/her name to the notice at the time of issuance; or
         (b)   In the case of a notice produced by a computer device, by
signing a single certificate, to be kept by the ordinance enforcement
administrator, attesting to the correctness of all notices produced by the
device while under his/her control.
      3.   The original or a facsimile of the violation notice shall be
retained by the ordinance enforcement administrator and kept as a record in the
ordinary course of business.
      4.   Any violation notice issued, signed and served in accordance
herewith, or a copy of the notice, shall be prima facie correct and shall be
prima facie evidence of the correctness of the facts shown on the notice.
   (F)   Administrative Hearings: An administrative hearing to adjudicate any
alleged ordinance violation on its merits shall be granted to the alleged
violator at the date, time and place set forth by the EMOED and by notice given
and served upon the alleged violator. All administrative hearings shall be
recorded and shall culminate in a determination of liability or nonliability,
made by the hearing officer, who shall consider facts and/or testimony without
the application of the formal or technical rules of evidence. Evidence,
including hearsay, may be admitted only if it is of a type commonly relied upon
by reasonable prudent persons in the conduct of their affairs. The hearing
officer shall, upon a determination of liability, assess fines and penalties in
accordance with subsection (K) of this section. Persons appearing to contest
the alleged violation on its merits may be represented by counsel at their own
expense. The burden of proof shall be on the city to present the preponderance
of evidence to prove the violation of the ordinance.
   (G)   Notices: Service of notices sent in accordance herewith shall be
complete as of the date of deposit in the United States mail. The notices sent
in accordance herewith shall be in the following sequence and contain, but not
be limited to, the following information:
      1.   Upon failure of the person receiving a notice of a violation of a
city ordinance, to appear at the time and date designated for a hearing stated
on said notice, the EMOED shall send or cause to be sent notices by first class
mail, postage prepaid, to the person who received the notice of an ordinance
violation and shall contain, but not be limited to, the following information:
         (a)   Date and location of violation cited in the violation notice;
         (b)   Particular ordinance violated;
         (c)   Vehicle make and state registration number (if applicable);
         (d)   Fine and any penalty that may be assessed for late payment;
         (e)   A section entitled "notice of hearing" which shall clearly set
forth that the person receiving a notice of ordinance violation may appear at
an administrative hearing to contest the validity of the violation notice on
the date and at the time and place as specified in the notice of hearing;
         (f)   Date, time and place of the administrative hearing at which the
alleged violation may be contested on its merits;
         (g)   Statement that failure to either pay the fine and any applicable
penalty or failure to appear at the hearing on its merits on the date and at
the time and place specified will result in a final determination of liability
for the "cited" violation in the amount of the fine and penalty indicated;
         (h)   Statement that upon the occurrence of a final determination of
liability for the failure, and the exhaustion of, or the failure to exhaust,
available administrative or judicial procedures for review, any unpaid fine or
penalty will constitute a debt due and owing the city.
      2.   A notice of final determination of liability shall be sent following
the conclusion of administrative hearing, as is hereinafter set forth, and
shall contain, but not be limited to, the following information and warnings:
         (a)   A statement that the unpaid fine and any penalty assessed is a
debt due and owing the city.
         (b)   A statement of any sanction ordered or costs imposed which costs
are debts due and owing the city.
         (c)   A warning that failure to pay the fine and any penalty due and
owing the city within the time specified may result in proceeding with
collection procedures in the same manner as a judgment entered by any court of
competent jurisdiction.
         (d)   Any other warning of possible impoundment as permitted by law or
ordinance.
   (H)   Final Determination Of Liability: A final determination of liability
shall occur following the failure to pay the fine or penalty after the hearing
officer's determination of liability and the exhaustion of, or the failure to
exhaust any administrative review procedures hereinafter set forth. Where a
person fails to appear at the administrative hearing to contest the alleged
violation on the date and at the time and place specified in a prior served or
mailed notice pursuant to subsection (G) of this section, the hearing officer's
determination of liability shall become final either upon a denial of a timely
petition to set aside that determination or upon the expiration of the period
for filing a petition without a filing having been made.
   (I)   Judicial Review: Any final decision by a hearing officer that a code
violation does or does not exist shall constitute a final determination for
purposes of judicial review under the Illinois administrative review law.
   (J)   Enforcement Of Judgment:
      1.   Any fine, other sanction, or costs imposed, or part of any fine,
other sanction or costs imposed, remaining unpaid after the exhaustion of or
the failure to exhaust judicial review procedures under the Illinois
administrative review law shall be a debt due and owing the municipality and
may be collected in accordance with applicable law.
      2.   After expiration of the period in which judicial review under the
Illinois administrative review law may be sought for a final determination of a
code violation, the city attorney may commence a proceeding in the circuit
court of Rock Island County for the purpose of obtaining a judgment on the
findings, decision, and order. Nothing in this section shall prevent the city
from consolidating multiple findings, decisions, and orders against a person in
such a proceeding. Upon commencement of the action, the city shall file a
certified copy of the findings, decision, and order, which shall be accompanied
by a certification that recites facts sufficient to show that the findings,
decision and order were issued in accordance with state law and the applicable
city ordinance. Service of the summons and a copy of the petition may be by any
method provided for by section 2-203 of the code of civil procedure or by
certified mail, return receipt requested, provided that the total amount of
fines, other sanctions, and costs imposed by the findings, decision, and order
does not exceed two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00). If the court is
satisfied that the findings, decision, and order was entered in accordance with
the requirements of state law and the applicable city ordinance and that the
violation had an opportunity for a hearing and for judicial review:
         (a)   The court shall render judgment in favor of the city and against
the violator for the amount indicated in the findings, decision and order, plus
costs. The judgment shall have the same effect and may be enforced in the same
manner as other judgments for the recovery of money.
         (b)   The court may also issue any other orders and injunctions that
are requested by the city to enforce the order of the hearing officer to
correct a code violation.
      3.   In any case in which a hearing officer finds that a defendant has
failed to comply with a judgment ordering a defendant to correct a code
violation or imposing any fine or other sanction as a result of a code
violation, any expenses incurred by a municipality to enforce the judgment
including, but not limited to, attorney fees, court costs, and costs related to
property demolition or foreclosure after they are fixed by the hearing officer,
shall be a debt due and owing the municipality and may be collected in
accordance with applicable law and this ordinance.
      4.   A lien shall be imposed on the real estate or personal estate, or
both of the defendant in the amount of any debt due and owing the municipality
under this section, and after court entry of judgment as set forth in
subsection (J)2 of this section. The lien may be recorded and enforced in the
same manner as a judgment lien pursuant to a judgment of a court of competent
jurisdiction. No lien may be enforced under this section until it has been
recorded in the manner provided by article XII of the code of civil procedure
or by the uniform commercial code.
      5.   A hearing officer may set aside any judgment entered by default and
set a new hearing date upon a petition filed within twenty one (21) days after
the issuance of the order of default if the hearing officer determines that the
petitioner's failure to appear at the hearing was for good cause or at any time
if the petitioner establishes that the municipality did not provide proper
service of process.
   (K)   Schedule Of Ordinances And Penalties: The ordinance covered by this
section and the minimum penalties to be imposed for violation thereof, is as
follows: (Ord. 07-24, 12-3-2007)
Title, Chapter Offense Penalty
Title, Chapter      Offense                                    Penalty
Title 3, chapter 7  Liquor dealers, violations of liquor       $75.00 - $750.00
                    ordinance
Title 4, chapter 1  Violation of building code                 $75.00 - $750.00
Title 4, chapter 2  Violation of housing code                  $75.00 - $750.00
Title 4, chapter 3  Violation of plumbing code                 $75.00 - $750.00
Title 4, chapter 4  Violation of electrical code               $75.00 - $750.00
Title 4, chapter 7  Dangerous buildings                        $75.00 - $750.00
Title 4, chapter 8  Moving buildings                           $75.00 - $750.00
Title 4, chapter 9  Violation of sign ordinance                $75.00 - $750.00
Title 4, chapter 11 Violation of mechanical code               $75.00 - $750.00
Title 4, chapter 12 Development in floodplain                  $75.00 - $750.00
Title 5, chapter 2  Violation of fire code                     $75.00 - $750.00
Title 6, chapter 3  Misdemeanors                               $75.00 - $750.00
6-3-53              Violation of smoking ordinance             $75.00 - $750.00
Title 6, chapter 4  Miscellaneous violation of chapter 4,      $75.00 - $750.00
                    "Animals"
6-4-1               Cruelty to animals                         $75.00 - $750.00
6-4-2.1             Maintaining or keeping a dangerous or      $75.00 - $750.00
                    vicious dog
6-4-2.2             Permitting dangerous animal to run at      $75.00 - $750.00
                    large
6-4-2.5             Permitting a dog or cat to run at large    $75.00 - $750.00
Title 6, chapter 5  Violation of chapter 5, "Dogs And Cats"    $75.00 - $750.00
Title 6, chapter 6  Curfew violation                           $75.00 - $750.00
Title 6, chapter 7  Public gathering violation                 $75.00 - $750.00
Title 6, chapter 8  Sound amplifier violation                  $75.00 - $750.00
Title 6, chapter 10 Burglar and holdup alarm violation         $75.00 - $750.00
Title 6, chapter 11 Abatement of chronic nuisances             $75.00 - $750.00
Title 6, chapter 12 Clandestine drug lab site violation        $75.00 - $750.00
Title 7, chapter 1  Health nuisances                           $75.00 - $750.00
Title 7, chapter 2  Food service violation                     $75.00 - $750.00
Title 7, chapter 4  Plant and weed violation                   $75.00 - $750.00
Title 7, chapter 9  Solid waste and refuse violation           $75.00 - $750.00
Title 7, chapter 13 Violation of Tattoo Establishment          $75.00 - $750.00
                    Ordinance
Title 8, chapter 3  Violation of Excavations Ordinance         $75.00 - $750.00
8-7-2               Violation of rules and regulations in City $75.00 - $750.00
                    park
Title 8, chapter 8  Violation of Water and Sewer Ordinance     $75.00 - $750.00
Title 9, chapter 2  Violation of rules for driving             $75.00 - $750.00
Title 9, chapter 3  Violation of parking rules                 $75.00 - $750.00
9-3-15              Violation of handicapped parking rules     $75.00 - $250.00
Title 9, chapter 4  Violation of City Parking Lot Ordinance    $75.00 - $750.00
Title 9, chapter 5  Violation of One-Way Street Ordinance      $75.00 - $750.00
Title 9, chapter 8  Violation of Condition of Vehicle          $75.00 - $750.00
                    Ordinance
Title 9, chapter 11 Violation of Abandoned Vehicle Ordinance   $75.00 - $750.00
Title 10
(                   Violation of Zoning Ordinance              $75.00 - $750.00
10-29-5)
 
(Ord. 07-24, 12-3-2007; amd. Ord. 08-01, 2-4-2008; Ord. 08-08, 9-2-2008)
      1.   Except as otherwise provided, any person convicted of a violation of
any section or provision of this Code shall be fined in a sum not less than
fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00).
Each day which such violation occurs and continues shall constitute a separate
violation.
      2.   A penalty imposed for violation of an ordinance may include, or
consist of, a requirement that the defendant perform some reasonable public
service work such as, but not limited to, the picking up of litter in public
parks or along public highways or the maintenance of public facilities. (Ord.
07-24, 12-3-2007)
      3.   Any person charged with a violation of an ordinance and served with
a citation, may sign a plea of guilty to the ordinance violation and pay a fine
of one hundred dollars ($100.00) within seven (7) days of receipt of a notice
of charge of the violation, when such citation so indicates, at the East Moline
Police Department, 915 16th Avenue, East Moline, Illinois. (Ord. 08-08, 9-2-
2008)
CHAPTER 5
CITY COUNCIL
SECTION:
1-5-1: Election; Functions
1-5-1.1: Persons Ineligible To Be A Member Of The City Council; Non-Partisan
Elections
1-5-2: Meetings
1-5-2.1: Remote Attendance Policy
1-5-3: Mayor To Preside
1-5-4: Ordinances; Approval; Veto
1-5-5: Reconsideration; Passing Over Veto
1-5-6: Quorum
1-5-7: Committee Of The Whole
1-5-8: Records
1-5-9: Disturbing Meetings
1-5-10: Rules Of Order
1-5-11: Personnel Commission
1-5-12: Salaries Of The Mayor, City Clerk, Treasurer, And Aldermen
1-5-1: ELECTION; FUNCTIONS:
The members of the council shall be elected and serve for a four (4) year term
as is provided by statute. The council shall be the legislative division of the
city government and shall perform such duties and have such powers as may be
authorized by statute. (1962 Code § 2.101)
1-5-1.1: PERSONS INELIGIBLE TO BE A MEMBER OF THE CITY COUNCIL; NON-PARTISAN
ELECTIONS:
   (A)   No person shall be eligible to the office of alderman unless such
person shall be a qualified elector, and reside within the ward for which such
person is elected; nor shall such person be eligible if said person is in
arrears for the payment of any tax or other liability due in said city; nor
shall said person be directly or indirectly interested in any contract whatever
to which the city is party; nor shall said person be eligible if said person
shall have been convicted of malfeasance, bribery, or other corrupt practices
or crimes; nor shall said person be eligible to any office, the salary of which
is payable out of the City Treasury, if at any time of such appointment such
person shall be a member of the City Council; nor shall any member of the City
Council at the same time hold any other office under the city government; nor
shall said member be either directly or indirectly, individually or as a member
of a firm, engaged in any business transaction, other than official with the
city, through its mayor or any of its authorized boards, agents, or attorneys
whereby any money is to be paid, directly or indirectly, out of the City
Treasury to such member or firm.
   (B)   The offices of mayor and city alderman shall be elected at nonpartisan
elections and, if necessary, non-partisan primaries.
      1.   The Mayor and City Alderman of the City of East Moline elected at
the Consolidate Election held in 2017 (Mayor and the 2017 Aldermen) shall hold
office for four (4) years and until their respective successors are elected and
qualified. The provisions of this proposition and applicable law, in particular
65 ILCS 5/3.1-25-15 through 65 ILCS 5/3.1-25-55, inclusive, of the Illinois
Municipal Code, shall govern the election of the successors of the Mayor and
"2017 Aldermen," except that where such provisions refer to President, Trustees
and Village, they shall be read as Mayor, Aldermen and City, respectively and
except references to 65 ILCS 5/3.1-25-60 and 65 ILCS 5/3.1-25-70 shall be
ignored. Such successors shall be nominated at a primary election to be held at
the Consolidated Primary of 2021 and every fourth year thereafter (if a primary
is necessary pursuant to the provisions of 65 ILCS 5/3.1-25-15 through 65 ILCS
5/3.1-25-55, inclusive of the Illinois Municipal Code), and elected at a
general election to be held at the Consolidated Election in 2017 and every
fourth year thereafter.
      2.   The four (4) year Aldermen of the City of East Moline elected at the
Consolidated Election in 2015 (the "2015 Aldermen") shall hold office until
their successors are elected and qualified. The provisions of this proposition
and applicable law, in particular 65 ILCS 5/3.1-25-15 through 65 ILCS 5/3.1-25-
55, inclusive, of the Illinois Municipal Code including exceptions noted above,
shall govern the election of the successors of the "2015 Aldermen." Such
successors shall be nominated at a primary election to be held at the
Consolidated Primary of 2019 and every fourth year thereafter (if a primary is
necessary pursuant to the provisions of 65 ILCS 5/3.1-25-15 through 65 ILCS 5/
3.1-25-55, inclusive, of the Illinois Municipal Code), and elected at a general
election to be held at the Consolidated Election in 2003 and every fourth year
thereafter.
      3.   Any election to fill a vacancy in the office of Mayor or of a 2015
AI den nan to be held prior to or at the regularly scheduled 2019 elections
shall he in accord with the provisions of this proposition and applicable law,
in particular, 65 ILCS 5/3.1-25-15 through 65 ILCS 5/3.1-25-55, inclusive, of
the Illinois Municipal Code including exceptions noted above.
   (C)    Effective January 2018, and continuing thereafter, if a candidate for
any office mentioned in this section participates, campaigns or otherwise runs
for office on a partisan basis or with an affiliation with any perineal party,
such candidate shall be disqualified from office, and any such person running
with any such designation or affiliation shall not be certified by the City
Clerk as a valid candidate; provided, however, that any such person already
elected and serving in office at the time of the enactment of this ordinance
shall be permitted to affiliate with political parties or maintain their
political designation with respect to their office until their current term
expires or until a vacancy occurs in such person's position, whichever first
occurs.
   (D)   Any election to fill any vacancy in any of the offices enumerated
herein which is to be held after the effective date of this section shall be
held in accordance with the General Election Law; provided, however, that where
any such provision would conflict with this section, then this section shall
supersede such conflicting provision as an enactment of the City of East
Moline's home rule powers. (Ord. 17-10, 4-17-2017)
1-5-2: MEETINGS:
The term "meeting" as used in any existing East Moline city council
resolutions, ordinances or rules shall supersede and replace any other
definition used in any previous or existing ordinance, resolution or policy and
shall be defined to mean "any gathering, whether in person or by video or audio
conference, telephone calls, electronic means (such as, without limitation,
electronic mail, electronic chat and instant messaging), or other means of
contemporary interactive communication, or a majority of a quorum of the
members of a public body held for the purpose of discussing public business" or
such other definition as shall be contained within the state statutes. (Ord.
06-25, 11-6-2006)
   (A)   Regular Meetings: The regular meetings of the council shall be held in
the city council room on the first and third Monday of each month at the hour
of six thirty o'clock (6:30) P.M., provided that if the regular meeting falls
on a legal holiday, or on Martin Luther King's birthday, the meeting shall take
place on the next day at the same hour and place. Adjourned meetings may be
held at such other times as the council may determine. (Ord. 96-1, 2-5-1996)
   (B)   Special Meetings: Special meetings of the council may be called by the
mayor or three (3) aldermen, provided that a written notice of such meeting
shall be given to each member of the council at least twenty four (24) hours
before the time set for the meeting, provided that in case all the elected
members of the council are present at any special meeting then the requirement
of notice shall be unnecessary and shall be deemed waived. (1962 Code § 2.103)
1-5-2.1: REMOTE ATTENDANCE POLICY:
   (A)   Policy Statement: It is the policy of the East Moline city council,
East Moline, Illinois, that a member of any group associated with this unit of
government which is subject to the provisions of the open meetings act of the
East Moline city council may attend and participate in any open or closed
meeting of that city council from a remote location via telephone, video or
internet connection, provided that such attendance and participation is in
compliance with this policy and any other applicable laws.
   (B)   Prerequisites: A member of the East Moline city council shall be
provided the opportunity to attend an open and closed meeting or only one of
such meetings from a remote location if the member meets the following
conditions and a majority of a quorum of the East Moline city council votes to
approve the remote attendance:
      1.   The member must notify the city clerk of the East Moline city
council at least twenty four (24) hours before the meeting unless advance
notice is impractical;
      2.   The member must meet one of three (3) reasons described herein why
he or she is unable to physically attend the meeting, including either: a) the
member cannot attend because of personal illness or disability; b) the member
cannot attend because of employment purposes or the business of the city
council of the city of East Moline; or c) the member cannot attend because of a
family or other emergency; and
      3.   A quorum of the East Moline city council must be physically present.
   (C)   Voting Procedures: After roll call, a vote of the East Moline city
council shall be taken, considering the prerequisites set forth in subsection
(B) of this section, on whether to allow an off site council member to
participate remotely. All of the members physically present are permitted to
vote on whether remote participation will be allowed. A vote may be taken to
permit remote participation for a stated series of meetings if the same reason
applies in each case. Otherwise, a vote must be taken to allow each remote
participation.
   (D)   Quorum And Vote Required: A quorum must be established by members
physically present at any meeting before it can be considered whether to allow
a member to participate in the meeting remotely. A vote of a majority of a
quorum shall be necessary to decide the issue. For the meeting to continue
there shall always need to be a quorum physically present.
   (E)   Minutes: The member participating remotely shall be considered an off
site participant and counted present by means of video or audio conference for
that meeting if the member is allowed to participate. The meeting minutes of
the East Moline city council shall also reflect and state specifically whether
each member is physically present, present by video, or present by audio means.
   (F)   Rights Of Remote Member: The member permitted to participate in the
same capacity as those members physically present, is subject to all general
meeting guidelines and procedures previously adopted and adhered to. The remote
member shall be heard, considered, and counted as to any vote taken.
Accordingly, the name of any remote member shall be called during any vote
taken, and his or her vote counted and recounted by the city clerk and placed
in the minutes for the corresponding meeting. A member participating remotely
may leave a meeting and return as in the case of any member.
   (G)   Meetings: The term "meeting" as used herein refers to any gathering,
whether in person or by video or audio conference, telephone call, electronic
means (such as, without limitation, electronic mail, electronic chat, and
instant messaging), or other means of contemporaneous interactive
communication, or a majority of a quorum of the members of a public body held
for the purposes of discussing public business.
   (H)   Closed Meetings: A quorum of the East Moline city council's members
must be physically present at any closed meeting. Members participating
remotely shall otherwise be entitled to participate in closed meetings by video
or audio conference.
   (I)   Costs: A member participating remotely via telephone shall be
reimbursed for the cost of the telephone call upon a valid receipt shown. Any
other costs associated with remote participation, including video conferencing
and other audio and video equipment, must be approved by the East Moline city
council. (Ord. 06-25, 11-6-2006)
1-5-3: MAYOR TO PRESIDE:
The mayor shall preside at all meetings of the city council. He shall not vote
on any ordinance, resolution, or motion except:
   (A)   Where the vote of the aldermen has resulted in a tie;
   (B)   Where one-half (1/2) of the aldermen elected have voted in favor of an
ordinance, resolution, or motion even though there is no tie vote.
In both instances specified, the mayor shall vote. Nothing is in this section
to deprive an acting mayor or mayor pro tem from voting in his capacity as
alderman, but he shall not be entitled to another vote in his capacity as
acting mayor or mayor pro tem. (M.C. 1962, sec. 2.104)
1-5-4: ORDINANCES; APPROVAL; VETO:
All resolutions and motions: a) which create any liability against the city, or
b) which provide for the expenditure or appropriation of its money, or c) to
sell any city property, and all ordinances, passed by the city council shall be
deposited with the city clerk. If the mayor approves of them, he shall sign
them. Those of which he disapproves he shall return to the city council, with
his written objections, at the next regular meeting of the city council
occurring not less than five (5) days after their passage. The mayor may
disapprove of any one or more sums appropriated in any ordinance, resolution or
motion making an appropriation, and if so, the remainder shall be effective.
However, the mayor may disapprove entirely of an ordinance, resolution, or
motion making an appropriation. If the mayor fails to return any ordinance or
any specified resolution or motion with his written objections, within the
designated time, it shall become effective despite the absence of his
signature. (M.C. 1962, sec. 2.105)
1-5-5: RECONSIDERATION; PASSING OVER VETO:
Every resolution and motion specified in section
1-5-4 of this chapter, and every ordinance, which is returned to the city
council by the mayor shall be reconsidered by the city council. If, after such
reconsideration, two-thirds (2/3) of all the aldermen elected to the city
council shall agree to pass an ordinance, resolution, or motion,
notwithstanding the mayor's refusal to approve it, then it shall be effective.
The vote on the question of passage over the mayor's veto shall be by yeas and
nays, and shall be recorded in the journal. (1962 Code § 2.106)
1-5-6: QUORUM:
A majority of the corporate authorities, i.e., aldermen and mayor, shall
constitute a quorum of the city council. (Ord. 98-18, 5-4-1998)
1-5-7: COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE:
The regular meeting of the committee of the whole shall be held in the city
council room on the first and third Monday of each month, immediately following
the city council meeting. If the regular meeting falls on a legal holiday, or
on Martin Luther King's birthday, the meeting shall take place on the next
business day at the same hour and place. (Ord. 10-01, 1-19-2010)
1-5-8: RECORDS:
The city clerk shall keep the minutes and records of the council proceedings.
(1962 Code § 2.109)
1-5-9: DISTURBING MEETINGS:
It shall be unlawful to disturb any regular or special meeting of the city
council or of any committee thereof, or to behave in a disorderly manner at any
such meeting. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be
fined not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than five hundred dollars
($500.00) for each offense. (Ord. 95-24, 8-7-1995)
1-5-10: RULES OF ORDER:
   (A)   Roll Call: At the hour appointed for the meetings, the clerk shall
proceed to call the roll of aldermen, marking the absentees, and announce
whether a quorum is present. If quorum be present, the council shall proceed
with the business before it. (1962 Code § 2.201)
   (B)   Order Of Business: The order of business at meetings of the city
council shall be as follows:
      1.   Pledge Of Allegiance.
      2.   Roll call.
      3.   Public comment.
      4.   Report by the city clerk.
      5.   Consent agenda:
         (a)   Approval of minutes.
         (b)   Approval of bills; concurrence with proclamations.
         (c)   Any items requiring council approval, that in the opinion of the
mayor and city clerk, are of a noncontroversial nature.
      6.   Report by the mayor.
      7.   Report by the city attorney, ordinances, resolutions, etc.
      8.   Report of committee of the whole, and any other committee.
      9.   Unfinished business from preceding meeting.
      10.   City staff communications.
      11.   Closed session, if needed.
      12.   Adjournment. (Ord. 11-26A, 10-3-2011)
   (C)   Priority Of Business: All questions relating to the priority of
business shall be decided by the mayor without debate. (1962 Code § 2.203)
   (D)   Rescinded Action: No vote or action of the city council shall be
rescinded at any special meeting unless there be present at such special
meeting as many members of the council as were present at the meeting when such
vote or action was taken, as provided by statute. (1962 Code § 2.204)
   (E)   Addressing Meetings: No person other than the mayor or a member of the
city council shall address that body at any regular or special meeting of the
council except upon consent of a majority of the members present. (1962 Code §
2.205)
   (F)   Resolutions: Any resolution submitted to the city council shall be
reduced to writing before being voted upon, at the request of any two (2)
members of the council. (1962 Code § 2.206)
   (G)   Suspension Of Rules: The rules of order, other than those prescribed
by statute, may be suspended at any time by consent of a majority of the
members present at any meeting. (1962 Code § 2.207)
   (H)   Robert's Rules Of Order: Except when in conflict with the foregoing
provisions, "Robert's Rules Of Order" shall govern the deliberations of the
council. (1962 Code § 2.208)
   (I)   Meetings Open To The Public: All council meetings at which any legal
action is taken shall be open to the public. (1962 Code § 2.209)
   (J)   Motion To Adjourn: Any motion to adjourn a council meeting shall be
submitted to a roll call vote of the council. (Ord. 79-60, 9-4-1979)
   (K)   Expense Voucher: Each alderman shall submit to the finance director
his voucher for reimbursement of all expenses incurred in attending any
municipal seminar, conference or convention, within thirty (30) days after the
alderman's return. (Ord. 98-18, 5-4-1998)
   (L)   Public Comment:
      1.   A public comment period not to exceed fifteen (15) minutes will be
held during each regularly scheduled city council meeting.
      2.   Anyone desiring to address the city council must complete and submit
a public comment card available in the city council chambers up to fifteen (15)
minutes prior to the start of the meeting. The person must include his or her
name and contact information.
      3.   There shall be a maximum of five (5) speakers in any public comment
period. In the event more than five (5) public comment cards are submitted, the
mayor shall randomly select the five (5) speakers. Comments are limited to
three (3) minutes per speaker. A speaker cannot give his or her allotted
minutes to another speaker to increase that person's allotted time.
      4.   Speakers will be acknowledged by the mayor and shall address the
city council in a respectful manner from the podium and not approach the city
council or city staff. Speakers will begin their statement by first stating
their name and address for the record.
      5.   Statements are to be directed to the city council as a whole and not
to individual council members or individual city staff. Public comment is not
intended to require council members or city staff to provide any answer to the
speaker. Discussions between speakers and members of the audience will not be
allowed.
      6.   After the speaker has made his or her statement, he or she shall be
seated with no further debate, dialogue or comment. (Ord. 11-09, 3-7-2011)
1-5-11: PERSONNEL COMMISSION:
There is hereby created the personnel commission of the city of East Moline.
This commission shall be made up of three (3) members, who shall be two (2)
members of the city council appointed by the mayor, with the advice and consent
of the city council, and the third member being the city administrator. The
city council appointees shall represent differing political philosophies.
The commission shall be responsible for the review and recommendation to the
city council of proposals regarding personnel and employment issues within the
city needing city council approval. The subject proposals would include the
creation of an employee position, the elimination of an employee position, the
combination of employee positions, the restructuring of a department, or any
other personnel issue that affects employee positions and policies, rather than
a particular employee. The city administrator may consult with the commission
on other appropriate issues. The commission may consult with representatives of
the unions representing city employees in the review process of the commission.
(Ord. 98-30, 8-3-1998)
1-5-12: SALARIES OF THE MAYOR, CITY CLERK, TREASURER, AND ALDERMEN:
The following annual salaries shall be established for each of the city
officers, for and during their respective terms, as set forth below:
 
                      Current Salary New Salary Term Commencement Date
Mayor                 $17,200.00     $17,200.00 May 1, 2003
City clerk            3,600.00       7,200.00   May 1, 2009
Treasurer             2,000.00       3,000.00   May 1, 2005
Alderman              2,400.00       3,600.00   May 1, 2003
(Wards 2, 4 and 6)
Alderman              2,400.00       3,600.00   May 1, 2005
(Wards 1, 3, 5 and 7)
 
(Ord. 02-28, 8-19-2002; amd. Ord. 08-07, 9-2-2008)
CHAPTER 6
MAYOR
SECTION:
1-6-1: Election
1-6-2: Bond
1-6-3: Duties
1-6-4: Appointment Of Officers
1-6-5: Designation Of Officers' Duties
1-6-6: Mayor Pro Tem
1-6-7: Acting Mayor
1-6-8: Formal Occasions
1-6-1: ELECTION:
The Mayor shall be elected for a four (4) year term, and shall serve until his
successor is elected and qualified as is provided by statute. (M.C. 1962, sec.
1.001)
1-6-2: BOND:
Before entering upon the duties of his office, the Mayor shall execute a bond
in such amount and with such sureties as may be required by the Council,
conditioned upon the faithful performance of the duties of his office, provided
the amount of such bond shall not be less than three thousand dollars
($3,000.00). (M.C. 1962, sec. 1.008)
1-6-3: DUTIES:
The Mayor shall be the chief executive officer of the City, shall preside over
the meetings of the Council, and shall perform such duties as may be required
of him by Statute or ordinance. He shall have supervision over all of the
executive officers and employees of the City, and shall have the power and
authority to inspect all books and records pertaining to City affairs and kept
by an officer or employee of the City at any reasonable time. (M.C. 1962, sec.
1.002)
1-6-4: APPOINTMENT OF OFFICERS:
The Mayor shall appoint, by and with the advice and consent of the City
Council, all officers of the City whose election or appointment is not
otherwise provided for. Any vacancies occurring in an appointive office shall
be filled in the same manner. (M.C. 1962, sec. 1.003)
1-6-5: DESIGNATION OF OFFICERS' DUTIES:
Whenever there is a dispute as to the respective duties or powers of any
appointed officer of the City this dispute shall be settled by the Mayor after
consultation with the City Attorney; and the Mayor shall have the power to
delegate to any appointed officer any duty which is to be performed when no
specific officer has been directed to perform that duty. (M.C. 1962, sec.
1.004)
1-6-6: MAYOR PRO TEM:
During a temporary absence or disability of the Mayor, the City Council shall
elect one of its members to act as Mayor Pro Tem who during such absence or
disability shall perform the duties and possess all the rights and powers of
the Mayor as is provided by statute. The City Council may at the beginning of
each fiscal year, elect one of its members to act as Mayor Pro Tem during the
then upcoming fiscal year, when the City Council has determined by its vote
that a temporary absence or disability of the Mayor necessitates the assumption
of the Mayor's duties by the Mayor Pro Tem.
The temporary absence relates not to a mere absence from the Council chambers
while the Mayor is in some other part of the City, but rather an absence from
the City for such a length of time as would reasonably call for the appointment
of a fully-empowered replacement. The disability of the Mayor relates to a
provable physical or mental inability to perform the general functions and
duties of the office. (Ord. 89-16, 7-3-1989)
1-6-7: ACTING MAYOR:
In the event of a vacancy in the office of Mayor the Council may appoint one of
the members as acting Mayor to serve until the vacancy is filled at a regular
or special election as provided by law. (M.C. 1962, sec. 1.006)
1-6-8: FORMAL OCCASIONS:
The Mayor shall act for and on behalf of the City on formal occasions and
receptions; but in his absence or inability to attend any such function the
Council may select any other City officer to so act. (M.C. 1962, sec. 1.007)
CHAPTER 7
CITY CLERK
SECTION:
1-7-1: Election; Term
1-7-2: Bond
1-7-3: Signatures
1-7-4: Money Collected
1-7-5: Accounts (Rep. by Ord. 98-18, 5-4-1998)
1-7-6: Records
1-7-7: Seal
1-7-8: Documents
1-7-9: Indices
1-7-10: Ex Officio Collector
1-7-11: Additional Duties
1-7-12: Vacancies
1-7-13: Compensation
1-7-14: Office; Hours (Rep. by Ord. 98-18, 5-4-1998)
1-7-15: Deputy Clerk
1-7-1: ELECTION; TERM:
The City Clerk shall be elected and serve for a four (4) year term and until
his successor is elected and qualified, as provided by statute. (M.C. 1962,
sec. 4.001)
1-7-2: BOND:
Before entering upon his duties of office, the City Clerk shall execute a bond
in such amount as is provided by statute, conditioned upon the faithful
performance of his duties. (M.C. 1962, sec. 4.002)
1-7-3: SIGNATURES:
The City Clerk shall seal and attest all contracts of the City and all
licenses, permits and such other documents as shall require this formality.
(M.C. 1962, sec. 4.003)
1-7-4: MONEY COLLECTED:
The Clerk shall turn over all money received by him on behalf of the City to
the City Treasurer promptly upon receipt of the same; and with such money he
shall give a statement as to the source thereof. (M.C. 1962, sec. 4.004)
1-7-5: ACCOUNTS:
(Rep. by Ord. 98-18, 5-4-1998)
1-7-6: RECORDS:
The Clerk shall attend all meetings of the City Council and Committee of the
Whole and keep a full record of the proceedings of the Council and the
Committee of the Whole in the journal, commonly known as the minutes. In
addition to the record of ordinances and other records which the Clerk is
required by statute to keep, the Clerk shall keep a register of all licenses
and permits issued, and the payments thereof; a record showing all of the
officers and regular employees of the City; and such other records as may be
required by the City Council. (Ord. 99-4, 2-1-1999)
1-7-7: SEAL:
The Clerk shall be the custodian of the City Seal, and shall affix its
impression on the City documents whenever required and appropriate. The Seal is
hereby authorized to be a rubber stamp seal, and shall be in the form and
transcription as heretofore established by the City Council. (Ord. 98-15, 4-20-
1998)
1-7-8: DOCUMENTS:
The Clerk shall be the custodian of all documents belonging to the City which
are not assigned to the custody of some other officer. (M.C. 1962, sec. 1.008)
1-7-9: INDICES:
The Clerk shall keep and maintain a proper index to all documents and records
kept by him, so that ready access thereto and use thereof may be had. (M.C.
1962, sec. 4.009)
1-7-10: EX OFFICIO COLLECTOR:
The Clerk shall act as and perform all the duties of Collector unless and until
a separate collector is appointed. (M.C. 1962, sec. 4.010)
1-7-11: ADDITIONAL DUTIES:
In addition to the duties herein provided the Clerk shall perform such other
duties and functions as may be required by statute or ordinance. (M.C. 1962,
sec. 4.011)
1-7-12: VACANCIES:
In case the office of City Clerk shall become vacant for any reason, the Mayor
and Council shall appoint a successor as provided by statute. (M.C. 1962, sec.
4.012)
1-7-13: COMPENSATION:
The compensation of the City Clerk shall be such as is provided for by the City
Council in the manner provided by statute. (M.C. 1962, sec. 4.013)
1-7-14: OFFICE; HOURS:
(Rep. by Ord. 98-18, 5-4-1998)
1-7-15: DEPUTY CLERK:
There is hereby created the office of Deputy Clerk. The City Clerk is
authorized to appoint a Deputy Clerk who shall have the power and duty to
execute all documents required by any law or ordinance to be executed by the
Clerk, and affix the Seal of the City thereto whenever required.
When signing any documents the Deputy Clerk shall sign the name of the City
Clerk followed by the word "by" and the Deputy Clerk's own name and the words
"Deputy Clerk".
The powers and duties herein described shall be exercised by such Deputy Clerk
only in the absence of the City Clerk from his office in the City Hall, and
only when either written direction has been given by the City Clerk to exercise
each power, or the City Council has determined by resolution that the City
Clerk is temporarily or permanently incapacitated to perform such function.
Such Deputy Clerk shall have the authority and power herein described, and such
further power and authority as may be provided by statute. (M.C. 1962, sec.
4.015; amd. 1974 Code; Ord. 74-27, 6-17-1974)
CHAPTER 8
CITY TREASURER
SECTION:
1-8-1: Election; Term
1-8-2: Bond
1-8-3: General Duties
1-8-4: Deposit Of Funds
1-8-5: Records
1-8-6: Accounts
1-8-7: Reports
1-8-8: Register Of Warrants
1-8-1: ELECTION; TERM:
The City Treasurer shall be elected and serve for a four (4) year term and
until his successor is qualified, as is provided by statute. (M.C. 1962, sec.
5.001)
1-8-2: BOND:
The Treasurer shall give bond in such sum as may be required by the City
Council, and as required by statute, with sureties to be approved by the
Council. The bond shall be conditioned upon the faithful performance by the
Treasurer of the duties of office, and to indemnify the City for any loss due
to any neglect or wrongful act on the part of the Treasurer. (Ord. 98-18, 5-4-
1998)
1-8-3: GENERAL DUTIES:
The Treasurer shall perform such duties as may be prescribed for him by statute
or ordinance. He shall receive all money paid into the City, either directly
from the person paying it or from the hands of such other officer or employees
as may receive it, and he shall pay out money only on vouchers or orders
properly signed by the Mayor and City Clerk. (M.C. 1962, sec. 5.003)
1-8-4: DEPOSIT OF FUNDS:
He shall deposit the City funds in such depositories as may be selected from
time to time as is provided by statute, and he shall keep the City money
separate and distinct from his own and shall not intermingle his own money with
it or make private or personal use of the City funds. (M.C. 1962, sec. 5.004)
1-8-5: RECORDS:
The Treasurer shall keep records showing all money received by him, the source
from which it was received, and the purpose for which it was received, and the
purpose for which it was paid out; and he shall keep a record showing at all
times the financial status of the City. (M.C. 1962, sec. 5.005)
1-8-6: ACCOUNTS:
The City Treasurer shall keep such books and accounts as may be required by the
City Council, and shall keep them in the manner required by the City Council.
(M.C. 1962, sec. 5.006)
1-8-7: REPORTS:
The Treasurer shall make monthly reports to the Council showing the state of
the finances of the City, and the amounts received and spent during the month,
which reports shall be filed, and he shall make an annual report at the close
of the fiscal year with the total amount of all receipts and expenditures of
the City and his transactions as Treasurer during the preceding year. (M.C.
1962, sec. 5.007)
1-8-8: REGISTER OF WARRANTS:
The Treasurer shall keep a register of all warrants, bonds or orders filed with
him or paid by him, and all vouchers, as is required by statute. (M.C. 1962,
sec. 5.008)
CHAPTER 9
CORPORATION COUNSEL
SECTION:
1-9-1: Appointment, Term
1-9-2: Additional Counsel
1-9-3: Suits And Actions
1-9-4: Judgments
1-9-1: APPOINTMENT, TERM:
The council may retain a law firm to serve as corporation counsel and legal
advisor for the city, who shall be appointed by the mayor, by and with the
advice and consent of the city council, and who shall serve in such capacity
during the term for the appointing mayor, based upon satisfactory annual
performance reviews by the mayor and city council. (Ord. 13-09, 5-6-2013)
1-9-2: ADDITIONAL COUNSEL:
The city council may engage additional counsel whenever in its opinion such
additional counsel is necessary. (Ord. 13-09, 5-6-2013)
1-9-3: SUITS AND ACTIONS:
The corporation counsel shall prosecute or defend any and all claims for
liability, suits or actions at law or equity to which the city may be a party,
or in which it may be interested, or which may be brought against or by any
officer of the city on behalf of the city, or in the capacity of such person as
an officer of the city. The corporation counsel shall also provide the city
with the following legal services:
   (A)   Attendance at city council meetings;
   (B)   Providing legal advice to mayor and city administrator;
   (C)   Drafting of ordinances and resolutions;
   (D)   Contract review;
   (E)   Representation of boards and commissions;
   (F)   Representation in all other litigation including labor and employment
law, collective bargaining, workers' compensation and environmental law;
   (G)   Prosecution of violations of municipal code and the Illinois motor
vehicle code;
   (H)   Providing legal advice and services to the city staff and members of
the city council, in coordination with the city administrator. (Ord. 13-09, 5-
6-2013)
1-9-4: JUDGMENTS:
It shall be the duty of the corporation counsel to see to the full enforcement
of all judgments or decrees rendered or entered in favor of the city, and of
all similar interlocutory orders. (Ord. 13-09, 5-6-2013)
CHAPTER 10
HEALTH INSPECTOR
SECTION:
1-10-1: Office Created; Term
1-10-2: Duties
1-10-3: Enforce Regulations (Rep. by Ord. 98-18, 5-4-1998)
1-10-4: Reports
1-10-1: OFFICE CREATED; TERM:
There is hereby created the office of health inspector, an executive office of
the City. The term health inspector, health official and environmental health
specialist shall be considered one in the same. The health inspector shall be
appointed by the City Administrator, by and with the advice and consent of the
City Council, and shall be supervised by the Inspections Coordinator. (Ord. 18-
10, 9-17-2018)
1-10-2: DUTIES:
It shall be the duty of the health inspector to enforce all ordinances
containing provisions for the protection of the public health; to make
inspections of foodstuffs and of the premises used for storing or selling of
provisions as may be provided by ordinance; and shall perform such other duties
and functions as may be required by statute or ordinance. (1962 Code § 6.202)
1-10-3: ENFORCE REGULATIONS:
(Rep. by Ord. 98-18, 5-4-1998)
1-10-4: REPORTS:
The health inspector shall make such reports to the Council as may be required.
He shall also make recommendations for rulings, orders or ordinances respecting
the public health whenever he is requested to do so or whenever he deems it
necessary or advisable. (1962 Code § 6.204)
CHAPTER 11
BUILDING INSPECTOR
SECTION:
1-11-1: Appointment
1-11-2: Duties
1-11-3: Stop Order
1-11-4: Entry Powers
1-11-1: APPOINTMENT:
There is hereby created the position of building inspector. The term building
inspector and building official shall be one in the same. The building
inspector shall be appointed by the City Administrator, with the advice and
consent of City Council, and supervised by the Inspections Coordinator. (Ord.
18-10, 9-17-2018)
1-11-2: DUTIES:
It shall be the duty of the building inspector to see to the enforcement of all
ordinance provisions relating to buildings and to inspect all buildings or
other structures being erected or altered, as frequently as may be necessary to
ensure compliance with the ordinances of the City. (Ord. 98-18, 5-4-1998)
1-11-3: STOP ORDER:
The building inspector shall have the power to order all work stopped on
construction or alteration or repair of buildings in the City in accordance
with the adopted codes referenced by title 4, chapter 1 of this Code.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be subject to
penalty as provided by section
1-4-1 of this title. (Ord. 18-10, 9-17-2018)
1-11-4: ENTRY POWERS:
The building inspector shall have the power to make or cause to be made entry
into any building or premises where the work of alteration, repair or
construction of any building or structure is going on, for the purpose of
making inspections at any reasonable hour. (1962 Code § 6.305)
CHAPTER 12
ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR
SECTION:
1-12-1: Creation Of Office
1-12-2: Other Business
1-12-3: Powers
1-12-4: Inspections
1-12-5: Stop Order
1-12-6: Certificate
1-12-1: CREATION OF OFFICE:
There is hereby created the position of electrical inspector, who shall be
appointed by the City Administrator, with the advice and consent of the City
Council, and supervised by the Inspections Coordinator. (Ord. 18-10, 9-17-2018)
1-12-2: OTHER BUSINESS:
It shall be unlawful for the electrical inspector, except in the performance of
his duties, to engage in the business of installation, alteration, maintenance
or sale of electric wiring, electric devices or electrical material, either
directly or indirectly, and he shall have no financial interest in any concern
engaged in any such business in the City. (1962 Code § 6.402)
1-12-3: POWERS:
The electrical inspector shall have the right during reasonable hours to enter
any building in the discharge of his official duties, or for the purpose of
making an inspection or test of the electrical equipment therein; and he shall
have the duty and authority to enforce all the ordinance provisions relating to
electric signs, electrical wiring and electrically operated equipment. He shall
have the power to cause the current in any wire or conduit to be turned off
whenever this is necessary in an emergency for the protection of life or
property. (1962 Code § 6.403)
1-12-4: INSPECTIONS:
He shall make all inspections necessary to the enforcement of the City
ordinances; and no electric wiring shall be covered until it has been inspected
and approved. (1962 Code § 6.404)
1-12-5: STOP ORDER:
The electrical inspector shall have the power to order all work stopped on
construction or alteration or repair of buildings in the City in accordance
with the adopted codes referenced by title 4, chapter 1 of this Code.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be subject to
penalty as provided by section
1-4-1 of this title. (Ord. 18-10, 9-17-2018)
1-12-6: CERTIFICATE:
The electrical inspector shall give a certificate of approval to the owner or
person in charge of the premises which he has inspected where he finds that the
electric apparatus and wiring therein fully comply with the ordinances of the
City. (1962 Code § 6.406)
CHAPTER 13
PLUMBING INSPECTOR
SECTION:
1-13-1: Appointment
1-13-2: Duties
1-13-3: Stop Order
1-13-4: Entry Powers
1-13-1: APPOINTMENT:
There is hereby created the office of plumbing inspector, who shall be
appointed by the City Administrator by and with the advice and consent of the
City Council, and shall be supervised by the Inspections Coordinator. (Ord. 18-
10, 9-17-2018)
1-13-2: DUTIES:
It shall be the duty of the plumbing inspector, who shall be empowered to
enforce all City ordinances relating to the installation, care, and standards
of the Plumbing Code and Mechanical Code. He shall make all necessary
inspections and tests which may be needed in the performance of his duties.
(Ord. 98-18, 5-4-1998)
1-13-3: STOP ORDER:
The plumbing inspector shall have the power to order all work stopped on
construction or alteration or repair of buildings in the City in accordance
with the adopted codes referenced by title 4, chapter 1 of this Code.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be subject to
penalty as provided by section
1-4-1 of this title. (Ord. 18-10, 9-17-2018)
1-13-4: ENTRY POWERS:
The plumbing inspector shall have the power to enter any building or premises
on or in which plumbing fixtures or pipes are being installed, altered or
repaired, at all reasonable hours, to make inspections to ensure the
enforcement of the ordinances relating to plumbing. (1962 Code § 6.504)
CHAPTER 14
DIRECTOR OF MAINTENANCE SERVICES
SECTION:
1-14-1: Office Created
1-14-2: Duties
1-14-3: Ordinances
1-14-4: Employees
1-14-5: Salary
1-14-6: Assistant Director Of Maintenance Services
1-14-1: OFFICE CREATED:
There is hereby created the office of Director of Maintenance Services, who
shall be appointed by the Mayor, by and with the approval of the City Council,
and who shall serve in such capacity for an indefinite term, based upon
satisfactory annual performance reviews by the City Administrator and the
Mayor, or otherwise under the review procedure as established by the City
Council. (Ord. 99-25, 6-21-1999)
1-14-2: DUTIES:
The Director of Maintenance Services shall have the following duties and
responsibilities:
   (A)   The construction and repair of all street and alley improvements,
paving, curbing, sidewalks, and bridges.
   (B)   The maintenance of all streets, including snow removal.
   (C)   Refuse collection, and operation or maintenance of the City landfill.
   (D)   Vehicle maintenance.
   (E)   Water distribution system maintenance, but not the water storage tanks
and towers.
   (F)   Sewage collection system maintenance.
   (G)   Storm water drainage system maintenance, including storm sewers and
open drainageways.
   (H)   Park land maintenance.
   (I)   Supervise assistant Director of Maintenance Services.
   (J)   Such other duties as determined by the Mayor or City Council from time
to time. (Ord. 88-1, 1-4-1988)
1-14-3: ORDINANCES:
The Director of Maintenance Services shall report the care or use of streets,
alleys, or sidewalks in the City, of which he may become cognizant. (Ord. 88-1,
1-4-1988)
1-14-4: EMPLOYEES:
The Director of Maintenance Services shall have supervision over all employees
in or assigned to the Maintenance Services Division. (Ord. 88-1, 1-4-1988)
1-14-5: SALARY:
The salary of the Director of Maintenance Services shall be set by the City
Council as provided by law from time to time. (Ord. 98-18, 5-4-1998)
1-14-6: ASSISTANT DIRECTOR OF MAINTENANCE SERVICES:
   (A)   There is hereby created the office of assistant Director of
Maintenance Services, who shall be appointed by the City Administrator, by and
with the advice and consent of the City Council.
   (B)   The salary of the assistant Director of Maintenance Services shall be
set by the City Council as provided by law, from time to time. (Ord. 98-18, 5-
4-1998)
CHAPTER 15
UTILITY SERVICES
SECTION:
1-15-1: Office Of Director Of Water Filtration Created
1-15-2: Qualifications
1-15-3: Duties
1-15-4: Salary
1-15-5: Office Of Director Of Wastewater Treatment
1-15-6: Qualifications; Training
1-15-7: Duties
1-15-8: Salary
1-15-1: OFFICE OF DIRECTOR OF WATER FILTRATION CREATED:
There is hereby created the office of Director of Water Filtration, who shall
be appointed by the Mayor, by and with the approval of the City Council, and
who shall serve in such capacity for an indefinite term, based upon
satisfactory annual performance reviews by the City Administrator and the
Mayor, or otherwise under the review procedure as established by the City
Council. (Ord. 99-26, 6-21-1999)
1-15-2: QUALIFICATIONS:
The Director of Water Filtration shall have the following qualifications:
   (A)   The Director shall have a thorough knowledge of the processes and
equipment used in water treatment system control and maintenance, and shall
have the ability to plan, direct, and evaluate the water facilities operation
and maintenance, having had previous experience in waterworks management and
supervision.
   (B)   The Director shall have graduated from a college or university of
recognized standing, having obtained a Bachelor's Degree in Engineering or
Science related to water treatment, chemistry, biology and/or process design,
or any equivalent combination of experience and training which provides the
required knowledge, skills and abilities.
   (C)   The Director must hold an Illinois Class A Public Water Supply
Operator's Certificate, or pass the required test for said Certificate within
six (6) months of his employment date.
   (D)   The Director should be experienced in working with State and Federal
environmental regulatory agencies. (Ord. 88-20, 3-7-1988)
1-15-3: DUTIES:
The Director of Water Filtration shall have the following duties and
responsibilities:
   (A)   Operate systems in compliance with Illinois EPA regulations, submit
required reports, renew permits, review and interpret proposed and current
regulations, assist consultants in developing plans for the correction of
noncomplying conditions.
   (B)   Carry out activities relating to personnel training, scheduling,
compensation, recruiting, termination, discipline, and negotiation.
   (C)   Supervise and participate in all aspects of operation and maintenance
such as routine daily operations, process control, lab testing and quality
assurance, preventive and corrective maintenance, building and grounds
maintenance, and the evaluation and documentation of these activities. Maintain
State certification for water laboratory to provide Illinois EPA testing and
reporting requirements.
   (D)   Assist in preparation, evaluation, and implementation of annual
operating budgets, help with requisitioning and procurement, recommend needed
capital improvements and rate structure changes.
   (E)   Maintain effective communications with employees, City administrators,
government officials, and the general public. (Ord. 88-20, 3-7-1988)
   (F)   Such other duties as required by the Mayor or City Administrator from
time to time. (Ord. 88-20, 3-7-1988; amd. Ord. 89-24, 8-21-1989)
1-15-4: SALARY:
The salary of the Director shall be set by the City Council as provided by law.
(Ord. 88-20, 3-7-1988)
1-15-5: OFFICE OF DIRECTOR OF WASTEWATER TREATMENT:
There is hereby created the office of Director of Wastewater Treatment, who
shall be appointed by the Mayor, by and with the approval of the City Council,
and who shall serve in such capacity for an indefinite term, based upon
satisfactory annual performance reviews by the City Administrator and the
Mayor, or otherwise under the review procedure as established by the City
Council. (Ord. 99-27, 6-21-1999)
1-15-6: QUALIFICATIONS; TRAINING:
   (A)   Skills And Qualifications: The Director of Wastewater Treatment shall
have the following skills and qualifications:
      1.   Thorough working knowledge of all aspects of activated sludge
wastewater treatment, facilities, operations, and maintenance.
      2.   Thorough working knowledge of laboratory operations and test
equipment.
      3.   Familiarity of personal computers with experience with DOS,
database, word processing and spreadsheets.
      4.   Ability to establish and maintain effective working relationships
with City employees, elected officials, the press, and the general public.
      5.   Good written, verbal, and planning skills.
      6.   Ability to make quick decisions in emergencies to safeguard the
wastewater plant, its employees, the environment, and public health.
      7.   Ability to perform arithmetic and algebraic calculations including
the use of decimals, fractions, volumes, and areas.
      8.   Ability to climb ladders and to enter and work in confined spaces.
      9.   Ability to safely handle various treatment chemicals and recognize
and properly react to hazards. Ability to use a self-contained breathing
apparatus.
      10.   Ability to understand maintenance manuals, and mechanical,
electrical and structural blueprints.
      11.   Possession of a valid Illinois Class 1 driver's license.
      12.   Possession of an Illinois EPA Class 1 operator's license, or
possession within six (6) months.
   (B)   Experience And Training: The Director of Wastewater Treatment shall
have the following experience and training:
The Director shall have graduated from a college or university of recognized
standing, having obtained a Bachelor's Degree in Engineering or a science
related to wastewater treatment. The Director shall have a minimum of three (3)
years' experience in a wastewater treatment plant in a supervisory level
position, or shall have any equivalent combination of training or experience
which provides the required knowledge, skills and abilities. (Ord. 99-7, 2-15-
1999)
1-15-7: DUTIES:
The Director of Wastewater Treatment shall have the following duties and
responsibilities:
   (A)   Establishes plant objectives.
   (B)   Operates wastewater treatment facilities in compliance with EPA
regulations and coordinates with State and Federal regulatory agencies; submits
required reports and permits on a timely basis; reviews, interprets, and plans
for proposed and current regulations; and assists consultants in developing
plans for the correction of current and or potentially noncomplying conditions.
   (C)   Responsible for carrying out the activities relating to the scheduling
and discipline of wastewater plant employees. Trains wastewater plant employees
in operation, maintenance, laboratory, and safety skills.
   (D)   Assists in preparation, evaluation, and implementation of the
Department's operating and capital improvement budget; requisition and
procurement; and in recommending needed capital improvements and rate structure
changes.
   (E)   Supervises all aspects of operation and maintenance, such as: routine
daily operations, preventive and corrective maintenance, building and grounds
maintenance, and the evaluation and documentation of these activities.
   (F)   Assists City administration in the selection and discipline of
wastewater plant employees.
   (G)   Oversees all aspects of laboratory and pretreatment operations in
strict compliance with EPA regulations.
   (H)   Such other duties as required by the Mayor or City Administrator from
time to time. (Ord. 99-7, 2-15-1999)
1-15-8: SALARY:
The salary of the Director shall be set by the City Council as provided by law.
(Ord. 99-7, 2-15-1999)
CHAPTER 16
DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS
(Rep. by Ord. 89-25, 8-21-1989)
CHAPTER 17
BUDGET OFFICER
SECTION:
1-17-1: Creation Of Position
1-17-2: Oath; Bond
1-17-3: Duties
1-17-4: Miscellaneous
1-17-5: Adoption Of Municipal Budget Act
1-17-1: CREATION OF POSITION:
There is hereby created the position of Budget Officer, who shall be appointed
by the Mayor, by and with the advice and consent of the City Council, and who
shall serve in such capacity for an indefinite term, based upon satisfactory
annual performance reviews by the Mayor and the City Council. (Ord. 99-28, 6-
21-1998)
1-17-2: OATH; BOND:
The Budget Officer shall take oath and post bond as provided by law. (Ord. 73-
6, 1-15-1973)
1-17-3: DUTIES:
The Budget Officer's duties shall be the following:
   (A)   Permit and encourage and establish the use of efficient planning,
budgeting, auditing, reporting, accounting and other fiscal management
procedures in all Municipal departments, commissions and boards.
   (B)   Compile an annual budget.
   (C)   Examine all books and records of all Municipal departments,
commissions and boards which relate to monies received by the Municipality,
Municipal departments, commissions and boards, and paid out by the
Municipality, Municipal departments, commissions and boards, debits and
accounts receivable, amounts owed by or to the Municipality, the Municipal
departments, commissions and boards.
   (D)   Obtain such additional information from the Municipality, Municipal
departments, commissions and boards as may be useful for purposes of compiling
a Municipal budget. Such information would be furnished by the Municipality,
Municipal departments, commissions and boards in the form required. Any
department, commission or board which refuses to make such information as is
requested of it available to the Budget Officer shall not be permitted to make
expenditures of any subsequent budget for the Municipality until such Municipal
departments, commissions or boards shall comply in full with the request of the
Budget Officer.
   (E)   Establish and maintain such procedures as shall ensure that
expenditures are made by the Municipality, Municipal departments, commissions,
or boards as authorized by the budget. (Ord. 73-6, 1-15-1973)
1-17-4: MISCELLANEOUS:
   (A)   The Budget Officer may hold another Municipal office and may receive
compensation for both offices.
   (B)   He shall perform his duties under the supervision of the Mayor and
City Council. (Ord. 73-6, 1-15-1973)
1-17-5: ADOPTION OF MUNICIPAL BUDGET ACT:
The City of East Moline hereby adopts 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-2-9.1
through 5/8-2-9.9, otherwise known as the Illinois Municipal Budget Act. The
Budget Officer shall compile an annual budget, pursuant to the authority and
direction of said sections of this Chapter. Passage of the annual budget by the
corporate authorities shall be in lieu of passage of the appropriation
ordinance as required by 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-2-9. The annual
budget shall be adopted by the corporate authorities before the beginning of
the fiscal year to which it applies. (Ord. 87-7, 2-16-1987)
CHAPTER 18
HEAD CUSTODIAN
(Rep. by Ord. 88-34, 6-6-1988)
CHAPTER 19
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
SECTION:
1-19-1: Effect (Rep. by Ord. 94-8, 5-16-1994)
1-19-2: Appointments
1-19-3: Elections
1-19-4: Term Of Office; Vacancies
1-19-5: Monies Received
1-19-6: Oath
1-19-7: Salaries
1-19-8: Assignment Of Duties
1-19-9: Records
1-19-10: Bond
1-19-11: Arrests
1-19-12: Termination Of Office
1-19-13: Inspections By City Officers
1-19-14: Impersonation
1-19-15: Interference With Officers
1-19-16: Residence; Officers, Employees
1-19-17: Ethics Ordinance
1-19-18: Sexual Harassment Policy
1-19-1: EFFECT:
(Rep. by Ord. 94-8, 5-16-1994)
1-19-2: APPOINTMENTS:
All officers other than elective officers shall be appointed by the mayor by
and with the consent or advice of the city council, as is provided by statute;
provided that all employees shall in the absence of any provisions to the
contrary be affirmed or selected by the mayor. (M.C. 1962, sec. 11.102)
1-19-3: ELECTIONS:
Elections for municipal offices shall be held as provided by statute, and at
the time prescribed by statute. (M.C. 1962, sec. 11.904)
1-19-4: TERM OF OFFICE; VACANCIES:
Every appointive officer of the city shall hold office until May 1 following
his appointment or until his successor is appointed and qualified, unless it is
otherwise provided by ordinance. In case of a vacancy in any such place, it
shall be filled in the same manner in which appointments or selections are
made, in the absence of provision to the contrary. (M.C. 1962, sec. 11.103)
1-19-5: MONIES RECEIVED:
Every officer of the city shall at least once each month turn over all monies
received by him in his official capacity, to the treasurer with a statement
showing the source from which the same was received. (M.C. 1962, sec. 11.104)
1-19-6: OATH:
Every officer of the city shall, before entering upon his duties, take the oath
prescribed by statute. (M.C. 1962, sec. 11.105)
1-19-7: SALARIES:
All officers and employees of the city shall receive such salary as may be from
time to time provided by ordinance or resolution. (M.C. 1962, sec. 11.106)
1-19-8: ASSIGNMENT OF DUTIES:
The mayor by and with the consent of the council shall have the power to assign
to any appointive officer any duty which is not assigned by ordinance to some
other specific officer; and shall determine disputes or questions relating to
the respective powers or duties of officers. (M.C. 1962, sec. 11.107)
1-19-9: RECORDS:
All records kept by any officer of the city shall be open to inspection by the
mayor, or any member of the council at all reasonable times, whether or not
such records are required to be kept by statute or ordinance. (M.C. 1962, sec.
11.108)
1-19-10: BOND:
Every officer and employee shall, if required by the city council, upon
entering upon the duties of his office, give a bond in such amount and with
such sureties as may be determined by the said council, conditioned upon the
faithful performance of his office or position. (M.C. 1962, sec. 11.109)
1-19-11: ARRESTS:
The mayor, members of the city council, as well as every member of the police
department, are hereby declared to be conservators of the peace with such
powers to make arrests as are given to conservators of the peace by statute.
(M.C. 1962, sec. 11.110)
1-19-12: TERMINATION OF OFFICE:
Every officer and employee of the city, upon the expiration of his term for any
cause whatsoever, shall deliver to his successor all books and records which
may be the property of the city, and if no successor has been appointed within
one week after the termination of office, such property shall be delivered to
the city clerk or city treasurer. (M.C. 1962, sec. 11.111)
1-19-13: INSPECTIONS BY CITY OFFICERS:
Any officer or employee of the city, who is authorized to enforce ordinances,
may make such inspections as may be necessary to see to the enforcement of such
ordinances.
Whenever such officer or employee shall have reason to believe that there
exists, on or in any premises in the city, any nuisance dangerous to public
health, any fire hazard, any structural defect likely to result in injury to
person or property, or any electrical wiring or equipment in such condition as
to present a fire hazard or danger to person, he shall ask permission of the
occupant of such premises, or the owner or custodian thereof, if the premises
are unoccupied, to inspect the same.
Each such occupant or owner shall permit such inspection at any reasonable
time. Any such owner or occupant who refuses to permit such inspection shall be
subject to penalty as provided by section
1-4-1 of this title. (M.C. 1962, sec. 11.112)
1-19-14: IMPERSONATION:
It shall be unlawful for any person to impersonate without lawful authority any
city officer or employee. Any person violating this section shall be subject to
penalty provided by section
1-4-1 of this title. (M.C. 1962, sec. 11.113)
1-19-15: INTERFERENCE WITH OFFICERS:
It shall be unlawful to interfere with or hinder any officer or employee of the
city while engaged in the duties of his office or employment. Any person
violating any provision of this section shall be subject to the penalty
provided by section
1-4-1 of this title. (M.C. 1962, sec. 11.114)
1-19-16: RESIDENCE; OFFICERS, EMPLOYEES:
All officers shall comply with the residence requirements of the Illinois
municipal code. (Ord. 98-18, 5-4-1998)
1-19-17: ETHICS ORDINANCE:
   (A)   Definitions: For purposes of this ordinance, the following terms shall
be given these definitions:
    CAMPAIGN FOR ELECTIVE OFFICE: Any activity in furtherance of an effort to
influence the selection, nomination, election, or appointment of any individual
to any federal, state, or local public office or office in a political
organization, or the selection, nomination, or election of presidential or vice
presidential electors, but does not include activities: 1) relating to the
support or opposition of any executive, legislative, or administrative action,
2) relating to collective bargaining, or 3) that are otherwise in furtherance
of the person's official duties.
   CANDIDATE: A person who has filed nominating papers or petitions for
nomination or election to an elected office, or who has been appointed to fill
a vacancy in nomination, and who remains eligible for placement on the ballot
at a regular election, as defined in section 1-3 of the election code 1 .
   COLLECTIVE BARGAINING: Has the same meaning as that term is defined in
section 3 of the Illinois public labor relations act 2 .
   COMPENSATED TIME: With respect to an employee, any time worked by or
credited to the employee that counts toward any minimum work time requirement
imposed as a condition of his or her employment, but for purposes of this
ordinance, does not include any designated holidays, vacation periods, personal
time, compensatory time off or any period when the employee is on a leave of
absence. With respect to officers or employees whose hours are not fixed,
"compensated time" includes any period of time when the officer is on premises
under the control of the employer and any other time when the officer or
employee is executing his or her official duties, regardless of location.
   COMPENSATORY TIME OFF: Authorized time off earned by or awarded to an
employee to compensate in whole or in part for time worked in excess of the
minimum work time required of that employee as a condition of his or her
employment.
   CONTRIBUTION: Has the same meaning as that term is defined in section 9-1.4
of the election code 3 .
   EMPLOYEE: A person employed by the city of East Moline, whether on a full
time or part time basis or pursuant to a contract, whose duties are subject to
the direction and control of an employer with regard to the material details of
how the work is to be performed, but does not include an independent
contractor.
   EMPLOYER: The city of East Moline.
   GIFT: Any gratuity, discount, entertainment, hospitality, loan, forbearance,
or other tangible or intangible item having monetary value including, but not
limited to, cash, food and drink, and honoraria for speaking engagements
related to or attributable to government employment or the official position of
an officer or employee.
   LEAVE OF ABSENCE: Any period during which an employee does not receive: 1)
compensation for employment, 2) service credit towards pension benefits, and 3)
health insurance benefits paid for by the employer.
   OFFICER: A person who holds, by election or appointment, an office created
by statute or ordinance, regardless of whether the officer is compensated for
service in his or her official capacity.
   POLITICAL ACTIVITY: Any activity in support of or in connection with any
campaign for elective office or any political organization, but does not
include activities: 1) relating to the support or opposition of any executive,
legislative, or administrative action, 2) relating to collective bargaining, or
3) that are otherwise in furtherance of the person's official duties.
   POLITICAL ORGANIZATION: A party, committee, association, fund, or other
organization (whether or not incorporated) that is required to file a statement
of organization with the state board of elections or a county clerk under
section 9-3 of the election code 4 , but only with regard to those activities
that require filing with the state board of elections or a county clerk.
   PROHIBITED POLITICAL ACTIVITY:
      1.   Preparing for, organizing, or participating in any political
meeting, political rally, political demonstration, or other political event.
      2.   Soliciting contributions, including, but not limited to, the
purchase of, selling, distributing, or receiving payment for tickets for any
political fundraiser, political meeting, or other political event.
      3.   Soliciting, planning the solicitation of, or preparing any document
or report regarding anything of value intended as a campaign contribution.
      4.   Planning, conducting, or participating in a public opinion poll in
connection with a campaign for elective office or on behalf of a political
organization for political purposes or for or against any referendum question.
      5.   Surveying or gathering information from potential or actual voters
in an election to determine probable vote outcome in connection with a campaign
for elective office or on behalf of a political organization for political
purposes or for or against any referendum question.
      6.   Assisting at the polls on election day on behalf of any political
organization or candidate for elective office or for or against any referendum
question.
      7.   Soliciting votes on behalf of a candidate for elective office or a
political organization or for or against any referendum question or helping in
an effort to get voters to the polls.
      8.   Initiating for circulation, preparing, circulating, reviewing, or
filing any petition on behalf of a candidate for elective office or for or
against any referendum question.
      9.   Making contributions on behalf of any candidate for elective office
in that capacity or in connection with a campaign for elective office.
      10.   Preparing or reviewing responses to candidate questionnaires.
      11.   Distributing, preparing for distribution, or mailing campaign
literature, campaign signs, or other campaign material on behalf of any
candidate for elective office or for or against any referendum question.
      12.   Campaigning for any elective office or for or against any
referendum question.
      13.   Managing or working on a campaign for elective office or for or
against any referendum question.
      14.   Serving as a delegate, alternate, or proxy to a political party
convention.
      15.   Participating in any recount or challenge to the outcome of any
election.
   PROHIBITED SOURCE: Any person or entity who:
      1.   Is seeking official action: a) by an officer or b) by an employee,
or by the officer or another employee directing that employee;
      2.   Does business or seeks to do business: a) with the officer or b)
with an employee, or with the officer or another employee directing that
employee;
      3.   Conducts activities regulated: a) by the officer or b) by an
employee, or by the officer or another employee directing that employee; or
      4.   Has interests that may be substantially affected by the performance
or nonperformance of the official duties of the officer or employee.
   (B)   Prohibited Political Activities:
      1.   No officer or employee shall intentionally perform any prohibited
political activity during any "compensated time", as defined herein. No officer
or employee shall intentionally use any property or resources of the city of
East Moline in connection with any prohibited political activity.
      2.   At no time shall any officer or employee intentionally require any
other officer or employee to perform any prohibited political activity: a) as
part of that officer's or employee's duties, b) as a condition of employment,
or c) during any compensated time off (such as holidays, vacation or personal
time off).
      3.   No officer or employee shall be required at any time to participate
in any prohibited political activity in consideration for that officer or
employee being awarded additional compensation or any benefit, whether in the
form of a salary adjustment, bonus, compensatory time off, continued employment
or otherwise, nor shall any officer or employee be awarded additional
compensation or any benefit in consideration for his or her participation in
any prohibited political activity.
      4.   Nothing in this section prohibits activities that are permissible
for an officer or employee to engage in as part of his or her official duties,
or activities that are undertaken by an officer or employee on a voluntary
basis which are not prohibited by this ordinance.
      5.   No person either: a) in a position that is subject to recognized
merit principles of public employment or b) in a position the salary for which
is paid in whole or in part by federal funds and that is subject to the federal
standards for a merit system of personnel administration applicable to grant in
aid programs, shall be denied or deprived of employment or tenure solely
because he or she is a member or an officer of a political committee, of a
political party, or of a political organization or club.
   (C)   Gift Ban:
      1.   Persons Prohibited: Except as permitted by this subsection, no
officer or employee, and no spouse of or immediate family member living with
any officer or employee (collectively referred to herein as "recipients"),
shall intentionally solicit or accept any gift from any "prohibited source", as
defined herein, or which is otherwise prohibited by law or ordinance. No
prohibited source shall intentionally offer or make a gift that violates this
section.
      2.   Exceptions: Subsection (C)1 of this section is not applicable to the
following:
         (a)   Opportunities, benefits, and services that are available on the
same conditions as for the general public.
         (b)   Anything for which the officer or employee, or his or her spouse
or immediate family member, pays the fair market value.
         (c)   Any: 1) contribution that is lawfully made under the election
code or 2) activities associated with a fundraising event in support of a
political organization or candidate.
         (d)   Educational materials and missions.
         (e)   Travel expenses for a meeting to discuss business.
         (f)   A gift from a relative, meaning those people related to the
individual as father, mother, son, daughter, brother, sister, uncle, aunt,
great aunt, great uncle, first cousin, nephew, niece, husband, wife,
grandfather, grandmother, grandson, granddaughter, father-in-law, mother-in-
law, son-in-law, daughter-in-law, brother-in-law, sister-in-law, stepfather,
stepmother, stepson, stepdaughter, stepbrother, stepsister, half brother, half
sister, and including the father, mother, grandfather, or grandmother of the
individual's spouse and the individual's fiance or fiancee.
         (g)   Anything provided by an individual on the basis of a personal
friendship unless the recipient has reason to believe that, under the
circumstances, the gift was provided because of the official position or
employment of the recipient or his or her spouse or immediate family member and
not because of the personal friendship. In determining whether a gift is
provided on the basis of personal friendship, the recipient shall consider the
circumstances under which the gift was offered, such as: 1) the history of the
relationship between the individual giving the gift and the recipient of the
gift, including any previous exchange of gifts between those individuals; 2)
whether to the actual knowledge of the recipient the individual who gave the
gift personally paid for the gift or sought a tax deduction or business
reimbursement for the gift; and 3) whether to the actual knowledge of the
recipient the individual who gave the gift also at the same time gave the same
or similar gifts to other officers or employees, or their spouses or immediate
family members.
         (h)   Food or refreshments not exceeding seventy five dollars ($75.00)
per person in value on a single calendar day; provided that the food or
refreshments are: 1) consumed on the premises from which they were purchased or
prepared or 2) catered. For the purposes of this section, "catered" means food
or refreshments that are purchased ready to consume which are delivered by any
means.
         (i)   Food, refreshments, lodging, transportation, and other benefits
resulting from outside business or employment activities (or outside activities
that are not connected to the official duties of an officer or employee), if
the benefits have not been offered or enhanced because of the official position
or employment of the officer or employee, and are customarily provided to
others in similar circumstances.
         (j)   Intragovernmental and intergovernmental gifts. For the purpose
of this act, "intragovernmental gift" means any gift given to an officer or
employee from another officer or employee, and "intergovernmental gift" means
any gift given to an officer or employee by an officer or employee of another
governmental entity.
         (k)   Bequests, inheritances, and other transfers at death.
         (l)   Any item or items from any one prohibited source during any
calendar year having a cumulative total value of less than one hundred dollars
($100.00). Each of the exceptions listed in this section is mutually exclusive
and independent of every other.
      3.   Disposition Of Gifts: An officer or employee, his or her spouse or
an immediate family member living with the officer or employee, does not
violate this ordinance if the recipient promptly takes reasonable action to
return a gift from a prohibited source to its source or gives the gift or an
amount equal to its value to an appropriate charity that is exempt from income
taxation under section 501(c)(3) of the internal revenue code of 1986, as now
or hereafter amended, renumbered, or succeeded.
   (D)   Ethics Advisor:
      1.   The city administrator, with the advice and consent of the city
council shall designate an ethics advisor for the city of East Moline. The
duties of the ethics advisor may be delegated to an officer or employee of the
city of East Moline unless the position has been created as an office by the
city of East Moline.
      2.   The ethics advisor shall provide guidance to the officers and
employees of the city of East Moline concerning the interpretation of and
compliance with the provisions of this ordinance and state ethics laws. The
ethics advisor shall perform such other duties as may be delegated by the city
council.
   (E)   Ethics Commission:
      1.   There is hereby created a commission to be known as the ethics
commission of the city of East Moline. The commission shall be comprised of
three (3) members appointed by the city administrator with the advice and
consent of the city council. No person shall be appointed as a member of the
commission who is related, either by blood or by marriage up to the degree of
first cousin, to any elected officer of the city of East Moline.
No more than two (2) members of the commission shall belong to the same
political party at the time such appointments are made. Party affiliation shall
be determined by affidavit of the person appointed.
      2.   At the first meeting of the commission, the initial appointees shall
draw lots to determine their initial terms. Two (2) commissioners shall serve
two (2) year terms, and the third commissioner shall serve a one year term.
Thereafter, all commissioners shall be appointed to two (2) year terms.
Commissioners may be reappointed to serve subsequent terms.
At the first meeting of the commission, the commissioners shall choose a
chairperson from their number. Meetings shall be held at the call of the
chairperson or any two (2) commissioners. A quorum shall consist of two (2)
commissioners, and official action by the commission shall require the
affirmative vote of two (2) members.
      3.   The city administrator, with the advice and consent of the city
council, may remove a commissioner in case of incompetency, neglect of duty or
malfeasance in office after service on the commissioner by certified mail,
return receipt requested, of a copy of the written charges against the
commissioner and after providing an opportunity to be heard in person or by
counsel upon not less than ten (10) days' notice. Vacancies shall be filled in
the same manner as original appointments.
      4.   The commission shall have the following powers and duties:
         (a)   To promulgate procedures and rules governing the performance of
its duties and the exercise of its powers.
         (b)   Upon receipt of a signed, notarized, written complaint, to
investigate, conduct hearings and deliberations, issue recommendations for
disciplinary actions, impose fines in accordance with subsection (F)3 of this
section and refer violations of subsection (B) or (C) of this section to the
appropriate attorney for prosecution. The commission shall, however, act only
upon the receipt of a written complaint alleging a violation of this ordinance
and not upon its own prerogative.
         (c)   To receive information from the public pertaining to its
investigations and to require additional information and documents from persons
who may have violated the provisions of this ordinance.
         (d)   To compel the attendance of witnesses and to compel the
production of books and papers pertinent to an investigation. It is the
obligation of all officers and employees of the city of East Moline to
cooperate with the commission during the course of its investigations. Failure
or refusal to cooperate with requests by the commission shall constitute
grounds for discipline or discharge.
         (e)   The powers and duties of the commission are limited to matters
clearly within the purview of this ordinance.
      5.   (a) Complaints alleging a violation of this ordinance shall be filed
with the ethics commission.
         (b)   Within three (3) business days after the receipt of a complaint,
the commission shall send by certified mail, return receipt requested, a notice
to the respondent that a complaint has been filed against him or her and a copy
of the complaint. The commission shall send by certified mail, return receipt
requested, a confirmation of the receipt of the complaint to the complainant
within three (3) business days after receipt by the commission. The notices to
the respondent and the complainant shall also advise them of the date, time,
and place of the meeting to determine the sufficiency of the complaint and to
establish whether probable cause exists to proceed.
         (c)   Upon not less than forty eight (48) hours' public notice, the
commission shall meet to review the sufficiency of the complaint and, if the
complaint is deemed sufficient to allege a violation of this ordinance, to
determine whether there is probable cause, based on the evidence presented by
the complainant, to proceed. The meeting may be closed to the public to the
extent authorized by the open meetings act. The commission shall issue notice
to the complainant and the respondent of the commission's ruling on the
sufficiency of the complaint and, if necessary, on probable cause to proceed
within seven (7) business days after receiving the complaint.
If the complaint is deemed sufficient to allege a violation of subsection (C)
of this section and there is a determination of probable cause, then the
commission's notice to the parties shall include a hearing date scheduled
within four (4) weeks after the complaint's receipt. Alternatively, the
commission may elect to notify in writing the attorney designated by the
corporate authorities to prosecute such actions and request that the complaint
be adjudicated judicially. If the complaint is deemed not sufficient to allege
a violation or if there is no determination of probable cause, then the
commission shall send by certified mail, return receipt requested, a notice to
the parties of the decision to dismiss the complaint, and that notice shall be
made public.
If the complaint is deemed sufficient to allege a violation of subsection (B)
of this section, then the commission shall notify in writing the attorney
designated by the corporate authorities to prosecute such actions and shall
transmit to the attorney the complaint and all additional documents in the
custody of the commission concerning the alleged violation.
         (d)   On the scheduled date and upon at least forty eight (48) hours'
public notice of the meeting, the commission shall conduct a hearing on the
complaint and shall allow both parties the opportunity to present testimony and
evidence. The hearing may be closed to the public only if authorized by the
open meetings act.
         (e)   Within thirty (30) days after the date the hearing or any
recessed hearing is concluded, the commission shall either: 1) dismiss the
complaint or 2) issue a recommendation for discipline to the alleged violator
and to the city administrator, or impose a fine upon the violator, or both. The
particular findings in the case, any recommendation for discipline, and any
fine imposed shall be a matter of public information.
         (f)   If the hearing was closed to the public, the respondent may file
a written demand for a public hearing on the complaint within seven (7)
business days after the issuance of the recommendation for discipline or
imposition of a fine, or both. The filing of the demand shall stay the
enforcement of the recommendation or fine. Within fourteen (14) days after
receiving the demand, the commission shall conduct a public hearing on the
complaint upon at least forty eight (48) hours' public notice of the hearing
and allow both parties the opportunity to present testimony and evidence.
Within seven (7) days thereafter, the commission shall publicly issue a final
recommendation to the alleged violator and to the city administrator or impose
a fine upon the violator, or both.
         (g)   If a complaint is filed during the sixty (60) days preceding the
date of any election at which the respondent is a candidate, the commission
shall render its decision as required under subsection (E)5(e) of this section
within seven (7) days after the complaint is filed, and during the seven (7)
days preceding that election, the commission shall render such decision before
the date of that election, if possible.
         (h)   The commission may fine any person who intentionally violates
any provision of subsection (C) of this section in an amount of not less than
one thousand one dollars ($1,001.00) and not more than five thousand dollars
($5,000.00). The commission may fine any person who knowingly files a frivolous
complaint alleging a violation of this ordinance in an amount of not less than
one thousand one dollars ($1,001.00) and not more than five thousand dollars
($5,000.00). The commission may recommend any appropriate discipline up to and
including discharge.
         (i)   A complaint alleging the violation of this act must be filed
within one year after the alleged violation.
   (F)   Penalties:
      1.   A person who intentionally violates any provision of subsection (B)
of this section may be punished by a term of incarceration in a penal
institution other than a penitentiary for a period of not more than three
hundred sixty four (364) days, and may be fined in an amount not to exceed two
thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00).
      2.   A person who intentionally violates any provision of subsection (C)
of this section is subject to a fine in an amount of not less than one thousand
one dollars ($1,001.00) and not more than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00).
      3.   Any person who intentionally makes a false report alleging a
violation of any provision of this ordinance to the local enforcement
authorities, the state's attorney or any other law enforcement official may be
punished by a term of incarceration in a penal institution other than a
penitentiary for a period of not more than three hundred sixty four (364) days,
and may be fined in an amount not to exceed two thousand five hundred dollars
($2,500.00).
      4.   A violation of subsection (B) of this section shall be prosecuted as
a criminal offense by an attorney for the city of East Moline by filing in the
circuit court an information, or sworn complaint, charging such offense. The
prosecution shall be under and conform to the rules of criminal procedure.
Conviction shall require the establishment of the guilt of the defendant beyond
a reasonable doubt.
A violation of subsection (C) of this section may be prosecuted as a quasi-
criminal offense by an attorney for the city of East Moline, or, if an ethics
commission has been created, by the commission through the designated
administrative procedure.
      5.   In addition to any other penalty that may be applicable, whether
criminal or civil, an officer or employee who intentionally violates any
provision of subsection (B) or (C) of this section is subject to discipline or
discharge. (Ord. 04-18, 5-3-2004)
 
Notes
1 1. 10 ILCS 5/1-3.
2 2. 5 ILCS 315/3.
3 3. 10 ILCS 5/9-1.4.
4 1. 10 ILCS 5/9-3.
1-19-18: SEXUAL HARASSMENT POLICY:
   (A)   Prohibition On Sexual Harassment. It is unlawful to harass a person
because of that person’s sex. The courts have determined that sexual harassment
is a form of discrimination under Title VII of the U.S. Civil Rights Act of
1964, as amended in 1991. All persons have a right to work in an environment
free from sexual harassment. Sexual harassment is unacceptable misconduct which
affects individuals of all genders and sexual orientations. It is a policy of
THE city of East Moline to prohibit harassment of any person by any municipal
official, municipal agent, municipal employee or municipal agency or office on
the basis ofsex or gender. All municipal officials, municipal agents, municipal
employees and municipal agencies or offices are prohibited from sexually
harassing any person, regardless of any employment relationship or lack
thereof.
   (B)   Definition Of Sexual Harassment. This policy adopts the definition of
sexual harassment as stated in the Illinois Human Rights Act, which currently
defines sexual harassment as:
      1.   Any unwelcome sexual advances or requests for sexual favors or any
conduct of a sexual nature when:
         (a)   Submission to such conduct is made either explicitly or
implicitly a term or condition of an individual’s employment,
         (b)   Submission to or rejection of such conduct by an individual is
used as the basis for employment decisions affecting such individual, or
         (c)   Such conduct has the purpose or effect of substantially
interfering with an individual’s work performance or creating an intimidating,
hostile or offensive working environment.
      2.   Conduct which may constitute sexual harassment includes:
         (a)   Verbal: sexual innuendos, suggestive comments, insults, humor,
and jokes about sex, anatomy or gender-specific traits, sexual propositions,
threats, repeated requests for dates, or statements about other employees, even
outside of their presence, of a sexual nature.
         (b)   Non-verbal: suggestive or insulting sounds (whistling), leering,
obscene gestures, sexually suggestive bodily gestures, “catcalls”, “smacking”
or “kissing” noises.
         (c)   Visual: posters, signs, pin-ups or slogans of a sexual nature,
viewing pornographic material or websites.
         (d)   Physical: touching, unwelcome hugging or kissing, pinching,
brushing the body, any coerced sexual act or actual assault.
         (e)   Textual/Electronic: “sexting” (electronically sending messages
with sexual content, including pictures and video), the use of sexually
explicit language, harassment, cyber stalking and threats via all forms of
electronic communication (e-mail, text/picture/video messages, intranet/on-line
postings, blogs, instant messages and social network websites like Facebook and
Twitter).
      3.   The most severe and overt forms of sexual harassment are easier to
determine. On the other end of the spectrum, some sexual harassment is more
subtle and depends, to some extent, on individual perception and
interpretation. The courts will assess sexual harassment by a standard of what
would offend a “reasonable person.”
   (C)   Procedure For Reporting An Allegation Of Sexual Harassment.
      1.   An employee who either observes sexual harassment or believes
herself/himself to be the object of sexual harassment should deal with the
incident(s) as directly and firmly as possible by clearly communicating her/his
position to the offending employee, and her/his immediate supervisor. It is not
necessary for sexual harassment to be directed at the person making the report.
      2.   Any employee may report conduct which is believed to be sexual
harassment, including the following:
         (a)   Electronic/Direct Communication. If there is sexual harassing
behavior in the workplace, the harassed employee should directly and clearly
express her/his objection that the conduct is unwelcome and request that the
offending behavior stop. The initial message may be verbal. If subsequent
messages are needed, they should be put in writing in a note or a memo.
         (b)   Contact with Supervisory Personnel. At the same time direct
communication is undertaken, or in the event the employee feels threatened or
intimidated by the situation, the problem must be promptly reported to the
immediate supervisor of the person making the report, a department head, a
director of human resources, an ethics officer, the city manager or
administrator, or the chief executive officer of the municipality.
The employee experiencing what he or she believes to be sexual harassment must
not assume that the employer is aware of the conduct. If there are no witnesses
and the victim fails to notify a supervisor or other responsible officer, the
municipality will not be presumed to have knowledge of the harassment.
         (c)   Resolution Outside Municipality. The purpose of this policy is
to establish prompt, thorough and effective procedures for responding to every
report and incident so that problems can be identified and remedied by the
municipality. However, all municipal employees have the right to contact the
Illinois Department of Human Rights (IDHR) or the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC) for information regarding filing a formal complaint with
those entities. An IDHR complaint must be filed within 180 days of the alleged
incident(s) unless it is a continuing offense. A complaint with the EEOC must
be filed within 300 days.
      3.   Documentation of any incident may be submitted with any report (what
was said or done, the date, the time and the place), including, but not limited
to, written records such as letters, notes, memos and telephone messages.
      4.   All allegations, including anonymous reports, will be accepted and
investigated regardless of how the matter comes to the attention of the
municipality. However, because of the serious implications of sexual harassment
charges and the difficulties associated with their investigation and the
questions of credibility involved, the claimant’s willing cooperation is a
vital component of an effective inquiry and an appropriate outcome.
   (D)   Prohibition On Retaliation For Reporting Sexual Harassment
Allegations.
      1.   No municipal official, municipal agency, municipal employee or
municipal agency or office shall take any retaliatory action against any
municipal employee due to a municipal employee’s:
         (a)   Disclosure or threatened disclosure of any violation of this
policy,
         (b)   The provision of information related to or testimony before any
public body conducting an investigation, hearing or inquiry into any violation
of this policy, or
         (c)   Assistance or participation in a proceeding to enforce the
provisions of this policy.
      2.   For the purposes of this policy, retaliatory action means the
reprimand, discharge, suspension, demotion, denial of promotion or transfer, or
change in the terms or conditions of employment of any municipal employee that
is taken in retaliation for a municipal employee’s involvement in protected
activity pursuant to this policy.
      3.   No individual making a report will be retaliated against even if a
report made in good faith is not substantiated. In addition, any witness will
be protected from retaliation.
      4.   Similar to the prohibition against retaliation contained herein, the
State Officials and Employees Ethics Act (5ILCS 430/15-10) provides
whistleblower protection from retaliatory action such as reprimand, discharge,
suspension, demotion, or denial of promotion or transfer that occurs in
retaliation for an employee who does any of the following:
         (a)   Discloses or threatens to disclose to a supervisor or to a
public body an activity, policy, or practice of any officer, member. State
agency, or other State employee that the State employee reasonably believes is
in violation of a law, rule, or regulation,
         (b)   Provides information to or testifies before any public body
conducting an investigation, hearing, or inquiry into any violation of a law,
rule, or regulation by any officer, member. State agency or other State
employee, or
         (c)   Assists or participates in a proceeding to enforce the
provisions of the State Officials and Employees Ethics Act.
      5.   Pursuant to the Whistleblower Act (740 ILCS 174/15(a)), an employer
may not retaliate against an employee who discloses information in a court, an
administrative hearing, or before a legislative commission or committee, or in
any other proceeding, where the employee has reasonable cause to believe that
the information discloses a violation of a State or federal law, rule, or
regulation. In addition, an employer may not retaliate against an employee for
disclosing information to a government or law enforcement agency, where the
employee has reasonable cause to believe that the information discloses a
violation of a State or federal law, rule, or regulation. (740 ILCS 174/15(b)).
      6.   According to the Illinois Human Rights Act (775 ILCS 5/6-101), it is
a civil rights violation for a person, or for two or more people to conspire,
to retaliate against a person because he/she has opposed that which he/she
reasonably and in good faith believes to be sexual harassment in employment,
because he/she has made a charge, filed a complaint, testified, assisted, or
participated in an investigation, proceeding, or hearing under the Illinois
Human Rights Act.
      7.   An employee who is suddenly transferred to a lower paying job or
passed over for a promotion after filing a complaint with IDHR or EEOC, may
file a retaliation charge - due within 180 days (IDHR) or 300 days (EEOC) of
the alleged retaliation.
   (E)   Consequences Of A Violation Of The Prohibition On Sexual Harassment.
In addition to any and all other discipline that may be applicable pursuant to
municipal policies, employment agreements, procedures, employee handbooks and/
or collective bargaining agreement, any person who violates this policy or the
Prohibition on Sexual Harassment contained in 5 ILCS 430/5- 65, may be subject
to a fine of up to $5,000 per offense, applicable discipline or discharge by
the municipality and any applicable fines and penalties established pursuant to
local ordinance, State law or Federal law. Each violation may constitute a
separate offense. Any discipline imposed by the municipality shall be separate
and distinct from any penalty imposed by an ethics commission and any fines or
penalties imposed by a court of law or a State or Federal agency.
   (F)   Consequences For Knowingly Making A False Report.
      1.   A false report is a report of sexual harassment made by an accuser
using the sexual harassment report to accomplish some end other than stopping
sexual harassment or retaliation for reporting sexual harassment. A false
report is not a report made in good faith which cannot be proven. Given the
seriousness of the consequences for the accused, a false or frivolous report is
a severe offense that can itself result in disciplinary action. Any person who
intentionally makes a false report alleging a violation of any provision of
this policy shall be subject to discipline or discharge pursuant to applicable
municipal policies, employment agreements, procedures, employee handbooks and/
or collective bargaining agreements.
      2.   In addition, any person who intentionally makes a false report
alleging a violation of any provision of the State Officials and Employees
Ethics Act to an ethics commission, an inspector general, the State Police, a
State’s Attorney, the Attorney General, or any other law enforcement official
is guilty of a Class A misdemeanor. An ethics commission may levy an
administrative fine of up to $5,000 against any person who intentionally makes
a false, frivolous or bad faith allegation. (Ord. 18-01, 1-16-2017)
CHAPTER 20
ENGINEERING SERVICES DIVISION
SECTION:
1-20-1: Creation Of Division
1-20-2: Office Created
1-20-3: Qualifications
1-20-4: Duties
1-20-5: Salary
1-20-1: CREATION OF DIVISION:
There is hereby created the engineering services division of the municipal
services department of the city, which division and all employees thereunder
shall be under the direct supervision of the director of engineering services.
(Ord. 88-3, 1-4-1988)
1-20-2: OFFICE CREATED:
There is hereby created the office of director of engineering services, who
shall be appointed by the mayor, by and with the approval of the city council,
and who shall serve in such capacity for an indefinite term, based upon
satisfactory annual performance reviews by the city administrator and the
mayor, or otherwise under the review procedure as established by the city
council. (Ord. 99-30, 6-21-1999)
1-20-3: QUALIFICATIONS:
   (A)   Possession of a professional engineer's registration issued by the
state of Illinois.
   (B)   Extensive experience in progressively responsible professional civil
engineering work and graduation from an engineering school or recognized
standing with major work in civil engineering; or any equivalent combination of
experience and training which provide the required knowledge, skills and
abilities.
   (C)   Comprehensive knowledge of the principles and practices of civil
engineering as related to the preparation of plans and specifications for a
wide variety of public works; thorough knowledge of land and engineering survey
systems, methods and techniques; thorough knowledge of urban planning methods
and techniques; thorough knowledge of construction and maintenance materials
and of approved standards of safety as related to structural designs and
specifications; ability to direct subordinate personnel in proper work methods
and to guide their work; ability to adapt approved engineering methods and
standards to the design and construction of a variety of public works projects;
good professional judgment; good physical condition.
   (D)   The ability to relate to and work with the public, elected officials,
staff and employees, and other professionals. (Ord. 88-3, 1-4-1988)
1-20-4: DUTIES:
The director of engineering services shall have the following duties and
responsibilities:
   (A)   To plan and direct the activities of the engineering services
division.
   (B)   To plan and layout street renovation and construction projects and
assign priorities to motor fuel tax projects and other projects.
   (C)   To advise city council on public works problems.
   (D)   To confer with contractors and representatives of other governmental
agencies on major construction and design problems.
   (E)   To develop work programs and prepare budget estimates.
   (F)   To supervise and direct the building/electrical inspector, plumbing
inspector, and health inspector. (Ord. 88-3, 1-4-1988)
   (G)   To regulate the standards and specifications for construction of
public infrastructure including, but not limited to, streets, water mains,
sewer mains and storm drainage systems. As such, all construction of public
infrastructure shall meet the standards and requirements as set forth by the
director of engineering, from time to time. (Ord. 10-07, 4-5-2010)
1-20-5: SALARY:
The salary of the director of engineering services shall be set by the city
council as provided by law, from time to time. (Ord. 98-18, 5-4-1998)
CHAPTER 21
CIRCUIT COURT
(Rep. by Ord. 11-11, 3-21-2011)
CHAPTER 22
FINANCES
SECTION:
1-22-1: Budget Appropriations
1-22-2: Tax Levy
1-22-3: Indebtedness
1-22-4: Contracts
1-22-5: Surety Bonds
1-22-6: Bills; Payroll
1-22-7: Payment By Treasurer
1-22-8: Audit
1-22-9: Returned Checks Fee
1-22-1: BUDGET APPROPRIATIONS:
Before May 1 of each fiscal year, as required by statute, the Mayor and City
Council shall enact a budget ordinance which shall summarize all anticipated
budgetary expenditures to be made during the coming year, other than those
payable from bond issues. This budget ordinance shall be published as required
by law within ten (10) days after its enactment. (Ord. 95-8, 3-20-1995)
1-22-2: TAX LEVY:
   (A)   Not sooner than ten (10) days after the publication of the budget
ordinance a tax levy ordinance shall be enacted, as required by law, levying
such taxes as may be needed to meet the anticipated expenses of the coming
year, together with such taxes as may be required to meet outstanding bond
issues, or for purposes payable from special taxes properly authorized.
   (B)   A certified copy of the tax levy ordinance shall be filed with the
County Clerk not later than the last Tuesday in December. Such ordinance shall
show the total budgeted for each item, and the amount of tax levied therefor.
(Ord. 95-8, 3-20-1995)
1-22-3: INDEBTEDNESS:
No indebtedness shall be incurred, excepting such indebtedness as may be
payable solely from the proceeds of a duly authorized bond issue or from a
designated specified source, unless there is a prior budgeted source, out of
which such indebtedness could be paid, as provided by statute. (Ord. 95-8, 3-
20-1995)
1-22-4: CONTRACTS:
The Mayor, or any other person designated by the City Council, may sign on
behalf of the City any contract authorized by the City Council. No contract may
be entered into without the authority of the City Council. (Ord. 95-8, 3-20-
1995)
1-22-5: SURETY BONDS:
Whenever a surety bond to indemnify the City is required as a prerequisite to
exercising the duties of any office or position, or to the issuance of a
license or permit or for the exercise of any special privilege, the surety on
such bond shall be a corporation licensed and authorized to do business in this
State as a surety company, in the absence of specific provision to the contrary
by ordinance. (Ord. 95-8, 3-20-1995)
1-22-6: BILLS; PAYROLL:
All bills payable by the City, other than for the payment of salaries
established by the City Council, shall be submitted to the City Council for
approval before payment. (Ord. 95-8, 3-20-1995)
1-22-7: PAYMENT BY TREASURER:
The Treasurer shall pay out money in payment of all bills, or for salaries, or
for any other purpose other than the retirement of principle or interest on
bonds or tax anticipation warrants, only upon warrant signed by the Mayor and
the Clerk as provided by statute. Such warrants shall designate the items to be
paid and the funds from which they are to be paid. (Ord. 95-8, 3-20-1995)
1-22-8: AUDIT:
As soon as practicable at the close of each fiscal year, and no later than six
(6) months thereafter, there shall be an audit of all accounts of the City made
by a competent person authorized to act as an auditor under the laws of
Illinois, to be designated by the City Council. Copies of such audit report
shall be filed with the City Clerk and with the Director of the State
Department of Revenue and in such other places as may be required by law. (Ord.
95-8, 3-20-1995)
1-22-9: RETURNED CHECKS FEE:
All checks returned to the city of East Moline for closed account or
nonsufficient funds, whether for water and sewer bills, inspection fees, police
department fees, recreation fees, or for other purposes with respect to all
departments of the city of East Moline, shall have a thirty dollar ($30.00)
service fee applied to said check, and accrued on account.(Ord. 04-33, 9-7-
2004; amd. Ord. 19-04, 2-19-2019)
CHAPTER 23
WARDS
SECTION:
1-23-1: Establishment
1-23-1: ESTABLISHMENT:
The City is hereby divided into seven (7) wards with boundaries as set forth in
the attached map and as designated as follows:
FIRST WARD: All that part of the City as is described as follows:
Beginning at the intersection of the Mississippi River and the extended center
line of 1st Street in the City of East Moline, Illinois, being in Township 18
North, Range 1 west of the 4th Principal Meridian; thence northeasterly along
the Mississippi River to the extended center line of 7th Street; thence south
along the extended center line and the center line of 7th Street to the
intersection of the center line of 23rd Avenue; thence west along the center
line of 23rd Avenue and 23rd Avenue extended when it is not a street, to the
center line of Kennedy Drive; thence south on the center line of Kennedy Drive
to the center line of 28th Avenue; thence west on the center line of 27th
Avenue and the extended center line of 27th Avenue to the extended center line
of 1st Street; thence north on the extended center line of 1st Street and the
center line of 1st Street to the point of beginning.
SECOND WARD: All that part of the City as is described as follows:
Beginning at the intersection of the extended center line of 27th Avenue and
the extended center line of 1st Street, which point is on the west line of the
east half of Section 35, Township 18 North, Range 1 west of the 4th Principal
Meridian, in the City of East Moline, Rock Island County, State of Illinois;
thence east on the extended center line and the center line of 27th Avenue to
the center line of Kennedy Drive; thence south on the center line of Kennedy
Drive to the center line of 34th Avenue; thence east on the center line of 34th
Avenue to the east line of 7th Street; thence continuing east on the extended
center line of 34th Avenue to the northerly line of Seven Hills First Addition;
thence in a northeasterly direction along the north line of the Seven Hills
First Addition to the east line of Lot 30, Seven Hills First Addition; thence
southerly on the east line of Lot 30 and the east line of Lot 30 extended to
the center line of 8th Street; thence south on the center line of 8th Street to
the south line of 38th Avenue; thence west on the south line of 38th Avenue to
the west line of Lot 9 of Seven Hills Second Addition; thence south on the west
line of Lot 9 to the west line of Lot 10 of Meadowlawn 5th Addition; thence
continuing south on the west line of Lot 10 and the extended west line of Lot
10 to the center line of 8th Street; thence southerly on the center line of 8th
Street to the center line of 41st Avenue; thence east on the center line of
41st Avenue to the center line of 9th Street; thence south on the center line
of 9th Street to the center line of 42nd Avenue; thence west on the center line
of 42nd Avenue to the west line of the east half of Section 2, Township 17
North, Range 1 West, thence north along the west line of the east half of
Section 2 and the west line of the east half of Section 35, Township 18 North,
Range 1 west of the 4th Principal Meridian to the point of beginning.
(Ord. 82-32, 9-8-1982)
THIRD WARD: All that part of the City as is described as follows:
Beginning at the intersection of the center line of Kennedy Drive and the
center line of 23rd Avenue in the City of East Moline, Illinois; thence east
along the center line of 23rd Avenue and the extension of same when it is not a
through street to the center line of 7th Street; thence south on the center
line of 7th Street to the center line of 34th Avenue; thence west on the center
line of 34th Avenue to the center line of Kennedy Drive; thence north on the
center line of Kennedy Drive to the place of beginning.
FOURTH WARD: All that part of the City as is described as follows:
Beginning at the intersection of the extended center line of 7th Street in the
City of East Moline, Illinois, and the Mississippi River; thence northeasterly
along the Mississippi River to the east line of South Moline Township; thence
south on the east line of South Moline Township to the center line of 13th
Street; thence southerly on the center line of 13th Street also being the east
line of South Moline Township to the center line of 27th Avenue; thence
continuing westerly on the extended center line of 27th Avenue to a point due
north of the intersection of the center line of 10th Street and 30th Avenue;
thence southerly to the aforesaid intersection; thence easterly along the
center line of 30th Avenue to the center line of Archer Drive; thence southerly
on the center line of Archer Drive to the center line of 36th Avenue; thence
west on the center line of 36th Avenue to the center line of 9th Street; thence
north on the center line of 9th Street to the north line of Lot 30 Meadowlawn
3rd Addition; thence in a westerly direction along the north line of said Lot
30, and the northerly line of Seven Hills 1st Addition to the center line of
7th Street; thence north along the center line of 7th Street to the place of
beginning.
FIFTH WARD: All that part of the City as is described as follows:
All that part of the City of East Moline, Illinois, lying south of 42nd Avenue
east of the center line of Section 2 and 11, and west of the east boundary of
South Moline Township also being Archer Drive together with the following:
Beginning at the intersection of the center line of 13th Street, City of East
Moline, Illinois, with the center line of 42nd Avenue; thence west on the
center line of 42nd Avenue to the center line of 9th Street; thence north on
the center line of 9th Street to the center line of 41st Avenue; thence west on
the center line of 41st Avenue to the center line of 8th Street; thence
northerly on the center line of 8th Street to the extension of the west line of
Lot 10 of Meadowlawn 6th Addition; thence north on the extended west line of
Lot 10 and the west line of Lot 10 to the west line of Lot 9 of Seven Hills 2nd
Addition; thence north on the west line of Lot 9 to the south line of 38th
Avenue; thence north on the center line of 8th Street to the extended east line
of Lot 30 of Seven Hills 1st Addition; thence northerly on the extended east
line of Lot 30 and the east line of Lot 30 to the north line of Seven Hills 1st
Addition; thence easterly along the north line of Seven Hills 1st Addition to
the north line of Lot 30 Meadowlawn 3rd Addition; thence continuing easterly
along the extended north line of Lot 30 to the center line of 9th Street;
thence south on the center line of 9th Street to the center line of 36th
Avenue; thence east on the center line of 36th Avenue to the center line of
Archer Drive also being the east line of South Moline Township; thence south on
the center line of Archer Drive to the point of beginning.
(Ord. 77-1, 1-3-1977)
SIXTH WARD: All that part of the City as is described as follows:
Commencing at the intersection of the center line of 18th Avenue, City of East
Moline, with the center line of 13th Street, which point is on the west line of
Hampton Township; thence southeast along the center line of 18th Avenue to the
center line of 19th Street; thence north on the center line of 19th Street to
the point of intersection with an alley lying midway between 7th and 8th
Avenues; thence running northwest on the center line of said alley and said
alley extended to the right of way line of the BNSF Railroad, f/k/a Chicago,
Milwaukee, St. Paul and Pacific Railroad; thence southwest along the Railroad
right of way to the west boundary line of Hampton Township; thence running
southerly along the Township boundary line to the place of beginning, and all
that part of the City of East Moline, Illinois, lying south of 18th Avenue and
east of Archer Drive, also being the west line of Hampton Township, and west of
19th Street and 19th Street extended.
SEVENTH WARD: All that part of the City as is described as follows:
All that part of the City of East Moline, Illinois, lying northerly of the BNSF
Railroad, f/k/a Chicago, Burlington and Quincy Railroad and easterly from the
following described line:
Beginning at the intersection of the Mississippi River and the west line of
Hampton Township; thence south on the west line of Hampton Township to the
right of way of the BNSF Railroad, f/k/a Chicago, Milwaukee and St. Paul
Railroad; thence northerly along the BNSF Railroad, f/k/a Chicago, Milwaukee
and St. Paul Railroad to the extended center line of an alley lying midway
between 7th and 8th Avenues; thence southeasterly along the extended center
line and the center line of the alley midway between 7th and 8th Avenues to the
center line of 19th Street; thence south along the center line of 19th Street
to the right of way of the BNSF Railroad, f/k/a Chicago, Burlington and Quincy
Railroad.
(Ord. 98-18, 5-4-1998)
CHAPTER 24
CITY JAIL
SECTION:
1-24-1: Establishment
1-24-2: Keeper
1-24-3: Prisoners
1-24-4: Escape
1-24-5: Communications With Prisoners
1-24-1: ESTABLISHMENT:
The place in the City heretofore established and used as the jail, or any other
place which may be hereafter established by the City Council for that purpose,
is hereby declared to be the City jail. (M.C. 1962, sec. 11.501)
1-24-2: KEEPER:
The Chief of Police shall be the keeper of the jail and shall have custody over
all persons confined therein and of all property pertaining thereto. (M.C.
1962, sec. 11.502)
1-24-3: PRISONERS:
The jail shall be used for incarceration of all persons arrested for violating
any laws of the State of Illinois, the United States, or for violating any City
ordinances until such person shall be lawfully brought before a magistrate for
a hearing or until such person shall be lawfully transferred to some other
place of incarceration or otherwise lawfully released. (M.C. 1962, sec. 11.503)
1-24-4: ESCAPE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to escape, attempt to escape, or to assist
any prisoner to escape or attempt to escape from the City jail. (M.C. 1962,
sec. 11.504)
1-24-5: COMMUNICATIONS WITH PRISONERS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to communicate with any prisoner held in
the jail without the permission of the Chief of Police. (M.C. 1962, sec.
11.505)
CHAPTER 25
DEPOSITORIES
SECTION:
1-25-1: Depositories Enumerated
1-25-1: DEPOSITORIES ENUMERATED:
First Midwest Bank, East Moline Branch, East Moline, Illinois; Bank of New
York, New York, New York; Firstar Bank N.A., Rock Island, Illinois; DHCU
Community Credit Union; the National Bank, East Moline, Illinois; American Bank
& Trust Co.; IH Mississippi Valley Credit Union; Blackhawk State Bank; JPMorgan
Chase Bank, N.A.; and the Illinois public treasurer's investment pool,
Springfield, Illinois, are hereby designated as depositories in which the funds
and monies of the city in the custody of the treasurer may be kept, and the
treasurer shall be discharged from responsibility for all such funds and monies
which are deposited therein. (Ord. 06-48, 12-18-2006)
CHAPTER 26
WATER DEPARTMENT
(Rep. by Ord. 99-10, 3-15-1999)
CHAPTER 27
SAFETY DIRECTOR
(Rep. by Ord. 98-18, 5-4-1998)
CHAPTER 28
CITY ADMINISTRATOR
SECTION:
1-28-1: Office Created
1-28-2: Qualifications
1-28-3: Duties And Responsibilities
1-28-4: Salary
1-28-1: OFFICE CREATED:
There is hereby created the office of City Administrator, who shall be
appointed by the Mayor, by and with the approval of the City Council, and who
shall serve in such capacity for an indefinite term, based upon satisfactory
annual performance reviews by the Mayor and the City Council. (Ord. 99-29, 6-
21-1999)
1-28-2: QUALIFICATIONS:
The City Administrator shall have the following qualifications:
   (A)   Training: The City Administrator shall be a graduate of a college or
university with a Bachelor's Degree in Business Administration, Accounting,
Finance, Public Administration, or other appropriate field, and shall have four
(4) years of responsible business or public service experience, including two
(2) years of administrative experience, or an equivalent combination of
training and experience.
   (B)   Knowledge: The City Administrator shall have a knowledge of management
administration, city government operation, and good general business practices.
The person shall also have the ability to perform well in the following areas:
personnel management, labor relations, financial management and budgeting,
public works management, and community development. (Ord. 88-4, 1-4-1988; amd.
Ord. 89-24, 8-21-1989)
1-28-3: DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES:
The City Administrator shall have the following duties and responsibilities:
(Ord. 88-4, 1-4-1988; amd. Ord. 89-24, 8-21-1989)
   (A)   Plan and direct the activities of the Utility Services Division,
Maintenance Services Division, Administrative Services Division, Engineering
Services Division, and Development Services Division.
   (B)   Coordinate the functions of the Municipal Services Department with the
other City departments. (Ord. 98-18, 5-4-1998)
   (C)   Administer personnel functions within the City.
   (D)   Assist the Mayor and City Council Finance Committee in the preparation
and administration of the annual budget. The Administrator shall consult with
each of the various City department heads, commissions and boards and may
require and obtain such information from them as may be useful and necessary
for preparation of the annual budget. (Ord. 88-4, 1-4-1988; amd. Ord. 89-24, 8-
21-1989)
   (E)   (Rep. by Ord. 98-18, 5-4-1998)
   (F)   Administration of buildings and grounds.
   (G)   Administration of physical facilities for the Circuit Court office.
   (H)   Serve as coordinator of the East Moline Emergency Services and
Disaster Agency.
   (I)   Serve as Budget Officer for the City.
   (J)   Such other duties as determined by the Mayor and City Council from
time to time. (Ord. 88-4, 1-4-1988; amd. Ord. 89-24, 8-21-1989)
   (K)   Develop and maintain an employee performance appraisal and review
system. (Ord. 95-26, 8-21-1995)
1-28-4: SALARY:
The salary of the City Administrator shall be set by the City Council as
provided by law, from time to time. (Ord. 98-18, 5-4-1998)
CHAPTER 29
FINANCE DEPARTMENT
SECTION:
1-29-1: Creation Of Department
1-29-2: Office Created
1-29-3: Qualifications
1-29-4: Duties
1-29-5: Salary
1-29-6: Office Hours
1-29-7: Accounts
1-29-8: Internal Audit Committee
1-29-9: Tax Exempt Obligations
1-29-1: CREATION OF DEPARTMENT:
There is hereby created the finance department of the city, which department
and all employees thereunder shall be under the direct supervision of the
director of finance. (Ord. 96-10, 4-1-1996)
1-29-2: OFFICE CREATED:
There is hereby created the office of director of finance, who shall be
appointed by the mayor, by and with the approval of the city council, and who
shall serve in such capacity for an indefinite term, based upon satisfactory
annual performance reviews by the city administrator and the mayor, or
otherwise under the review procedure as established by the city council. (Ord.
99-31, 6-21-1999)
1-29-3: QUALIFICATIONS:
The director of finance shall have the following qualifications:
   (A)   Completion of a bachelor's degree in accounting with at least five (5)
years of experience in a comparable municipal accounting system.
   (B)   A working knowledge of municipal financial and budgetary processes.
   (C)   A working knowledge of a mainframe computer and PC based accounting
software.
   (D)   A working knowledge of PC based spreadsheet software. (Ord. 96-10, 4-
1-1996)
1-29-4: DUTIES:
The director of finance shall have the following duties and responsibilities:
   (A)   Direct supervision of the employees of the finance department.
   (B)   Responsible for the collection and disbursement of all city funds and
the proper accounting of each transaction.
   (C)   Serve as ex officio city treasurer and invest city funds in compliance
with the city's investment policy.
   (D)   Prepare financial data for the monthly reports and the budget process,
and prepare the tax levy at the direction of the city council. (Ord. 96-10, 4-
1-1996)
   (E)   Responsible for the review of all purchases within the city to assure
that all purchases are in compliance with the city's purchasing policy. (Ord.
98-18, 5-4-1998)
   (F)   Responsible for all city insurance policies and surety bonds.
   (G)   Responsible for the issuance of all city licenses.
   (H)   Responsible for payment and collection of all city debt and
receivables.
   (I)   Keep accurate and detailed accounts of all taxes and assessments and
all monies due the city, monies received and the several sources from which
derived, and all funds of the city and all disbursements and obligations.
   (J)   Provide primary staff assistance to the city administrator in
preparation and administration of the annual budget.
   (K)   Perform duties under and report directly to the mayor. (Ord. 96-10, 4-
1-1996)
1-29-5: SALARY:
The salary of the director of finance shall be set by the city council as
provided by law, and shall be in accordance with the supervisory pay scale for
labor grade 21 on the exempt chart. (Ord. 99-14, 5-3-1999)
1-29-6: OFFICE HOURS:
The finance department shall be open for the transaction of city business from
eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. to five o'clock (5:00) P.M., Mondays through Fridays.
Such office shall be closed on Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays. (Ord. 98-
18, 5-4-1998)
1-29-7: ACCOUNTS:
The finance director or city treasurer shall keep accounts showing all money
received and the source and disposition thereof; and such other accounts as may
be required by statute or ordinance. The finance director or city treasurer
shall further have the responsibility of investing the funds of the city in
those accounts and investments as permitted by state statute and city
ordinance. (Ord. 98-18, 5-4-1998)
1-29-8: INTERNAL AUDIT COMMITTEE:
   (A)   An internal audit committee shall be established by the city council
to oversee the internal audit function for the city, to provide an extra review
to ensure the accuracy of the city records and to assure that purchases are
being made in accordance with established city policy.
   (B)   The internal audit committee shall be comprised of two (2) citizens of
the city of East Moline and two (2) elected officials of the city of East
Moline, to be appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of the city
council. (Ord. 99-22, 6-21-1999)
1-29-9: TAX EXEMPT OBLIGATIONS:
   (A)   Compliance Officer Is Responsible For Records: The director of finance
of the city (known, for purposes of this ordinance only, as the "compliance
officer") is designated as the keeper of all records of the city with respect
to the tax exempt obligations, and such officer shall report to the city
council at least annually that he/she has all of the required records in his/
her possession, or is taking appropriate action to obtain or recover such
records.
   (B)   Closing Transcripts: For each issue of tax exempt obligations, the
compliance officer shall receive, and shall keep and maintain or cause to be
kept and maintained, a true, correct and complete counterpart of each document
and agreement delivered in connection with the authorization and issuance of
the tax exempt obligations, including, without limitation: 1) the proceedings
of the city authorizing the tax exempt obligations, 2) any offering document
with respect to the offer and sale of the tax exempt obligations, 3) any legal
opinions with respect to the tax exempt obligations delivered by any lawyers,
and 4) all written representations of any person delivered in connection with
the authorization, issuance and initial sale of the tax exempt obligations.
   (C)   Arbitrage Rebate Liability: The compliance officer shall review the
agreements of the city with respect to the tax exempt obligations and shall
prepare, or cause to be prepared by a qualified consultant, and present to the
city council a report stating whether or not the city has any rebate liability
to the U.S. treasury, and setting forth any applicable exemptions that the tax
exempt obligations may have from rebate liability. Such report shall be updated
annually and delivered to the city council. Such report may be based in part on
an opinion or opinions of nationally recognized bond counsel addressed to the
city.
   (D)   Recommended Records: The compliance officer shall review the records
related to the tax exempt obligations and shall determine what requirements the
city must meet in order to maintain the tax exemption of interest paid on the
tax exempt obligations. The compliance officer shall then prepare a list of the
contracts, requisitions, invoices, receipts and other information that may be
needed in order to establish that the interest paid on the tax exempt
obligations is entitled to be excluded from "gross income" for federal income
tax purposes. Notwithstanding any other policy of the city, such retained
records shall be kept for as long as the tax exempt obligations relating to
such records (and any obligations issued to refund those tax exempt
obligations) are outstanding, plus three (3) years, and shall include the
following at a minimum:
      1.   Complete copies of the bond transcripts delivered when any issue of
tax exempt obligations is initially issued and sold;
      2.   Copies of account statements showing the disbursements of all bond
proceeds for their intended purposes;
      3.   Copies of account statements showing all investment activity of any
and all accounts in which the proceeds of any issue of tax exempt obligations
has been held;
      4.   Copies of all bid requests and bid responses used in the acquisition
of any special investments used for the proceeds of any tax exempt obligations,
including any swaps, swaptions, or other financial derivatives entered into
with respect to any tax exempt obligations in order to establish that such
instruments were purchased at fair market value;
      5.   Copies of any subscriptions to the U.S. treasury for the purchase of
state and local government series (SLGS) obligations;
      6.   Any calculations of liability for arbitrage rebate that is or may
become due with respect to any issue of tax exempt obligations, and any
calculations prepared to show that no arbitrage rebate is due, together, if
applicable, with account statements or canceled checks showing the payment of
any rebate amounts to the U.S. treasury together with any applicable IRS form
8038-T; and
      7.   Copies of all contracts of the city, including any leases, with
respect to the use of any property owned by the city and acquired or financed
with the proceeds of tax exempt obligations, any part of which property is used
by a private person at any time when such tax exempt obligations are or have
been outstanding.
   (E)   IRS Examination: If the internal revenue service ("IRS") commences an
examination of any tax exempt obligations, the compliance officer shall inform
the city council of such event, and is authorized to respond to inquiries of
the IRS, and to hire outside, independent professional counsel to assist in the
response to the examination. (Ord. 11-35, 12-19-2011)
CHAPTER 30
TAX RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITY
SECTION:
1-30-1: Title
1-30-2: Scope
1-30-3: Definitions
1-30-4: Notices
1-30-5: Late Payment
1-30-6: Payment
1-30-7: Certain Credits And Refunds
1-30-8: Audit Procedure
1-30-9: Appeal
1-30-10: Hearing
1-30-11: Interest And Penalties
1-30-12: Abatement
1-30-13: Installment Contracts
1-30-14: Statute Of Limitations
1-30-15: Voluntary Disclosure
1-30-16: Publication Of Tax Ordinances
1-30-17: Liens For Unpaid Taxes
1-30-18: Application
1-30-1: TITLE:
This ordinance shall be known as, and may be cited as, the LOCALLY IMPOSED AND
ADMINISTERED TAX RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITY ORDINANCE. (Ord. 01-15, 5-21-2001)
1-30-2: SCOPE:
The provisions of this ordinance shall apply to the city's procedures in
connection with all of the city's locally imposed and administered taxes. (Ord.
01-15, 5-21-2001)
1-30-3: DEFINITIONS:
Certain words or terms herein shall have the meanings ascribed to them as
follows:
ACT: The "Local Government Taxpayers' Bill of Rights Act".
CITY: The city of East Moline, Illinois.
CORPORATE AUTHORITIES: The city's mayor and city council.
LOCAL TAX ADMINISTRATOR: The city's director of finance is charged with the
administration and collection of the locally imposed and administered taxes,
including staff, employees, or agents to the extent they are authorized by the
local tax administrator to act in the local tax administrator's stead. The
local tax administrator shall have the authority to implement the terms of this
ordinance to give full effect to this ordinance. The exercise of such authority
by the local tax administrator shall not be inconsistent with this ordinance
and the act.
LOCALLY IMPOSED AND ADMINISTERED TAX OR TAX: Each tax imposed by the city that
is collected or administered by the city, and not an agency or department of
the state. It does not include any taxes imposed upon real property under the
property tax code or fees collected by the city other than infrastructure
maintenance fees.
NOTICE: Each audit notice, collection notice or other similar notice or
communication in connection with each of the city's locally imposed and
administered taxes.
TAXPAYER: Any person required to pay any locally imposed and administered tax
and generally includes the person upon whom the legal incidence of such tax is
placed and with respect to consumer taxes includes the business or entity
required to collect and pay the locally imposed and administered tax to the
city. (Ord. 01-15, 5-21-2001)
1-30-4: NOTICES:
Unless otherwise provided, whenever notice is required to be given, the notice
is to be in writing mailed not less than seven (7) calendar days prior to the
day fixed for any applicable hearing, audit or other scheduled act of the local
tax administrator. The notice shall be sent by the local tax administrator as
follows:
   (A)   First-class or express mail, or overnight mail, addressed to the
persons concerned at the persons' last known address, or
   (B)   Personal service or delivery. (Ord. 01-15, 5-21-2001)
1-30-5: LATE PAYMENT:
Any notice, payment, remittance or other filing required to be made to the city
pursuant to any tax ordinance shall be considered late unless it is: a)
physically received by the city on or before the due date, or b) received in an
envelope or other container displaying a valid, readable U.S. postmark dated on
or before the due date, properly addressed to the city, with adequate postage
prepaid. (Ord. 01-15, 5-21-2001)
1-30-6: PAYMENT:
Any payment or remittance received for a tax period shall be applied in the
following order: a) first to the tax due for the applicable period; b) second
to the interest due for the applicable period; and c) third to the penalty for
the applicable period. (Ord. 01-15, 5-21-2001)
1-30-7: CERTAIN CREDITS AND REFUNDS:
   (A)   The city shall not refund or credit any taxes voluntarily paid without
written protest at the time of payment in the event that a locally imposed and
administered tax is declared invalidly enacted or unconstitutional by a court
of competent jurisdiction. However, a taxpayer shall not be deemed to have paid
the tax voluntarily if the taxpayer lacked knowledge of the facts upon which to
protest the taxes at the time of payment or if the taxpayer paid the taxes
under duress.
   (B)   The statute of limitations on a claim for credit or refund shall be
three (3) years after the end of the calendar year in which payment in error
was made. The city shall not grant a credit or refund of locally imposed and
administered taxes, interest, or penalties to a person who has not paid the
amounts directly to the city.
   (C)   The procedure for claiming a credit or refund of locally imposed and
administered taxes, interest or penalties paid in error shall be as follows:
      1.   The taxpayer shall submit to the local tax administrator in writing
a claim for credit or refund together with a statement specifying:
         (a)   The name of the locally imposed and administered tax subject to
the claim;
         (b)   The tax period for the locally imposed and administered tax
subject to the claim;
         (c)   The date of the tax payment subject to the claim and the
canceled check or receipt for the payment;
         (d)   The taxpayer's recalculation, accompanied by an amended or
revised tax return, in connection with the claim; and
         (e)   A request for either a refund or a credit in connection with the
claim to be applied to the amount of tax, interest and penalties overpaid, and,
as applicable, related interest on the amount overpaid; provided, however, that
there shall be no refund and only a credit given in the event the taxpayer owes
any monies to the city.
      2.   Within ten (10) days of the receipt by the local tax administrator
of any claim for a refund or credit, the local tax administrator shall either:
         (a)   Grant the claim; or
         (b)   Deny the claim, in whole or in part, together with a statement
as to the reason for the denial or the partial grant and denial.
      3.   In the event the local tax administrator grants, in whole or in
part, a claim for refund or credit, the amount of the grant for refund or
credit shall bear interest at the rate of three percent (3%) per annum, based
on a year of three hundred sixty five (365) days and the number of days
elapsed, from the date of the overpayment to the date of mailing of a refund
check or the grant of a credit. (Ord. 01-15, 5-21-2001)
1-30-8: AUDIT PROCEDURE:
Any request for a proposed audit pursuant to any local administered tax shall
comply with the notice requirements of this ordinance.
   (A)   Each notice of an audit shall contain the following information:
      1.   The tax;
      2.   The time period of the audit; and
      3.   A brief description of the books and records to be made available
for the auditor.
   (B)   Any audit shall be conducted during normal business hours and if the
date and time selected by the local tax administrator is not agreeable to the
taxpayer, another date and time may be requested by the taxpayer within thirty
(30) days after the originally designated audit and during normal business
hours.
   (C)   The taxpayer may request an extension of time to have an audit
conducted. The audit shall be conducted within twenty five (25) days from the
date the notice is given, unless the taxpayer and the local tax administrator
agreed to some other convenient time. In the event the taxpayer is unable to
comply with the audit on the date in question, the taxpayer may request another
date within twenty five (25) days, approved in writing, that is convenient to
the taxpayer and the local tax administrator.
   (D)   Every taxpayer shall keep accurate books and records of the taxpayer's
business or activities, including original source documents and books of entry
denoting the transactions which had given rise or may have given rise to any
tax liability, exemption or deduction. All books shall be kept in the English
language and shall be subject to and available for inspection by the city.
   (E)   It is the duty and responsibility of every taxpayer to make available
its books and records for inspection by the city. If the taxpayer (or tax
collector) fails to provide the documents necessary for audit within the time
provided, the local tax administrator may issue a tax determination and
assessment based on the tax administrator's determination of the best estimate
of the taxpayer's tax liability.
   (F)   If an audit determines there has been an overpayment of a locally
imposed and administered tax as a result of the audit, written notice of the
amount of the overpayment shall be given to the taxpayer within thirty (30)
days of the city's determination of the amount of the overpayment.
   (G)   In the event a tax payment was submitted to the incorrect local
governmental entity, the local tax administrator shall notify the local
governmental entity imposing such tax. (Ord. 01-15, 5-21-2001)
1-30-9: APPEAL:
   (A)   The local tax administrator shall send written notice to a taxpayer
upon the local tax administrator's issuance of a protestable notice of tax due,
a bill, a claim denial, or a notice of claim reduction regarding any tax. The
notice shall include the following information:
      1.   The reason for the assessment;
      2.   The amount of the tax liability proposed;
      3.   The procedure for appealing the assessment; and
      4.   The obligations of the city during the audit, appeal, refund and
collection process.
   (B)   A taxpayer who receives written notice from the local tax
administrator of a determination of tax due or assessment may file with the
local tax administrator a written protest and petition for hearing, setting
forth the basis of the taxpayer's request for a hearing. The written protest
and petition for hearing must be filed with the local tax administrator within
forty five (45) days of receipt of the written notice of the tax determination
and assessment.
   (C)   If a timely written notice and petition for hearing is filed, the
local tax administrator shall fix the time and place for hearing and shall give
written notice to the taxpayer. The hearing shall be scheduled for a date
within fourteen (14) days of receipt of the written protest and petition for
hearing, unless the taxpayer requests a later date convenient to all parties.
   (D)   If a written protest and petition for hearing is not filed within the
forty five (45) day period, the tax determination, audit or assessment shall
become a final bill due and owing without further notice.
   (E)   Upon the showing of reasonable cause by the taxpayer and the full
payment of the contested tax liability along with interest accrued as of the
due date of the tax, the local tax administrator may reopen or extend the time
for filing a written protest and petition for hearing. In no event shall the
time for filing a written protest and petition for hearing be reopened or
extended for more than ninety (90) days after the expiration of the forty five
(45) day period. (Ord. 01-15, 5-21-2001)
1-30-10: HEARING:
   (A)   Whenever a taxpayer or a tax collector has filed a timely written
protest and petition for hearing under section
1-30-9 of this chapter, the local tax administrator shall conduct a hearing
regarding any appeal.
   (B)   No continuances shall be granted except in cases where a continuance
is absolutely necessary to protect the rights of the taxpayer. Lack of
preparation shall not be grounds for a continuance. Any continuance granted
shall not exceed fourteen (14) days.
   (C)   At the hearing the local tax administrator shall preside and shall
hear testimony and accept any evidence relevant to the tax determination, audit
or assessment. The strict rules of evidence applicable to judicial proceedings
shall not apply.
   (D)   At the conclusion of the hearing, the local tax administrator shall
make a written determination on the basis of the evidence presented at the
hearing. The taxpayer or tax collector shall be provided with a copy of the
written decision. (Ord. 01-15, 5-21-2001)
1-30-11: INTEREST AND PENALTIES:
In the event a determination has been made that a tax is due and owing, through
audit, assessment or other bill sent, the tax must be paid within the time
frame otherwise indicated.
   (A)   Interest: The city hereby provides for the amount of interest to be
assessed on a late payment, underpayment, or nonpayment of the tax, to be three
percent (3%) per annum, based on a year of three hundred sixty five (365) days
and the number of days elapsed.
   (B)   Late Filing And Payment Penalties: If a tax return is not filed within
the time and manner provided by the controlling tax ordinance, a late filing
penalty of five percent (5%) of the amount of the tax required to be shown as
due on a return shall be imposed; and a late payment penalty of five percent
(5%) of the tax due shall be imposed. If no return is filed within the time or
manner provided by the controlling tax ordinance and prior to the city issuing
a notice of tax delinquency or notice of tax liability, then a failure to file
penalty shall be assessed equal to twenty percent (20%) of the total tax due
for the applicable reporting period for which the return was required to be
filed. A late filing or payment penalty shall not apply if a failure to file
penalty is imposed by the controlling ordinance. (Ord. 01-15, 5-21-2001)
1-30-12: ABATEMENT:
The local tax administrator shall have the authority to waive or abate any late
filing penalty, late payment penalty or failure to file penalty if the local
tax administrator shall determine reasonable cause exists for delay or failure
to make a filing. (Ord. 01-15, 5-21-2001)
1-30-13: INSTALLMENT CONTRACTS:
The city may enter into an installment contract with the taxpayer for the
payment of taxes under the controlling tax ordinance. The local tax
administrator may not cancel any installment contract so entered unless the
taxpayer fails to pay any amount due and owing. Upon written notice by the
local tax administrator that the payment is thirty (30) days delinquent, the
taxpayer shall have fourteen (14) working days to cure any delinquency. If the
taxpayer fails to cure the delinquency within the fourteen (14) day period or
fails to demonstrate good faith in restructuring the installment contract with
the local administrator, the installment contract shall be canceled without
further notice to the taxpayer. (Ord. 01-15, 5-21-2001)
1-30-14: STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS:
The city, through the local tax administrator, shall review all tax returns in
a prompt and timely manner and inform taxpayers of any amounts due and owing.
The taxpayer shall have forty five (45) days after receiving notice of the
reviewed tax returns to make any request for refund or provide any tax still
due and owing.
   (A)   No determination of tax due and owing may be issued more than three
(3) years maximum after the end of the calendar year for which the return for
the applicable period was filed or for the calendar year in which the return
for the applicable period was due, whichever occurs later.
   (B)   If any tax return is not filed or if during any four (4) year period
for which a notice of tax determination or assessment may be issued by the
city, the tax paid was less than seventy five percent (75%) of the tax due, the
statute of limitations shall be six (6) years maximum after the end of the
calendar year in which return for the applicable period was due or end of the
calendar year in which the return for the applicable period was filed.
   (C)   No statute of limitations shall apply if a fraudulent tax return was
filed by the taxpayer. (Ord. 01-15, 5-21-2001)
1-30-15: VOLUNTARY DISCLOSURE:
For any locally imposed and administered tax for which a taxpayer has not
received a written notice of an audit, investigation, or assessment from the
local tax administrator, a taxpayer is entitled to file an application with the
local tax administrator for a voluntary disclosure of the tax due. A taxpayer
filing a voluntary disclosure application must agree to pay the amount of tax
due, along with interest of one percent (1%) per month, for all periods prior
to the filing of the application but not more than four (4) years before the
date of filing the application. A taxpayer filing a valid voluntary disclosure
application may not be liable for any additional tax, interest, or penalty for
any period before the date the application was filed. However, if a taxpayer
incorrectly determined and underpaid the amount of tax due, the taxpayer is
liable for the underpaid tax along with applicable interest on the underpaid
tax, unless the underpayment was the result of fraud on the part of the
taxpayer, in which case the application shall be deemed invalid and void. The
payment of tax and interest must be made by no later than ninety (90) days
after the filing of the voluntary disclosure application or the date agreed to
by the local tax administrator. However, any additional amounts owed as a
result of an underpayment of tax and interest previously paid under this
section must be paid within ninety (90) days after a final determination and
the exhaustion of all appeals of the additional amount owed or the date agreed
to by the local tax administrator, whichever is longer. (Ord. 01-15, 5-21-2001)
1-30-16: PUBLICATION OF TAX ORDINANCES:
Any locally administered tax ordinance shall be published via normal or
standard publishing requirements. The posting of a tax ordinance on the
internet shall satisfy the publication requirements. Copies of all tax
ordinances shall be made available to the public upon request at the city
clerk's office. (Ord. 01-15, 5-21-2001)
1-30-17: LIENS FOR UNPAID TAXES:
The local tax administrator shall establish an internal review procedure
regarding any liens filed against any taxpayers for unpaid taxes. Upon a
determination by the local tax administrator that the lien is valid, the lien
shall remain in full force and effect. If the lien is determined to be
improper, the local tax administrator shall:
   (A)   Timely remove the lien at the city's expense;
   (B)   Correct the taxpayer's credit record; and
   (C)   Correct any public disclosure of the improperly imposed lien. (Ord.
01-15, 5-21-2001)
1-30-18: APPLICATION:
This ordinance shall be liberally construed and administered to supplement all
of the city's tax ordinances. To the extent that any tax ordinance is in
conflict with or inconsistent with this ordinance, this ordinance shall be
controlling. (Ord. 01-15, 5-21-2001)
CHAPTER 31
REDEVELOPMENT PROJECTS; TAX INCREMENT ALLOCATION
SECTION:
1-31-1: Establishment Of Interested Parties Registry
1-31-2: Definitions
1-31-3: Maintenance Of Registry
1-31-4: Registration By Residents
1-31-5: Registration By Organizations
1-31-6: Determination Of Eligibility
1-31-7: Renewal And Termination
1-31-8: Amendment To Registration
1-31-9: Registries Available For Public Inspection
1-31-10: Notices To Be Sent To Interested Parties
1-31-11: Noninterference
1-31-12: Amendment Of This Chapter
1-31-1: ESTABLISHMENT OF INTERESTED PARTIES REGISTRY:
The city shall establish a separate interested parties registry for each
redevelopment project area, whether existing as of the date of the adoption of
this chapter or subsequently established. The city shall establish a new
registry whenever it has identified an area for study and possible designation
as a redevelopment project area. In any event, the process of establishing the
new registry must be completed prior to the deadline for sending any of the
notices required by section
1-31-10 of this chapter or any other notices required by the act with respect
to the proposed redevelopment project area. (Ord. 01-07, 3-19-2001)
1-31-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the definitions set
forth below:
ACT: The tax increment allocation redevelopment act, 65 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/11-74.4-1 et seq., as amended from time to time.
CITY: The city of East Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois, an Illinois
municipality.
INTERESTED PARTY(S):
   (A)   Any organization(s) active within the city,
   (B)   Any resident(s) of the city, and
   (C)   Any other entity or person otherwise entitled under the act to
register in a specific registry who has registered in such registry and whose
registration has not been terminated in accordance with this chapter.
REDEVELOPMENT PROJECT AREA: A redevelopment project area that: a) is intended
to qualify (or has subsequently qualified) as a "redevelopment project area"
under the act and b) is subject to the "interested parties" registry
requirements of the act.
REGISTRATION FORM: The form appended to ordinance 01-07 on file in the office
of the city clerk or such revised form as may be approved by the city
consistent with the requirements of the act.
REGISTRY OR REGISTRIES: Each interested parties registry, and all such
registries, collectively, established by the city pursuant to section 11-74.4-
4.2 of the act for the city's redevelopment project areas. (Ord. 01-07, 3-19-
2001)
1-31-3: MAINTENANCE OF REGISTRY:
The registries shall be maintained by the city clerk or his or her designee. If
the city determines that an officer of the city other than the city clerk
should maintain the registries, the city may transfer the responsibility for
maintaining the registries to such another officer or department of the city,
provided that the city: a) gives prior written notice to all interested parties
not less than thirty (30) days prior to such transfer and b) publishes notice
of such transfer in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. (Ord. 01-
07, 3-19-2001)
1-31-4: REGISTRATION BY RESIDENTS:
An individual seeking to register as an interested person with respect to a
redevelopment project area must complete and submit a registration form to the
city clerk, which shall be in substantially the form attached to ordinance 01-
07 as exhibit I, on file the office of the city clerk. Such individual must
also submit a copy of a current driver's license, lease, utility bill,
financial statement or such other evidence as may be acceptable to the city
clerk to establish the individual's current city residency. (Ord. 01-07, 3-19-
2001)
1-31-5: REGISTRATION BY ORGANIZATIONS:
An organization seeking to register as an interested person with respect to a
redevelopment project area must complete and submit a registration form to the
city clerk. Such organization must also submit a copy of a one page statement
describing the organization's current operations in the city. (Ord. 01-07, 3-
19-2001)
1-31-6: DETERMINATION OF ELIGIBILITY:
All individuals and organizations whose registration form and supporting
documentation complies with this chapter shall be registered in the applicable
registry within ten (10) business days of the city clerk's receipt of all such
documents. The city clerk shall provide written notice to the registrant
confirming such registration. Upon registration, interested parties shall be
entitled to receive all notices and documents required to be delivered under
this chapter or as otherwise required under the act with respect to the
applicable redevelopment project area. If the city clerk determines that a
registrant's registration form and/or supporting documentation is incomplete or
does not comply with this chapter, the city clerk shall give written notice to
the registrant specifying the defect(s). The registrant shall be entitled to
correct any defects and resubmit a new registration form and supporting
documentation. (Ord. 01-07, 3-19-2001)
1-31-7: RENEWAL AND TERMINATION:
An interested person's registration shall remain effective for a period of
three (3) years. At any time after such three (3) year period, the city clerk
may provide written notice by regular mail to the interested person stating
that such registration shall terminate unless the interested person renews such
registration within thirty (30) days of the city clerk's mailing of written
notice. To renew such registration, the interested person shall, within such
thirty (30) day period, complete and submit the same registration form and
supporting documentation then required of initial registrants in order to
permit the city clerk to confirm such person's residency or such organization's
operations in the city. The registration of all individuals and organizations
whose registration form and supporting documentation is submitted in a timely
manner and complies with this chapter shall be renewed for an additional,
consecutive three (3) year period. If the city clerk determines that a
registrant's renewal registration form and/or supporting documentation is
incomplete or does not comply with this chapter, the city clerk shall give
written notice to the registrant at the address specified in the renewal
registration form submitted by such registrant, specifying the defect(s). The
registrant shall be entitled to correct any defects and resubmit a new
registration form and supporting documentation within thirty (30) days of
receipt of the city clerk's notice. If all defects are not corrected within
thirty (30) days of the interested person's receipt of the city clerk's notice,
the interested person's registration shall be terminated. Any interested person
whose registration is terminated shall be entitled to register again as if a
first time registrant. (Ord. 01-07, 3-19-2001)
1-31-8: AMENDMENT TO REGISTRATION:
An interested party may amend its registration by giving written notice to the
city clerk by certified mail of any of the following: a) a change in address
for notice purposes; b) in the case of organizations, a change in the name of
the contact person; and c) a request for a voluntary termination of
registration. Upon receipt of such notice, the city clerk shall revise the
applicable registry accordingly. (Ord. 01-07, 3-19-2001)
1-31-9: REGISTRIES AVAILABLE FOR PUBLIC INSPECTION:
Each registry shall be available for public inspection during normal city
business hours. The registry shall include the name, address and telephone
number of each interested person and, for organizations, the name and phone
number of a designated contact person. (Ord. 01-07, 3-19-2001)
1-31-10: NOTICES TO BE SENT TO INTERESTED PARTIES:
Interested parties shall be sent the following notices and any other notices
required under the act with respect to the applicable redevelopment project
area:
   (A)   Pursuant to section 11-74.4-5(a) of the act, notice of the
availability of a proposed redevelopment plan and eligibility report, including
how to obtain this information, such notice shall be sent by mail within a
reasonable period of time after the adoption of the ordinance fixing the public
hearing for the proposed redevelopment plan.
   (B)   Pursuant to section 11-74.4-5(a) of the act, notice of changes to
proposed redevelopment plans that do not: 1) add additional parcels of property
to the proposed redevelopment project area, 2) substantially affect the general
land uses proposed in the redevelopment plan, 3) substantially change the
nature of or extend the life of the redevelopment project or 4) increase the
number of low or very low income households to be displaced from the
redevelopment project area, provided that measured from the time of creation of
the redevelopment project area the total displacement of households will exceed
ten (10); such notice shall be sent by mail not later than ten (10) days
following the city's adoption by ordinance of such changes.
   (C)   Pursuant to section 11-74.4-5(c) of the act, notice of amendments to
previously approved redevelopment plans that do not: 1) add additional parcels
of property to the redevelopment project area, 2) substantially affect the
general land uses in the redevelopment plan, 3) substantially change the nature
of the redevelopment project, 4) increase the total estimated redevelopment
project costs set out in the redevelopment plan by more than five percent (5%)
after adjustment for inflation from the date the plan was adopted, 5) add
additional redevelopment project costs to the itemized list of redevelopment
project costs set out in the redevelopment plan or 6) increase the number of
low or very low income households to be displaced from the redevelopment
project area, provided that measured from the time of creation of the
redevelopment project area the total displacement of households will exceed ten
(10); such notice shall be sent by mail not later than ten (10) days following
the city's adoption by ordinance of any such amendment.
   (D)   Pursuant to section 11-74.4-5(d)(9) of the act, for redevelopment
plans or projects that would result in the displacement of residents from ten
(10) or more inhabited residential units or that contain seventy five (75) or
more inhabited residential units, notice of the availability of the annual
report described by section 11-74.4-5(d) of the act, including how to obtain
the annual report; such notice shall be sent by mail within a reasonable period
of time after completion of the certified audit report.
   (E)   Pursuant to section 11-74.4-6(e) of the act, notice of the preliminary
public meeting required under the act for a proposed redevelopment project area
that will result in the displacement of ten (10) or more inhabited residential
units or which will contain seventy five (75) or more inhabited residential
units, such notice shall be sent by certified mail not less than fifteen (15)
days before the date of such preliminary public meeting. (Ord. 01-07, 3-19-
2001)
1-31-11: NONINTERFERENCE:
This chapter shall not be used to prohibit or otherwise interfere with the
ability of eligible organizations and individuals to register for receipt of
information to which they are entitled under the act. (Ord. 01-07, 3-19-2001)
1-31-12: AMENDMENT OF THIS CHAPTER:
This chapter may be amended by the city subject to and consistent with the
requirements of the act. (Ord. 01-07, 3-19-2001)
CHAPTER 32
INSPECTIONS COORDINATOR
SECTION:
1-32-1: Appointment
1-32-2: Duties
1-32-3: Stop Order
1-32-4: Entry Powers
1-32-1: APPOINTMENT:
There is hereby created the position of Inspections Coordinator, who shall be
supervised by the City Administrator and appointed based on seniority of the
most senior member of the Health and Inspections Departments. The Inspections
Coordinator and Code official shall be considered one in the same. (Ord. 18-10,
9-17-2018)
1-32-2: DUTIES:
It shall be the duty of the Inspections Coordinator to see to the enforcement
of all ordinance provisions relating to code compliance for codes referenced in
sections
4-1-1 and
4-3-1 and title 7 of this Code. The Inspections Coordinator will also plan and
direct the activities of the Health and Inspections Department and report to
City Council as required. (Ord. 18-10, 9-17-2018)
1-32-3: STOP ORDER:
The Inspections Coordinator shall have the power to order all work stopped on
construction or alteration or repair of buildings in the City in accordance
with the adopted codes referenced by title 4, chapter 1 of this Code.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be subject to
penalty as provided by section
1-4-1 of this title. (Ord. 18-10, 9-17-2018)
1-32-4: ENTRY POWERS:
The Inspections Coordinator shall have the power to make or cause to be made
entry into any building or premises where the work of alteration, repair or
construction of any building or structure is going on, for the purpose of
making inspections at any reasonable hour. (Ord. 18-10, 9-17-2018)
TITLE 2
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
CHAPTER 1
BOARD OF HEALTH
SECTION:
2-1-1: Appointment (Rep. by Ord. 98-19, 5-4-1998)
2-1-2: General Duties
2-1-3: Quarantine, Vaccination
2-1-4: Orders, Notices
2-1-1: APPOINTMENT:
(Rep. by Ord. 98-19, 5-4-1998)
2-1-2: GENERAL DUTIES:
The Board of Health shall have the powers and perform the duties assigned to it
by statute or ordinance. It shall be the duty of the Board of Health to enforce
all provisions of this Code which relate to public health, or relate to
nuisances.
The Board of Health shall make all necessary rules and regulations for the
protection of the health of the inhabitants of the City and to guard against
the spread of contagious diseases, and to prevent by necessary rules the
induction of diseases, contagious or otherwise, within the corporate limits of
the City. (M.C. 1962, sec. 9.102)
2-1-3: QUARANTINE, VACCINATION:
The Board of Health is hereby authorized to make such reasonable rules as may
be necessary regarding quarantine and vaccination, for the prevention and
spread of contagious diseases, and to quarantine premises where such diseases
occur for such time as may be necessary to protect public health.
The said Board shall have the power to prevent persons from entering or leaving
premises on which a case of contagious or epidemic disease occurs or is found,
and to placard the same with signs indicating the nature of such disease and
the existence of the quarantine. (M.C. 1962, sec. 9.103)
2-1-4: ORDERS, NOTICES:
Any person violating any order of the Board of Health or refusing to obey any
such order or destroying, mutilating or concealing any notice posted by or
under the authority of the Board of Health shall be subject to penalty as
provided for by Section
1-4-1 of this Code. (M.C. 1962, sec. 9.104)
CHAPTER 2
BOARD OF LIBRARY DIRECTORS
SECTION:
2-2-1: Appointment
2-2-2: Term
2-2-3: Organization
2-2-4: Duties, Functions
2-2-5: Rules And Regulations
2-2-1: APPOINTMENT:
The Board shall consist of nine (9) directors to be appointed by the Mayor with
the advice and consent of the City Council. (Ord. 98-19, 5-4-1998)
2-2-2: TERM:
The term of the library directors shall be three (3) years, staggered so that
three (3) terms expire each year, as provided by law. (M.C. 1962, sec. 9.202)
2-2-3: ORGANIZATION:
The said library directors shall select a president and secretary as provided
by statute, and shall meet at such times as the Library Board may determine.
(M.C. 1962, sec. 9.203)
2-2-4: DUTIES, FUNCTIONS:
The Library Board shall have charge of the operation of any City library and of
the expenditure of all library funds. Each year it shall file a report with the
City Council containing, among other things, an itemized statement of the
expenses anticipated for the coming year, as required by law. (M.C. 1962, sec.
9.204)
2-2-5: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The Board of Library Directors shall have the power to make any reasonable
rules and regulations governing the use of the library and library facilities.
(M.C. 1962, sec. 9.205)
CHAPTER 3
BOARD OF LOCAL IMPROVEMENTS
SECTION:
2-3-1: Appointments
2-3-2: General Duties
2-3-3: Meeting Dates
2-3-1: APPOINTMENTS:
There is hereby established the Board of Local Improvements for the City of
East Moline, which shall consist of the Mayor, the Director of Engineering
Services or City Administrator and the Maintenance Services Director or his/her
designee, all as provided by 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/9-2-7. (Ord. 98-
19, 5-4-1998)
2-3-2: GENERAL DUTIES:
The Board of Local Improvements shall have the powers and perform the duties
assigned to it by statute or ordinance. (Ord. 76-54, 9-20-1976)
2-3-3: MEETING DATES:
The Board of Local Improvements shall meet at the call of the Mayor or any two
(2) members. (Ord. 76-54, 9-20-1976)
CHAPTER 4
BOARD OF STANDARDS AND APPEALS
SECTION:
2-4-1: Board Created
2-4-2: Members
2-4-3: Duties And Powers
2-4-4: Appeal Process And Rulings
2-4-1: BOARD CREATED:
There is hereby created a Board of Standards and Appeals, which shall have the
responsibility and power to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or
determinations as made by the Inspection Departments relative to the
application, enforcement and interpretations of the Building, Life Safety,
Electrical, Mechanical, Plumbing, Fire, Sign, Weed Abatement and Health Code
Ordinances. The Code official, or his or her designee, shall be an ex officio
member of the Board and shall act as Secretary to said Board, but shall have no
vote upon any matter before the Board. The Board shall adopt rules of procedure
for conducting its business and shall render all decisions and findings in
writing to the appellant, with a duplicate copy to the affected inspection
department. Appeals to the Board shall be processed in accordance with the
provisions contained in section
2-4-4 of this chapter. Copies of rules or regulations adopted by the Board
shall be delivered to the Inspection Departments, who shall make them freely
accessible to the public. (Ord. 18-10, 9-17-2018)
2-4-2: MEMBERS:
   (A)   Alternate Members: The Mayor shall appoint not less than two (2)
alternate members who shall be called by the Board Chairman to hear appeals
during the absence or disqualification of a member. Alternate members shall
possess the qualifications required for Board membership.
   (B)   Chairman: The Board shall annually select one of its members to serve
as Chairman.
   (C)   Secretary: The Board shall annually designate a qualified person to
serve as Secretary to the Board. The Secretary shall file a detailed record of
all proceedings in the Office of the Chief Administrative Officer.
   (D)   Qualifications: The Board of Standards and Appeals shall consist of
members who are qualified by experience and training to pass on matters
pertaining to building construction.
   (E)   Disqualification Of Member: A member shall not hear an appeal in which
that member has a personal, professional or financial interest. Voting members
of the Board shall not be employees of the jurisdiction.
   (F)   Compensation Of Members: Compensation of members shall be determined
by law. (Ord. 18-10, 9-17-2018)
2-4-3: DUTIES AND POWERS:
   (A)   The Board shall determine the suitability of new material, alternative
materials, methods of construction, processes or occupancies, and shall have
the power to hear and decide appeals or orders, decisions or determinations as
made by the Inspection Departments relative to the application and
interpretation of the Building, Life Safety, Electrical, Mechanical, Plumbing,
Fire, Sign, Weed Abatement, and Health Codes. (Ord. 95-16, 3-6-1995)
   (B)   The Board shall meet upon notice from the Chairman, within ten (10)
days of the filing of an appeal, or at stated periodic meetings. (Ord. 18-10,
9-17-2018)
   (C)   The Board shall have no authority relative to interpretation of the
administrative provisions of this Code nor shall the Board be empowered to
waive requirements of this Code. (Ord. 95-16, 3-6-1995)
2-4-4: APPEAL PROCESS AND RULINGS:
   (A)   Limitation For Appeal: An application for appeal shall be based on a
claim that the true intent of this Code or the rules legally adopted thereunder
have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this Code do not fully
apply or an equally good or better form of construction is proposed.
   (B)   Application For Appeal: Any person directly affected by a decision of
the Code official or a notice or order issued under this Code shall have the
right to appeal to the Board of Standards and Appeals, provided that a written
application for appeal is filed within ten (10) days after the day the
decision, notice or order was served. An application for appeal shall be based
on a claim that the true intent of this Code or the rules legally adopted
thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this Code do
not fully apply, or the requirements of this Code are adequately satisfied by
other means.
   (C)   Open Hearing: Hearings before the Board shall be open to the public.
The appellant, the appellant's representative, the Code official and any person
whose interests are affected shall be given an opportunity to be heard. A
quorum shall consist of not less than two-thirds (2/3) of the Board membership.
   (D)   Procedure: The Board shall adopt and make available to the public
through the Secretary procedures under which a hearing will be conducted. The
procedures shall not require compliance with strict rules of evidence, but
shall mandate that only relevant information be received.
   (E)   Postponed Hearing: When the full Board is not present to hear an
appeal, either the appellant or the appellant's representative shall have the
right to request a postponement of the hearing.
   (F)   Board Decision: The Board shall modify or reverse the decision of the
Code official only by a concurring vote of a majority of the total number of
appointed Board members.
   (G)   Records And Copies: The decision of the Board shall be recorded.
Copies shall be furnished to the appellant and to the Code official.
   (H)   Administration: The Code official shall take immediate action in
accordance with the decision of the Board.
   (I)   Court Review: Any person, whether or not a previous party of the
appeal, shall have the right to apply to the appropriate court for a writ of
certiorari to correct errors of law. Application for review shall be made in
the manner and time required by law following the filing of the decision in the
Office of the Chief Administrative Officer.
   (J)   Stays Of Enforcement: Appeals of notice and orders (other than
Imminent Danger notices) shall stay the enforcement of the notice and order
until the appeal is heard by the Standards and Appeals Board. (Ord. 18-10, 9-
17-2018)
CHAPTER 5
BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS
SECTION:
2-5-1: Creation, Membership And Procedure
2-5-2: Applications And Appeals
2-5-3: Powers Of Board
2-5-1: CREATION, MEMBERSHIP AND PROCEDURE:
A Board of Zoning Appeals consisting of seven (7) members shall be appointed by
the Mayor with the advice and consent of the Council in accordance with the
provisions of 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-13-1 et seq. At least two (2)
such members shall be named from among the members of the City Planning
Commission. The appointing authority may remove any member of the Board for
cause and after public hearing.
   (A)   The Board shall elect its own chairman and have the power to adopt
rules and regulations for its own government, not inconsistent with law or with
the provisions of the zoning title of this Code 1  or any other provisions of
this Code. Meetings shall be held at the call of the chairman and at such other
times as the Board may determine. The chairman, or in his absence, the acting
chairman, may administer oaths and compel attendance of witnesses. The
secretary of the Planning Commission shall act as the Board’s secretary.
   (B)   Meetings of the Board shall be open to the public; minutes shall be
kept of proceedings, showing the action of the Board and the vote of each
member upon questions, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating that fact,
and records shall be made of the Board's examinations and other official
actions, all of which shall be filed immediately in the Office of the Board as
a public record.
   (C)   Four (4) members of the Board shall constitute a quorum. The Board
shall act by resolution, and the concurring vote of four (4) members shall be
necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of the
Director of Development Services or to decide in favor of an applicant any
matter upon which it is required to pass under the zoning title, or to effect
any variation in the requirements of the zoning title.
   (D)   The Board may call on the City departments for assistance in the
performance of its duties, and it shall be the duty of such departments to
render such assistance to the Board as may reasonably be required. (Ord. 18-08,
6-3-2019; amd. Ord. 19-17, 6-3-2019)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 10 of this Code.
2-5-2: APPLICATIONS AND APPEALS:
   (A)   Application; Filing; Fee: An application to the Board, in cases in
which it has original jurisdiction under the provisions of the zoning title,
may be taken by any property owner, including a tenant, or by any governmental
officer, department, board or bureau. Such application shall be filed with the
building inspector, together with a fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00), who
shall transmit the same, together with all the plans, specifications and other
papers pertaining to the application to the Board. Should the application be
withdrawn prior to publication of legal notice thereon, such fee will be
returned upon written request of the applicant.
   (B)   Appeal; Fee: An appeal to the Board may be taken by any property
owner, including a tenant, or by any governmental officer, department, board or
bureau affected by any ruling of the building inspector. Such appeal shall be
taken within a reasonable time, as prescribed by the rules of the Board, by
filing with the building inspector a notice of appeal specifying the grounds
thereof. The building inspector shall forthwith transmit to the Board such
notice of appeal, together with all the plans and papers constituting the
record upon which the action appealed from was taken. A fee of twenty five
dollars ($25.00) shall also accompany the appeal. Should the appeal be
withdrawn prior to publication of legal notice thereon, such fee will be
returned upon written request of the applicant.
   (C)   Hearing Notice: The Board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing
of an application or of an appeal. It shall give at least fifteen (15) days'
notice of the time and place of such hearing by insertion in a newspaper
published in the community, and shall also give notice delivered by first class
mail at least five (5) days before the time fixed for such hearing to the
applicant or appellant and to the building inspector, and to the respective
owners of record of property adjoining or adjacent to the premises in question.
Any party may appear at such hearing in person or by agent or by attorney. The
Board shall decide the application or appeal within a reasonable time.
   (D)   Stay Of Proceeding: An appeal shall stay all proceedings in
furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the building inspector
certifies to the Board that by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a
stay would in his opinion cause imminent peril to life or property. In such
case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by an order which may, on
due cause shown, be granted by the Board on application, after notice to the
building inspector, or by a court of record. (Ord. 67-24, 7-24-1967)
2-5-3: POWERS OF BOARD:
The Board shall have jurisdiction in matters and shall have the specific and
general powers provided in the zoning title.
   (A)   Special Exceptions and Interpretation of Map: The Board shall have the
power to hear and decide, in accordance with the provisions of the zoning
title, requests or applications for special exceptions or of interpretation of
the Zoning Map or for decisions upon other special questions upon which the
Board is authorized to pass.
      1.   Special Exceptions: hi addition to permitting the special exceptions
heretofore specified in this report, the Board shall have authority to permit
the following:
         (a)   Nonconforming Uses: The substitution for a nonconforming use, by
another nonconforming use, if no structural alterations except those required
by law or ordinance are made; provided, however, that any use so substituted
shall be of the same or a more restricted classification.
         (b)   Temporary Uses and Permits:
            (1)   The temporary use of a building or premises in any district
for a purpose or use that does not conform to the regulations prescribed by the
zoning title, provided that such use be of a true temporary nature and does not
involve the erection of substantial buildings. Such permit shall be granted in
the form of a temporary and revocable permit for not more than a twelve (12)
month period, subject to such conditions as will safeguard the public health,
safety, convenience and general welfare.
            (2)   The temporary use of a building or premises in undeveloped
sections for a purpose that does not conform to the regulations prescribed by
the zoning title, provided that such structure or use is of a true temporary
nature, is promotive of or incidental to the development of such undeveloped
sections, and does not involve the erection of substantial buildings. Such
permit shall be granted in the form specified under subsection (A) 1(b)(1) of
this Section.
      2.   Authorize special uses requiring approval of the Zoning Board of
Appeals: The Board may grant authorization of certain special uses in zoning
districts as provided in the zoning title. The Board shall give due regard to
the nature and condition of all adjacent uses and structures, and the
consistency therewith of the proposed use and development. Before authorizing a
use as a special exception, the Board shall determine whether the proposed
exception or use would be hazardous, harmful, noxious, offensive or a nuisance
to the surrounding neighborhood by reason of noise, smoke, odor, vibration,
dust and dirt, cinders, noxious gases, glare and heat, fire and safety hazards,
sewage wastes and pollution, transportation and traffic, aesthetic and
psychological effects. The Board may utilize and give recognition to those
performance standards which are available in model codes or ordinances, or have
been developed by planning, manufacturing, health, architectural and
engineering research organizations, and can be applied to the proposed use, to
assist it in reaching a fair and objective decision. Upon authorizing a special
use and/or exception, the Board may impose such requirements and conditions, in
addition to those expressly stipulated in the report for the particular special
use and/or exception, as the Board may deem necessary for the protection of
adjacent properties and the public interest.
      3.   Interpretation of Map: Where the street or lot layout actually on
the ground or as recorded, differs from the street and lot lines indicated on
the Zoning Map, the Board, after notice to the owners of the property and after
public hearing, shall interpret the Map in such a way as to carry out the
intent and purposes of the zoning title for the particular section or district
in question.
   (B)   Administrative Review And Variances: The Board of Appeals also shall
have the power:
      1.   Administrative Review: To hear and decide appeals where it is
alleged by the applicant that there is error in any order, requirement,
decision, grant or refusal made by the building inspector in the enforcement of
the provisions of the zoning title.
      2.   Variances: To authorize on appeal in specific cases such variance
from the terms of the zoning title as will not be contrary to the public
interest, where owing to a special condition, a literal enforcement of the
provisions of the zoning title will result in unnecessary hardship, and so that
the spirit of the zoning title shall be observed and substantial justice done,
as follows:
         (a)   Where by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness or shape
of a specific piece of property at the time of enactment of the zoning title,
or by reason of exceptional topographic conditions, or other extraordinary and
exceptional situation or condition of such piece of property, or of the use or
development of property immediately adjoining the piece of property in
question, the literal enforcement of the provisions of the zoning title would
result in peculiar and exceptional practical difficulties or exceptional and
undue hardship upon the owner of such property, unnecessary to carry out the
spirit and purpose of the zoning title, the Board shall have the power to
authorize, upon appeal, a variance from such strict application, so as to
relieve such difficulties or hardships, and so that the spirit and purpose of
the zoning title shall be observed and substantial justice done. In authorizing
a variance the Board may attach thereto such conditions regarding the location,
character and other features of the proposed building, structure or use as it
may deem advisable in the interest of the furtherance of the purposes of the
zoning title.
         (b)   No such variance in the provisions or requirements of the zoning
title shall be authorized by the Board unless the Board finds beyond reasonable
doubt that all of the following conditions exist:
            (1)   That there are exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or
conditions applying to the property in question or to the intended use of the
property that do not apply generally to other properties or class of uses in
the same zoning district.
            (2)   That such variance is necessary for the preservation and
enjoyment of a substantial property right possessed by other properties in the
same zoning district and in the vicinity.
            (3)   That the authorizing of such variance will not be of
substantial detriment to adjacent property and will not materially impair the
purposes of the zoning title or the public interest.
         (c)   No grant or variance shall be authorized unless the Board
specifically finds that the condition or situation of the specific piece of
property for which the variance is sought is not of so typical or recurrent a
nature as to make reasonably practicable the formulation of a general
regulation, under an amendment of the zoning title, for such conditions or
situations.
         (d)   The Board shall have no power to authorize a variance for the
establishment of a nonconforming use where none previously existed.
      3.   Action Of Board: In exercising its powers, the Board may, in
conformity with the provisions of the Illinois Compiled Statutes and of the
zoning title, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order,
requirement, decision or determination appealed from and may make such order,
requirement, decision or determination as, in the Board’s opinion, ought to be
made, and to the end has all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal is
taken.
   (C)   Judicial Review: All final administrative decisions of the Board of
Zoning Appeals shall be subject to judicial review pursuant to the provisions
of the “Administrative Review Act”, approved May 8, 1945, and all amendments
and modifications thereof, and the rules adopted pursuant thereto. (Ord. 18-08,
6-3-2019; amd. Ord. 19-17, 6-3-2019)
CHAPTER 6
CITIZENS' ADVISORY COMMITTEE
SECTION:
2-6-1: Creation
2-6-2: Term Of Office
2-6-3: Meetings
2-6-4: Duties And Functions
2-6-5: Declaration Of Policy
2-6-1: CREATION:
There is hereby established a committee to be known as the citizens' advisory
committee consisting of nine (9) members, one of which members shall be
designated as chairman to be appointed by the mayor and with the advice and
consent of the city council. The members of the committee should be appointed
from any of the following religious, ethnic, vocational, professional groups or
from any other group: (Ord. 69-52, 10-6-1969; amd. Ord. 03-18, 5-19-2003)
   42nd Avenue business
   Banks or savings and loan
   Builder or developer
   Civic groups
   County housing authority
   Doctor, dental or legal profession
   Downtown business
   EM Ministerial Association
   EM planning commission
   Management
   Minority groups
   News media
   Organized labor
   School districts
   Social agencies
They shall serve without compensation, but may be reimbursed for any personal
expense incurred in the performance of their duties, subject to prior approval
of the city council. (Ord. 69-52, 10-6-1969)
2-6-2: TERM OF OFFICE:
For the first term, five (5) members shall be appointed for three (3) years;
five (5) members for two (2) years and five (5) members for one year. Each
succeeding group of five (5) shall be appointed for a term of three (3) years,
thus assuring a balance of ten (10) members at the end of each term. In the
event no reappointment or replacement has been made by the mayor and council at
the end of the expiring term, the members whose terms are expiring shall
continue on said committee until such time as a reappointment or replacement
has been made by the mayor, by and with the consent of the city council. (Ord.
69-52, 10-6-1969)
2-6-3: MEETINGS:
The committee shall meet monthly at the city hall with provision for special
meetings when necessary. (Ord. 69-52, 10-6-1969)
2-6-4: DUTIES AND FUNCTIONS:
The committee shall cooperate with the mayor, city council and other agencies
to serve as the formal means through which active participation is provided to
aid and support the development and the carrying out of the workable program
for community improvement for the city. The functions of the committee will
include:
   (A)   The use of the skills, knowledge and experience of its members and the
organizations and groups they represent to assist and advise the local
government with respect to programs for the orderly growth, development, and
improvement of the community;
   (B)   Keep the general public informed about such programs and of progress
thereunder; and
   (C)   Serve as a medium for the promotion of progress of workable program
projects. (Ord. 69-52, 10-6-1969)
2-6-5: DECLARATION OF POLICY:
This committee is established for the principles and purposes of citizen
involvement in the growing complexity of urban development and other large and
small complex problems to achieve the basic objective of creating and
sustaining a voluntary union and mutual trust between government and its
citizens. (Ord. 69-52, 10-6-1969)
CHAPTER 7
EAST MOLINE EMERGENCY SERVICES AND DISASTER AGENCY
SECTION:
2-7-1: Establishment
2-7-2: Coordinator
2-7-3: Functions
2-7-4: Service As Mobile Support Team
2-7-5: Agreements With Other Political Subdivisions
2-7-6: Emergency Action
2-7-7: Compensation
2-7-8: Reimbursement By State
2-7-9: Purchases And Expenditures
2-7-10: Oath
2-7-11: Office
2-7-12: Appropriation - Levy Of Taxes
2-7-1: ESTABLISHMENT:
There is hereby created the East Moline Emergency Services and Disaster Agency
(hereinafter called East Moline ESDA) to prevent, minimize, repair, and
alleviate injury or damage resulting from disaster caused by enemy attack,
sabotage, or other hostile action, or from natural or manmade disaster, in
accordance with "The Illinois Emergency Services and Disaster Act of 1975" 1 .
This East Moline ESDA shall consist of the Coordinator and such additional
members as may be selected by the Coordinator. (Ord. 76-12, 4-5-1976)
 
Notes
1 1. 20 ILCS 3305/1.
2-7-2: COORDINATOR:
The Coordinator of the East Moline ESDA shall be appointed by the Mayor and
shall serve until removed by same.
The Coordinator shall have direct responsibility for the organization,
administration, training and operation of the East Moline ESDA, subject to the
direction and control of the Mayor as provided by statute.
In the event of the absence, resignation, death or inability to serve as the
Coordinator, the Mayor or any person designated by him, shall be and act as
Coordinator until a new appointment is made as provided in this Ordinance.
(Ord. 76-12, 4-5-1976)
2-7-3: FUNCTIONS:
The East Moline ESDA shall perform such ESDA functions within the City as shall
be prescribed in and by the State ESDA plan and program prepared by the
Governor, and such orders, rules and regulations as may be promulgated by the
Governor, and in addition shall perform such duties outside the corporate
limits as may be required pursuant to any Mutual Aid Agreement with any other
political subdivision, municipality, or quasi-municipality entered into as
provided by "The State ESDA Act of 1975". (Ord. 76-12, 4-5-1976)
2-7-4: SERVICE AS MOBILE SUPPORT TEAM:
All or any members of the East Moline ESDA organization may be designated as
members of a Mobile Support Team created by the Director of the State ESDA as
provided by law.
The leader of such Mobile Support Team shall be designated by the Coordinator
of the East Moline ESDA organization.
Any member of a Mobile Support Team who is a City employee or officer while
serving on call to duty by the Governor, or the State Director, shall receive
the compensation and have the powers, duties, rights and immunities incident to
such employment or office. Any such member who is not a paid officer or
employee of the City, while so serving, shall receive from the State reasonable
compensation as provided by law. (Ord. 76-12, 4-5-1976)
2-7-5: AGREEMENTS WITH OTHER POLITICAL SUBDIVISIONS:
The Coordinator of the East Moline ESDA may negotiate Mutual Aid Agreements
with other cities or political subdivisions of the State, but no such agreement
shall be effective until it has been approved by the Mayor and by the State
Director of ESDA. (Ord. 76-12, 4-5-1976)
2-7-6: EMERGENCY ACTION:
If the Governor proclaims that a disaster emergency exists in the event of
actual enemy attack upon the United States or the occurrence within the State
of Illinois of a major disaster resulting from enemy sabotage or other hostile
action, or from manmade or natural disaster, it shall be the duty of the East
Moline ESDA to cooperate fully with the State ESDA and with the Governor in the
exercise of emergency powers as provided by law. (Ord. 76-12, 4-5-1976)
2-7-7: COMPENSATION:
Members of the East Moline ESDA who are paid employees or officers of the City,
if called for training by the State Director of ESDA, shall receive for the
time spent in such training the same rate of pay as is attached to the position
held; members who are not such City employees or officers shall receive for
such training time such compensation as may be established by the Mayor. (Ord.
76-12, 4-5-1976)
2-7-8: REIMBURSEMENT BY STATE:
The State Treasurer may receive and allocate to the appropriate fund, any
reimbursement by the State to the City for expenses incident to training
members of the East Moline ESDA as prescribed by the State Director of ESDA,
compensation for services and expenses of members of a Mobile Support Team
while serving outside the City in response to a call by the Governor or State
Director of ESDA, as provided by law, and any other reimbursement made by the
State incident to ESDA activities as provided by law. (Ord. 76-12, 4-5-1976)
2-7-9: PURCHASES AND EXPENDITURES:
The Mayor may, on recommendation of the City Coordinator of the East Moline
ESDA, authorize any purchase of contracts necessary to place the City in a
position to combat effectively any disaster resulting from the explosion of any
nuclear or other bomb or missile, and to protect the public health and safety,
protect property, and provide emergency assistance to victims in the case of
such disaster, or from manmade or natural disaster.
In the event of enemy caused or other disaster, the City Coordinator of the
East Moline ESDA is authorized, on behalf of the City to procure such services,
supplies, equipment or material as may be necessary for such purposes, in view
of the exigency without regard to the statutory procedures or formalities
normally prescribed by law regarding or pertaining to City contracts or
obligations, as authorized by "The State ESDA Act of 1975", provided that if
the Mayor meets at such time he shall act subject to the directions and
restrictions imposed by that body. (Ord. 76-12, 4-5-1976)
2-7-10: OATH:
Every person appointed to serve in any capacity in the East Moline ESDA
organization shall, before entering upon his duties, subscribe to the following
oath, which shall be filed with the Coordinator:
I,                     , do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will support and
defend and bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of the United
States and the constitution of the State of Illinois, and the territory,
institutions, and facilities thereof, both public and private, against all
enemies, foreign and domestic; that I take this obligation freely, without any
mental reservation or purpose of evasion; and that I will well and faithfully
discharge the duties upon which I am about to enter. And I do further swear (or
affirm) that I do not advocate, nor am I, nor have I been, a member of any
political party or organization that advocates the overthrow of the government
of the United States or of this State by force or violence; and that during
such time as I am affiliated with the East Moline ESDA organization, I will not
advocate nor become a member of any political party or organization that
advocates the overthrow of the government of the United States or of this State
by force or violence.
(Ord. 76-12, 4-5-1976)
2-7-11: OFFICE:
The Mayor is authorized to designate space in a City building, or elsewhere, as
may be provided for by the Mayor for the East Moline ESDA as its office. (Ord.
76-12, 4-5-1976)
2-7-12: APPROPRIATION - LEVY OF TAXES:
The Mayor may make an appropriation for ESDA purposes in the manner provided by
law, and may levy in addition for ESDA purposes only, a tax not to exceed five
cents ($0.05) per one hundred dollars ($100.00) of the assessed value of all
taxable property in addition to all other taxes, as provided by "The State ESDA
Act of 1975"; however, that amount collectible under such levy shall in no
event exceed one-fourth of one cent ($0.025) per capita. (Ord. 76-12, 4-5-1976)
CHAPTER 8
COMMISSION FOR SENIOR CITIZENS
(Rep. by Ord. 98-19, 5-4-1998)
CHAPTER 9
COMMISSION ON HUMAN RELATIONS
SECTION:
2-9-1: Creation
2-9-2: Term Of Office
2-9-3: Meetings
2-9-4: Duties And Functions
2-9-5: Cooperation With Groups, Agencies
2-9-6: Investigations, Research, Publications
2-9-1: CREATION:
There is hereby established a commission known as the Commission on Human
Relations, consisting of nine (9) members, to be appointed by the Mayor and
with the advice and consent of the City Council. The Commission shall annually
elect a chairman at their May meeting 1 .
The member must be residents of the City of East Moline. The members of the
Commission should be selected in such a manner that they represent a cross-
section of the community in regard to race/ethnic background, religious
background, vocational/professional background. Although it is intended that
diverse racial and ethnic backgrounds be represented, this is not to be
construed to prohibit caucasian persons of European heritage to be members of
the Commission.
Special attention must be given to ensure that the following groups are
represented:
   Black African-American
   Hispanic
   Asian
   American Indian
   Disabled Persons
   Women
   Labor
   Small Business
   Education
Members shall serve without compensation, but may be reimbursed for any
personal expense incurred in the performance of their duties, subject to prior
approval of the City Council. The City's Affirmative Action Officer shall serve
as an additional, nonvoting member of the Commission. (Ord. 92-45, 10-19-1992)
 
Notes
1 1. See Section
  2-9-3 of this Chapter.
2-9-2: TERM OF OFFICE:
Three (3) members shall be appointed for a term of three (3) years; three (3)
for a term of two (2) years; and the final three (3) for a term of one year.
Each succeeding group of three (3) shall be appointed for a term of three (3)
years, thus assuring a balance of six (6) carryover members at the end of each
term. In the event no reappointment or replacement has been made by the Mayor
and City Council at the end of the expiring term, the member whose term is
expiring shall continue on said Commission until such time as a reappointment
or replacement has been made by the Mayor, by and with the consent of the City
Council. (Ord. 92-45, 10-19-1992)
2-9-3: MEETINGS:
The Commission shall meet, at a minimum, semi-annually, in May and in November
of each year, at the City Hall, with provisions for special meetings as often
as necessary, which may be called by the chairman or three (3) members of the
Commission. (Ord. 92-45, 10-19-1992)
2-9-4: DUTIES AND FUNCTIONS:
The Commission shall cooperate with the Mayor, City Council, City departments,
agencies and officials; in securing the furnishing of equal services to all
residents, and training City employees to use methods of dealing with
intergroup relations which develop respect for equal rights and which result in
equal treatment without regard to race, color, religion, sex, national origin,
age, disability, occupation or income level; assuring fair and equal treatment
under the law to all citizens; protecting the rights of all persons to enjoy
public accommodations and facilities and to receive equal treatment from all
holders of licenses, contracts or privileges from the City; and maintaining
equality of opportunity for employment and advancement in the City government.
The Commission shall monitor the City's Affirmative Action Plan, including all
policies therein, and shall advise the Mayor and City Council of incidents,
complaints or practices which may violate City policies, and/or State and
Federal law.
All City departments and agencies shall cooperate with the Commission and shall
provide any necessary information which the Commission needs when requested.
Upon receipt of recommendation in writing from the Commission, each department
or agency shall submit a reply in writing indicating the disposition of an
action taken with regard to such recommendations. The Commission shall render
an annual report 1  to the Mayor and City Council which shall be published in
the City Council Agenda. (Ord. 92-45, 10-19-1992)
 
Notes
1 1. Intended annual report is to coincide with annual report to EEOC.
2-9-5: COOPERATION WITH GROUPS, AGENCIES:
The Commission shall invite and enlist the cooperation of minority, religious,
and women's groups as well as community organizations, public and private
agencies assisting the disabled, labor and business organizations, fraternal
and benevolent societies, veterans organizations, professional and technical
organizations, and other groups in the City, in carrying out its mission. The
Commission may aid in the formation of local community groups in such
neighborhoods or other commonality as it deems necessary or desirable to carry
out specific programs designed to lessen tension and improve understanding in
the community.
This Commission shall cooperate with State and Federal agencies whenever such
action is necessary and appropriate in order to carry out its duties. (Ord. 92-
45, 10-19-1992)
2-9-6: INVESTIGATIONS, RESEARCH, PUBLICATIONS:
The Commission shall receive and investigate complaints and initiate its own
investigations of practices of discrimination and acts of prejudice against any
person or group because of race, color, religion, sex, national origin, age or
disability. The Commission shall monitor and hear complaints and grievances as
outlined in the City's Affirmative Action Plan and infractions of civil rights
as outlined by State and Federal statutes.
(Note: Corrective action and not punitive action is intended.)
The Commission shall have as its goal the progressive improvement of human
relations and increased respect for, and protection of, human rights in the
entire City.
The Commission shall issue reports and results of investigations in the City
Council Agenda and make such recommendations to the Mayor and City Council that
will correct deficiencies and expedite improved human relations. (Ord. 92-45,
10-19-1992)
CHAPTER 10
ELECTRICAL COMMISSION
(Rep. by Ord. 98-19, 5-4-1998)
CHAPTER 11
FIRE AND POLICE COMMISSIONERS
SECTION:
2-11-1: Creation
2-11-2: Duties
2-11-1: CREATION:
There shall be a Board of Fire and Police Commissioners as provided by law,
which shall consist of three (3) members to be appointed by the Mayor, whose
terms of office shall be three (3) years and until their respective successors
are appointed and have qualified, by and with the advice and consent of the
City Council. Not more than two (2) members of the Board shall belong to the
same political party. (Ord. 94-5, 3-21-1994)
2-11-2: DUTIES:
The Board of Fire and Police Commissioners shall have charge of all
appointments to the Fire and Police Departments and shall conduct and hold all
entrance and promotional examinations in the manner required by law. (M.C.
1962, sec. 9.902)
CHAPTER 12
FIREMEN'S PENSION BOARD
SECTION:
2-12-1: Creation
2-12-2: Duties
2-12-1: CREATION:
There is hereby created a Board of Trustees of the Fire Pension Fund which
shall consist of the Fire Chief, the Mayor, the City Treasurer, the City Clerk
or Deputy City Clerk and three (3) other persons who shall be chosen from the
active firefighters of the City, and one other person who shall be chosen from
the retired firefighters as provided by statute. The members of the Board
selected from the active and retired firefighters shall be elected at the time
and in the manner provided by statute. (Ord. 98-19, 5-4-1998)
2-12-2: DUTIES:
The Board of Trustees of the Firemen's Pension Fund shall have control of the
management of all funds belonging to or designated by law as part of the
Firemen's Pension Fund and of the administration of such funds, as provided by
statute. (M.C. 1962, sec. 9.1002)
CHAPTER 13
MUNICIPAL YOUTH COUNCIL
(Rep. by Ord. 98-19, 5-4-1998)
CHAPTER 14
PARK AND RECREATION BOARD
SECTION:
2-14-1: Board Membership
2-14-2: Organization
2-14-3: Control And Purposes
2-14-4: Receipts; Donations; Disposition
2-14-1: BOARD MEMBERSHIP:
The park and recreation board shall consist of nine (9) members. One member of
the nine (9) members shall be an alderman, with voting power. In addition,
there shall be an alternate alderman appointed, to have voting power only in
the absence of the primary aldermanic member. Both the primary and alternate
aldermanic members shall be appointed by the mayor, with the consent of the
city council. The board appointments shall be for a two (2) year term with the
terms staggered so that four (4) members are appointed one year and four (4)
members appointed the following year, with the aldermanic term being for one
year and being made annually. The appointments shall be made by the mayor on
the first regular council meeting in May of each year. (Ord. 95-14, 4-17-1995;
amd. Ord. 03-17, 5-19-2003)
2-14-2: ORGANIZATION:
The board shall elect one of its number as chairman, one as secretary, and one
as treasurer. The treasurer of the park and recreation board shall be
responsible for the compilation and reporting of the financial condition of the
park board, and shall not have authority to prepare or execute drafts for the
expenditures of funds. The board shall keep a correct record of its proceedings
and shall meet at such times as it may determine. (Ord. 00-24, 8-7-2000)
2-14-3: CONTROL AND PURPOSES:
   (A)   The park board shall have the responsibility for the establishment,
planning and coordination of all public parks and recreation programs involving
park property and shall direct the ornamenting, adorning, laying out and
improving of the grounds of said parks.
   (B)   The employment and day to day supervision of such workmen as may be
necessary to carry out such purposes, and as may be permitted under the budget
of the park board as submitted to the city council and approved each year,
shall be under the director of maintenance services. The director shall be
assisted by the park supervisor. The director of maintenance services shall be
responsible for budget recommendations to the park board regarding wages,
equipment and maintenance; the director shall further coordinate the use of
park employees with other municipal functions and services so as to make best
use of all municipal employees and equipment. All materials and equipment
purchased for park purposes shall be coordinated with material and equipment
purchases of the department of maintenance services and shall be authorized by
the director of maintenance services. In addition, the park board shall assume
the responsibility for the planning, establishing and maintaining of the
municipal recreation programs within the city, such programs to include
playgrounds, sports and recreation programs, and recreation centers.
   (C)   The board shall collect all receipts from park board activities and
properties and deposit them in the park fund in the city treasury. All funds
expended for the establishment and maintenance of public parks for the use and
benefit of the inhabitants of the city shall be budgeted and accounted for
separately so as to assure the proper expenditure of the taxes levied for park
purposes.
   (D)   In addition, all funds from the adult softball program and other
programs as agreed upon by the parties shall be deposited to a separate fund in
the city clerk's office, with authorized expenditures being made from said
segregated funds.
   (E)   The supervisor of parks shall be compensated at a rate to be
determined from time to time by the city council and shall be appointed by the
mayor with the approval and consent of the city council. (Ord. 88-29, 5-2-1988)
2-14-4: RECEIPTS; DONATIONS; DISPOSITION:
All receipts on account of the city parks, whether arising from rentals,
donation, sale of any part thereof, or of any lands so willed and devised by
any person to the city, shall be exclusively expended and applied under the
direction and control of the park board. (Ord. 88-29, 5-2-1988)
CHAPTER 15
PLAN COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-15-1: Purpose
2-15-2: Membership
2-15-3: Term Of Office
2-15-4: Procedure
2-15-5: Powers And Duties
2-15-6: Land Subdivision Or Resubdivision
2-15-1: PURPOSE:
In order that adequate provisions be made for the preparation of a
comprehensive plan for the guidance, direction and control of the growth and
development or redevelopment of the City and contiguous territory not more than
one and one-half (11/2) miles beyond the corporate limits and not included in
another municipality, a Plan Commission is hereby created as provided for by
State law. (Ord. 64-31, 9-8-1964)
2-15-2: MEMBERSHIP:
Said Plan Commission shall consist of nine (9) members, citizens of the City
appointed by the Mayor, on the basis of their particular fitness for their duty
on said Plan Commission and subject to the approval of the City Council. The
assistant Director of Planning and Development shall serve as secretary of the
Plan Commission. (Ord. 98-19, 5-4-1998)
2-15-3: TERM OF OFFICE:
Of the nine (9) members originally appointed, three (3) shall serve for a
period of three (3) years; three (3) for a period of two (2) years, and three
(3) for a period of one year. Thereafter, such members shall serve for a period
of three (3) years. Vacancies shall be filled by appointments for unexpired
terms only. All members of the Commission shall serve without compensation
except that they may be reimbursed for reasonable expenses. (Ord. 64-31, 9-8-
1964)
2-15-4: PROCEDURE:
Immediately following their appointment, the members of the Plan Commission
shall meet, organize, elect such officers as it may deem necessary, and adopt
rules and regulations of organization and procedure consistent with this Code
and State laws. The Commission shall keep written records of its proceedings,
which shall be open at all times to public inspection. The Commission shall
submit an annual report to the Mayor and City Council setting forth its
transactions and recommendations. (Ord. 64-31, 9-8-1964)
2-15-5: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The Plan Commission shall have the following powers and duties:
   (A)   To prepare and recommend to the City Council a comprehensive plan for
the present and future development or redevelopment of the City and contiguous
unincorporated territory not more than one and one-half (11/2) miles beyond the
corporate limits of the City and not included in any other municipality. Such
plan when adopted in whole or in separate geographical or functional parts,
shall be the Official Comprehensive Plan, or part thereof. Such plans shall be
advisory except as to such part thereof as has been implemented by ordinances.
The Comprehensive Plan shall not be adopted or amended except after notice and
public hearing as required by 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-12-7. The City
Clerk shall file notice of the adopted Comprehensive Plan and any amendments
thereto with the County Recorder of Deeds and report same to the chairman of
the Planning Commission.
   (B)   To provide for the health, safety, comfort and convenience of the
inhabitants of the City and contiguous territory, the Plan Commission shall
establish reasonable standards of design for subdivisions and resubdivisions,
reasonable requirements governing the location, width, course and surfacing of
public streets and highways, alleys, ways for public service facilities, curbs,
gutters, sidewalks, streetlights, parks, playgrounds, school grounds, size of
lots to be used for residential purposes, storm water drainage, water supply
and distribution, sanitary sewers, and sewage collection and treatment. The
requirements specified herein shall become regulatory when adopted by
ordinance.
   (C)   The Plan Commission shall receive for review, the plans for each
subdivision of land within the City and within one and one-half (11/2) miles of
the City and not part of another municipality. The Plan Commission shall
determine whether the subdivision conforms to the Comprehensive Plan and the
Official Map of the City and report by resolution to the Council and within the
time limits prescribed in 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-12-8.
   (D)   To recommend to the City Council from time to time, such changes in
the Comprehensive Plan, or any part thereof, as may be deemed necessary.
   (E)   To prepare and recommend to the City Council, from time to time,
proposals and/or recommendations for specific improvements in pursuance of the
Comprehensive Plan.
   (F)   To give aid to the officials of the City charged with the direction of
projects for improvements embraced within the Official Plan, or parts thereof,
to further the making of such improvements and generally to promote the
realization of the Comprehensive Plan.
   (G)   To arrange and conduct any form of publicity in relation to its
activities for the general purpose of public understanding.
   (H)   To cooperate with regional planning commissions and other agencies or
groups to further the local planning program and to assure harmonious and
integrated planning for the area.
   (I)   To exercise such other powers germane to the powers granted by State
law, as may be conferred by the City Council.
   (J)   To designate land suitable for annexation to the Municipality and the
recommended zoning classification for such land upon annexation. (Ord. 64-31,
9-8-1964)
2-15-6: LAND SUBDIVISION OR RESUBDIVISION:
At any time or times, before or after the formal adoption of the Comprehensive
Plan by the corporate authorities, an official map may be designated by
ordinance, which map may consist of the whole area included within the Official
Comprehensive Plan, or one or more separate geographical or functional parts,
and may include all or any part of the contiguous unincorporated area within
one and one-half (11/2) miles of the corporate limits of the City. All
requirements for public hearing, filing of notice of adoption with the County
Recorder of Deeds, and filing of said Plan and ordinances, including the
Official Map, with the City Clerk shall be complied with as provided for by
law. No map or plat of any subdivision or resubdivision presented for record
affecting land within the corporate limits of the City or within contiguous
territory which is not more than one and one-half (11/2) miles beyond the
corporate limits shall be entitled to record or shall be valid unless the
subdivision shown thereon provides for standards of design and standards
governing streets, alleys, public ways, ways for public service facilities,
streetlights, public grounds, size of lots to be used for residential purposes,
storm and flood water runoff channels and basins, water supply and
distribution, sanitary sewers and sewage collection and treatment in conformity
with the applicable requirements of this Code, including the Official Map.
(Ord. 64-31, 9-8-1964)
CHAPTER 16
POLICE PENSION BOARD
SECTION:
2-16-1: Creation
2-16-2: Duties
2-16-1: CREATION:
There shall be a Police Pension Board consisting of five (5) members. Of these
members, two (2) shall be appointed by the Mayor, serving a term of two (2)
years each; two (2) shall be elected from the regular police force of the City,
and one shall be elected from the beneficiaries of the pension. Each member
shall serve for two (2) years and elected members shall be selected in the
manner provided by statute. Provided, that the terms of the members of the
Police Pension Fund first appointed shall commence on the second Tuesday of May
following the adoption of this Chapter. (M.C. 1962, sec. 9.1401)
2-16-2: DUTIES:
It shall be the duty of the members of the Police Pension Board to manage,
invest and control the Police Pension Fund and all monies pertaining thereto in
the manner provided by statute and to pay beneficiaries as provided by law.
(M.C. 1964, sec. 9.1402)
CHAPTER 17
RECREATION BOARD
(Rep. by Ord. 88-29, 5-2-1988)
CHAPTER 18
SAFETY COUNCIL
(Rep. by Ord. 98-19, 5-4-1998)
CHAPTER 19
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-19-1: Creation And Members
2-19-2: Removal Of Members
2-19-3: Purpose
2-19-4: Meetings
2-19-5: Financing
2-19-6: Functions
2-19-7: Powers
2-19-8: Cooperation
2-19-1: CREATION AND MEMBERS:
There is hereby created the economic development commission of the city of East
Moline. This commission shall consist of nine (9) members, to be appointed by
the mayor and with the advice and consent of the city council.
Six (6) members shall be appointed so as to represent the following groups:
business, labor, industry, professional, development and citizens at large.
Three (3) members shall be appointed as follows:
   (A)   The city administrator, or his designee.
   (B)   Two (2) aidermen of different political parties, each to be appointed
for a two (2) year term.
All members appointed under the prior Ordinance shall continue to serve the
designated terms as appointed.
In the event no reappointment or replacement has been made by the Mayor and
Council at the end of the expiring term, the members whose terms are expiring
shall continue on said commission until such time as a reappointment or
replacement has been made by the Mayor, by and with the consent of the City
Council. Any such appointment shall be for the remainder of the (2) year term.
(Ord. 74-64, 12-9-1974; amd. Ord. 19-03; 2-19-2019)
2-19-2: REMOVAL OF MEMBERS:
Any member may be removed for missing three (3) consecutive meetings. Removal
shall be by majority vote of the remaining commissioners whom are in good
standing. The Mayor shall appoint a new member with City Council approval to
complete the remainder of the term of said removed member. (Ord. 19-03, 2-19-
2019)
2-19-3: PURPOSE:
The commission shall be charged with the responsibility of promoting and
ensuring sound commercial and industrial development and redevelopment within
the corporate limits of the city of East Moline. (Ord. 19-03; 2-19-2019)
2-19-4: MEETINGS:
After appointing the members, the mayor shall call the first meeting at which
time the commission shall elect a chairman, vice chairman and a secretary-
treasurer. The commission at said first meeting shall determine the time the
regular meeting shall be held. The chairman may recommend changing the regular
meeting time and meeting place as may become necessary from time to time. The
chairman may call special meetings to conduct the business of the commission.
The commission shall act by majority rule on all matters.
Minutes will be taken of proceedings of all meetings showing the actions of the
commission, and the vote of each member upon questions coming before it.
Members may attend and participate either in person or electronically. These
minutes will be made available to the City Council upon request. (Ord. 98-19,
5-4-1998; amd. Ord. 19-03, 2-19-2019)
2-19-5: FINANCING:
The City shall, at its discretion, fund the Commission for reasonable and
necessary operating expenses. (Ord. 74-64, 12-9-1974; amd. Ord. 19-03, 2-19-
2019)
2-19-6: FUNCTIONS:
   (A)   Industrial Park Development: The commission shall submit for city
council approval a plan for orderly development of the East Moline industrial
park and shall also submit for city council approval restrictive covenants
governing the development of the park. The commission may recommend to the city
council, from time to time, such changes in the development plan and
restrictive covenants as may be deemed necessary.
The commission shall obtain a current appraisal of the industrial park land in
order to aid in establishing a fair selling price competitive with the present
market.
The commission is authorized to actively seek out industrial prospects, to
negotiate a sale price for the sale of land located in the industrial park, and
to advertise for bids for the sale of said land. Subsequent recommendations and
details are to be submitted to the city council for final approval. The city
council may disapprove the recommendation of the commission only by a vote of
two- thirds (2/3) of those aldermen present.
Upon approval, the city council shall pass all ordinances necessary to
implement said approval.
The commission is authorized to recommend the issuance of industrial project
revenue bonds to the city council and to represent to prospective purchasers of
real estate or other developers that said recommendation would be made on their
behalf.
The commission will not sell any land for speculation. Any person, business or
corporation who purchases land must agree to begin construction within one
hundred eighty (180) days from date of sale. Exception to this rule will be
allowed for an existing industry in the industrial park to purchase adjacent
property for future expansion of existing facilities. The commission shall have
the authority to allow a real estate broker retained by the commission to
receive a commission for the sale of the land.
   (B)   Commercial Development And Redevelopment: The commission is to promote
and actively seek respectable businesses which will be an asset to the city of
East Moline. It shall actively participate in improving, developing or
redeveloping all commercial areas so designated by the plan commission of the
city of East Moline.
The commission shall study all requests by businesses that ask for city
participation financially. The commission shall submit to the city council for
consideration a final recommendation, including all supportive details, such as
percentage of city participation, tangible and intangible benefits, and
expected return on investment.
The commission is to enlist the support of existing businesses in preventing
the deterioration of these areas and ensuring a continual program of upgrading
and renovation.
   (C)   General: The City-Wide Economic Developmental Strategic Plan shall be
reviewed by the commission annually. The commissioner may recommend to the City
Council or city staff, from time to time, such changes in the development plan
and restrictive covenants as may be deemed necessary or advisable.
The commission shall be authorized to obtain current appraisals of developable/
Re-developable land/property in order to aid in land/property development or
redevelopment.
The commission is authorized to actively seek out industrial and business
prospects, to obtain bids and/or negotiate a sale price for the sale of land
and property owned by the City, or where the City has other financial interest
(s), including, but not limited to, TIF, Enterprise Zone, creation or retention
of jobs, and any evaluation, determination and assistance of financing gaps not
otherwise adequately addressed by other regional or local development entities.
All recommendations and details are to be submitted to the City Council for
final approval. The City Council shall approve or disapprove any recommendation
by majority vote. Upon approval, the City Council shall pass all ordinances or
resolutions necessary to implement such approval.
The commission is authorized to recommend the issuance of any type of financial
obligation to the City Council and to represent to prospective purchasers of
real estate or other developers that said recommendation would be made on their
behalf.
   (D)   Commercial Development and Redevelopment: The commission is to promote
and actively seek respectable businesses which will be an asset to the city of
East Moline. It shall actively participate in improving, developing or
redeveloping all commercial areas so designated by the plan commission of the
city of East Moline.
The commission shall study all requests by businesses that ask for city
participation financially. The commission shall submit to the city council for
consideration a final recommendation, including all supportive details, such as
percentage of city participation, tangible and intangible benefits, and
expected return on investment or value created. Project recommendation shall
include a definition and timeline for commencement of the project.
The commission is to enlist the support of existing businesses in preventing
the deterioration of these areas and ensuring a continual program of upgrading
and renovation. (Ord. 74-64, 12-9-1974; amd. Ord. 19-03, 2-19-2019)
2-19-7: POWERS:
The commission shall have any and all express and implied powers to carry out
the development enumerated in this ordinance, those powers shall include but
are not limited to, the power to allocate accumulate, authorize, reserve and
expand any sums as reasonably necessary. (Ord. 74-64, 12-9-1974; amd. Ord. 19-
03, 2-19-2019)
2-19-8: COOPERATION:
Under the direction of the City Administrator, the commission may call on city
departments for assistance in the performance of its duties, and it shall be
the duty of each city department to render such assistance to the commission as
may be reasonably required. (Ord. 74-64, 12-9-1974; amd. Ord. 19-03, 2-19-2019)
CHAPTER 20
HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-20-1: Purpose
2-20-2: Composition Of Commission
2-20-3: Qualifications
2-20-4: Terms
2-20-5: Officers
2-20-6: Meetings; Quorum
2-20-7: Powers And Duties
2-20-8: Surveys And Research
2-20-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this Ordinance is to promote the protection, enhancement,
perpetuation, and use of improvement of special character or historical
interest or value in the interest of the health, prosperity, safety, and
welfare of the people of the City of East Moline by:
   (A)   Providing a mechanism to identify and preserve the historic and
architectural characteristics of East Moline which represent elements of the
City's cultural, social, economic, political, and architectural history;
   (B)   Promoting civic pride in the beauty and noble accomplishments of the
past as represented in East Moline's landmarks and historic districts;
   (C)   Stabilizing and improving the economic vitality and value of East
Moline's landmarks and historic areas;
   (D)   Protecting and enhancing the attractiveness of the City to have
buyers, visitors and shoppers and thereby supporting business, commerce,
industry, and providing economic benefit to the City;
   (E)   Fostering and encouraging preservation, restoration of structures,
areas, and neighborhoods and thereby preventing future urban blight. (Ord. 99-
52, 12-6-1999)
2-20-2: COMPOSITION OF COMMISSION:
The East Moline Historic Preservation Commission shall consist of seven (7)
voting members, who shall be residents of the City of East Moline, and to be
appointed by the Mayor and approved by the City Council. (Ord. 99-52, 12-6-
1999)
2-20-3: QUALIFICATIONS:
The members shall be appointed on the basis of expertise, experience or
interest in the area of architectural history, building construction or
engineering, finance, historical and architectural preservation, neighborhood
organizing or real estate. (Ord. 99-52, 12-6-1999)
2-20-4: TERMS:
Members of the Commission shall be appointed for terms of three (3) years. Of
those members first taking office, two (2) shall be appointed for one year,
three (3) for two (2) years, and two (2) for three (3) years. No members shall
serve more than two (2) successive three (3) year terms. Alternate members
shall be appointed to serve in the absence of or disqualification of the
regular members. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term only. Members
shall serve without compensation. (Ord. 99-52, 12-6-1999)
2-20-5: OFFICERS:
Officers shall consist of a chairman, vice chairman, and a secretary elected by
the Preservation Commission who shall serve a term of one year and shall be
eligible for reelection, but no members shall serve as an officer for more than
two (2) consecutive years. The chairman shall preside over meetings. In the
absence of the chairman, the vice chairman shall perform the duties of the
chairman. If both are absent, a temporary chairman shall be elected by those
present. The secretary to the Preservation Commission shall have the following
duties:
   (A)   Take minutes of each Preservation Commission meeting;
   (B)   Be responsible for publication and distribution of copies of the
minutes, reports, and decisions of the Preservation Commission to the members
of the Preservation Commission;
   (C)   Give notice as provided herein or by law for all public hearings
conducted by the Preservation Commission;
   (D)   Advise the Mayor of vacancies on the Preservation Commission and
expiring terms of members; and
   (E)   Prepare and submit to the City Council a complete record of the
proceedings before the Preservation Commission on any matter requiring Council
consideration. (Ord. 99-52, 12-6-1999)
2-20-6: MEETINGS; QUORUM:
A quorum shall consist of a majority of the members. All decisions or actions
of the Historic Preservation Commission shall be made by a majority vote of
those members present and voting at any meeting where a quorum exists. Meetings
shall be held at regularly scheduled times to be established by resolution of
the Commission at the beginning of each calendar year or at any time upon the
call of the chairman. There shall be a minimum of four (4) meetings per year.
No member of the Historic Preservation Commission shall vote on any matter that
may materially or apparently affect the property, income or business interest
of that member. No action shall be taken by the Commission that could in any
manner deprive or restrict the owner of property in its use, modification,
maintenance disposition, or demolition until such owner shall first have had
the opportunity to be heard at a public meeting of the Preservation Commission,
as provided herein. The chairman, and in his absence the acting chairman, may
administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All meetings of the
Preservation Commission shall be open to the public. The Preservation
Commission keeps minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote, indicating such
fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions,
all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the Preservation
Commission and shall be a public record. (Ord. 99-52, 12-6-1999)
2-20-7: POWERS AND DUTIES:
   (A)   To adopt its own procedural regulations;
   (B)   To conduct an ongoing survey to identify historically and
architecturally significant properties, structures and areas;
   (C)   To investigate and recommend to the City Council to adopt procedures
to protect properties or structures having special historic, community, or
architectural value;
   (D)   To determine an appropriate system of markers and make recommendations
for the design and implementation of specific markings of properties or
structures which have special historic, community, or architectural value;
   (E)   To advise property owners on physical and financial aspects of
preservation, renovation, rehabilitation, and reuse, and on procedures for
inclusion on the State or National Register of Historic Places;
   (F)   To inform and educate the citizens of East Moline concerning the
historic and architectural heritage of the City by publishing appropriate maps,
newsletters, brochures, and pamphlets, and by holding programs and seminars;
   (G)   To accept and administer on behalf of the City of East Moline, upon
designation by the City Council, such gifts, grants and money as may be
appropriate for the purpose of this Ordinance;
   (H)   To call upon available City staff members, as well as other experts
for technical advice;
   (I)   To testify before all boards and commissions, including the City
Planning Commission and the Zoning Board of Appeals, on any matter affecting
historically and architecturally significant properties;
   (J)   To periodically review the East Moline Zoning Ordinance and to
recommend to the City Planning Commission and the City Council any amendments
appropriate for the protection and continued use of historically or
architecturally significant properties. (Ord. 99-52, 12-6-1999)
2-20-8: SURVEYS AND RESEARCH:
The Historic Preservation Commission shall undertake an ongoing survey and
research effort in the City of East Moline to identify neighborhoods, areas,
sites, structures, and objects that have historic, community, architectural, or
aesthetic importance, interest, or value. As part of the survey, the Historic
Preservation Commission shall review and evaluate any prior surveys and studies
by any unit of government or private organization and compile appropriate
descriptions, facts, and photographs. The Historic Preservation Commission
shall identify significant structures based upon the following criteria:
   (A)   Architecturally or historically significant properties in one
identifiable neighborhood or district geographical area of the City of East
Moline;
   (B)   Association with a particular person, event, or historical period;
   (C)   Representation of a particular architectural style or school, or of a
particular architect, engineer, builder, designer or craftsman;
   (D)   Such other criteria as may be adopted by the Preservation Commission
to assure systematic survey of all significant properties within the City of
East Moline. (Ord. 99-52, 12-6-1999)
CHAPTER 21
PATHWAY PRIORITIES PROJECT COMMITTEE
SECTION:
2-21-1: Creation And Membership
2-21-2: Term Of Office
2-21-3: Meetings
2-21-4: Purpose, Powers And Duties
2-21-1: CREATION AND MEMBERSHIP:
There is hereby established a committee to be known as the pathway priorities
project committee, consisting of nine (9) members, to be appointed by the
mayor, with the advice and consent of the city council. The members should be
appointed from any of the following groups:
City of East Moline residents.
Employees or officers of school district 37.
Employees or officers of school district 34.
Employees or officers of school district 30 (UTHS).
Bistate regional commission.
Community Not For Profit Health And Wellness Organization.
East Moline business owner or representative.
One member of the committee shall be appointed from the city of East Moline
engineering department.
The members shall be selected and appointed on the basis of interest in the
area of pedestrian sidewalk and trail projects, transportation planning,
education, public safety, engineering and architectural principles.
The members shall serve without compensation, but may be reimbursed for any
personal expense incurred in the performance of their duties, subject to prior
approval of the city council.
The chairman of the committee shall be elected annually by a majority vote of
the committee. The chairman shall annually appoint a recording secretary. (Ord.
11-01, 1-18-2011)
2-21-2: TERM OF OFFICE:
Each member shall serve a term of three (3) years, with the initial
appointments being for staggered terms of one, two (2) and three (3) years
each. In the event no reappointment or replacement has been made by the mayor
and city council at the end of the expiring terms, members shall continue on
said committee until such time as a reappointment or replacement has been made
by the mayor, by and with the consent of the city council. (Ord. 11-01, 1-18-
2011)
2-21-3: MEETINGS:
The committee shall meet monthly at city hall or at a place designated by the
chairman. All meetings shall be open to the public and held in accordance with
the Illinois open meetings act. (Ord. 11-01, 1-18-2011)
2-21-4: PURPOSE, POWERS AND DUTIES:
The purpose of the committee is to create a healthier and safer East Moline
through promotion of multimodel transportation.
The committee will plan and implement concepts and projects which promote, but
are not limited to:
Bicycle networks and routes.
"Complete streets".
Interconnection of pedestrian, bicycle, transit and vehicle routes as part of
the intermodal and "multimodel" transportation system.
Interconnection of trails and networks to other cities and counties.
Pedestrian and bicycle bridges.
Pedestrian pathways.
Promote plans and concepts to interconnect with other forms of transportation
including, but not limited to, school and public bus routes, water taxi
facilities, rail terminals and airport terminals.
Safe routes to schools.
Shared use trails.
Sidewalks.
The committee shall cooperate and interact with:
Activate quad cities.
Bistate regional commission/Bistate trails committee.
Illinois department of transportation.
Illinois safe routes to school programs.
League Of American Bicyclists.
League Of Illinois Bicyclists.
Quad Cities Bicycle Club.
Quad cities transportation advocacy group.
River Action, Inc.
and other appropriate organizations. (Ord. 11-01, 1-18-2011)
CHAPTER 22
ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS FOR PSEBA
SECTION:
2-22-1: Purpose
2-22-2: Administrative Composition
2-22-3: Procedure
2-22-4: Administrative Hearing
2-22-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide a fair and efficient method of
determining the eligibility of an employee for the benefits enumerated under
the Public Safety Employee Benefits Act (820 ILCS 320/1 et seq.) through the
process of an administrative hearing. All benefits provided employees pursuant
to the Public Safety Employees Benefits Act will be consistent with the Act.
(Ord. 18-19, 11-19-2018)
2-22-2: ADMINISTRATIVE COMPOSITION:
The system of the administrative hearing shall be comprised of a hearing
officer whose power, authority and limitations are as follows:
   (A)   Power of the Hearing Officer: The hearing officer shall have all of
the powers granted to them under common law relative to the conduct of an
administrative hearing including the power to:
      1.   Preside over all City hearings involving the Public Safety Employee
Benefits Act (820ILCS 320/1 et seq.).
      2.   Administer oaths.
      3.   Hear testimony and accept evidence that is relevant to the issue of
eligibility under the Public Safety Employee Benefits Act (820 ILCS 320/1 et
seq.).
      4.   Issue subpoenas to secure attendance of witnesses and the production
or relevant papers or documents upon the request of the parties or their
representatives.
      5.   Rule upon the objections in the admissibility of evidence.
      6.   Preserve and authenticate the record of the hearing and all exhibits
in evidence introduced at the hearing.
      7.   Issue a determination based on the evidence presented at the
hearing, the determination of which shall be in writing and shall include a
written finding of fact, decision and order.
   (B)   Hearing Officer The Mayor with the consent of the City Council, is
hereby authorized to appoint a person to hold the position of a hearing officer
for each and every individual hearing that shall come before this village. In
making said selection, the Mayor shall consider all pertinent information
including, at a minimum:
      1.   The candidate’s ability to comply with the job description as set
forth herein.
      2.   Background and performance data made available to the Mayor on file
with the City or otherwise obtained by the City.
      3.   The candidate must be an attorney licensed to practice in the State
of Illinois for at least three (3) years and have a knowledge of and experience
in employment and labor law, general civil procedure, the rule of evidence and
administrative practice. (Ord. 18-19, 11-19-2018)
2-22-3: PROCEDURE:
The system of administrative hearing for determination of eligibility for
benefits tinder the Public Safety Employee Benefits Act (820ILCS 320/1 et seq.)
shall be initiated by the serving of a written notice on the City Clerk by any
public safety employee stating in foil detail the nature of the employee’s
claim giving foil particulars thereof, i.e. date, time, place, nature of injury
and any other factual circumstances surrounding said incident giving rise to
said claim; requesting the benefits enumerated under the Public Safety Employee
Benefits Act (820 ILCS 320/1 et seq.) and requesting the setting of a hearing
for the eligibility to receive said benefits. (Ord. 18-19, 11-19-2018)
2-22-4: ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING:
An administrative hearing shall be held to adjudicate and determine whether the
subject public safety employee is eligible for benefits under the Public Safety
Employee Benefits Act (820 ILCS 320/1 et seq.). If the employee is found
eligible, the employee benefits shall be consistent with the Act.
   (A)   Time and Date: Hearings shall be held on the date, time and place and
established by the City with appropriate notice served up the public safety
employee.
   (B)   Record: All hearings shall be attended by a certified court reporter
and a transcript of all proceedings shall be made by said certified court
reporter.
   (C)   Procedures: The City and foe petitioning public safety employee shall
be entitled to representation by counsel at said hearing and may present
witnesses, may present testimony and documents, may cross-examine opposing
witnesses and may request foe issuance of subpoenas to compel the appearance of
relevant witnesses or foe production of relevant documents.
   (D)   Evidence: The rules of evidence as set forth in the Illinois Code of
Evidence shall apply.
   (E)   Final Determination: The determination by foe hearing officer of
whether foe petitioning public safety employee is eligible for the benefits
under the Public Safety Employee Benefits Act (820 ILCS 320/1 et seq.) shall
constitute a final determination for foe purpose of judicial review under foe
common law writ of certiorari. (Ord. 18-19, 11-19-2018)
CHAPTER 23
DESIGN REVIEW BOARD
SECTION:
2-23-1: Creation Of Board
2-23-2: Purpose
2-23-3: Membership
2-23-4: Terms, Vacancies, Officers
2-23-5: Duties And Powers Of The Design Review Board
2-23-6: Procedure For Review
2-23-7: Funding And Staffing
2-23-1: CREATION OF BOARD:
There is hereby established a design review board (the "board") for the City of
East Moline. The board shall be responsible for reviewing and approving the
design of certain public and private developments, renovations, construction
projects, and grant proposals related to certain programming of the city. (Ord.
25-12, 8-18-2025)
2-23-2: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the board is to:
   A.   Review and provide recommendations on the aesthetic and architectural
aspects of proposed projects.
   B.   Ensure that the design of new buildings, renovations, and alterations
aligns with the city's comprehensive plan, zoning regulations, and design
guidelines.
   C.   Promote high-quality design that enhances the character and identity of
the city.
   D.   Preserve the city's heritage through thoughtful and respectful design
decisions. (Ord. 25-12, 8-18-2025)
2-23-3: MEMBERSHIP:
The design review board shall consist of five (5) members, appointed by the
mayor and confirmed by the city council. The members shall have expertise in
fields related to architecture, development, historic preservation, urban
design, planning, landscape architecture, or other relevant disciplines. City
staff members, such as the city administrator, community development director,
chief building official, or director of engineering may serve on the board. The
mayor shall serve as an ex-officio member of the board. (Ord. 25-12, 8-18-2025)
2-23-4: TERMS, VACANCIES, OFFICERS:
Each member shall serve a term of two (2) year, with staggered terms to ensure
continuity of the board's work. Members may be reappointed. Vacancies on the
board shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointments. The
board shall elect a chairperson and a vice chairperson from among its members.
The chairperson shall preside over meetings, and the vice chairperson shall act
in the absence of the chairperson. (Ord. 25-12, 8-18-2025)
2-23-5: DUTIES AND POWERS OF THE DESIGN REVIEW BOARD:
   A.   Designation Of Focus Areas: The board shall designate areas of the
community where it shall focus its work, such as key development areas like the
Bend, the Rustbelt (12th Avenue), downtown (15th Avenue), the Avenue of the
Cities, or other areas deemed by the board as needing design oversight.
   B.   Review Of Projects: The design review board shall review the design of
all applicable projects within designated areas, including:
      1.   New construction.
      2.   Major renovations or alterations.
      3.   Demolition of historic or architecturally significant structures.
      4.   Any other projects that may require design review under the city's
zoning code.
   C.   Standards For Review: The board shall base its review on established
design guidelines and the following considerations:
      1.   Compatibility with surrounding development.
      2.   Quality of architectural design and materials.
      3.   Preservation of historical and cultural resources.
      4.   Compliance with zoning regulations and comprehensive planning
objectives.
      5.   Environmental sustainability and energy efficiency.
      6.   Accessibility and public safety.
   D.   Recommendations: The board shall provide written recommendations to the
city council or community development department regarding the design of the
project. The board may recommend approval, approval with modifications, or
denial of a proposed design.
   E.   Review Of Business Improvement Grant (BIG) Applications: The design
review board shall also be responsible for reviewing grant proposals submitted
as part of applications for funding under the city's Business Improvement Grant
(BIG) program. In this capacity, the board shall evaluate:
      1.   The alignment of proposed projects with the city's grant guidelines.
      2.   The potential of projects to enhance the aesthetics and character of
the community.
      3.   The quality and sustainability of project design.
      4.   The compatibility of the project with the goals of the city.
      After reviewing the proposals, the design review board shall provide
recommendations to the city council on whether projects should receive grant
funding, and the extent of any modifications that should be made to improve the
project's design.
      6.   Authority: The design review board's decisions and recommendations
are advisory. The final decision on whether to approve or deny a project rests
with the city council or the designated zoning authority, as provided by the
city's zoning ordinances. (Ord. 25-12, 8-18-2025)
2-23-6: PROCEDURE FOR REVIEW:
   A.   Submission Of Plans: Applicants shall submit design plans, drawings,
and supporting documents to the building inspections division of the community
development department for review by the design review board. The division
shall ensure that the submission meets the necessary criteria before being
forwarded to the board.
   B.   Public Meetings: The design review board shall hold public meetings to
discuss and review the proposed designs. Notices of meetings shall be posted in
accordance with public notice requirements. The public shall have an
opportunity to provide comments at these meetings.
   C.   Timeline For Review: The design review board shall complete its review
within thirty (30) days after the submission of plans. If additional time is
needed, the board may extend the review period with the consent of the
applicant.
   D.   Appeals: If an applicant disagrees with the board's recommendations,
they may appeal to the city council or other designated body according to the
city's established appeals procedures. (Ord. 25-12, 8-18-2025)
2-23-7: FUNDING AND STAFFING:
   A.   Staff Support: The city's community development department shall
provide staff support to the design review board, including scheduling
meetings, preparing agendas, and providing any technical assistance required by
the board.
   B.   Budget: The city council shall appropriate funding to cover the
operational costs of the design review board, including staff, materials, and
any other necessary expenses. (Ord. 25-12, 8-18-2025)
TITLE 3
BUSINESS REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
LICENSES AND PERMITS
SECTION:
3-1-1: Applications
3-1-2: Subject To License
3-1-3: License Year
3-1-4: Forms
3-1-5: Signatures
3-1-6: Investigation
3-1-7: Fees
3-1-8: Termination Of Licenses
3-1-9: Building And Premises
3-1-10: Change Of Location
3-1-11: Nuisances
3-1-12: Revocation
3-1-13: Posting License
3-1-14: Vehicle Tag
3-1-15: Penalty For Late Payment
3-1-1: APPLICATIONS:
Applications for all licenses and permits required by this code shall be made,
in writing, to the city clerk in the absence of provision to the contrary. Each
application shall state the name of the applicant, the permit or license
desired, the location to be used, if any, the time covered and the fee to be
paid; and each application shall contain such additional information as may be
needed for the proper guidance of the city officials in the issuing of the
permit or license applied for. (1962 Code § 21.001)
3-1-2: SUBJECT TO LICENSE:
Whenever in this code a license is required for the maintenance, operation or
conduct of any business or establishment, or for doing business or engaging in
any activity or occupation, any person shall be subject to the requirement if
by himself or through an agent, employee or partner, he holds himself forth as
being engaged in the business or occupation; or solicits patronage therefor,
actively or passively; or performs or attempts to perform any part of such
business or occupation in the city. (1962 Code § 21.002)
3-1-3: LICENSE YEAR:
The license year for the city shall begin on May 1 and end on April 30 of each
year, except as otherwise set forth. (1962 Code § 21.003; amd. 1974 Code)
3-1-4: FORMS:
Forms for all licenses and permits, and applications therefor, shall be
prepared and kept on file by the city clerk. (1962 Code § 21.004)
3-1-5: SIGNATURES:
Each license or permit issued shall bear the signatures of the mayor and the
city clerk in the absence of any provision to the contrary. (1962 Code §
21.005)
3-1-6: INVESTIGATION:
Upon the receipt of an application for a license or permit, where provisions of
this code necessitate an inspection or investigation before the issuance of
such permit or license, the city clerk shall refer such application to the
proper officer for making such investigation within forty eight (48) hours of
the time of such receipt. The officer charged with the duty of making the
investigation or inspection shall make a report thereon, favorable or
otherwise, within ten (10) days after receiving the applications or a copy
thereof. The health inspector shall make or cause to be made an inspection in
regard to such license in the connection of the care and handling of food and
the preventing of nuisances and the spread of disease, for the protection of
health; the building inspector shall make or cause to be made any such
inspections relative to the construction of buildings or other structures. All
other investigations except where otherwise provided, shall be made by the
chief of police or by some other officer designated by the mayor and council.
(1962 Code § 21.006)
3-1-7: FEES:
In the absence of provision to the contrary, all fees and charges for licenses
or permits shall be paid in advance at the time application therefor is made to
the city clerk. Except as otherwise provided, all license fees shall become a
part of the corporate fund.
There will be a ten dollar ($10.00) fee for each duplicate copy of the license
requested.
There will be a fifty dollar ($50.00) fee for each license that must be
reprocessed due to incorrect business information submitted to the city on the
initial application. (Ord. 15-03, 8-17-2015)
3-1-8: TERMINATION OF LICENSES:
All annual licenses shall terminate on December 31, where no provision to the
contrary is made.
The City Clerk shall mail to all licensees of the City a statement of the time
of expiration of the license held by the licensees, if an annual, three (3)
weeks prior to the date of such expiration. Provided, that a failure to send
out such notice, or the failure of the licensee to receive it shall not excuse
the licensee from a failure to obtain a new license, or a renewal thereof, nor
shall it be a defense in an action for operation without a license. (1962 Code
§ 21.008; amd. Ord. 20-13, 7-20-2020)
3-1-9: BUILDING AND PREMISES:
No license shall be issued for the conduct of any business, and no permit shall
be issued for any thing, or act, if the premises and building to be used for
the purpose do not fully comply with the requirements of this code. No such
license or permit shall be issued for the conduct of any business or
performance of any act which would involve a violation of the zoning title
(title 10 of this code). (1962 Code § 21.009)
3-1-10: CHANGE OF LOCATION:
The location of any licensed business or occupation, or of any permitted act,
may be changed, provided ten (10) days' notice thereof is given to the city
clerk, in the absence of any provision to the contrary; provided, that the
building and zoning requirements of this code are complied with. (1962 Code §
21.010)
3-1-11: NUISANCES:
No business, licensed or not, shall be so used for or in connection with the
operation of another licensed business or occupation unless provided for or
required by ordinance when said business is detrimental and a nuisance to the
general public. It shall be the duty of the licensee, or the person in charge
of the premises to be inspected, to admit thereto for the purpose of making the
inspection any officer or employee of the city who is authorized or directed to
make such inspection at any reasonable time that admission is requested.
Whenever an analysis of any commodity or material is reasonably necessary to
secure conformance with any code provision or to detect violations thereof, it
shall be the duty of the licensee of the municipality whose business is
governed by such provision to give to any authorized officer or employee of the
city requesting the same sufficient samples of such material or commodity for
such analysis upon request.
In addition to any other penalty which may be provided, the mayor may revoke
the license of any licensed proprietor of any licensed business in the city who
refuses to permit any such officer or employee who is authorized to make such
inspection or take such samples to make the inspection, or take an adequate
sample of the said commodity, or who interferes with such officer or employee
while in the performance of his duty in making such inspection. Provided, that
no license shall be revoked for such cause unless written demand is made upon
the licensee or person in charge of the premises, in the name of the city,
stating that such inspection or sample is desired at the time it is sought to
make the inspection or obtain the sample. (1962 Code § 21.011)
3-1-12: REVOCATION:
Any license or permit for a limited time may be revoked by the city council at
any time during the life of such license or permit for any violation by the
licensee or permittee of the code provisions relating to the license or permit,
the subject matter of the license or permit, or to the premises occupied; such
revocation may be in addition to any fine imposed. (1962 Code § 21.012)
3-1-13: POSTING LICENSE:
It shall be the duty of any person conducting a licensed business in the city
to keep his license posted in a prominent place on the premises used for such
business at all times. (1962 Code § 21.013)
3-1-14: VEHICLE TAG:
Whenever the number of vehicles used in the basis of a license fee, the city
clerk shall furnish each licensee with a license for each vehicle covered by
the license fee, and such license shall be posted in a conspicuous place on
each such vehicle while it is in use. (1962 Code § 21.014; amd. 1974 Code)
3-1-15: PENALTY FOR LATE PAYMENT:
In the event that any payment for any type of license or permit to be issued by
the city of East Moline is made after the date for payment, the following
penalties shall be added to the amount of the license or permit fee:
   (A)   Any payment in excess of fifteen (15) days past the due date shall
bear a penalty of twelve percent (12%).
   (B)   Any payment in excess of forty five (45) days past the due date shall
bear a penalty of twenty five percent (25%). (Ord. 75-59, 12-15-1975)
CHAPTER 2
AMBULANCES
SECTION:
3-2-1: License Required
3-2-2: Definition
3-2-3: Requirements Of Applicant
3-2-4: Fee
3-2-5: Vehicles
3-2-6: Register
3-2-7: Drivers
3-2-8: Insurance
3-2-9: Traffic Rules
3-2-10: Unlawful Use
3-2-11: Destinations
3-2-12: Driver's License Required
3-2-13: Driver's License Fee
3-2-14: Qualifications
3-2-15: Penalty
3-2-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful to engage in the business of operating an ambulance in the
City without having first secured a license therefor. Application for such
licenses shall be made in writing to the Clerk, and shall state thereon the
name of the applicant, the intended place of business and the number of
ambulances to be operated. If the applicant is a corporation, the names and
addresses of the president and secretary thereof shall be given. (Ord. 73-39,
10-15-1973)
3-2-2: DEFINITION:
The term "ambulance" as used in this Chapter shall mean and include an
especially equipped motor vehicle to be used as an emergency unit for carrying
the sick and injured. (Ord. 73-39, 10-15-1973)
3-2-3: REQUIREMENTS OF APPLICANT:
No such license shall be issued to or held by any person or corporation who has
less than two (2) ambulances, and no more than six (6) firms shall be so
licensed. (Ord. 73-39, 10-15-1973)
3-2-4: FEE:
The annual fee for such license shall be ten dollars ($10.00) per ambulance.
Whenever the number of ambulances so operated shall be increased during the
license year, the licensee shall notify the Clerk of such change and shall pay
the additional fee.
Such fee shall be in lieu of any other vehicle fee required by ordinance and
the Clerk shall issue suitable tags or stickers for the number of ambulances
covered by each license. Such tag or sticker shall be displayed in a prominent
place on each ambulance while it is in use, and may be transferred to any
ambulance put into service to replace one withdrawn from service.
The licensee shall notify the Clerk of the motor number and State license
number of each ambulance operated and of the corresponding Municipal tag or
sticker number. (Ord. 73-39, 10-15-1973)
3-2-5: VEHICLES:
No ambulance shall be operated unless it bears a State license duly issued; and
no such ambulance shall be operated unless it is equipped with a siren
producing an audible signal of an intensity of one hundred (100) decibels at a
distance of fifty feet (50') from said siren, and with a lamp emitting an
oscillating, rotating or flashing red beam directed in part toward the front of
the vehicle and containing a power rating of at least one hundred (100) amps,
with the aforesaid siren and lamp in full operation at all times during such
trip or journey. It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police to inspect every
ambulance so often as may be necessary to see to the enforcement of the
provisions of this Section. Each ambulance, while operated, shall have on each
side in letters readable from a distance of twenty feet (20') the name of the
licensee operating it. If more than one ambulance is operated by the licensee,
each ambulance shall be designated by a different number, and such number shall
also appear on each side of the ambulance. (Ord. 73-39, 10-15-1973)
3-2-6: REGISTER:
It shall be the duty of the City Clerk to keep a register of the names of
persons to whom such license is granted or transferred, the date when issued or
transferred, the number of the license and the description of the vehicle or
vehicles licensed. (Ord. 73-39, 10-15-1973)
3-2-7: DRIVERS:
No person shall drive an ambulance or be hired or permitted to do so unless he
has passed the qualifications established by statute. (Ord. 73-39, 10-15-1973)
3-2-8: INSURANCE:
No ambulance shall be operated unless it is covered by a bond or public
liability policy as required by statute. (Ord. 73-39, 10-15-1973)
3-2-9: TRAFFIC RULES:
It shall be the duty of every driver of an ambulance to obey all traffic rules
established by statute or ordinance with the following exceptions: when the
ambulance is being used in response to an emergency situation, and the same is
operated at a speed in excess of forty (40) miles per hour and directed to
disregard traffic laws for the purpose of a specific trip, the ambulance shall
be operated in complete conformance with every other motor vehicle law and
regulation by statute or ordinance in which ambulances are operated, relating
to the operation of motor vehicles, as such provision applies to motor vehicles
in general, except laws and regulations pertaining to compliance with official
traffic-control devices or to vehicular operation upon the right half of the
roadway. (Ord. 73-39, 10-15-1973)
3-2-10: UNLAWFUL USE:
It shall be unlawful to knowingly permit any ambulance to be used in the
perpetuation of a crime or misdemeanor. (Ord. 73-39, 10-15-1973)
3-2-11: DESTINATIONS:
Ambulance operators shall deliver the sick or injured to any hospital in the
County of Rock Island, State of Illinois. (Ord. 73-39, 10-15-1973)
3-2-12: DRIVER'S LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall drive an ambulance unless he shall have secured a license
therefor as herein provided. (Ord. 73-39, 10-15-1973)
3-2-13: DRIVER'S LICENSE FEE:
The fee for an ambulance driver's license shall be five dollars ($5.00) per
year. (Ord. 73-39, 10-15-1973)
3-2-14: QUALIFICATIONS:
No such license shall be issued to any person who is not competent to operate a
motor vehicle or who is not familiar with the traffic laws and ordinances. The
Chief of Police shall examine each applicant for an ambulance driver's license
to determine the competency of the applicant, and no such license shall be
issued excepting on certificate of the Chief that the applicant has
demonstrated his ability to operate a motor vehicle as required herein. (Ord.
73-39, 10-15-1973)
3-2-15: PENALTY:
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this Chapter shall
be fined not less than one dollar ($1.00) nor more than one hundred dollars
($100.00) for each offense; and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on
each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 73-39, 10-
15-1973)
CHAPTER 3
PLACES FOR AMUSEMENT
SECTION:
3-3-1: Definitions
3-3-2: License Required
3-3-3: Application
3-3-4: Inspection
3-3-5: License Fees
3-3-6: Display Of License
3-3-7: Prohibitions And Restrictions
3-3-8: Revocation Of License
3-3-9: Seizure And Destruction Of Machine
3-3-10: Penalty
3-3-11: Separability Of Provisions
3-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context otherwise requires, the following terms as used in this
Chapter shall be construed according to the definitions given below:
MECHANICAL AMUSEMENT DEVICE: Any machine, which, upon the insertion of a coin,
slug, token, plat or disc or by any other means of consideration, may be
operated by the public generally for use as a game, entertainment or amusement,
whether or not registering a score. It shall include such devices as foosball
machines, electronic game machines, marble machines, pinball machines, skill
ball, mechanical grab machines and all games, operations or transactions
similar thereto under whatever name they may be indicated.
PERSON, FIRM, CORPORATION, OR ASSOCIATION: Any person, firm, corporation or
association which owns any such machine; the person, firm, corporation or
association in whose place of business any such machine is placed for use by
the public; and the person, firm, corporation or association having control
over such machine; provided, however, that the payment of such fee by any
person, firm, corporation or association enumerated herein shall be deemed a
compliance with this Section of the Ordinance.
PLACES FOR AMUSEMENT: Any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised and
held out to the public to be a place primarily for the offering of games of
amusement, or amusement devices, including the following: billiard, pool or
bagatelle or pigeon hole table; any mechanical amusement device. (Ord. 92-27,
7-6-1992)
3-3-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
Any person, firm, corporation or association operating a place of amusement as
herein defined by Section
3-3-1 of this Chapter, shall be required to obtain a license from the City of
East Moline, upon payment of a license fee. Application for such license shall
be made to the City Clerk upon a form to be supplied by the City Clerk for that
purpose by January 1 of each year. The license year shall be from January 1 to
December 31.
Any person, firm, corporation or association, not constituting a place for
amusement as defined herein, and operating a non-coin operated mechanical
amusement device, shall be required to obtain a license from the City of East
Moline, upon payment of a license fee. Application for such license shall be
made to the City Clerk for the purpose by January 1 of each year. The license
year shall be from January 1 to December 31. (Ord. 92-27, 7-6-1992; amd. Ord.
20-13, 7-20-2020)
3-3-3: APPLICATION:
The application for such license shall contain the following information:
   (A)   Name and address of applicant, age, date and place of birth;
   (B)   Prior convictions of applicant, if any;
   (C)   Location where place of amusement is to be operated; and
   (D)   Number and description of tables, machines or devices for which the
licensee is requesting authorization for the operation of, including mechanical
features, name of manufacturer and serial number.
No license shall be issued to any individual applicant unless he shall be over
twenty one (21) years of age and a citizen of the United States. (Ord. 76-15,
4-19-1976)
3-3-4: INSPECTION:
Application for license shall be made out in duplicate, one copy being referred
to the Chief of Police and the other copy to the City Electrical Inspector.
   (A)   The Chief of Police shall investigate the location wherein it is
proposed to operate such place of amusement, ascertain if the applicant is a
person of good moral character, and either approve or disapprove the
application.
   (B)   The Electrical Inspector shall inspect all wiring required for
amusement, determine if the same complies with the Electrical Code of the City
of East Moline, and shall either approve or disapprove the application.
   (C)   No license shall be issued to any applicant unless approved by the
Chief of Police and the Electrical Inspector. (Ord. 76-15, 4-19-1976)
3-3-5: LICENSE FEES:
Every applicant, before being granted a license shall pay an annual license fee
in the amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the privilege of operating
or maintaining for operation the place of amusement. (Ord. 81-73, 12-21-1981)
3-3-6: DISPLAY OF LICENSE:
   (A)   The license herein provided for shall be posted permanently and
conspicuously at the location of the premises.
   (B)   If the licensee shall move his place of business to another location
within the City of East Moline, the license may be transferred to such new
location upon application to the City Clerk, giving the street and number of
the new location. The new location shall be approved by the Chief of Police and
City Electrical Inspector in the same manner as provided in Section
3-3-4 of this Chapter. (Ord. 76-15, 4-19-1976)
3-3-7: PROHIBITIONS AND RESTRICTIONS:
   (A)   No person, firm, corporation or association holding a license under
this Ordinance shall permit persons under sixteen (16) years of age to
frequent, loiter, go or remain in any place of amusement licensed hereunder at
any time, unless accompanied by a parent or legal guardian.
      No person under the age of sixteen (16) years of age shall frequent,
loiter, go or remain in any place of amusement at any time, unless accompanied
by a parent or legal guardian. (Ord. 81-39, 5-4-1981)
   (B)   No person, firm, corporation or association holding a license under
this Ordinance shall permit any patron to bring onto the licensed premises or
possess any firearms or weapons on the premises, any alcohol or any beverage
containing alcohol, or any cannabis or controlled substance, as defined in the
Cannabis Control Act 1 . (Ord. 93-3, 2-1-1993)
   (C)   No person, firm, corporation or association holding a license under
this Ordinance shall permit patrons of such establishment to loiter outside of
the establishment so as to: 1) create a danger of a breach of the peace, 2)
create a disturbance or annoyance to the comfort and repose of any person, 3)
obstruct the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles, or 4) obstruct, molest or
interfere with any person lawfully in any public place. It shall be the burden
of the licensee to advise his patrons that any person loitering will not be
readmitted to such establishment.
   (D)   No person, firm, corporation or association shall permit any patrons
of such licensed establishment to remain on the premises if said patron has
caused a disturbance or engaged in disorderly conduct.
   (E)   It shall be unlawful to keep open for business any place for amusement
licensed hereunder between: 1) the hours of ten thirty o'clock (10:30) P.M.,
Sunday through Thursday, and nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. the following day; 2) the
hours of eleven thirty o'clock (11:30) P.M., Friday and Saturday and nine
o'clock (9:00) A.M., Saturday and twelve o'clock (12:00) noon on Sunday. (Ord.
76-15, 4-19-1976)
 
Notes
1 1. 720 ILCS 550/1 et seq.
3-3-8: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
Every license issued under this Ordinance is subject to the right, which is
hereby expressly reserved, to revoke the same should the licensee, directly or
indirectly, operate its place for amusement contrary to the provisions of this
Ordinance, the ordinances of the City of East Moline, or the law of the State
of Illinois. Said license may be revoked by the Mayor for written notice to the
licensee which notice shall specify the ordinance or law violations with which
the licensee is charged, if after a hearing the licensee is found to be guilty
of such violations. Ten (10) days' notice of the hearing shall be given the
licensee. At such hearing the licensee and his attorney may present and submit
evidence of witnesses in his defense. (Ord. 76-15, 4-19-1976)
3-3-9: SEIZURE AND DESTRUCTION OF MACHINE:
If the Chief of Police shall have reason to believe any mechanical amusement
device is a gambling device, per se, such machine may be seized by the police
and impounded and if upon trial of the exhibitor for allowing it to be used as
a gambling device said exhibitor be found guilty, such machine shall be
destroyed by the police. (Ord. 76-15, 4-19-1976)
3-3-10: PENALTY:
Any person, firm, corporation or association violating any of the provisions of
this Ordinance, in addition to the revocation of his or its license, shall be
liable to a fine or penalty of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more
than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. (Ord. 81-39, 5-4-1981)
3-3-11: SEPARABILITY OF PROVISIONS:
It is the intention of the City Council that each separate provision of this
Ordinance shall be deemed independent of all other provisions herein, and it is
further the intention of the City Council that if any provision of this
Ordinance be declared invalid, all other provisions thereof shall remain valid
and enforceable. (Ord. 76-15, 4-19-1976)
CHAPTER 4
COIN OPERATED DEVICES
SECTION:
3-4-1: Amusement Devices
3-4-2: Music Devices
3-4-3: Video Gaming Terminals
3-4-1: AMUSEMENT DEVICES:
   (A)   License Required: No person shall place or install, or maintain or
operate in any building or place within the city any mechanical or electrical
amusement devices, including amusement devices for use by the public and for
which a fee is charged, without first having obtained a license for each place
or location where such mechanical or electrical amusement device shall be
installed, maintained or operated. (Ord. 78-27, 6-19-1978)
   (B)   Application: Any person desiring the license required in and by this
section shall make application for that purpose to the city clerk, which
application shall set forth the full name of the applicant and his address, the
location and character of the building or place where such mechanical coin
controlled amusement devices are to be located, maintained and operated, the
number of such devices to be located, maintained and operated in such building
or place, and the charge to be made to the customer for operating each of such
devices. (1962 Code § 22.302)
   (C)   License Fee: The annual license fee for the privilege of placing,
installing, or maintaining mechanical or electrical amusement devices in any
building or place within the city for use by the public and for which a fee is
charged shall be forty dollars ($40.00), and shall be paid by the operator of
the building or public place.
   (D)   License Year: The license year for the city shall begin on January 1
and end on December 31 of each year, except as otherwise set forth.
   (E)   Minors: It shall be unlawful to permit any person under sixteen (16)
years of age to play or operate any coin operated pinball machine.
(1962 Code § 22.302; amd. Ord. 78-27, 6-19-1978; Ord. 81-72, 12-21-1981; Ord.
92-26, 7-6-1992; Ord. 20-13, 7-20-2020)
3-4-2: MUSIC DEVICES:
   (A)   Definition: The term "coin operated music device" shall mean any
phonograph, piano player, music box, "jukebox" or other instrument or device
capable of producing or reproducing any vocal or instrumental sounds, other
than a motion picture sound machine, which is governed or controlled by the
deposit of a coin or token. (1962 Code § 22.401)
   (B)   License Required: No person shall keep, or permit to be kept, for gain
or profit from operation within the city, any coin operated musical device
without first having obtained a license as herein provided. (1962 Code §
22.402)
   (C)   Application: Application for said license shall be made to the city
clerk, in conformity with chapter 1 of this title, except as otherwise herein
provided. In addition, the applicant shall set forth the description of the
coin operated musical device or devices intended to be kept for use on his
premises. (1962 Code § 22.403)
   (D)   Issuance: No such license shall be issued to any person unless such
person is the owner or proprietor of the premises in which such coin operated
musical device is to be installed. (1962 Code § 22.404)
   (E)   License Fee; Terms Of License: The annual license fee for the
privilege of keeping, or permitting to be kept, for gain or profit from
operation, any "coin operated music device" within the city, shall be forty
dollars ($40.00), and shall be paid by the applicant. (Ord. 81-72, 12-21-1981)
   (F)   Transfer Of License: No license issued to any person shall be
transferable. (1962 Code § 22.406)
   (G)   Regulations: No license issued hereunder shall permit the operation of
any coin operated musical instrument at any place or in any manner which will
disturb the peace and quiet of persons outside the licensed premises. (1962
Code § 22.407; amd. 1974 Code)
3-4-3: VIDEO GAMING TERMINALS:
   (A)   License Required: No person shall place or install, or maintain or
operate in any building or place within the city any coin operated video gaming
terminal, as authorized by the Illinois state legislature by adoption of the
video gaming act, 230 Illinois Compiled Statutes 40/1 through 85, for use by
the public and for which a fee is charged, without first having obtained a
license for each place or location where such video gaming terminal shall be
installed, maintained or operated.
   (B)   Application: Any person desiring the license required in and by this
section shall make application for that purpose to the city clerk, which
application shall set forth the full name and address of the applicant, the
location and character of the building or place where such coin operated video
gaming terminals are to be located, maintained and operated, the number of such
video gaming terminals to be located, maintained and operated in such building
or place, and the charge to be made to the customer for operating each of such
video gaming terminals.
   (C)   License Fee: The annual license fee for the privilege of placing,
installing or maintaining each coin operated video gaming terminal, as
authorized and licensed by the Illinois gaming board, in any building or place
within the city for use by the public and for which an operational fee is
charged for such use shall be one-hundred twenty five dollars ($125.00) per
terminal for the 2024 calendar year and two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per
terminal annually thereafter, and shall be paid to the city by the operator of
the building or public place. The annual license fee for each coin operated
video gaming terminal shall be prorated for any proportional period of the
license year term, as said term is set forth in subsection (D) of this section.
   (D)   License Year: Due to the global health emergency in 2020 and the
restrictions on restaurants and taverns, the majority of video gaming license
holders have been significantly affected by the Governor’s Executive Order.
Consequently, existing licenses set to expire April 30, 2020 are extended to
June 30, 2020. For 2020 video gaming license renewals only, video gaming
licenses are reduced to a half-year (six month) license with a revised fee of
50% of the annual fee. The six-month license fee will be due by July 31, 2020.
Renewals of video gaining licenses for 2020 will be valid from July 1 to
December 31. New video gaming licenses will be paid on a pro-rata basis
according to the time left in the remainder of the calendar year. This six-
month license will expire on December 31, 2020 at which time the regular annual
fee will be due for the license valid for year 2021. License renewals in 2021
and thereafter will follow the calendar year. License holders that have already
paid their 12-month video gaming license renewal fee will be provided a credit
for the amount paid in excess of the six-month fees for 2020 which shall be
applied to the 2021 renewal.
   The license year for the City shall begin on January 1 and end on December
31 of each year, except as otherwise set forth.
   (E)   Minor: It shall be unlawful to permit any person less than twenty one
(21) years of age to play or operate any coin operated video gaming terminal.
   (F)   1.   Video Gaming Terminals located in gas stations within the City
shall be permitted.
      2.   The number of licenses issued shall be limited to twenty (30) store
fronts not including gas stations. (Ord. 13-01, 1-22-2013; amd. Ord. 18-07, 9-
4-2018; Ord. 18-12, 10-1-2018; Ord. 20-13, 7-20-2020; Ord. 23-19, 12-4-2023)
CHAPTER 5
COMMERCIAL AND RESIDENTIAL SCAVENGERS
SECTION:
3-5-1: Definition
3-5-2: License And Bond
3-5-3: Application
3-5-4: Vehicles
3-5-5: Limitation Of Licenses To Be Issued
3-5-6: Disposal
3-5-1: DEFINITION:
The term "commercial and residential scavenger" shall mean any person or firm
engaged in the collection, removal, transportation and disposal of the contents
of any vault, tank or container, whether above or below grade, which consists
of residential garbage or rubbish or commercial garbage or rubbish. (Ord. 69-
25, 5-19-1969)
3-5-2: LICENSE AND BOND:
It shall be unlawful to perform the services of a commercial or residential
scavenger unless duly bonded and licensed. Each commercial and residential
scavenger shall annually give a bond for the sum of one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) to be approved by the Council conditioned to the faithful
performance of services.
License fees and bonds shall be due on May 1 of each year.
The license fee shall be twenty five dollars ($25.00) per year for the first
vehicle and ten dollars ($10.00) per year for each vehicle thereafter. (Ord.
69-25, 5-19-1969)
3-5-3: APPLICATION:
Each application for a license shall be obtained from the City Clerk for each
vehicle utilized, subject to the approval of the applicant therefor by the
Director of Maintenance Services, and in accordance with the provisions of this
Code. Prior to a license being issued, the applicant shall supply the City with
a current list of all his customers in the City. (Ord. 69-25, 5-19-1969; amd.
Ord. 88-1, 1-4-1988)
3-5-4: VEHICLES:
Prior to a license being issued, all vehicles must have been inspected and
certified by the Health Inspector of the City.
Any vehicles used by such commercial and residential scavenger in his business
must be constructed so that garbage and refuse will not be spilled from them;
they shall be watertight and equipped with permanent tops for such portions as
are used for the transportation of refuse and excluding the use of a canvas
top.
Any vehicles used by such commercial and residential scavenger in his business
must be maintained in a clean manner so as to prevent offensive odors or be
classed as a nuisance and drivers and assistants must be neat and clean in
appearance.
Any vehicles used by such commercial and residential scavenger in his business
must be marked with the name of the person owning the vehicle, together with
the number of his license in letters and figures not less than six inches (6")
in height and such lettering shall be placed on a conspicuous portion of the
vehicle so that it can be seen at all times while in use and operation. (Ord.
69-25, 5-19-1969)
3-5-5: LIMITATION OF LICENSES TO BE ISSUED:
There shall be no more than ten (10) commercial and residential scavenger
licenses issued by the City for any one year.
Any license which has not been used for a period of thirty (30) days, without a
just and reasonable cause, shall be subject to repeal by the City Council.
(Ord. 71-25, 5-17-1971)
3-5-6: DISPOSAL:
It shall be unlawful for any commercial and residential scavenger to deposit or
to store any refuse in any place within the City limits or within one mile
thereof, excepting with the permission of the City Council.
All commercial and residential scavengers will be required to comply with
applicable provisions of this Code covering their operation. (Ord. 69-25, 5-19-
1969)
CHAPTER 6
INDUSTRIAL SCAVENGERS
SECTION:
3-6-1: Definition
3-6-2: License And Bond
3-6-3: Application
3-6-4: Vehicles
3-6-5: Limitation Of Licenses; Repeal
3-6-6: Disposal
3-6-1: DEFINITION:
The term "industrial scavenger" shall mean any person or firm engaged in the
collection, removal, transportation and disposal of the contents of any vault,
tank or container, whether above or below grade, which consists of industrial
garbage or industrial rubbish. (Ord. 69-26, 5-19-1969)
3-6-2: LICENSE AND BOND:
It shall be unlawful to perform the services of an industrial scavenger unless
duly bonded and licensed. Each industrial scavenger shall annually give a bond
for the sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) to be approved by the City
Council, conditioned to the faithful performance of services. License fees and
bonds shall be due on May 1 of each year.
The license fee shall be twenty five dollars ($25.00) per year for the first
vehicle and ten dollars ($10.00) per year for each vehicle thereafter. (Ord.
69-26, 5-19-1969)
3-6-3: APPLICATION:
Each application for a license shall be obtained from the City Clerk for each
vehicle utilized, subject to the approval of the applicant therefor by the
Director of Maintenance Services, and in accordance with the provisions of this
Code. Prior to a license being issued, the applicant shall supply the City with
a current list of all his customers in the City. (Ord. 69-26, 5-19-1969; amd.
Ord. 88-1, 1-4-1988)
3-6-4: VEHICLES:
Prior to a license being issued, all vehicles must have been inspected and
certified by the Health Inspector of the City.
Any vehicles used by such industrial scavenger in his business must be
constructed so that garbage and refuse will not be spilled from them; they
shall be watertight and equipped with permanent tops for such portions as are
used for the transportation of refuse and excluding the use of a canvas top.
Any vehicles used by such industrial scavenger in his business must be
maintained in a clean manner so as to prevent offensive odors or be classed as
a nuisance and all drivers and assistants must be neat and clean in appearance.
Any vehicles used by such industrial scavenger in his business must be marked
with the name of the person owning the vehicle together with the number of his
license in letters and figures not less than six inches (6") in height, and
such lettering shall be placed on a conspicuous portion of the vehicle so that
it can be seen at all times while in use and operation. (Ord. 69-26, 5-19-1969)
3-6-5: LIMITATION OF LICENSES; REPEAL:
   (A)   There shall be no more than ten (10) industrial scavenger licenses
issued by the City for any one year.
   (B)   Any license which has not been used for a period of thirty (30) days
without just and reasonable cause shall be subject to repeal by the City
Council. (Ord. 71-26, 5-17-1971)
3-6-6: DISPOSAL:
It shall be unlawful for any industrial scavenger to deposit or to store any
refuse in any place within the City limits or within one mile thereof,
excepting with the permission of the City Council.
All industrial scavengers will be required to comply with applicable sections
of this Code covering their operation. (Ord. 69-26, 5-19-1969)
CHAPTER 7
LIQUOR DEALERS
SECTION:
3-7-1: Definitions
3-7-2: Local Liquor Control Commissioner
3-7-3: Licensing Procedure; Application Process
3-7-4: Restrictions On Licenses
3-7-5: Term; Prorating Fee
3-7-6: License Fees
3-7-7: Nature Of Facilities
3-7-8: Disposition Of Fees
3-7-9: Renewal Of License
3-7-10: Closing Hours
3-7-11: Entry Powers
3-7-12: List
3-7-13: Transfer Of License
3-7-14: Change Of Location
3-7-15: Sanitary Conditions
3-7-16: Employees
3-7-17: Peddling
3-7-18: Location Restrictions
3-7-19: Stores Selling School Supplies, Lunches
3-7-20: Sale To Persons Under Twenty One
3-7-21: Sale To Intoxicated Persons, Habitual Drunkards
3-7-22: Gambling
3-7-23: Remedies For Violation
3-7-24: Operation
3-7-25: Conduct Prohibited
3-7-26: Illegal Possession Of Alcohol By Consumption By A Minor
3-7-27: Consumption, Transportation Or Possession Of Alcoholic Liquors On
Public Way Or Parking Lot
3-7-1: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context otherwise requires, the following terms as used in this
chapter shall be construed according to the definitions given below:
ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR: Includes alcohol, spirits, wine and beer, and every liquid or
solid, patented or not, containing alcoholic contents, spirits, wine or beer,
and capable of being consumed as a beverage by a human being.
CLUB: A corporation organized under the laws of this state, and not for
pecuniary profit, solely for the promotion of some common object other than the
sale or consumption of alcoholic liquor, which conforms to the definition of a
club.
HOTEL/MOTEL: Every building or other structure kept, used, maintained,
advertised and held out to the public to be a place where meals are actually
and regularly served and consumed and where sleeping accommodations are offered
for pay to travelers and guests, whether transient, permanent or residential,
in which twenty five (25) or more rooms are used for the sleeping
accommodations of such guests and having one or more public dining rooms where
meals are served to such guests, such sleeping accommodations and dining rooms
being conducted in the same building or buildings, in connection therewith, and
such building or buildings, structure or structures being provided with
adequate and sanitary dining room and kitchen equipment and capacity.
LICENSEE: Any person, firm or corporation or partnership or club holding a
license under the provisions of this chapter.
MINOR: Any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years of age except for
persons eighteen (18) years of age through twenty (20) years of age who are
acting in pursuance of their employment at and with an establishment that is
licensed in accordance with this chapter.
ORIGINAL PACKAGE: Any bottle, flask, jug, can, cask, barrel, keg, hogshead or
other receptacle or container, whatsoever used, corked or capped, sealed and
labeled by the manufacturer of alcoholic liquor, to contain and to convey any
alcoholic liquor.
RESTAURANT: Any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to
the public to be a place where meals are served, and where meals are actually
and regularly served, without sleeping accommodations, such space being
provided with adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment and
capacity and having employed therein a sufficient number and kind of employees
to prepare, cook and serve suitable food for its guests. Provided further that
the sale of alcohol is incidental to the primary purpose of the sale of food.
Any such establishment shall also be subject to all applicable food service
regulations.
Any restaurant providing a bar area shall prohibit minors from being within
three feet (3') of such bar and shall not serve minors directly from the bar.
The bar area should be easily distinguishable from the food service areas.
RETAIL SALE: Sales for use or consumption, and not for resale, in any form.
SALE: Any transfer, exchange or barter, in any manner or by any means
whatsoever for a consideration, and includes and means all sales made by any
person, whether as principal, proprietor, agent, servant or employee, and
includes, but is not limited to, all of the following acts when done for
consideration:
   (A)   The selling of liquor.
   (B)   The "giving away" of liquor.
   (C)   The dispensing of liquor.
   (D)   The providing of mix, ice, water or glasses for the purpose of mixing
drinks containing alcoholic liquor for consumption on the same premises.
   (E)   The pouring of liquor.
   (F)   The providing of "set-ups" containing alcoholic liquor.
   (G)   The maintaining of a private or public club which serves liquor on its
premises to its patrons or members.
   (H)   The maintaining of a restaurant which serves liquor on its premises to
its patrons.
   (I)   The possessing in any business or commercial establishment of
alcoholic liquor to be served to patrons on the premises. (Ord. 90-2, 2-5-1990;
amd. Ord. 97-38, 8-18-1997; Ord. 10-54, 12-20-2010; Ord. 18-35, 12-17-2018;
Ord. 19-02, 2-4-2019)
3-7-2: LOCAL LIQUOR CONTROL COMMISSIONER:
The mayor is hereby authorized to be the local liquor control commissioner and
shall be charged with the administration of the dramshop act, 235 Illinois
Compiled Statutes et seq., and of such ordinances and resolutions relating to
alcoholic liquor as may be enacted. The mayor may appoint a person or persons
to assist in the exercises for the powers and the performance of the duties
provided for such local liquor control commissioner. The liquor control
commissioner shall possess all the powers and duties as provided for in the
Illinois liquor control act. (Ord. 90-2, 2-5-1990)
3-7-3: LICENSING PROCEDURE; APPLICATION PROCESS:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale in the city any
alcoholic liquor without having a license, or in violation of the terms of such
license.
   (B)   No liquor license shall be issued under the provisions of this chapter
unless the applicant has completed the following application process, paid an
initial one time application fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each
license other than a class C license, and paid the annual license fee as
required under section
3-7-6 of this chapter:
      1.   Application Form: All applicants shall complete an application form
which shall include, but not be limited to, the following information:
         (a)   The applicant's name, address, telephone number, date and place
of birth, social security number, driver's license number, employment history
and criminal arrest record. In the case of a copartnership or corporation, the
aforementioned information shall be provided on all officers of the corporation
and all partners.
         (b)   The name, address and telephone number of the location which is
to be licensed.
         (c)   The type of license and any options requested.
         (d)   If the applicant is a corporation, the date and place of
incorporation.
         (e)   The length of time the business or corporation has been engaged
in the sale of alcoholic liquor.
         (f)   The name and address of the landlord if the proposed location is
not owned by the applicant.
         (g)   A statement that the applicant has no financial connections with
any manufacturer, bottler, jobber or wholesaler of alcoholic liquor.
         (h)   A statement that the proposed location is not located within one
hundred feet (100') of any church, school, hospital, home for the aged or
indigent persons, or for veterans, their wives or children, or any military or
naval base.
         (i)   A statement as to whether applicant has made similar application
for a similar license or premises other than described in this application, and
the disposition of such application.
         (j)   A statement as to whether a previous license issued by any state
or subdivision thereof, or by the Federal government has been revoked and the
reasons thereof.
      2.   Affidavit; Signed: All applicants shall sign an affidavit stating
that the statements made in the application form are true and that any untruths
or omissions shall be grounds for revocation of a license. The affidavit shall
further state that the applicant agrees to observe all laws of the United
States, the State of Illinois and the City of East Moline in the conduct of
their business.
      3.   Review And Investigation: All applicants for licensing hereunder
shall be reviewed by the Local Liquor Commissioner. The Local Liquor
Commissioner or designee shall investigate all information contained in the
application and if upon said investigation the Local Liquor Commissioner is
satisfied that the information contained therein is true and that the applicant
has complied with all the requirements of the State of Illinois and the City of
East Moline, he/she shall approve the application. Upon receipt by the City
Clerk of all required license fees, the Local Liquor Commissioner shall then
issue a license in accordance with the provisions herein.
      4.   Changes In Managers Or Agents: If during any licensing period, the
previously designated manager or agent is replaced, the licensee shall notify
the Local Liquor Commissioner no later than ten (10) days following the
appointment of a new manager or agent and said manager or agent shall provide
to the Local Liquor Commissioner the information required under subsection (B)1
of this Section for the purpose of investigating their eligibility to hold such
position. (Ord. 90-2, 2-5-1990)
      5.   Proof Of Dram Shop Insurance: All applicants shall provide a
certificate of dram shop liability insurance with the following limits:
 
Bodily injury, one person     $ 30,000.00
Bodily injury, one occurrence 300,000.00
Injury to means of support    100,000.00
Property damage               100,000.00
 
prior to issuance/renewal of any license, with said certificate to cover the
period of the license issued. Any licensee failing to maintain dram shop
liability insurance on a current basis, with proof thereof filed with the City
Clerk, shall be subject to prosecution for a violation of this Ordinance, with
a fine of seventy five dollars ($75.00) for each day the violation continues.
(Ord. 96-25, 11-4-1996)
      6.   Private Clubs; Supplemental Information: All applicants for
licensing under the provisions of this Chapter herein defined as a private club
shall also submit the following application materials:
         (a)   A list of all club officers and their addresses for the
preceding three (3) years. Whenever such officers shall change, a revised list
shall be forwarded to the Local Liquor Commissioner within ten (10) days.
         (b)   A copy of the articles of incorporation and bylaws if the
applicant is a corporation, or articles of association, or bylaws, if the
applicant is an association.
      7.   Right Of Entry And Inspection: The right of entry and inspection of
any licensed premises by any officer or agent of any department of the City of
East Moline shall be a condition upon which every license hereunder shall be
issued and the acceptance of any license hereunder shall conclusively be deemed
to be the consent of the applicant and licensee to such entry and inspection.
(Ord. 90-2, 2-5-1990)
3-7-4: RESTRICTIONS ON LICENSES:
No such license shall be issued to:
   (A)   A person who is not a resident of the city of East Moline, Illinois.
(Ord. 94-28, 11-7-1994)
   (B)   A person who is not of good character and reputation in the community
in which he resides.
   (C)   A person who is not a citizen of the United States.
   (D)   A person who has been convicted of a felony under any federal or state
law.
   (E)   A person who has been convicted of being the keeper of or is the
keeper of a house of ill fame.
   (F)   A person who has been convicted of pandering or other crime or
misdemeanor opposed to decency and morality.
   (G)   A person whose license issued under this chapter has been revoked for
cause.
   (H)   A person who at the time of application for renewal of any license
issued hereunder would not be eligible for such license under a first
application.
   (I)   A copartnership, unless all the members of such copartnership shall be
qualified to receive a license.
   (J)   A corporation, if any officer, manager or director thereof, or any
stockholder or stockholders owning in the aggregate more than five percent (5%)
of the stock of such corporation, would not be eligible to receive a license
hereunder for any reason other than citizenship and residence within the county
of Rock Island, Illinois.
   (K)   A person whose place of business is conducted by a manager or agent
unless said manager or agent possesses the same qualifications required of the
licensee.
   (L)   A person who does not own the premises for which a license is sought,
or does not have a lease thereon for the full period for which the license is
to be issued. (Ord. 90-2, 2-5-1990)
   (M)   Any law enforcing public official, including members of local liquor
control commissions, any mayor, alderman, or member of the city council or
commission, any president of the village board of trustees, any member of a
village board of trustees, or any president or member of a county board; and no
such official shall be interested directly in the manufacture, sale or
distribution of alcoholic liquor, except that which are not located within the
territory subject to the jurisdiction of that official if the issuance of such
license is approved by the state liquor control commission. (Ord. 97-12, 2-17-
1997)
   (N)   Any person, association or corporation not eligible for a state retail
liquor license.
   (O)   A person who is not a beneficial owner of the business to be operated
by the licensee.
   (P)   A person who has been convicted of a gambling offense as prescribed by
any of subsections (a)(3) through (a)(10) of 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/
28-1 or as proscribed by 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/28-3, of the
"criminal code of 1961", proscribed by a statute replaced by any of the
aforesaid statutory provisions.
   (Q)   A person to whom a federal wagering stamp has been issued by the
federal government for the current tax period.
   (R)   A copartnership to which a federal wagering stamp has been issued by
the federal government for the current tax period, or if any of the partners
have been issued a federal gaming device stamp or federal wagering stamp by the
federal government for the current tax period.
   (S)   A corporation, if any officer, manager or director thereof, or any
stockholder owning in the aggregate more than twenty percent (20%) of the stock
of such corporation, has been issued a federal wagering stamp for the current
tax period. (Ord. 90-2, 2-5-1990)
   (T)   No facility selling motor vehicle fuel will be allowed to have on site
consumption of alcohol or any license allowing consumption of alcohol on said
premises. (Ord. 15-05, 11-16-2015)
3-7-5: TERM; PRORATING FEE:
Due to the global health emergency in 2020 and the restrictions on restaurants
and taverns, the majority of liquor license holders have been significantly
affected by the Governor’s Executive Order. Consequently, existing licenses set
to expire April 30, 2020 are extended to June 30, 2020. For 2020 liquor license
renewals only, liquor licenses are reduced to a half-year (six month) license
with a revised fee of 50% of the annual fee. The six-month license fee will be
due by July 31, 2020. Renewals of video gaming licenses for 2020 will be valid
from July 1 to December 31. New liquor licenses will be paid on a pro-rata
basis according to the time left in the remainder of the calendar year. This
six-month license will expire on December 31,2020 at which time the regular
annual fee will be due for the license valid for year 2021. License renewals in
2021 and thereafter will follow the calendar year. License holders that have
already paid their 12- month video gaming license renewal fee will be provided
a credit for the amount paid in excess of the six-month fees for 2020 which
shall be applied to the 2021 renewal.
Each such license shall terminate on December 31 next following its issuance.
The annual license fee shall be paid at the time of application, or renewal of
said license, and there shall be no refund of any portion of the same in the
event of termination of the business prior to the end of the license year. The
initial annual license fee to be paid shall be reduced in proportion to the
foil calendar months which have expired in the license year during which the
license is issued. (Ord. 90-2, 2-5-1990; amd. Ord. 20-13, 7-20-2020)
3-7-6: LICENSE FEES:
Every person, firm, or corporation engaged in the retail sale of alcoholic
liquor in the city shall pay an annual license fee, with said annual license
fee to be paid in full by December 31. Class A and B licenses shall be
permitted to present live entertainment.
   (A)   Class A license shall authorize the retail sale of liquor for
consumption on the premises as well as other retail sales of liquor. Any class
A licensee shall be fully equipped for the sale of liquor and other beverages
by the drink, and shall comply with all health code requirements for a wet bar.
The annual license fee for a class A license shall be one thousand dollars
($1,000.00), effective May 1,1997.
      Any facilities selling motor vehicle fuel cannot receive a class A
license as consumption of alcohol is not allowed on said premises.
   (B)   Class B license which shall be issued only to “clubs” as defined by
this chapter and shall entitle the licensee to sell from the premises
permanently occupied by such club, liquor for consumption on such premises as
well as other retail sales of packaged liquor. Such sales shall only be made to
a member of such club in good standing and bona fide and invited guests for
such members when accompanied by their hosts. Any class B licensee shall be
fully equipped for the sale of liquor and other beverages by the drink, and
shall comply with all health code requirements for a wet bar. The annual
license fee for a class B license shall be one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for
all kinds of alcoholic liquor, effective May 1, 1997.
   (C)   Class C license which shall entitle the licensee to make only retail
sales of alcoholic liquor for consumption only on the premises at any banquet,
picnic, bazaar, fair or similar public or private assembly. Such class C
licenses shall be issued only to “clubs” as hereinbefore defined, societies,
fraternal or benevolent organizations organized not for pecuniary profit. Such
class C licenses shall designate thereon the day for which the same is granted
and the fee paid therefor. Such class C licenses must be obtained by any “club”
as herein defined if a dance is given by said club which is open to the public
or by any organization falling within the classes heretofore named if such
organizations shall give a dance on the premises permanently occupied by any
club, at which dance or dances alcoholic liquor is sold to those in attendance.
The fee for a class C license shall be twenty five dollars ($25.00) for each
day the same is in effect.
   (D)   Class D license which shall entitle the licensee to make only package
liquor sales of alcoholic beverages for consumption only off of the premises.
The annual license fee for a class D license shall be one thousand dollars
($1,000.00), effective May 1, 1997.
      1.   A licensee holding a class D license may conduct product sampling
for consumption at the licensed retail location. Up to three (3) samples,
consisting of no more than one-fourth (1/4) ounce of distilled spirits, one
ounce of wine, or two (2) ounces of beer may be served to a consumer in one
day. The facility hosting the product sampling must comply with food sanitation
codes and have the proper permits from the city health department prior to the
conducting of the product sampling.
      2.   Age Restrictions: Any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years
of age except for persons eighteen (18) years of age through twenty (20) years
of age who are acting in pursuance of their employment at and with an
establishment that is licensed in accordance with this chapter.
   (E)   Class E license shall entitle the licensee to dispense and sell beer
and wine only under the following specific conditions:
      1.   Fee: This license will be valid from April 1 through October 1 of
each year and the fee for a class E license shall be one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) per annum, effective May 1, 1997.
      2.   Hours Permitted: Licensee will be permitted to dispense beer and
wine on no more than three (3) nights in any one week from the hour of four
o’clock (4:00) P.M. until eleven o’clock (11:00) P.M. and in addition thereto,
said licensee will have the privilege of selling beer and wine on a total of
three (3) afternoons per annum from the hour of twelve o’clock (12:00) noon to
six o’clock (6:00) P.M.
      3.   Dispensing During Races: Licensee will be permitted to dispense beer
and wine only when scheduled races are planned.
      4.   Disposable Containers: All beer and wine is to be sold only in
disposable cups.
      5.   Premises Restrictions: All beer and wine is to be consumed on the
premises.
      6.   Concession Stands: Licensee shall provide a special concession stand
for beer and wine only which shall be the only place where they will be sold.
      7.   Additional Area Restrictions: No beer or wine shall be dispensed or
consumed in the pits where the drivers, mechanics and personnel required for
the races are situated until the completion of all races for the day whether it
be in the afternoon or evening.
      8.   Age Restrictions: Any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years
of age except for persons eighteen (18) years of age through twenty (20) years
of age who are acting in pursuance of their employment at and with an
establishment that is licensed in accordance with this chapter.
      9.   Enforcement: Licensee shall provide a minimum of four (4) law
enforcement officers at each and every racing event at which the sale of beer
and wine takes place.
   (F)   Class E-2 License shall entitle the licensee to dispense and sell
alcoholic beverages only under the following specific conditions:
      1.   Venue: This license shall apply to private outdoor venues designed
specifically for music, theater or entertainment acts. This license is
specifically intended for venues of less than four acres.
      2.   Fee: This license will be valid from May 1 to April 30 each year and
the fee for the Class E-2 license shall be one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per
annum.
      3.   Hours Permitted: Licensee will be permitted to dispense alcohol at
this specific outdoor venue between the hours of noon (12:00 PM) and 10:00 PM
on Sunday through Thursday and between the hours of noon (12:00 PM) and
midnight (12:00 AM) on Fridays and Saturdays (and evenings prior to a state
designated holiday or when a special event permit is issued) and only on days
when music, theater or entertainment acts are scheduled to perform or a
festival, art fair or other special event is scheduled for the venue. Alcohol
sales and the dispensing of alcohol shall be discontinued no later than 15
minutes prior to the conclusion of the final performance of the day or when the
festival, fair or special event is scheduled to close for the day.
      4.   Consumption on Premises Only: The consumption of alcohol shall be
limited to the licensed venue and shall not be allowed on public rights-of-way
adjoining the venue including sidewalks and streets. This license does not
provide for the sale of package liquor for consumption off-premises.
      5.   Disposable Containers: All alcoholic beverages sold at this venue
are to be sold in disposable containers.
      6.   Concessions and Sales Location: Licensee shall provide a concession
area for alcoholic beverages shall be the only place where alcoholic beverages
will be sold on the premises. No alcoholic beverages shall be allowed to be
brought into the venue by attendees and any alcohol consumed on site must be
purchased from the license holder at the venue.
      7.   Age Restrictions: All concessions personnel responsible for selling
alcoholic beverages at the venue shall be at least twenty-one (21) years of
age.
      8.   Enforcement: License shall consult with the East Moline Police
Department to determine the number of police officers present at each event at
which alcoholic beverages are sold or dispensed.
      9.   Noise: All amplified sound or music, and whether live or recorded,
shall end at 10:00 PM on Sundays through Thursday, and at midnight (12:00 AM)
on Fridays, Saturdays and evenings prior to state designated holidays.
   (G)   Class E-3 License shall entitle the licensee to sell beer and wine
only under the following specific conditions:
      1.   Venue: This license shall apply to outdoor venues operated by a
governmental body designed specifically for athletic events and leagues.
      2.   Fee: This license will be valid from March 1 to October 31 each year
and the fee for the Class E-3 license shall be one thousand dollars ($1,000.00)
per annum.
      3.   Hours Permitted: Licensee will be permitted to sell beer and wine
between the hours of nine in the morning (9:00 AM) to eleven in the evening
(11:00 PM) from March 1st to October 31st each year. Beer and wine sales shall
be discontinued no later than eleven in the evening (11:00 PM) regardless of
whether the athletic event has concluded for the day.
      4.   Consumption on Premises Only: The consumption of alcohol shall be
limited to the licensed venue and shall not be allowed on public rights-of-way
adjoining the venue including sidewalks and streets. This license does not
provide for the sale of package liquor for consumption off-premises.
      5.   Disposable Containers: All alcoholic beverages sold at this venue
are to be sold in disposable containers.
      6.   Concessions and Sales Location: Licensee shall provide a concession
area for alcoholic beverages shall be the only place where alcoholic beverages
will be sold on the premises. No alcoholic beverages shall be allowed to be
brought into the venue by attendees and any alcohol consumed on site must be
purchased from the license holder at the venue.
      7.   Age Restrictions: All concessions personnel responsible for selling
alcoholic beverages at the venue shall be at least twenty-one (21) years of
age.
   (H)   Class F license which shall authorize the retail sale of alcoholic
liquor on premises operated as a restaurant in which food is served and sales
of alcohol is incidental to the primary purpose of selling food. The annual
license fee for a class F license shall be one thousand dollars ($1,000.00).
      1.   Age Restrictions: Any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years
of age except for persons eighteen (18) years of age through twenty (20) years
of age who are acting in pursuance of their employment at and with an
establishment that is licensed in accordance with this chapter.
   (I)   Class G license which shall be known as an outdoor liquor service area
license, shall be issued only to holders of a class A, B, or F license, which
shall be known as the primary license, and shall authorize the retail sale of
liquor for consumption on the premises in a separately designated area for
outdoor service.
      1.   Renewal and Fee: This license may be renewed annually with the
primary license. An annual fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) shall be charged
for said outdoor liquor service area license. The holder of an outdoor liquor
service area license shall provide proper additional dramshop insurance for
said license.
      2.   Location and Review: Outdoor liquor service area shall be a
definable area and be located on private property (not on public right of way),
in a business or industrial zone and shall be located adjacent to the building
occupied by the primary license holder for the sale of liquor. Entry to the
outdoor liquor service area shall be controlled by the liquor license holder.
There shall be no entry from public right of way or adjoining property. The
outdoor liquor service area shall not be located within five feet (5') of a
public right of way. The seating capacity of the outdoor liquor service area
shall be counted as part of the occupancy load of the primary liquor
establishment. Before a class G license shall be approved and issued by the
liquor commissioner for a business in a Business zoning classification, the
outdoor liquor service area shall be reviewed and approved at a public hearing
by the board of zoning appeals. Before a class G license shall be approved and
issued by the liquor commissioner for a business in an Industrial zoning
classification, the outdoor liquor service area shall be reviewed and approved
by the City Administrator or his/her designee.
      3.   Hours of Operation: Outdoor liquor service areas shall operate only
between the hours of ten o’clock (10:00) A.M. and twelve o’clock (12:00)
midnight.
      4.   Construction: Outdoor liquor service areas shall be constructed with
a hard nonporous deck of concrete, asphalt, laid brick with mortared joints, or
other easily cleanable, durable and nonabsorbent surface approved by the
building inspector and the health inspector. The deck shall be graded to drain
and prevent pooling of liquids. The outdoor liquor service area shall be
surrounded by a solid decorative barrier four feet (4') in height. A utility
gate may be installed, but shall be locked during business hours. An additional
gate, at least thirty-six inches (36") wide, shall be installed to provide an
emergency exit from the outdoor liquor service area. This gate shall be
equipped with latches that will allow for emergency exit from the outdoor
liquor service area, but not allow entry into the designated area. The gate
shall be marked as an emergency exit only. In order to prevent unlawful entry
into the outdoor liquor service area, the emergency exit shall be equipped with
an alarm device to alert the manager or other designated employee when the gate
is opened. Such alarm shall not be required if the emergency exit gate is in
constant direct view of the on duty manager and/or employees of the
establishment. Additional emergency exit gates may be required for larger
outdoor liquor service areas (as per UBC 1001.6). For requests for Class G
licenses in the Business zoning classifications, the board of zoning appeals
may modify or exempt the barrier requirement for unusual conditions. For
requests for Class G licenses in the Industrial zoning classifications, the
City Administrator or his/her designee may modify or exempt the barrier
requirement for unusual conditions.
      5.   Lighting: If the outdoor liquor service area is in operation after
sunset, the area shall be illuminated with adequate outdoor lighting as
determined by the building code. Such outdoor lighting shall not disturb
surrounding properties.
      6.   Sound/Music; Live or Recorded: All amplified sound or live music
shall be in compliance with section 6-8-4 of this code. All music, recorded or
live, shall end at ten o’clock (10:00) P.M. on Sundays through Thursdays, and
at twelve o’clock (12:00) midnight on Fridays and Saturdays and state
designated holidays or when a special event permit is issued.
      7.   Furnishings: All tables, chairs, refuse receptacles and other
furnishings used in the outdoor liquor service area shall be manufactured from
durable material intended for outdoor use.
   (J)   Class H license which shall be known as a not for profit event
license, and shall authorize the licensee to make the retail sales of liquor
for consumption only on the premises and shall authorize no package, carryout
or wholesale sales of liquor. The class H license shall permit the licensee to
conduct a minimum of twelve (12) events and a maximum of forty eight (48)
events per year on the licensed premises. Such class H license shall be issued
only to a “not for profit” corporation organized and authorized to do business
in the state of Illinois. The applicant will provide the city with a copy of
its “not for profit” articles of incorporation and a copy of its dramshop
insurance coverage certificate.
      All events are to be held indoors. If an outdoor event is proposed, a
separate application shall be filled out and submitted to the liquor
commissioner for approval at least thirty (30) days in advance.
      1.   Hours Of Operation: Operation of events by a class H licensee shall
be between the hours of ten o’clock (10:00) A.M. and twelve o’clock (12:00)
midnight.
      2.   Notification: The license holder will provide the city a tentative
agenda for the year of events to be held. Any additions, deletions, or
modifications to the list must be submitted to the city in writing forty eight
(48) hours in advance.
      3.   Fees: The annual license fee for a class H license will be two
hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). (Ord. 90-2, 2-5-1990; amd. Ord. 96-25, 11-4-
1996; Ord. 97-11, 2-17-1997; Ord. 00-11, 3-20-2000; Ord. 04-16, 5-3-2004; Ord.
10-54, 12-20-2010; Ord. 12-01, 2-6-2012; Ord. 15-06, 11-16-2015; Ord. 18-11, 9-
17-2018; Ord. 19-02, 2-4-2019; Ord. 19-13, 5-20-2019; Ord. 19-19, 5-20-2019;
Ord. 19-20, 7-1-2019; Ord. 19-22, 7-15-2019; Ord. 19-26, 9-16-2019; Ord. 20-06,
5-4-2020; Ord. 20-13, 7-20-2020; Ord. 23-06, 3-20-2023)
3-7-7: NATURE OF FACILITIES:
No license shall be issued to any grocery store, supermarket, drugstore or
other store where goods are sold at retail in packages unless a separate area
is established for the retail sale of hard liquor exclusive of wine and beer
sales. For purposes of this section, taverns and restaurants shall not be
deemed to be "stores where goods are sold at retail". The sale of all alcoholic
beverages must be rung up at a register operated by a person of the age of
twenty one (21) years or older. (Ord. 90-2, 2-5-1990)
Any establishment selling gas which wishes to receive a class A license must
meet the following conditions and criteria:
   (A)   Have a completely self-contained separate operation/facility, which
must be completely walled off from the establishment which sells motor vehicle
fuel;
   (B)   Obtaining any and all separate permits as requested;
   (C)   Meet all building, health, plumbing and liquor codes;
   (D)   Have their own external entrances and exits:
   (E)   Have their own address and services;
   (F)   Have at least one employee solely employed to operate only the said
establishment. (Ord. 15-07, 11-16-2015)
3-7-8: DISPOSITION OF FEES:
All such fees shall be paid to the city clerk at the time application is made,
and shall be forthwith turned over to the treasurer. In the event the license
applied for is denied, the fee shall be returned to the applicant; if the
license is granted, then the fee shall be deposited in the general corporate
fund or in such other fund as shall have been designated by the city council by
proper action. (Ord. 90-2, 2-5-1990)
3-7-9: RENEWAL OF LICENSE:
Any licensee may renew the license at the expiration thereof, provided that the
licensee is then qualified to receive a license and the premises for which such
renewal license is sought is suitable for the purposes; provided, further that
the renewal privilege herein provided for shall not be construed as a vested
right which shall in any case prevent the city from decreasing the number of
licenses to be issued within this jurisdiction. (Ord. 90-2, 2-5-1990)
3-7-10: CLOSING HOURS:
   (A)   Unless otherwise herein provided, it shall be unlawful to keep open or
permit to be open any place where alcoholic liquor is sold for consumption on
the premises, except during the hours set forth as follows:
 
Monday - Thursday 6:00 A.M. to 3:00 A.M. the following day
Friday - Saturday 6:00 A.M. to 3:00 A.M. the following day
Sunday            8:00 A.M. to 3:00 A.M. the following day
 
It shall be unlawful to permit alcoholic liquor to be consumed on the premises
after the closing hour of the licensee.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to keep open or permit to be open under a class D
license as issued by the city, any package liquor store, except during the
hours set forth as follows:
 
Monday - Saturday 6:00 A.M. to 2:00 A.M. the following day
Sunday            8:00 A.M. to 2:00 A.M. the following day
 
   (C)   It shall be unlawful to keep open or permit to be open any
establishment operating under a class F license as issued by the city, except
during the hours set forth as follows:
 
Monday - Thursday 6:00 A.M. to 1:00 A.M. the following day
Friday - Saturday 6:00 A.M. to 3:00 A.M. the following day
Sunday            8:00 A.M. to 1:00 A.M. the following day
 
(Ord. 96-9, 4-15-1996)
3-7-11: ENTRY POWERS:
The local liquor control commissioner hereby is given the power to enter or to
authorize any law enforcing officer to enter at any time upon any premises
licensed hereunder to determine whether any of the provisions of 235 Illinois
Compiled Statutes, or any rules or regulations adopted by the commissioner or
by the state commission have been or are being violated, and at such time to
examine the premises of said licensee in connection therewith. (Ord. 90-2, 2-5-
1990)
3-7-12: LIST:
The local liquor control commissioner shall keep or cause to be kept a complete
record of all such licenses issued by the commissioner. (Ord. 90-2, 2-5-1990)
3-7-13: TRANSFER OF LICENSE:
A license shall be purely personal privilege, good for not to exceed one year
after issuance unless sooner revoked as in this chapter provided, and shall not
constitute property, nor shall it be subject to being encumbered or
hypothecated. Such license shall not descend by the laws of testate or
intestate devolution, but it shall cease upon the death of the licensee;
provided, that executors or administrators of the estate of any deceased
licensee, when such estate consists in part of alcoholic liquor, may continue
the business of the sale or manufacture of alcoholic liquor under order of the
appropriate court, and may exercise the privileges of the deceased or insolvent
or bankrupt licensee after the death of such decedent, or such insolvency or
bankruptcy until the expiration of such license, but not longer than six (6)
months after the death, bankruptcy or insolvency of such licensee. A refund
shall be made of that portion of the license fees paid for any period in which
the licensee shall be prevented from operating under such license in accordance
with the provisions of this section.
Any licensee may renew the license at the expiration thereof, provided the
licensee is then qualified to receive a license and the premises for which such
renewal license is sought are suitable for such purposes.
In the event a licensed liquor dealer sells the business to a new owner, the
new owner shall make application for the issuance of a new license, as set
forth in subsection
3-7-3(B) of this chapter. The new owner shall make payment of an application
fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00), and shall meet all qualifications as set
forth in sections
3-7-4 and
3-7-5 of this chapter, before a new license is issued.
In the event the shareholders of a corporation holding a liquor license sell
any portion of the stock of the corporation to a new shareholder, the new
shareholder or shareholders shall meet the qualifications of each licensee as
set forth in section
3-7-4 of this chapter. (Ord. 90-2, 2-5-1990)
3-7-14: CHANGE OF LOCATION:
A liquor dealer's license shall permit the sale of alcoholic liquor only in the
premises described in the application and license. Such location may be changed
only upon the written permit to make such change issued by the mayor. No change
of location shall be permitted unless the proposed new location is a proper one
for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor under the statutes of the state and the
provisions of this code. (Ord. 90-2, 2-5-1990)
3-7-15: SANITARY CONDITIONS:
All premises used for the sale of alcoholic liquor, or for the storage of such
liquor for sale, shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition, and shall be
kept in full compliance with the code provisions regulating the condition of
premises used for the storage or sale of food for human consumption. (Ord. 90-
2, 2-5-1990)
3-7-16: EMPLOYEES:
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to employ in any
premises used for the sale of alcoholic liquor any person who is afflicted
with, or who is a carrier of, any contagious, infectious or venereal diseases;
and it shall be unlawful for any person afflicted with or who is a carrier of
any such disease to work in or about any such premises or to engage to work in
or about any such premises or to engage in any way in the handling, preparation
or distribution of such liquor. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or
corporation to employ, for the purpose of selling, serving or delivering
alcoholic liquor, or for the purpose of entertaining patrons of the licensed
premises, any person who is under the age of twenty one (21) years. (Ord. 96-
22, 8-19-1996)
3-7-17: PEDDLING:
It shall be unlawful to peddle alcoholic liquor in the city. (Ord. 90-2, 2-5-
1990)
3-7-18: LOCATION RESTRICTIONS:
No license shall be issued for the sale at retail of any alcoholic liquor
within one hundred feet (100') of any church, school other than an institution
of higher learning, hospital, home for aged or indigent persons or for
veterans, their spouses or children or any military or naval station; provided,
that this prohibition shall not apply to hotels offering restaurant service,
regularly organized clubs, or to restaurants, food shops or other places where
the sale of alcoholic liquor is not the principal business carried on; nor to
the renewal of a license for the sale at retail of alcoholic liquor on premises
within one hundred feet (100') of any church or school where the church or
school has been established within such one hundred feet (100') since the
issuance of the original license. In the case of a church, the distance of one
hundred feet (100') shall be measured to the nearest part of any building used
for worship services or education programs and not to property boundaries.
(Ord. 10-54, 12-20-2010)
3-7-19: STORES SELLING SCHOOL SUPPLIES, LUNCHES:
No license shall be issued to any person for the sale at retail of any
alcoholic liquor at any store or other place of business where the majority of
customers are minors of school age or where the principal business transacted
consists of school books, school supplies, food, lunches or drinks for such
minors. (Ord. 90-2, 2-5-1990)
3-7-20: SALE TO PERSONS UNDER TWENTY ONE:
   (A)   No licensee nor any officer, associate, member, representative, agent
or employee of such licensee shall sell, give or deliver alcoholic liquor to
any person under the age of twenty one (21) years, or to an intoxicated person
or to any person known by him or her to be under legal disability or in need of
mental treatment. No person, after purchasing or otherwise obtaining alcoholic
liquor, shall sell, give or deliver such alcoholic liquor to another person
under the age of twenty one (21) years, except in the performance of a
religious ceremony or service; and except where a parent provides alcoholic
liquor to a child in their own residence.
      For the purpose of preventing the violation of this section, any
licensee, or the licensee's agent or employee, may refuse to sell or serve
alcoholic beverages to any person who is unable to produce adequate written
evidence of identity and of the fact that he or she is over the age of twenty
one (21) years. Any police officer may require any person who is unable to
produce adequate written evidence of identity and of the fact that he or she is
over the age of twenty one (21) years, to leave those licensed premises as
described in subsection (E) of this section.
      Adequate written evidence of age and identity of the person is a document
issued by a federal, state, county, or municipal government, or subdivision or
agency thereof, and shall be limited to: a current motor vehicle operator's
license, a current state photograph identification as issued by the secretary
of state, or a current passport. Proof that the defendant-licensee, or the
defendant-licensee's employee or agent, demanded, was shown and reasonably
relied upon such written evidence in any transaction forbidden by this section,
is competent evidence and may be considered in any criminal prosecution
therefor or to any proceedings for the suspension or revocation of any license
based thereon.
   (B)   Any person who sells, gives, or furnishes to any person under the age
of twenty one (21) years any false or fraudulent written, printed, or
photostatic evidence of the age and identity of such person, is guilty of a
violation of this ordinance.
   (C)   Any person under the age of twenty one (21) years who presents or
offers to any licensee, agent or employee, any written, printed or photostatic
evidence of age and identity which is false, fraudulent, or not actually his/
her own for the purpose of ordering, purchasing, attempting to purchase or
otherwise procuring or attempting to procure, the serving of any alcoholic
beverage, or who has in his/her possession any false or fraudulent written,
printed, or photostatic evidence of age and identity, is guilty of a violation
of this ordinance.
   (D)   Any person to whom the sale, gift or delivery of any alcoholic liquor
is prohibited because of age, shall not purchase or accept a gift of such
alcoholic liquor or have such alcoholic liquor in his/her possession. This
section does not apply to possession by a person under the age of twenty one
(21) years making a delivery of an alcoholic beverage in pursuance of the order
of his or her parent or in pursuance of his or her employment. (Ord. 90-2, 2-5-
1990)
   (E)   It shall be unlawful for any holder of a retail liquor dealer's
license or licensee's agent or employee to suffer or permit any minor to remain
in any room or compartment adjoining or adjacent to or situated in the room or
place where such licensed premises are located; provided, that this subsection
shall not apply to any minor who is accompanied by his or her parent or
guardian; or to any licensed premises where the sale of alcohol is incidental
to the primary purpose of the sale of food. In addition to all other fines and
penalties, the mayor may revoke or suspend the retail liquor dealer's license
for any violation of this section. (Ord. 10-54, 12-20-2010)
   (F)   It shall be unlawful for any parent or guardian to permit any minor
child of which he or she may be the parent or guardian to violate any of the
provisions of this section.
   (G)   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of twenty one (21)
years to remain in any room or compartment adjoining or adjacent to or situated
in the room or place where alcoholic liquor is sold for consumption on the
premises. This subsection shall not apply to any licensed premises which
derives its principal business from the sale of, or services of, commodities
other than alcoholic liquor. It shall, however, be permissible for a person
under the legal age, who is accompanied by his or her parent or legal guardian,
to be present on those premises where the licensee is permitted to make only
package liquor sales for consumption off of the licensed premises (class D
licensee), or on those premises of a licensee club as defined by this chapter
(class B licensee).
   (H)   Any person convicted of a violation of a provision of this section
shall be fined in a sum of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than
five hundred dollars ($500.00). (Ord. 90-2, 2-5-1990)
3-7-21: SALE TO INTOXICATED PERSONS, HABITUAL DRUNKARDS:
It shall be unlawful for the holder of an alcoholic liquor dealer's license to
sell, deliver or give any alcoholic liquor to any intoxicated person or to any
person known to the licensee to be a habitual drunkard, spendthrift, insane,
feebleminded or distracted person. (Ord. 90-2, 2-5-1990)
3-7-22: GAMBLING:
There shall be no illegal card games or illegal gambling allowed on any
premises licensed to sell alcoholic liquor, except for video gaming as
authorized by the Illinois legislature and as licensed by the Illinois gaming
board, which shall be allowed. (Ord. 12-10, 6-18-2012)
3-7-23: REMEDIES FOR VIOLATION:
   (A)   Fine: Any violation of the provisions of this chapter, except as
otherwise provided, shall be punishable by a minimum fine of two hundred
dollars ($200.00), and a maximum fine of seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00).
In the event any person is accused of a violation hereof and does not wish to
contest said allegation prior to the time a complaint is issued for the
violation, then said person so accused may pay to the city at police
headquarters a penalty in the sum of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for, and in
full satisfaction of, said violation.
Said fines are in addition to administrative provisions for suspension,
revocation or forfeiture of a license issued pursuant to this chapter and
payment of such fine shall not constitute an admission of guilt or innocence
for purposes of such administrative proceedings for suspension, revocation or
forfeiture. (Ord. 96-25, 11-4-1996)
   (B)   Result Of Violation:
      1.   Action; Suspension, Revocation Or Fine: Licenses granted under the
provisions of this chapter are subject to the following actions by the local
liquor control commissioner, upon a finding of a violation as set forth in
subsection (B)2 of this section:
         (a)   A suspension not to exceed thirty (30) days. During such a
period of suspension, no alcoholic liquor shall be sold, dispensed or consumed
in said licensed premises.
         (b)   Revocation of license. (Ord. 94-9, 5-16-1994)
         (c)   Fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each
violation; each day on which a violation continues shall constitute a separate
violation.
         (d)   Suspension and fine. (Ord. 96-25, 11-4-1996)
      2.   Violations:
         (a)   No person holding a license issued by the local liquor control
commissioner shall in the conduct of the licensed business or upon the licensed
premises:
            (1)   Violate any law of the state of Illinois.
            (2)   Violate the city ordinance or resolution regulating the sale
of alcoholic liquors.
            (3)   Suffer or permit a violation of any law of the state of
Illinois, or of any rule of the state commissioner.
            (4)   Suffer or permit a violation of the city ordinance or
resolution regulating the sale of alcoholic liquor.
         (b)   Violations may be proved by evidence that the licensee has been
convicted of a violation of the law of the state of Illinois in the conduct of
the licensed business or upon the premises, or has been found guilty of
violating any city ordinance or resolution regulating the sale of alcoholic
liquors.
         (c)   Proof before the local liquor control commissioner of facts
which establish a violation of any state statute, city ordinance or resolution
or rule of the commissioner, shall be sufficient cause of revocation or
suspension of any license, issued by the commissioner, or for imposition of a
fine, irrespective of whether or not a conviction has been obtained in any
court. (Ord. 94-9, 5-16-1994)
   (C)   Hearing: Upon receipt of a complaint being made of a violation of the
Illinois liquor control act or of this chapter, the liquor commissioner shall
set the matter for hearing and shall serve notice upon the licensee of the time
and place of such hearing and of the particular charge. Notice as herein
required shall be by registered mail or by leaving a copy of said notice at
said licensed place of business at least three (3) days prior to the date set
for hearing. Such hearings shall be open to the public and written minutes of
all proceedings shall be maintained. (Ord. 98-33, 8-17-1998)
   (D)   Close Establishment: In instances when the local liquor control
commissioner has reason to believe that continued operation of a licensed
establishment will immediately threaten the welfare of the community, the
commissioner may, upon issuance of a written order stating the reason for such
conclusion and without notice, order the licensed premises closed for not more
than seven (7) days during which time a hearing shall be held. When a licensee
is engaged in the conduct of another business or businesses upon the licensed
premises, such order shall not be applicable to such other business or
businesses.
   (E)   Revocation: Licenses granted under the provisions of this Chapter may
be revoked by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner for any violation of the
provisions of this Chapter, or of the Illinois Liquor Control Act including,
but not limited to, the following:
      1.   Conviction of the licensee of any felony.
      2.   Conviction of the licensee for any violation of the law relating to
the regulation of the sale of alcoholic liquor.
      3.   Conviction of the licensee for any violation of the law relating to
the possession and/or sale of any controlled substance upon the licensed
premises.
      4.   The wilful making of any false or fraudulent statement by the
licensee in an application for any license described herein.
   (F)   Proceedings For License Revocation: All proceedings for the revocation
of a license shall follow the procedures described in subsection (C) of this
Section.
   (G)   Violation; Nonuse Suspension: Any violation of this Chapter and/or of
the Illinois Liquor Control Act, by any licensee, manager, agent, officer,
director or employee shall be the sole responsibility of the licensee
regardless of whether the unlawful act or omission occurred without the
licensee's knowledge.
When any license is voluntarily not used by the said licensee within a period
of sixty (60) days from the date of issuance of said license, said license is
suspended. Further, if said license is issued and not used by the said licensee
for a period of sixty (60) days, the said license is suspended. The suspension
for nonuse shall not apply to race track licensees, or to a licensee or
applicant whose place of business is not yet constructed unless such
construction of the business premises is not completed within one hundred
eighty (180) days after application for a liquor license. (Ord. 90-2, 2-5-1990)
3-7-24: OPERATION:
   (A)   License Posted: Every holder of a license issued pursuant to this
Chapter shall immediately post and keep posted while in force, in a conspicuous
location on the premises, the license so issued. Whenever such license is lost
or destroyed, a duplicate thereof shall be issued by the Local Liquor
Commissioner upon application by the licensee, who shall also make a verified
statement of said loss or destruction. A twenty five dollar ($25.00) processing
fee shall be charged for issuance of any duplicate license.
   (B)   Compliance With Health And Safety Codes: All premises licensed
hereunder shall at all times be kept in a clean, orderly and sanitary condition
and shall comply with all building and safety codes so established by the City
of East Moline, Rock Island County and the State of Illinois.
   (C)   Sale To Persons Under Twenty One: A sign, as furnished by the City,
must be posted on the entrance door in all establishments stating the
acceptable proof of identification: Current driver's license with photo from
any state, state photo identification as issued by the Secretary of State, or a
current passport. The posted sign must also state the penalty of up to five
hundred dollars ($500.00) to be imposed upon any person under twenty one (21)
years of age for consuming or possessing alcohol or for misrepresenting their
age in order to obtain or purchase alcohol.
   (D)   Occupancy Load: The established occupant load of any licensed premises
shall not exceed the posted capacity at any time.
   (E)   Accessibility: During the hours of operation applicable to the class
of license held by the licensee, the doors to any licensed premises shall
remain unlocked unless such premises are closed for business. At no time shall
entrances to a licensed premises be locked when any patrons of said
establishment are present, except that doors may be locked fifteen (15) minutes
prior to closing time where exits are arranged so as to be readily opened from
the side from which egress is to be made (i.e., equipped with panic bar exit).
   (F)   Closing Time: At the closing time applicable to the class of license
held by any licensee hereunder, the selling, dispensing and serving of all
alcoholic liquor shall cease. The licensee, or agent thereof, shall at such
closing time clear the premises of all persons other than bona fide employees
of the licensed establishment who are engaged in cleanup activities. If any law
enforcement officer of the city of East Moline shall believe that any person
remaining in any licensed premises after closing time is not a bona fide
employee engaged in cleanup activities, said officer may demand evidence
documenting said employment. It shall be the responsibility of the licensee or
any agent or employee thereof to produce proof of bona fide employment.
   (G)   Telephone Required: All establishments licensed under the provisions
of this chapter shall have on their premises at least one operational telephone
other than a pay telephone. All licensees or agents thereof, shall telephone
the East Moline police department if asked to do so or if any violation of the
law occurs on the licensed premises.
   (H)   Gambling Devices: No illegal gambling device or other illegal gambling
paraphernalia shall be kept or used for the purpose of gambling in any location
licensed under the provisions of this chapter.
   (I)   Delivery: No licensee, or agent thereof, shall order to receive, the
delivery of any alcoholic liquor on Sunday at the premises so licensed or at
any other premises. (Ord. 90-2, 2-5-1990)
   (J)   Employment Of Felon: (Rep. by Ord. 94-9, 5-16-1994)
   (K)   Sale To Certain Persons Prohibited: No licensee hereunder, or agent
thereof shall sell, give or deliver any alcoholic liquor to any intoxicated
person or to any person he or she knows to be under legal disability or in need
of mental treatment. For the purposes of this section, "legally disabled" shall
mean the same as judged incompetent.
   (L)   Prostitution/Pandering Prohibited: No licensee hereunder shall allow
any person to solicit another for the purpose of prostitution upon any licensed
premises; nor shall any licensee hereunder, or agent thereof, arrange or offer
to arrange for money or anything of value, a situation in which a person may
practice prostitution. (Ord. 90-2, 2-5-1990)
   (M)   Single Container of Beer or Wine: No Class D License (Package Liquor
Sales), shall be permitted to sell single cans or bottles of beer, containing
less than twenty-four (24_ ounces in volume. No other license shall permit a
single can or bottle of beer to be taken and removed from the licensed
premises.
   (N)   Crowd Control: Whenever, the chief of police determines, on the basis
of past occurrences at the licensee’s premises, that additional security or
crowd control measures are required for the public safety and welfare, the
chief of police shall file a written request for a hearing before the liquor
commissioner to hear such request. Thereafter, the commissioner shall set said
matter for hearing with at least three (3) days’ written notice being given to
the licensee, at which hearing the request shall be presented by the chief of
police, with supporting testimony and evidence to substantiate said request.
The licensee shall be given an opportunity to present evidence in opposition to
said request. The commissioner shall thereafter determine if the public good
and convenience would be best served if additional crowd control or security
measures be required during the operation of the licensee, the hours during
which said crowd control or security measures shall be imposed, and the means
by which said measures shall be imposed. The commissioner may require that off
duty police officers having jurisdictional authority, be hired by the licensee,
at the expense of the licensee, to provide adequate security or crowd control.
Any failure by the licensee to provide such security or crowd control measures
as required by order of the commissioner, shall be considered as a violation of
this ordinance, and the order of the commissioner, and shall subject the
licensee to fine, or the suspension or revocation of his license. (Ord. 92-7,
3-22-1992; amd. Ord. 12-04, 3-5-2012; Ord. 20-06, 5-4-2020)
3-7-25: CONDUCT PROHIBITED:
The following kinds of conduct on premises in the city licensed to sell
alcoholic liquor, are prohibited:
   (A)   The performance of acts, or simulated acts, of sexual intercourse,
masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation or any sexual
acts which are prohibited by law.
   (B)   The actual or simulated touching, caressing or fondling of the breast,
buttocks, anus or genitals.
   (C)   The actual or simulated displaying of the breasts, pubic hair, anus,
vulva or genitals.
   (D)   The permitting by a licensee of any person to remain in or upon the
licensed premises who exposes to public view any portion of his or her genitals
or anus. (Ord. 90-2, 2-5-1990)
3-7-26: ILLEGAL POSSESSION OF ALCOHOL BY CONSUMPTION BY A MINOR:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to whom the sale, gift, delivery,
or service of any alcoholic beverage is prohibited because of age to consume or
to possess in any manner, including by consumption, any such alcoholic
beverage, except as otherwise provided by law. This violation may be proven by
evidence which indicates that the breath of the person charged with such
offense had a smell associated, generally or specifically, with any alcoholic
beverage and no additional evidence relating thereto shall be necessary to find
the defendant to be in violation of this Ordinance. It shall not be necessary
to show that the person charged with an offense hereunder was at the time in
question under the influence of any alcoholic beverage in any manner, but such
evidence shall be admissible to prove a violation of this Section.
   (B)   An affirmative defense to a charge of violation of this Section may be
raised to show that the minor has consumed an alcoholic beverage while
participating in a recognized religious ceremony, or in the privacy of a home
under the direct supervision of the parents or parent or legal guardian, or at
a location where consumption by said minor is otherwise prohibited by law.
(Ord. 94-24, 9-19-1994)
3-7-27: CONSUMPTION, TRANSPORTATION OR POSSESSION OF ALCOHOLIC LIQUORS ON
PUBLIC WAY OR PARKING LOT:
   (A)   Prohibition: It shall be unlawful for any person to drink, consume,
transport, carry or possess any alcoholic liquor, except in the original
package and with the seal unbroken, on the public street, sidewalk, parkway,
public parking lot or semi-public parking lot. The term "semi-public parking
lot", shall include any area wherein motor vehicles are parked by the public in
conjunction with establishment, office building, or apartment building.
   (B)   Exceptions: The above subsection does not apply to a specific fenced
in or otherwise enclosed area set aside for a civic function, when the sponsor
of that function has acquired permission from the City Council. The above
subsection may also be waived by the City Council for special events such as
parades or other events sponsored or co-sponsored by the City. (Ord. 94-29, 11-
21-1994)
CHAPTER 8
OCCUPATION TAXES
SECTION:
3-8-1: Retailers' Occupation Tax And Service Occupation Tax
3-8-2: Retailers' Occupation Tax (Rep. by Ord. 04-07, 3-22-2004, eff. 4-1-2004)
3-8-3: Utility Tax
3-8-4: Use Tax
3-8-5: Telecommunications Infrastructure Maintenance Fee
3-8-6: Hotel Accommodations Tax
3-8-7: Reserved
3-8-8: Cannabis Retailers’ Occupation Tax
3-8-1: RETAILERS' OCCUPATION TAX AND SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX:
   (A)   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of
selling tangible personal property, other than an item of tangible personal
property titled and registered with an agency of this state's government, at
retail in this municipality at the rate of 0.50 of one percent (1%) of the
gross receipts from such sales made in the course of such business while this
ordinance is in effect; and a tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in
this municipality in the business of making sales of service, at the rate of
0.50 of one percent (1%) of the selling price of all tangible personal property
transferred by such servicemen as an incident to a sale of service. Such
"nonhome rule municipal retailers' occupation tax" and the "nonhome rule
municipal service occupation tax" shall not be applicable to the sales of food
for human consumption that is to be consumed off the premises where it is sold
(other than alcoholic beverages, soft drinks and food that has been prepared
for immediate consumption) and prescription and nonprescription medicines,
drugs, medical appliances and insulin, urine testing materials, syringes and
needles used by diabetics. The imposition of these nonhome rule taxes is in
accordance with the provisions of section 8-11-1.3 and 8-11-1.4, respectively,
of the Illinois municipal code 1 .
   (B)   The taxes hereby imposed, and all civil penalties that may be assessed
as an incident thereto, shall be collected and enforced by the department of
revenue of the state of Illinois. The department of revenue shall have full
power to administer and enforce the provisions of this ordinance. (Ord. 04-07,
3-22-2004, eff. 4-1-2004)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/8-11-1.3 and 5/8-11-1.4.
3-8-2: RETAILERS' OCCUPATION TAX:
(Rep. by Ord. 04-07, 3-22-2004, eff. 4-1-2004)
3-8-3: UTILITY TAX:
   (A)   Tax: A tax is imposed on all persons engaged in the following
occupations or privileges:
      1.   Persons engaged in the business of transmitting messages by means of
electricity, at the rate of five percent (5%) of the gross receipts from such
business originating within the corporate limits of the city.
      2.   Persons engaged in the business of distributing, supplying,
furnishing or selling gas for use or consumption within the corporate limits of
the city, and not for resale, at the rate of five percent (5%) of the gross
receipts from all such gas except that used, during any tax period specified
herein, in excess of fifteen million (15,000,000) and up to thirty million nine
hundred (30,000,900) cubic feet through any one meter as interruptible fuel for
steam boilers and the rate on the gross receipts from such gas shall be two and
five-tenths percent (2.5%) and upon the gross receipts of such gas in excess of
thirty million (30,000,000) cubic feet shall be thirty five hundredths percent
(0.35%).
      3.   Persons engaged in the business of distributing, supplying,
furnishing or selling electricity for use or consumption within the corporate
limits of the city, and not for resale, at the rate of five percent (5%) of the
gross receipts therefrom, excluding, however, from those gross receipts,
receipts collected for street lighting at the municipal rate. The tax imposed
under this section shall not apply with respect to gross receipts pertaining to
bills for the distribution, supply, furnishing or sale of electricity where the
use or consumption of the electricity is subject to the tax imposed under
subsection (A)5 of this section.
      4.   Persons engaged in the business of distributing, furnishing or
selling gas for use or consumption within the corporate limits of the City, and
not for resale, at the rate of five percent (5%) of the gross receipts
therefrom.
      5.   (a) Pursuant to section
8-11-2 of the Illinois Municipal Code 1  and any and all other applicable
authority, a tax is imposed upon the privilege of using or consuming
electricity acquired in a purchase at retail and used or consumed within the
corporate limits of the City at the following rates, calculated on a monthly
basis for each purchaser:
         (1)   For the first 2,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month:
.61 cents per kilowatt-hour;
         (2)   For the next 48,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month:
.40 cents per kilowatt-hour;
         (3)   For the next 50,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month:
.36 cents per kilowatt-hour;
         (4)   For the next 400,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month:
.35 cents per kilowatt-hour;
         (5)   For the next 500,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month:
.34 cents per kilowatt-hour;
         (6)   For the next 2,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a
month: .32 cents per kilowatt-hour;
         (7)   For the next 2,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a
month: .315 cents per kilowatt-hour;
         (8)   For the next 5,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a
month: .31 cents per kilowatt-hour;
         (9)   For the next 10,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a
month: .305 cents per kilowatt-hour;
         (10)   For all electricity used or consumed in excess of 20,000,000
kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month:.30 cents per kilowatt- hour.
         (b)   The tax is in addition to all taxes, fees and other revenue
measures imposed by the City, the State or any other political subdivision of
the State.
         (c)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this Section, the tax
shall not be imposed if and to the extent that imposition or collection of the
tax would violate the Constitution or statutes of the United States or the
constitution of the State of Illinois.
         (d)   The tax shall be imposed with respect to the use or consumption
of electricity by residential customers beginning with the first bill issued on
or after October 1, 1998; and with respect to the use or consumption of
electricity by nonresidential customers beginning with the first bill issued to
such customers for delivery services in accordance with section 16-104 of the
Public Utilities Act 2  or the first bill issued to such customers on or after
January 1, 2001, whichever issuance occurs sooner.
   (B)   Regulations: No tax is imposed by this Section with respect to any
transaction in interstate commerce or otherwise to the extent of which such
business may not, under the Constitution and statutes of the United States, be
made subject to taxation by this State or any political subdivision thereof;
nor shall any persons engaged in the business of distributing, supplying,
furnishing or selling gas or electricity, or engaged in the business of
transmitting messages be subject to taxation by this State or any political
subdivision thereof; nor shall any persons engaged in the business of
distributing, supplying, furnishing or selling gas or electricity, or engaged
in the business of transmitting messages be subject to taxation by this State
or any political subdivision thereof; nor shall any persons engaged in the
business of distributing, supplying, furnishing or selling gas or electricity,
or engaged in the business of transmitting messages be subject to taxation
under the provisions of this Section for such transactions as are or may become
subject to taxation under the provisions of the "Municipal Retailers'
Occupation Tax Act" authorized by statute (Section
3-8-2 of this Chapter).
Such tax shall be in addition to the payment of money, or value of products or
services furnished to the City by the taxpayer as compensation from the use of
its streets, alleys or other public places, or installation and maintenance
therein, thereon, or thereunder of poles, wires, pipes or other equipment used
in the operation of the taxpayer's business.
   (C)   Collection Of Tax:
      1.   Subject to the provision of subsection (E) of this Section regarding
the delivery of electricity to resellers, the tax imposed under this Section
shall be collected from purchasers by the person maintaining a place of
business in this State who delivers electricity to such purchasers. This tax
shall constitute a debt of the purchaser to the person who delivers the
electricity to the purchaser and is recoverable at the same time and in the
same manner as the original charge for delivering the electricity.
      2.   Any tax required to be collected by this Section, and any tax in
fact collected, shall constitute a debt owed to the City by the person
delivering the electricity, provided, that the person delivering electricity
shall be allowed credit for such tax related to deliveries of electricity the
charges for which are written off as uncollectible, and provided further, that
if such charges are thereafter collected, the delivering supplier shall be
obligated to remit such tax.
      3.   Persons delivering electricity shall collect the tax from the
purchaser by adding such tax to the gross charge for delivering the
electricity. Persons delivering electricity shall also be authorized to add to
such gross charge an amount equal to three percent (3%) of the tax they collect
to reimburse them for their expense incurred in keeping records, billing
customers, preparing and filing returns, remitting the tax and supplying data
to the City upon request.
   (D)   Tax Remittance And Return:
      1.   Every tax collector shall, on a monthly basis, file a return on a
form prescribed by the City. The return and accompanying remittance shall be
due on or before the last day of the month following the month during which the
tax is collected or is required to be collected under subsection (C) of this
Section.
      2.   If the person delivering electricity fails to collect the tax from
the purchaser or is excused from collecting the tax under subsection (E) of
this Section, then the purchaser shall file a return in a form prescribed by
the City and pay the tax directly to the City on or before the last day of the
month following the month during which the electricity is used or consumed.
   (E)   Resales:
      1.   Electricity that is delivered to a person in the City shall be
considered to be for the use and consumption by that person unless the person
receiving the electricity has an active resale number issued by the Director of
Finance and furnishes that number to the person who delivers the electricity
and certifies to that person that the sale is either entirely or partially
nontaxable as a sale for resale.
      2.   If a person who receives electricity in the City claims to be an
authorized reseller of electricity, that person shall apply to the Director of
Finance for a resale number. The application shall state facts showing why it
is not liable for the tax imposed by this Section on any purchases of
electricity and shall furnish such additional information as the Director of
Finance may reasonably require.
      3.   Upon approval of the application, the Director of Finance shall
assign a resale number to the applicant and shall certify the number to the
applicant.
      4.   The Director of Finance may cancel the resale number of any person
if the person fails to pay any tax payable under this Section for electricity
used or consumed by the person, or if the number: a) was obtained through
misrepresentation, or b) is no longer necessary because the person has
discontinued making resales.
      5.   (a) If a reseller has acquired electricity partly for use or
consumption and partly for resale, the reseller shall pay the tax imposed by
this Section directly to the City pursuant to subsection (D)2 of this Section
on the amount of electricity that the reseller uses or consumes, and shall
collect the tax pursuant to subsection (C) of this Section and remit the tax
pursuant to subsection (D)1 of this Section on the amount of electricity
delivered by the reseller to a purchaser.
         (b)   Any person who delivers electricity to a reseller having an
active resale number and complying with all other conditions of this Section
shall be excused from collecting and remitting the tax on any portion of the
electricity delivered to the reseller, provided that the person reports to the
City the total amount of electricity delivered to the reseller, and such other
information that the City may reasonably require.
   (F)   Books And Records: Every tax collector, and every taxpayer required to
pay the tax imposed by this amendment shall keep accurate books and records of
its business or activity, including contemporaneous books and records denoting
the transactions that gave rise, or may have given rise, to any tax liability
under this Section. The books and records shall be subject to and available for
inspection at all times during business hours of the day.
   (G)   Definitions: For the purpose of this Section the following definitions
shall apply:
    GROSS RECEIPTS: The consideration received for the transmission of
messages, or for distributing, supplying, furnishing or selling gas, or
electricity for use or consumption and not for resale, as the case may be; and
for all services rendered in connection therewith valued in money, whether
received in money or otherwise, including cash, credit, services and property
of every kind and material and for all services rendered therewith; and shall
be determined without any deduction on account of the cost of transmitting said
messages without any deduction on account of the cost of the service, product
or commodity supplied, the cost of materials used, labor or service cost or any
other expenses whatsoever.
   PERSON: Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership,
association, joint stock company, joint venture, corporation, Municipal
corporation or political subdivision of the State, or a receiver, trustee,
conservator or a representative appointed by order of court. Notwithstanding
the foregoing, no Municipal utility tax shall be assessed upon bills for
utility service rendered by the Municipality itself.
   PERSON MAINTAINING A PLACE OF BUSINESS IN THIS STATE: Any person having or
maintaining within this State, directly or by a subsidiary or other affiliate,
an office, generation facility, distribution facility, transmission facility,
sales office or other place of business, or any employee, agent or other
representative operating within this State under the authority o the person or
its subsidiary or other affiliate, irrespective of whether such place of
business or agent or other representative is located in this State permanently
or temporarily, or whether such person, subsidiary or other affiliate is
licensed or qualified to do business in this State.
   PURCHASE AT RETAIL: Any acquisition of electricity by a purchaser for
purposes of use or consumption, and not for resale, but shall not include the
use of electricity by a public utility, as defined in section
8-11-2 of the Illinois Municipal Code 3  directly in the generation,
production, transmission, delivery or sale of electricity.
   PURCHASER: Any person who uses or consumes, within the corporate limits of
the City, electricity acquired in a purchase at retail, other than from an
exempt purchaser.
   TAX COLLECTOR: The person delivering electricity to the purchaser.
   TRANSMITTING MESSAGES: In addition to the usual and popular meaning of a
person-to-person communication, shall include the furnishing, for a
consideration, of services or facilities (whether owned or leased) or both, to
persons in connection with the transmission of messages where such persons do
not, in turn, receive any consideration in connection therewith, but shall not
include such furnishing of services or facilities to persons for the
transmission of messages to the extent that any such services or facilities for
the transmission of messages are furnished for a consideration, by such persons
to other persons, for the transmission of messages.
   (H)   Credit For Overpayment: If it shall appear that an amount of tax has
been paid which was not due under the provisions of this Section, whether as
the result of a mistake of fact or an error of law, then such amount shall be
credited against any tax due, or to become due, under this Section from the
taxpayer who made the erroneous payment; provided that no amounts erroneously
paid more than three (3) years prior to the filing of a claim therefor, shall
be so credited. If a taxpayer under this Section is unable to use a credit
authorized by this Section solely because the tax imposed by this Section has
been replaced by the tax imposed under subsection (A)5 of this Section then the
taxpayer may apply such credit against any tax due under subsection (A)5 of
this Section.
   (I)   Statute Of Limitations: No action to recover any amount of tax due
under the provisions of this Section shall be commenced more than three (3)
years after the due date of such amount.
   (J)   Penalties: Any taxpayer who fails to make a return, or who makes a
fraudulent return, or who wilfully violates any other provision of this Section
is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not
less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than five hundred dollars
($500.00), and in addition shall be liable in a civil action for the amount of
tax due.
   (K)   If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of
this Ordinance is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court
of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct,
and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the
remaining provisions thereof. (Ord. 98-39, 10-5-1998; amd. ORD. 23-20, 12-4-
2023)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/8-11-2.
2 1. 220 ILCS 5/16-104.
3 1. 65 ILCS 5/8-11-2.
3-8-4: USE TAX:
   (A)   A tax is hereby imposed in accordance with the provisions of 65
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-6 upon the privilege of using in the City of
East Moline, Illinois, any item of tangible personal property which is
purchased outside Illinois at retail from a retailer, and which is titled or
registered with an agency of Illinois government. The tax shall be at a rate of
one percent (1%) of the selling price of such tangible property with selling
price to have the meaning as defined in the Use Tax Act, approved July 14,
1955.
   (B)   Such tax shall be collected by the Illinois Department of Revenue for
all municipalities imposing the tax and shall be paid before the title or
certificate of registration for the personal property is issued. (Ord. 74-50,
10-7-1974)
3-8-5: TELECOMMUNICATIONS INFRASTRUCTURE MAINTENANCE FEE:
   (A)   Definitions: As used in this Section, the following terms shall have
the following meanings:
    GROSS CHARGES: The amount paid to a telecommunications retailer for the act
or privilege of originating or receiving telecommunications within the City,
and for all services rendered in connection therewith, valued in money whether
paid in money or otherwise, including cash, credits, services, property of
every kind or nature, and shall be determined without any deduction on account
of the cost of such telecommunications, the cost of the materials used, labor
or service costs, or any other expense whatsoever. In case credit is extended,
the amount thereof shall be included only as and when paid. "Gross charges" for
private line service shall include charges imposed at each channel point within
the City, and charges for that portion of the interstate interoffice channel
provided with the City. However, "gross charges" shall not include:
      1.   Any amounts added to a purchaser's bill because of a charge made
under: a) the fee imposed by this Section, b) additional charges added to a
purchaser's bill under section 9-221 or 9-222 of the Public Utilities Act, c)
amounts collected under 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-17, d) the tax
imposed by the Telecommunications Excise Tax Act, e) 911 surcharges, or f) the
tax imposed by section 4251 of the Internal Revenue Code;
      2.   Charges for a sent collect telecommunications received outside the
City;
      3.   Charges for leased time on equipment or charges for the storage of
data or information or subsequent retrieval or the processing of data or
information intended to change its form or content. Such equipment includes,
but is not limited to, the use of calculators, computers, data processing
equipment, tabulating equipment, or accounting equipment and also includes the
usage of computers under a time-sharing agreement;
      4.   Charges for customer equipment, including such equipment that is
leased or rented by the customer from any source, wherein such charges are
disaggregated and separately identified from other charges;
      5.   Charges to business enterprises certified under section 9-222.1 of
the Public Utilities Act to the extent of such exemption and during the period
of time specified by the City;
      6.   Charges for telecommunications and all services and equipment
provided in connection therewith between a parent corporation and its wholly
owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, and only to the extent
that the charges between the parent corporation and wholly owned subsidiaries
or between wholly owned subsidiaries represent expense allocation between the
corporations and not the generation of profit other than a regulatory required
profit for the corporation rendering such services;
      7.   Bad debts ("bad debt" means any portion of a debt that is related to
a sale at retail for which gross charges are not otherwise deductible or
excludable that has become worthless or uncollectible, as determined under
applicable Federal income tax standards; if the portion of the debt deemed to
be bad is subsequently paid, the retailer shall report and pay the tax on that
portion during the reporting period in which the payment is made);
      8.   Charges paid by inserting coins in coin- operated telecommunications
devices; or
      9.   Charges for telecommunications and all services and equipment
provided to the City.
   PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY: Any Municipal street, alley, water or public right of
way dedicated or commonly used for utility purposes, including utility
easements wherein the City has acquired the right and authority to locate or
permit the location of utilities consistent with telecommunications facilities.
"Public right of way" shall not include any real or personal City property that
is not specifically described in the previous sentence and shall not include
City buildings and other structures or improvements, regardless of whether they
are situated in the public right of way.
   RETAILER MAINTAINING A PLACE OF BUSINESS IN THIS STATE: Or any like term,
means and includes any retailer having or maintaining within the State of
Illinois, directly or by a subsidiary, an office, distribution facilities,
transmission facilities, sales office, warehouse, or other place of business,
or any agent or other representative operating within this State under the
authority of the retailer or its subsidiary, irrespective of whether such place
of business or agent or other representative is located here permanently or
temporarily, or whether such retailer or subsidiary is licensed to do business
in this State.
   SALE OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS AT RETAIL: The transmitting, supplying or
furnishing of telecommunications and all services rendered in connection
therewith for a consideration, other than between a parent corporation and its
wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, when the gross
charge made by one such corporation to another such corporation is not greater
than the gross charge paid to the retailer for their use or consumption and not
for sale.
   SERVICE ADDRESS: The location of telecommunications equipment from which
telecommunications services are originated or at which telecommunications
services are received. If this is not a defined location, as in the case of
wireless telecommunications, paging systems, maritime systems, air-to-ground
systems, and the like, "service address" shall mean the location of the
customer's primary use of the telecommunications equipment as defined by the
location in Illinois where bills are sent.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS: Includes, but is not limited to, messages or information
transmitted through use of local, toll, and wide area telephone service,
channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter services, computer
exchange services, private line services, specialized mobile radio services, or
any other transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar
means, between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave,
radio, satellite, or similar facilities. Unless the context clearly requires
otherwise, "telecommunications" shall also include "wireless
telecommunications" as hereinafter defined. "Telecommunications" shall not
include value added services in which computer processing applications are used
to act on the form, content, code, and protocol of the information for purposes
other than transmission. "Telecommunications" shall not include purchase of
telecommunications by a telecommunications service provider for use as a
component part of the service provided by him or her to the ultimate retail
consumer who originates or terminates the end-to-end communications. Retailer
access charges, right of access charges, charges for use of intercompany
facilities, and all telecommunications resold in the subsequent provision and
used as a component of, or integrated into, end-to-end telecommunications
service shall not be included in gross charges as sale for resale.
"Telecommunications" shall not include the provision of cable services through
a cable system as defined in the Cable Communications Act of 1984 (47 USC
section 521 and following) as now or hereafter amended or cable or other
programming services subject to an open video system fee payable to the City
through an open video system as defined in the Rules of the Federal
Communications Commission (47 CDF 76-1550 and following) as now or hereafter
amended.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER:
      1.   Any telecommunications retailer; and
      2.   Any person that is not a telecommunications retailer that installs,
owns, operates or controls equipment in the public right of way that is used or
designed to be used to transmit telecommunications in any form.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS RETAILER OR RETAILER OR CARRIER: Means and includes every
person engaged in the business of making "sales of telecommunications at
retail" as defined in this Section. The City may, in its discretion, upon
application, authorize the collection of the fee hereby imposed by any retailer
not maintaining a place of business within this State, who, to the satisfaction
of the City, furnishes adequate security to ensure collection and payment of
the fee. When so authorized, it shall be the duty of such retailer to pay the
fee upon all of the gross charges for telecommunications in the same manner and
subject to the same requirements as a retailer maintaining a place of business
within the City.
   WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS: Includes cellular mobile telephone services,
personal wireless services as defined in section 704 (C) of the
Telecommunications Act of 1996 (Public Law No. 104-104), 42 USC §332(c)(7), as
now or hereafter amended, including all commercial mobile radio services, and
paging services.
   (B)   Registration Of Telecommunications Providers:
      1.   Every "telecommunications provider" as defined by this Section shall
register within the City within thirty (30) days after the effective date of
this Section or becoming a telecommunications provider, whichever is later, on
a form to be provided by the City, provided, however, that any
telecommunications retailer that has filed a return pursuant to subsection (D)3
of this Section shall be deemed to have registered in accordance with this
Section.
      2.   Every telecommunications provider who has registered with the City
pursuant to subsection (B)1 of this Section has an affirmative duty to submit
an amended registration form or current return as required by subsection (D)3
of this Section, as the case may be, to the City within thirty (30) days from
the date of the occurrence of any changes in the information provided by the
telecommunications provider in the registration form or most recent return on
file with the City.
   (C)   Municipal Telecommunications Infrastructure Maintenance Fee:
      1.   A City telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee is hereby
imposed upon all telecommunications retailers in the amount of one percent (1%)
of all gross charges charged by the telecommunications retailer to service
addresses within the City for telecommunications originating or received in the
City.
      2.   Upon the effective date of the infrastructure maintenance fee
authorized in this Section, the City infrastructure maintenance fee authorized
hereunder shall be the only fee or compensation for the use of all public
rights of way within the City by telecommunications retailers. Imposition of
the infrastructure maintenance fee provided under this Section does not,
however, serve as a limitation on the levying of any taxes or imposition of any
fees otherwise authorized by law.
      3.   The City telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee
authorized by this Section shall be collected, enforced, and administered as
set forth in subsection (D) of this Section.
   (D)   Collection, Enforcement, And Administration Of Telecommunications
Infrastructure Maintenance Fees:
      1.   A telecommunications retailer shall charge to and collect from each
customer an additional charge in an amount equal to the City infrastructure
maintenance fee attributable to that customer's service address.
      2.   Unless otherwise approved by the City Administrator, the
infrastructure maintenance fee shall be remitted by the telecommunications
retailer to the City not later than the last day of the month subsequent to the
month in which a bill is issued to the customer, provided, however, that the
telecommunications retailer may retain an amount not to exceed two percent (2%)
of the City infrastructure maintenance fee collected by it to reimburse itself
for expenses incurred in accounting for and remitting the fee.
      3.   Remittance of the Municipal infrastructure fee to the City shall be
accompanied by a return, in a form to be prescribed by the City Administrator,
which shall contain such information as the City Administrator may reasonably
require.
      4.   Any infrastructure maintenance fee required to be collected pursuant
to this Section and any such infrastructure maintenance fee collected by such
telecommunications retailer shall constitute a debt owed by the
telecommunications retailer to the City. The charge imposed under subsection
(D)1 of this Section by the telecommunications retailer pursuant to this
Section shall constitute a debt of the purchaser to the telecommunications
retailer who provides such services until paid and, if unpaid, is recoverable
at law in the same manner as the original charge for such services.
      5.   If it shall appear that an amount of infrastructure maintenance fee
has been paid that was not due under the provisions of this Section, whether as
a result of a mistake of fact or an error of law, then such amount shall be
credited against any infrastructure maintenance fee due, or to become due,
under this Section, from the telecommunications retailer who made the erroneous
payment; provided, however, the City Administrator may request and
telecommunications retailer shall provide, written substantiation for such
credit. However, no claim for such credit may be made more than three (3) years
after the date of the erroneous payment unless: a) the credit is used only to
offset a claim of underpayment made by the City within the applicable statutory
period of limitations, and b) the credit derives from an overpayment made by
the same telecommunications retailer during the applicable statutory period of
limitations.
      6.   Amounts paid under this Section by telecommunications retailers
shall not be included in the tax base under any of the following acts as
described immediately below:
         (a)   "Gross charges" for purpose of the Telecommunications Excise Tax
Act;
         (b)   "Gross receipts" for purposes of the municipal utility tax as
prescribed in 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-2;
         (c)   "Gross charges" for purposes of the municipal telecommunications
tax as prescribed in 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-17;
         (d)   "Gross revenue" for purposes of the tax on annual gross revenue
of public utilities prescribed in section 2-202 of the Public Utilities Act.
      7.   The City shall have the right, in its discretion, to audit the books
and records of all telecommunications retailers subject to this Section to
determine whether the telecommunications retailer has properly accounted to the
City for the City infrastructure maintenance fee. Any underpayment of the
amount of the City infrastructure maintenance fee due to the City by the
telecommunications retailer shall be paid to the City plus five percent (5%) of
the total amount of the underpayment determined in an audit plus any costs
incurred by the City in conducting the audit, in an amount not to exceed five
percent (5%) of the total amount of the underpayment determined in an audit.
Said sum shall be paid to the City within twenty one (21) days after the date
of issuance of an invoice for same.
      8.   The City Administrator, or his or her designee, may promulgate such
further or additional regulations concerning the administration and enforcement
of this Section, consistent with its provisions, as may be required from time
to time and shall notify all telecommunications retailers that are registered
pursuant to subsection (B) of this Section of such regulations.
   (E)   Compliance With Other Laws: Nothing in this Section shall excuse any
person or entity from obligations imposed under any law, including, but not
limited to:
      1.   Generally applicable taxes; and
      2.   Standards for construction on, over, under, within, use of or repair
of the public rights of way, including standards relating to freestanding
towers and other structures upon the public rights of way, as provided; and
      3.   Any liability imposed for the failure to comply with such generally
applicable taxes or standards governing construction on, over, under, or
within, use of or repair of the public rights of way; and
      4.   Compliance with any ordinance or provision of this Code concerning
uses or structures not located on, over, or within the right of way.
   (F)   Existing Franchises And Licenses: Any franchise, license, or similar
agreements between telecommunications retailers and the City entered into
before the effective date of this Section regarding the use of public rights of
way shall remain valid according to and for their stated terms except for any
fees, charges or other compensation to the extent waived.
   (G)   Penalties: Any telecommunications provider who violates, disobeys,
omits, neglects or refuses to comply with any of the provisions of this Section
shall be subject to fine in accordance with the general penalty provisions of
this Code.
   (H)   Enforcement: Nothing in this Section shall be construed as limiting
any additional or further remedies that the City may have for enforcement of
this Section.
   (I)   Severability: If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or
portion of this Section is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by
any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate,
distinct, and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the
validity of the remaining portions hereof.
   (J)   Conflict: This Section supersedes all sections or parts of sections
adopted prior hereto which are in conflict herewith, to the extent of such
conflict.
   (K)   Waiver And Fee Implementation:
      1.   The City hereby waives all fees, charges and other compensation that
may accrue, after the effective date of the waiver, to the City by a
telecommunications retailer pursuant to any existing City franchise, license,
or similar agreement with a telecommunications retailer during the time the
City imposes the telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee. This waiver
shall only be effective during the time the infrastructure maintenance fee
provided for in this Ordinance is subject to being lawfully imposed on the
telecommunications retailer and collected by the telecommunications retailer
from the customer.
      2.   The City Clerk shall send a notice of the waiver by certified mail/
return receipt requested to each telecommunications retailer with whom the City
has a franchise.
      3.   The city infrastructure maintenance fee provided for in this
ordinance shall become effective and imposed on the first day of the month not
less than ninety (90) days after the city provides written notice by certified
mail to each telecommunications retailer with whom the city has an existing
franchise, license, or similar agreement that the city waives all compensation
under such existing franchise, license, or similar agreement during such time
as the fee is subject to being lawfully imposed and collected by the retailer
and remitted to the city. The infrastructure maintenance fee shall apply to
gross charges billed on or after the effective date as established in the
preceding sentence. (Ord. 97-45, 11-17-1997)
3-8-6: HOTEL ACCOMMODATIONS TAX:
   (A)   Definitions And Construction: For the purpose of this ordinance,
whenever any of the following words, terms or definitions are used herein, they
shall have the following meaning:
    CITY: The city of East Moline.
   HOTEL ACCOMMODATIONS: A room or rooms in any building or structure located
in the city and kept, used or maintained as or advertised or held out to the
public to be an inn, motel, hotel, apartment hotel, lodging house, dormitory or
place, where sleeping, rooming, conference or exhibition accommodations are
furnished for lease or rent, whether with or without meals, in which ten (10)
or more such accommodations are used or maintained for guests, lodgers or
roomers. The term "hotel accommodations" does not include an accommodation
which a person occupies, or has the right to occupy, as his domicile and
permanent residence.
   PERSON: Any natural person, receiver, administrator, executor, conservator,
assignee, trust in perpetuity, trust, estate, firm, partnership, joint venture,
club, company, business trust, domestic or foreign corporation, association,
syndicate, society, or any group of individuals acting as a unit, where mutual,
cooperative, fraternal, for profit, nonprofit or otherwise. Whenever the term
"person" is used in any clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, the term as
applied to corporations shall include the officers thereof, and as applied to
any other entity, the owners or part owners thereof.
   TREASURER: The treasurer of the city of East Moline.
In this ordinance, unless the text otherwise requires, words in the singular
number include the plural and in the plural include the singular; words of the
masculine gender include the feminine and the neuter; and when the sense so
indicates, words in the neuter gender may refer to any gender.
   (B)   Tax Imposed: There is hereby imposed and shall accrue, as set forth
herein, and be collected a tax, as herein provided, upon the rental or leasing
of any hotel accommodations at the rate of five percent (5%) of the gross
rental or leasing charge.
   (C)   Tax Borne By Lessee: The ultimate incidence of and liability for
payment of said tax shall be borne by the hotel owner, manager or operator of
such hotel accommodations. The tax herein levied shall be in addition to any
and all other taxes. The hotel owner, manager, or operator may reimburse
themselves for their tax liability for such tax by charging the lessee or
tenant of such hotel accommodations by separately stating such tax as an
additional charge, which charge may be stated in combination, in a single
amount, with state tax imposed under the "hotel operators' occupation tax act",
on the lessee's or tenant's statement of charges. It shall be the duty of every
owner, manager or operator of hotel accommodations to secure said tax from the
lessee or tenant of said hotel accommodations and pay over to the treasurer
said tax under rules and regulations prescribed by the treasurer and as
otherwise provided by this ordinance.
   (D)   Collection: The tax herein levied shall be secured by the hotel owner,
manager or operator from the lessee or tenant when collecting the price,
charge, or rent to which it applies. Every lessee or tenant shall be given a
bill, invoice, receipt or other statement or memorandum of the price, charge or
rent payable upon which the hotel accommodations tax shall be stated, charged
and shown separately. The hotel accommodations tax shall be paid to the
treasurer or the authorized representative of this office on a monthly basis.
The tax shall be due on or before the fifteenth day of the succeeding calendar
month.
   (E)   Payment And Penalty For Nonpayment:
      1.   Every owner, manager or operator of hotel accommodations shall file
a sworn tax return on a monthly basis with the treasurer showing tax receipts
received with respect to hotel accommodation space rented or leased during the
preceding monthly period, upon forms prescribed by the treasurer. At the time
of filing said tax return, the owner, manager or operator of hotel
accommodations shall pay to the treasurer all taxes due for the period to which
the tax return applies.
      2.   If for any reason any tax is not paid when due, a penalty at the
rate of two percent (2%) per month on the amount of tax which remains unpaid
shall be added and collected. Whenever any person shall fail to pay any tax as
herein provided, upon the request of the treasurer, the city attorney shall
bring or cause to be brought an action to enforce the payment of said tax in
behalf of the city in any court of competent jurisdiction with the cost of such
enforcement to be borne by the owner of the hotel accommodations.
   (F)   Records: Every owner, manager or operator of hotel accommodations
shall keep books and records showing the prices, rents or charges made or
charged, and occupancies taxable under this ordinance. The treasurer, or his
designee, shall at all reasonable times have full access to said books and
records.
   (G)   Suspension Or Revocation Of Licenses: If the mayor, after hearing held
by or for him, shall find that any person has wilfully avoided payment of the
tax imposed by this ordinance, he may suspend or revoke all city licenses held
by said tax evader. The owner, manager or operator of the hotel accommodations
shall have an opportunity to be heard and such hearing shall not be held less
than five (5) days after notice of the time and place of the hearing, addressed
to the owner, manager or operator at his last known place of business. The
suspension or revocation of any license shall not release or discharge the
owner, manager or operator of hotel accommodations from civil liability for the
payment of the tax nor for prosecution of such offense.
   (H)   Proceeds: All proceeds resulting from the imposition of the tax under
this ordinance, including penalties, shall be distributed within thirty (30)
days after the fifteenth day of the calendar month as follows:
      1.   Four percent (4%) of the gross tax revenue collected shall be
retained by the city to defray the costs of administering and processing the
imposition and collection of the tax.
      2.   The balance of the gross tax revenue collected shall be invested by
the director of finance in accordance with the written "investment policy" of
the city.
      3.   The amounts collected from the hotel accommodations tax shall only
be expended by the city to expand and maintain city owned bike/multipurpose
trails, to promote tourism and conventions within the city, and to attract
nonresident overnight visitors to the city.
   (I)   Penalties: Any person found guilty for violating, disobeying,
omitting, neglecting, or refusing to comply with, or resisting or opposing the
enforcement of any of the provisions of this ordinance, except when otherwise
specifically provided, upon conviction thereof shall be guilty of a municipal
offense and punished by a fine of not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00)
nor more than three hundred dollars ($300.00) for the first offense and not
less than three hundred dollars ($300.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00) for the second and each subsequent offense within a two (2)
year calendar period, provided, however, that all actions seeking the
imposition of fines only shall be filed as quasi-criminal actions subject to
the provisions of the Illinois civil practice act 1 . A separate and distinct
municipal offense shall be regarded as committed each day when any person shall
continue any such violation of this ordinance, or otherwise permit a continuing
violation after notification.
   (J)   Severability: If any provision, clause, sentence, paragraph, section,
or part of this ordinance, or application thereof to any person, firm,
corporation, public agency or circumstance, shall for any reason, be adjudged
by a court of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or invalid, said
judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder of this ordinance
and the application of such provision to other persons, firms, corporations,
public agencies or circumstances, but shall be confined in its operation to the
provision, clause, sentence, paragraph, section, or part thereof directly
involved in the controversy in which such judgment shall have been rendered and
to the person, firm, corporation, public agency, or circumstance involved. It
is hereby declared to be the legislative intent of the city that this ordinance
would have been adopted had such unconstitutional or invalid provision, clause,
sentence, paragraph, section or part thereof not been included. (Ord. 02-36,
10-7-2002, eff. 1-1-2003)
 
Notes
1 1. 735 ILCS 1-101 et seq.
3-8-7: RESERVED:
(Ord. 25-10, 7-21-2025)
3-8-8: CANNABIS RETAILERS’ OCCUPATION TAX:
   (A)   Rate. A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business
of selling cannabis, other than cannabis purchased under the Compassionate Use
of Medical Cannabis Pilot Program Act, at retail in the City of East Moline at
the rate of 3% of the gross receipts from these sales made in the course of
that business. The imposition of this tax is in accordance with the provisions
of Sections 8-11-22, of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-22).
   (B)   Collection of tax by retailers. The tax imposed by this Ordinance
shall be remitted by such retailer to the Illinois Department of Revenue
(Department). Any tax required to be collected pursuant to or as authorized by
this Ordinance and any such tax collected by such retailer and required to be
remitted to the Department shall constitute a debt owed by the retailer to the
State. Retailers may reimburse themselves for their seller’s tax liability
hereunder by separately stating that tax as an additional charge, which charge
may be stated in combination, in a single amount, with any State tax that
sellers are required to collect. The taxes hereby imposed, and all civil
penalties that may be assessed as an incident thereto, shall be collected and
enforced by the Department. The Department shall have fall power to administer
and enforce the provisions of this article.
   (C)   Severability. If any provision of this Ordinance, or the application
of any provision of this Ordinance, is held unconstitutional or otherwise
invalid, such occurrence shall not affect other provisions of this Ordinance,
or their application, that can be given effect without the unconstitutional or
invalid provision or its application. Each unconstitutional or invalid
provision, or application of such provision, is severable, unless otherwise
provided by this Ordinance.
(Ord. 19-31, 11-4-2019)
CHAPTER 9
OPEN HOUSING
SECTION:
3-9-1: Assure Equal Opportunity
3-9-2: Discrimination By Owner
3-9-3: Real Estate Broker's License Required (Rep. by Ord. 79-18, 4-16-1979)
3-9-4: Unfair Housing Practice
3-9-5: Broker Subject To Regulations
3-9-6: Duties Of Commission On Human Relations
3-9-7: File Complaint
3-9-1: ASSURE EQUAL OPPORTUNITY:
It is hereby declared the policy of the City to assure full and equal
opportunity to all residents of the City to obtain fair and adequate housing
for themselves and their families in the City without discrimination against
them because of race, color, religion, national origin or ancestry. (Ord. 67-
38, 10-2-1967)
3-9-2: DISCRIMINATION BY OWNER:
It is further declared to be the policy of the City that no owner, lessee,
sublessee, assignee, managing agent or other person having the right to sell,
rent or lease any housing accommodation within the City, or any agent of any of
these, should refuse to sell, rent, lease or otherwise deny to or withhold from
any person or group of persons, such housing accommodations because of race,
color, religion, national origin or ancestry in the terms, conditions or
privileges of the sale, rental or lease of any housing accommodation or in the
furnishing of facilities or services in connection therewith. (Ord. 67-38, 10-
2-1967)
3-9-3: REAL ESTATE BROKER'S LICENSE REQUIRED:
(Rep. by Ord. 79-18, 4-16-1979)
3-9-4: UNFAIR HOUSING PRACTICE:
It shall be an unfair housing practice, and unlawful for any real estate broker
licensed as such by the City, or any person owning residential real estate
within the City:
   (A)   To make any distinction, discrimination or restriction against any
person in the price, terms, conditions or privileges of any kind relating to
the sale, rental, lease or occupancy of any real estate used for residential
purposes in the City or in the furnishing of any facilities or services in
connection therewith, predicated upon race, color, religion, national origin or
ancestry of the prospective or actual buyer or tenant thereof.
   (B)   To publish, circulate, issue or display, or cause to be published,
circulated, issued or displayed, any communication, notice, advertisement, sign
or other writing of any kind relating to sale, rental or leasing of any
residential real estate property within the City which will indicate or express
any limitation or discrimination in the sale, rental or leasing of such
residential real estate, predicated upon race, color, religion, national origin
or ancestry of any prospective buyer, lessee or renter of such property.
   (C)   To refuse to sell, lease or rent any real estate which is used or
occupied as a home, residence, sleeping place of one or more persons, place of
business or office, but such term shall not include rooms for rental to one or
two (2) persons in a single-family dwelling, the remainder of which is occupied
by: 1) the owner or members of his immediate family, or 2) a lessee of the
entire dwelling or members of his immediate family because of the race, color,
religion, national origin or ancestry of the proposed buyer or renter.
   (D)   To discriminate or to participate in the discrimination in connection
with borrowing or lending money, guaranteeing loans, accepting mortgages or
otherwise obtaining or making available funds for the purchase, acquisition,
construction, rehabilitation, repair or maintenance of any residential housing
unit or housing accommodation in the City because of race, color, religion,
national origin or ancestry.
   (E)   To solicit for sale, lease or listing for sale or lease, residential
real estate within the City on the ground of loss of value due to the present
or prospective entry into any neighborhood of any person or persons of any
particular race, color, religion, national origin or ancestry.
   (F)   To distribute or cause to be distributed, written material or
statements designed to induce any owner of residential real estate in the City
to sell or lease his property because of any present or prospective change in
the race, color, religion, national origin or ancestry.
   (G)   To deliberately and knowingly refuse examination of any listing of
residential real estate within the City to any person because of race, color,
religion, national origin or ancestry. (Ord. 67-38, 10-2-1967)
   (H)   To represent to any person, because of race, color, religion, or
national origin, that any dwelling is not available for inspection, sale or
rental when such dwelling is in fact so available. (Ord. 75-24, 5-5-1975)
3-9-5: BROKER SUBJECT TO REGULATIONS:
It is further declared to be the policy of the City that any person who shall
exercise within the City any function of a real estate broker, shall be deemed
a broker for all purposes hereunder and shall be subject to all applicable
provisions hereof. (Ord. 67-38, 10-2-1967)
3-9-6: DUTIES OF COMMISSION ON HUMAN RELATIONS:
It is further declared to be the policy of the City that it shall be the duty
of the Commission on Human Relations to:
   (A)   Initiate or receive and investigate complaints charging unlawful
housing practices.
   (B)   Seek conciliation of such complaints, hold hearing, make findings of
fact, and orders, in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter and with
the Chapter establishing the Commission (Title 2, Chapter 9 of this Code).
   (C)   Render from time to time, but not less than once a year, a written
report of its activities and recommendations with respect to fair housing
practices to the Mayor and to the Council.
   (D)   Adopt such rules and regulations as may be necessary to carry out the
purposes and provisions of this Chapter. (Ord. 67-38, 10-2-1967)
3-9-7: FILE COMPLAINT:
It is further declared to be the policy of the City that any person aggrieved
in any manner by any violations of any provisions of this Chapter may file a
written complaint setting forth his grievance with the Commission on Human
Relations. Said complaint shall state the name and address of the complainant
and of the persons against whom the complaint is brought and shall also state
the alleged facts surrounding the alleged violation of this Chapter. (Ord. 67-
38, 10-2-1967; amd. Ord. 75-24, 5-5-1975)
CHAPTER 10
OUTDOOR ADVERTISERS
SECTION:
3-10-1: Definition
3-10-2: License Required
3-10-3: Application
3-10-4: Fee
3-10-5: Consent Of Owner
3-10-6: Refuse
3-10-7: Weeds And Materials At Base Of Billboards
3-10-8: Unlawful Advertising
3-10-9: Disfiguring Signs
3-10-10: Name Of Advertiser
3-10-11: Exemptions
3-10-1: DEFINITION:
The term "outdoor advertisers" as used in this Chapter shall mean and is hereby
defined to mean any person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of
placing, posting or painting any sign, advertisement, notice or display in or
on any place for the purpose of outdoor advertising so that the resultant
display is visible from any street, alley, sidewalk or other public place.
(M.C. 1962, sec. 25.601)
3-10-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any outdoor advertiser to do business in the City
without having first secured a license therefor as is herein required;
provided, that no license issued under this Chapter shall be construed to
permit the use for advertising purposes of any structures, natural or
artificial, which are located in any public street, alley or other public
place. (M.C. 1962, sec. 25.602)
3-10-3: APPLICATION:
Applications for such licenses shall be made in writing to the Clerk and shall
be accompanied by a list of all places, including billboards or natural
structures, on which it is intended to place signs or advertisements. This list
shall be added to from time to time by the licensee as a right to post or place
advertisements or signs on additional places as acquired. (M.C. 1962, sec.
25.603)
3-10-4: FEE:
The annual fee for such license shall be fifty dollars ($50.00). (M.C. 1962,
sec. 25.604; amd. 1974 Code; Ord. 74-47, 9-3-1974)
3-10-5: CONSENT OF OWNER:
It shall be unlawful to post any advertisements on any premises in the City
without the consent of the owner of such premises. Such consent must be in
writing and must be filed with the Clerk. (M.C. 1962, sec. 25.605)
3-10-6: REFUSE:
It shall be unlawful for any person engaged in outdoor advertising to permit
any refuse resulting from this work to accumulate anywhere in the City
excepting by placing it in properly established refuse receptacles, It shall be
unlawful to permit any loose or flapping or combustible materials to hang from
or be attached to any billboard or signboard or other place used for display or
advertising purposes. All refuse resulting from the operation of this business
must be carefully gathered up and properly disposed of. (M.C. 1962, sec.
25.606)
3-10-7: WEEDS AND MATERIALS AT BASE OF BILLBOARDS:
It shall be the duty of every outdoor advertiser to keep all grass and weeds,
and other growths, except trees and ornamental shrubbery, cut down so that the
same shall not grow to a height greater than ten inches (10") within six feet
(6') of any billboard or signboard used by him; provided that this obligation
shall extend only to property controlled by the advertiser. (M.C. 1962, sec.
25.607)
3-10-8: UNLAWFUL ADVERTISING:
It shall be unlawful for any person to post or display any advertisement of an
obscene or immoral character, or any advertisement tending to promote or cause
a riot, or breach of peace, or any advertisement of any unlawful gathering, or
advertisements of unlawful sales. (M.C. 1962, sec. 25.608)
3-10-9: DISFIGURING SIGNS:
It shall be unlawful to mutilate or disfigure in any way any lawful sign or
advertisements in the City. (M.C. 1962, sec. 25.609)
3-10-10: NAME OF ADVERTISER:
It shall be unlawful for any outdoor advertiser to carry on his business unless
the name of such advertiser is attached, displayed or printed on all billboards
or signboards used by him, or on any notice, placard or advertisements posted
by him, in such lettering as to be visible from a distance of at least five
feet (5') from the notice of advertisement. (M.C. 1962, sec. 25.610)
3-10-11: EXEMPTIONS:
The provisions of this Chapter shall not be construed to apply to the posting
of signs or notices by order of any court or by any public officer in the
performance of his duties. (M.C. 1962, sec. 25.611)
CHAPTER 11
PUBLIC SOLICITATION
SECTION:
3-11-1: Permit Required
3-11-2: Application
3-11-3: Public Solicitation Of Public Roadway
3-11-1: PERMIT REQUIRED 1 :
It shall be unlawful for any person to go from house to house soliciting funds
or subscriptions, or to publicly solicit either in person or by agent, upon the
public streets, sidewalks, or any other public place in the City, subscriptions
for charitable or religious or educational or other organizations or purposes,
whether presents or gifts of money or promises are sought, without having first
secured a permit therefor. (M.C. 1962, sec. 27.1101)
 
Notes
1 1. See Chapter 14 of this Title.
3-11-2: APPLICATION:
Application for such permit shall be made to the Clerk and shall be referred to
the Mayor; and no permit shall be issued except upon the order of the Mayor and
City Council. (M.C. 1962, sec. 27.1102)
3-11-3: PUBLIC SOLICITATION OF PUBLIC ROADWAY:
Public solicitation on a street or other roadway within the City shall be
permitted upon written application to the Mayor and upon order of the Mayor and
City Council, only upon the following conditions:
   (A)   Solicitation shall be permitted by a soliciting agency registered with
the Attorney General of the State as a charitable organization.
   (B)   The soliciting agency is engaged in Statewide fund raising activities.
   (C)   Any solicitation is limited to an intersection controlled by four (4)
way stop signs.
   (D)   The soliciting agent must be at least sixteen (16) years of age and
must wear a high visibility vest.
   (E)   The soliciting agency agrees in writing to hold the City harmless and
free from any liability for any injury to any person or property during
solicitation which is related to or arising from the act of solicitation. (Ord.
79-72, 12-17-1979, eff. 1-1-1980)
CHAPTER 12
TAXICABS/LIVERY VEHICLES
SECTION:
3-12-1: Definitions
3-12-2: License Required
3-12-3: Character Of Applicant
3-12-4: License Fee
3-12-5: Vehicles
3-12-6: Register
3-12-7: Taximeters
3-12-8: Drivers
3-12-9: Insurance
3-12-10: Traffic Rules
3-12-11: Unlawful Use
3-12-12: Passengers
3-12-13: Rates Of Fare
3-12-14: Cab Stands
3-12-15: Chauffeur's License
3-12-16: Driver's Fee
3-12-17: Qualifications
3-12-1: DEFINITIONS:
   (A)   The term "taxicab" as used in this Chapter shall mean and include a
motor vehicle used to transport passengers for public hire with call and demand
authority which does not operate over a fixed route, and with a taximeter to
determine the fare.
   (B)   The term "livery" as used in this Chapter shall mean and include a
motor vehicle used to transport passengers in a prearranged contractual basis
at an hourly rate, for a minimum of one hour. (Ord. 94-31, 12-19-1994)
3-12-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful to engage in the business of operating a taxicab,
limousine, or any other livery vehicle, in the City without having first
secured a license therefor. Application for such license shall be made, in
writing, to the Clerk, and shall state thereon the name of the applicant, the
intended place of business and the number of cabs or livery vehicles to be
operated. If the applicant is a corporation, the names and addresses of the
President and Secretary thereof shall be given. (Ord. 94-31, 12-19-1994)
3-12-3: CHARACTER OF APPLICANT:
No such license shall be issued to or held by any person who is not a person of
good character or who has been convicted of a felony; nor shall such license be
issued to or held by any corporation if any officer thereof would be ineligible
for a license under the foregoing conditions. (Ord. 94-31, 12-19-1994)
3-12-4: LICENSE FEE:
   (A)   The annual fee for such license shall be twenty five dollars ($25.00)
per vehicle. Whenever the number of cabs so operated shall increase during the
license years, the licensee shall notify the Clerk of such change and shall pay
the additional fee.
   (B)   Such fee shall be in lieu of any other vehicle fee required by
ordinance and the Clerk shall issue suitable licenses for the number of cabs
covered by each license fee. Such license shall be displayed in a prominent
place on each taxicab or livery vehicle while it is in use, and may be
transferred to any taxicab or livery vehicle put into service to replace one
withdrawn from service.
   (C)   The licensee shall notify the Clerk of the motor number and State
license number of each cab operated and of the corresponding Municipal license
number. (Ord. 94-31, 12-19-1994)
3-12-5: VEHICLES:
   (A)   No taxicab or other livery vehicle shall be operated unless it bears a
State license duly issued; and no such vehicle shall be operated unless it is
equipped with proper brakes, lights, tires, horn, muffler, rear vision mirror,
and windshield wiper in good condition. It shall be the duty of the Chief of
Police to inspect every such vehicle so often as may be necessary to see to the
enforcement of the provisions of this section.
   (B)   Each taxicab, while operated, shall have on each side, in letters
readable from a distance of twenty feet (20'), the name of the licensee
operating it. If more than one cab is operated by the licensee, each cab shall
be designated by a different number, and such number also shall so appear on
each side of such cab.
   (C)   Every taxicab or livery vehicle must have the name of the driver
posted in such a place and manner for passengers to read. (Ord. 94-31, 12-19-
1994)
3-12-6: REGISTER:
It shall be the duty of the city clerk to keep a register of the names of
persons to whom such license is granted or transferred, the date when issued or
transferred, the number of the license and the description of the vehicle or
vehicles licensed. (Ord. 94-31, 12-19-1994)
3-12-7: TAXIMETERS:
   (A)   Required; Illumination: All taxicabs operated under the authority of
this chapter shall be equipped with taximeters fastened in front of the
passengers, visible to them at all times day and night. After sundown, the face
of the taximeter shall be illuminated.
   (B)   Operation; Recording: Said taximeter shall be operated by a mechanism
of standard design and construction, which will accurately record the fare for
each trip. Each taximeter shall be sealed at all points and connections which,
if manipulated, would affect its correct reading and recording. Each taximeter
shall have a device or signal to denote when the vehicle is employed and when
it is not employed. The device shall be at the recording position at the
termination of each trip.
   (C)   Inspection By The City: The taximeters shall be subject to inspection
from time to time by the city. The city administrator or his designee is hereby
authorized either on complaint of a person or without such complaint, to
inspect any meter and, upon discovery of any inaccuracy therein, to notify the
person operating said taxicab to cease operation. Thereupon said taxicab shall
be kept off the streets until the taximeter is repaired and is placed in the
required working condition.
   (D)   Inspection Fee: The city administrator may impose an inspection fee
equal to the expenses incurred for an inspection. He also may contract with an
independent agency to perform the necessary inspections. The fee of any
independent agency shall be paid by the taxi owner.
   (E)   Manifests: Every driver shall maintain a daily manifest upon which are
recorded all trips each day showing time and place of origin and destination of
each trip and amount of fare. All such completed manifests shall be returned to
the owner or operator by the driver at the conclusion of his tour of duty. The
forms of each manifest shall be furnished to the driver by the owner or
operator and shall be of a character approved by the city administrator.
Every holder of a business license shall retain and preserve all drivers'
manifests in a safe place for at least the calendar year next preceding the
current calendar year. Said manifests shall be available to the police
department for review. (Ord. 94-31, 12-19-1994)
3-12-8: DRIVERS:
No person shall drive a taxicab or other livery vehicle or be hired or
permitted to do so unless he is duly licensed as a chauffeur.
It shall be unlawful for any driver of a taxicab or livery vehicle while on
duty to drink any intoxicating liquor, or to use any profane or obscene
language, to shout or call to prospective passengers, or to disturb the peace
in any way. (Ord. 94-31, 12-19-1994)
3-12-9: INSURANCE:
No taxicab or livery vehicle shall be operated in the city of East Moline,
unless it is covered by a bond or public liability policy for one million
dollars ($1,000,000.00) for the single limit liability insurance needed for
personal injury, death, or property damage. (Ord. 03-19, 5-19-2003)
3-12-10: TRAFFIC RULES:
It shall be the duty of every driver of a taxicab or livery vehicle to obey all
traffic rules established by statute or ordinance. (Ord. 94-31, 12-19-1994)
3-12-11: UNLAWFUL USE:
It shall be unlawful to knowingly permit any taxicab to be used in the
perpetration of a crime or misdemeanor. (Ord. 94-31, 12-19-1994)
3-12-12: PASSENGERS:
It shall be the duty of the driver of any taxicab to accept as a passenger any
person who seeks to so use the taxicab, provided such person is not intoxicated
and conducts himself in an orderly manner. No person shall be admitted to a
taxicab occupied by a passenger without the consent of the passenger.
The driver shall take his passenger to his destination by the most direct
available route from the place where the passenger enters the cab. (Ord. 94-31,
12-19-1994)
3-12-13: RATES OF FARE:
   (A)   Posting Of Fares: A licensed operator shall post fares to be charged
with the city council fifteen (15) days prior to initiating any change in
taxicab fares. In addition, taxicab fares shall be prominently posted within
taxicabs, so that a passenger may determine the rate he is to be charged.
   (B)   Taximeters Rates: For service for the East Moline area the rate shall
be computed as follows: All trips will be based on a base rate of two dollars
($2.00) to enter the cab plus one dollar seventy five cents ($1.75) per mile
thereafter.
   (C)   Cab Rentals: All cab rentals shall be based on a minimum rental of one
hour. The rental rate shall be twenty dollars ($20.00) per hour plus one dollar
seventy five cents ($1.75) per mile and shall be for the use in the quad city
area. (Ord. 94-31, 12-19-1994)
3-12-14: CABSTANDS:
Cabstands shall be in the areas designated by the city council by ordinance.
Each cabstand shall be appropriately marked by signs erected under the
supervision of the chief of police. It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle,
other than a licensed taxicab or livery vehicle in any cabstand.
A licensed taxicab or livery vehicle may be parked in any cabstand while such
taxicab or livery vehicle is in charge of its driver on duty awaiting a fare.
(Ord. 94-31, 12-19-1994)
3-12-15: CHAUFFEUR'S LICENSE:
No person shall drive a taxicab or livery vehicle unless he shall have secured
a license therefor as herein provided. (Ord. 94-31, 12-19-1994)
3-12-16: DRIVER'S FEE:
The fee collected by the city for a taxicab or livery driver's license shall be
fifteen dollars ($15.00). (Ord. 94-31, 12-19-1994)
3-12-17: QUALIFICATIONS:
No such license shall be issued to any person who is not competent to operate a
motor vehicle or who is not familiar with the traffic laws and traffic
provisions of this code. The chief of police shall examine each applicant for a
taxicab or livery driver's license to determine the competence of the
applicant, and no such license shall be issued excepting on certificate of the
chief that the applicant has demonstrated his ability to operate a motor
vehicle as required herein. (Ord. 94-31, 12-19-1994)
CHAPTER 13
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS AND MASSAGE SERVICES
SECTION:
3-13-1: Definitions
3-13-2: Inspection
3-13-3: License, Fee, And Renewal
3-13-4: Application For Massage Establishment
3-13-5: Facilities Necessary
3-13-6: Operating Requirements
3-13-7: Operator To Maintain Register Of Employees
3-13-8: Revocation Or Suspension Of License
3-13-9: Cause Of Denial, Revocation, OR Suspension Of License
3-13-10: Appeal Of Denial, Suspension, Revocation
3-13-11: Employment Of Persons Under The Age Of Eighteen Prohibited
3-13-12: Sale Or Transfer
3-13-13: Name And Place Of Business; Change Of Location
3-13-14: Unlawful Activities
3-13-15: Exceptions From Chapter Regulations
3-13-16: Violations And Penalty
3-13-17: Severability
3-13-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
COMPENSATION: The payment, loan, advance, donation, contribution, deposit, or
gift of money or anything of value.
EMPLOYEE: Any and all persons, other than the massage therapist, who render any
service to the owner, who receive compensation directly from the owner, and who
have no physical contact with the customers or clients.
INSPECTOR: Health inspector or their authorized representative.
MASSAGE: Any method of pressure on or friction against, or stroking, kneading,
rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating, or stimulating of the external soft
parts of the body with the hands or with the aid of any mechanical electrical
apparatus or appliances with or without such supplementary aids as rubbing
alcohol, liniments, antiseptics, oils, powder, creams, lotions, ointments or
other similar preparations commonly used in this practice, this does not mean
the provision by a State of Illinois licensed barber or cosmetologist of
customary barber or cosmetologist services, including without limitation scalp
rubs, hand rubs, feet and lower leg rubs, and facials, that are authorized by
the state license. Further massage does not include an act of a state
registered athletic trainer or the diagnosis, prescribing drugs or medicines,
spinal or other joint manipulations, nor any service or procedure for which a
license to practice medicine, chiropractic, physical therapy, or podiatry is
required by law.
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT: Any fixed place of business, building, room, or
establishment, other than a regularly licensed hospital, dispensary, or nursing
home, where nonmedical and nonsurgical manipulative exercises are practiced
upon the human body or where activities described in the definition of
'massage', whether as a primary, secondary, or ancillary purpose of the
business, are engaged in for a fee or other gratuity. Any establishment engaged
in or carrying on, or permitting any combination of massage and bath house
shall also be deemed a massage establishment.
MASSAGE THERAPIST: An individual who is properly licensed by the Illinois
department of financial and professional regulation, in accordance with the
massage therapy practice act, 225ILCS 57/1 et seq., and administers massage for
compensation.
OPERATOR/OWNER: Any entity that operates, owns, or controls a massage
establishment under this chapter.
SEXUAL OR GENITAL AREA: The genitals, pubic area, buttocks, anus or perineum of
any person, or the vulva or breasts of a female.
By reference hereto, and to the fullest extent possible, the city adopts the
provisions of 225 ILCS 57/1 et seq., including all requirements thereof.
(Ord. 24- 10, 11-4-2024)
3-13-2: INSPECTION:
   The City of East Moline police department, inspector, city attorney, or any
other designee of the city may conduct an inspection at any time during
business hours, upon complaint, and at least annually of each massage
establishment in the City of East Moline for the purposes of determining that
the provisions of this chapter are complied with.
(Ord. 24-10, 11-4-2024)
3-13-3: LICENSE, FEE, AND RENEWAL:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a massage establishment
without first having obtained a license from the city after approval of the
health inspector.
   (B)   Every applicant for a license to maintain, operate, or conduct a
massage establishment shall file an application under oath with the city upon a
form provided by said city and pay a filing fee of fifty dollars ($50), which
shall not be refundable.
   (C)   Licenses shall be valid for a period of one (1) year, expiring on the
30th of June.
(Ord. 24-10, 11-4-2024)
3-13-4: APPLICATION FOR MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT:
The application for a license to operate a massage establishment shall contain
the following information:
   (A)   Owner's name and date of birth.
   (B)   Owner's address, phone, and email.
   (C)   Business name, address, phone, and proposed hours of operation.
   (D)   Following information for all massage therapists: name, phone number,
email, photograph of massage therapist, valid IL massage therapist license,
exact duties, home address, and copy of valid picture ID.
   (E)   Description of all services to be performed.
   (F)   On-site manager's name, address, phone, and email.
   (G)   Provide a statement as to whether the applicant, any of the
applicant's partners, officers, or directors and the individual who shall be
responsible for operations of the massage establishment have ever been
convicted, pleaded nolo contendere to, or is currently charged with committing,
by indictment or information, any felony violation or offense or any crime of
moral turpitude, and as to each such conviction, pleas or charge, the
applicant, any of its partners, officers, or directors and the individual who
shall be responsible for operation of the massage establishment shall provide
the conviction or plea date if applicable, the case number, the nature of the
felony offense or crime of moral turpitude and the name and location of the
court or other adjudicative body.
   (H)   Previous three (3) year business, occupation, or employment history of
the applicant; whether such person, in previously operating in this or another
city or state under license, has had such license revoked or suspended, the
reason therefor, and the business activity or occupation subsequent to such
action of suspension or revocation.
   (I)   Fingerprints and background will be taken at the police department for
owner and all massage therapists.
   (J)   The tax identification number.
   (K)   All criminal convictions except minor traffic violations.
   (L)   Applicant must furnish a current massage therapy license from the
Illinois department of financial and professional regulation.
   (M)   Certification from the City of East Moline building, fire, police, and
zoning departments that proposed licensed premises are in conformity with all
regulations and ordinances of the department.
   (N)   Upon receipt of all required application materials, the City of East
Moline police department will review the criminal history of the applicant(s)
and provide a report to the inspector that includes information on any criminal
history and whether the applicant meets the requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. 24-10, 11-4-2024)
3-13-5: FACILITIES NECESSARY:
   A license to open a massage establishment shall not be issued unless an
inspection by the inspector reveals that the establishment complies with all
current city ordinances and state codes.
(Ord. 24-10, 11-4-2024)
3-13-6: OPERATING REQUIREMENTS:
   (A)   Every portion of a massage establishment, including appliances,
apparatus, and personnel shall be kept clean and operated in a sanitary
condition.
   (B)   All employees shall be clean and shall wear suitable, clean, outer
garments whose use is restricted to the massage establishment. Provision of a
separate dressing room for each sex must be available on the premises.
   (C)   Each therapist shall wash his or her hands in hot running water, using
a proper disinfectant soap, before administering a massage to each patron. Hand
washing facilities should be in each room or as close as practicable.
   (D)   All massage establishments shall be provided with clean, laundered
sheets and towels in sufficient quantity and shall be laundered after each use
and stored in a sanitary manner. All towels and linens furnished for use of one
(1) patron shall not be furnished for use of another until laundered.
   (E)   The sexual or genital area of patrons must be covered by
nontransparent towels, cloths or undergarments when in the presence of an
employee or therapist.
   (F)   No therapist shall administer a massage to a patron who exhibits any
skin fungus, skin infection, skin inflammation, skin eruption or skin lesions
(open or healing sores), unless a physician duly licensed by the State of
Illinois has certified in writing that such person may be safely massaged, and
the patron provides a copy of such document to the therapist prior to the
massage.
   (G)   No person suffering from any symptoms described in subsection (F) of
this section shall work in a massage establishment
   (H)   Oils, creams, lotions or other preparations used in administering
massages shall be kept in clean, closed containers or cabinets.
   (I)   Eating in the massage work areas shall not be permitted. Animals,
except for duly certified service animals, shall not be permitted in the
massage work areas.
   (J)   No therapist, employee or operator shall perform, offer or agree to
perform, any act which would require the touching of the patron's sexual or
genital area. It is unlawful for any person in the massage establishment to
touch, fondle, or massage a sexual or genital area of any other person.
   (K)   Each therapist shall disclose to each patron health problems that may
be contraindicated to the administration of massage therapy.
   (L)   Wet and dry heat rooms, shower compartments, and toilet rooms shall be
thoroughly cleaned each day the business is in operation. Bathtubs shall be
thoroughly cleaned after each use.
   (M)   Advertising: No massage establishment granted a license under the
provisions of this chapter shall place, publish or distribute or cause to be
placed, published or distributed any advertising matter that depicts any
portion of the human body that would reasonably suggest to prospective patrons
that any service, including any sex service and/or escort service, is available
other than those services as described in section
3-13-1 of this chapter, nor shall any massage establishment indicate in the
text, printed or digital, of such advertising that any service is available
other than those services as described in section 3-13-1 of this chapter.
   (N)   Windows considered to be the store front must remain transparent and
shall not be covered with advertising or other items.
   (O)   No service in section
3-13-1 of this ordinance by definition of massage, may be carried on within any
cubicle, room, booth or any area within a massage establishment which is fitted
with a door capable of being locked.
   (P)   Massage establishments shall not operate between the hours of nine
o’clock (9:00) pm and six o’clock (6:00) am, hours shall be posted and visible
by a member of the public.
(Ord. 24-10, 11-4-2024)
3-13-7: OPERATOR TO MAINTAIN REGISTER OF EMPLOYEES:
   (A)   The operator of a massage establishment must maintain a register of
all persons employed as massage therapists and each massage therapist's valid
license issued by the State of Illinois pursuant to the IL massage therapy
practice act, 225 ILCS 57/1, et seq" or valid certificate issued by an
authorized organization as set forth in the act. Every licensee shall display a
valid State of Illinois license and a City of East Moline license in a
conspicuous place within the massage establishment so that the licenses may be
readily seen by persons entering the premises.
   (B)   The operator shall keep a list containing the names and current
addresses of all employees working at the licensee's business premises along
with a declaration as to whether the employee is employed as a massage
therapist as defined herein. This list shall be revised by the licensee within
five (5) business days of the departure or upon the hiring of a new employee.
Registers, licenses, certificates, and corresponding documentation shall be
available for inspection at all times during regular business hours or whenever
requested by the city.
(Ord. 24-10, 11-4-2024)
3-13-8: REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF LICENSE:
   Any license issued for a massage establishment may be revoked or suspended
by the city for good cause, or in any case where any of the provisions of this
chapter are violated.
(Ord. 24-10, 11-4-2024)
3-13-9: CAUSE FOR DENIAL, REVOCATION, OR SUSPENSION OF LICENSE:
The license may be denied, immediately revoked, or suspended for just cause
including but not limited to:
   (A)   The correct license fee and/or application costs have not been
tendered to the city.
   (B)   The applicant for, or holder of, a license, if an individual; or any
of the stockholders, any of the officers and directors, if the applicant or
license holder is a corporation; or any of the partners, including limited
partners, if the applicant or license holder is a partnership; or the operator,
manager or any other person principally in charge of the massage establishment,
has been convicted of any of the following offenses or convicted of an offense
outside the State of Illinois that would have constituted any of the following
offenses if committed within the State of Illinois in the past ten (10) years;
      1.   Any offense involving sexual misconduct with children or other sex
offenses, as defined in chapter 720 of the Illinois compiled statutes;
      2.   A felony that involved the use of a deadly weapon, trafficking
narcotic drugs, or violence against another person, including rape or other
sexual misconduct, within the ten (10) years immediately preceding the date of
application;
      3.   A misdemeanor or licensing ordinance violation from any
jurisdiction, based upon conduct related to the business for which the business
license was applied; or
      4.   A crime of moral turpitude.
   (C)   The applicant for, or holder of, a license has knowingly made any
false, misleading, or fraudulent statement of fact in the license application,
or in any document required by the city in connection with this chapter.
   (D)   The applicant, if an individual; or any of the officers and directors,
if the applicant is a corporation; or any of the partners, including limited
partners, if the applicant is a partnership; and the manager or other person
principally in charge of the operation of the business, is not over the age of
eighteen (18) years.
   (E)   The application was incomplete or incorrectly completed.
   (F)   The establishment would not comply with this chapter and all
applicable laws, including but not limited to, both the City of East Moline and
state's building, zoning and health regulations.
   (G)   Any person has committed, on the premises of the establishment, an act
that would constitute prostitution pursuant to the laws of the State of
Illinois, or any offense involving narcotics, dangerous drugs, or gambling,
whether or not such person has been convicted of such prostitution, narcotics,
dangerous drugs or gambling offense under the laws of the State of Illinois.
   (H)   The establishment or any employee of the establishment has not
complied with the provisions of this chapter.
   (I)   Any violation of the advertising restrictions under this chapter.
   (J)   Upon the determination of the health officer that such business is
being managed, conducted or maintained without regard for the public health or
health of its patrons or without due regard to proper sanitation and hygiene.
(Ord. 24-10, 11-4-2024)
3-13-10: APPEAL OF DENIAL, SUSPENSION, REVOCATION:
   (A)   Any person desiring to contest a denial, suspension or revocation of a
license under this chapter shall have a right to appeal such decision to the
mayor or designee thereof as provided in this section within fourteen (14) days
after receipt of the notice of denial, suspension, or revocation by giving such
notice in writing and requesting a hearing.
   (B)   The mayor or designee thereof, after receipt of the written request
for a hearing, shall set a time and date for such hearing.
   (C)   The mayor or designee thereof shall give written notice of the time,
date and place for hearing to the applicant or permit holder at least five [5]
days in advance of the hearing date.
   (D)   At the hearing, the applicant or license holder may present and submit
evidence and witnesses to rebut the reasons cited for suspending, revoking or
denying the license. The appealing party shall have the right to file
additional documents, amend the written appeal and appear at such hearing in
person, be represented by an attorney and examine and cross-examine witnesses.
   (E)   The mayor or designee thereof shall not be bound by the rules of
evidence prevailing in the courts of law but shall, in ascertaining the
conditions and practices involved in the decision appealed, take into account
all reliable, probative and substantial evidence produced at the hearing
relating to the denial of the application or revocation of the permit.
   (F)   The appealing party shall supply, at his or her own cost, a court
reporter.
   (G)   Within fourteen (14) days after the close of the hearing, the mayor or
designee thereof shall render a decision in writing and make it available to
the appealing party.
   (H)   The mayor or designee thereof may reinstate a revoked license, grant
the requested license or renewal thereof, or affirm the suspension.
   (I)   The decision issued pursuant to this section shall be final.
   (J)   If a hearing is waived, the appealing party shall submit what
documentation he or she desires to have the mayor or designee thereof consider
with the written appeal, and the mayor or designee thereof shall render a
decision within fourteen (14) days of the filing of the written appeal.
(Ord. 24-10, 11-4-2024)
3-13-11: EMPLOYMENT OF PERSONS UNDER THE AGE OF EIGHTEEN PROHIBITED:
   It shall be unlawful for any owner, proprietor, manager or other person in
charge of any massage establishment to employ any person who is not at least
eighteen (18) years of age.
(Ord. 24-10, 11-4-2024)
3-13-12: SALE OR TRANSFER:
   Upon sale, transfer or relocation of a massage establishment, the permit and
license therefore shall be null and void; provided, however, that upon the
death or incapacity of the owner the massage establishment may continue in
business for a reasonable period of time to allow for an orderly transfer of
the permit.
(Ord. 24-10, 11-4-2024)
3-13-13: NAME AND PLACE OF BUSINESS; CHANGE OF LOCATION:
   No person granted a license pursuant to this chapter shall operate under any
name or conduct their business under any designation for any location not
specified in their permit.
(Ord. 24-10, 11-4-2024)
3-13-14: UNLAWFUL ACTIVITIES:
   It shall be unlawful for any person to massage any other person or give or
administer any of the other things mentioned in this chapter which violate the
provisions of this chapter or which violate any municipal or state law or
ordinance, including any offenses as set forth in 720 Illinois compiled
statutes 5/11-5 to 5/11-22 entitled "Sex Offenses". Any violation of this
provision shall be deemed grounds for revocation of the license granted
hereunder.
(Ord. 24-10, 11-4-2024)
3-13-15: EXCEPTIONS FROM CHAPTER REGULATIONS:
   This chapter shall not include hospitals, nursing homes, sanitaria, or
persons holding an unrevoked certificate to practice the healing arts under the
laws of the State of Illinois, or persons working under the direction of any
such persons or in any such establishments, nor shall this chapter apply to
barbers or cosmetologists lawfully carrying out their particular profession or
business and holding a valid, unrevoked license or certificate of registration
issued by the State of Illinois.
(Ord. 24-10, 11-4-2024)
3-13-16: VIOLATION AND PENALTY:
   Any person who violates, neglects, refuses to comply with or exists or
participates in any way in the violation of any of the provisions or
requirements of this chapter commits an offense, and each day a violation is
continued shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. Any person
committing any offense under this chapter shall be fined as follows: not less
than twenty-five dollars ($25) per day, per offense and not more than seven
hundred and fifty dollars ($750) per day, per offense.
(Ord. 24-10, 11-4-2024)
3-13-17: SEVERABILITY:
   If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or
phrase of this chapter or any part thereof, is for any reason held to be
unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of
the remaining portions of this chapter or any part thereof. The city council
hereby declares that it would have passed each section, subsection,
subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase thereof irrespective of the
fact that any one or more sections, subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs,
sentences, clauses or phrases be declared unconstitutional, invalid or
ineffective.
(Ord. 24-10, 11-4-2024)
CHAPTER 14
SOLICITORS AND CANVASSERS
SECTION:
3-14-1: Registration Required
3-14-2: Fee
3-14-3: Certificate
3-14-4: Exceptions
3-14-5: Revocation
3-14-1: REGISTRATION REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in business as a canvasser or
solicitor, calling at residences without the previous consent of the occupant
for the purpose of soliciting orders, sales, subscriptions or business of any
kind, or seeking for information or donations without first having registered
in the office of the city clerk. The registrant shall give his complete
identification, his signature, two (2) portrait photographs of approximately
two inches by two inches (2" x 2"), the name of his employer, the address and
phone number of his employer, the nature of the products or services in which
he is interested, the names of the manufacturers of such products, or of the
organization which he is representing, and the proposed method of operation in
the city. The general penalty provisions of this code shall be applied upon a
violation of this section. (Ord. 74-52, 10-21-1974; amd. Ord. 77-42, 10-3-1977)
3-14-2: FEE:
Each registrant shall pay to the city clerk a registration fee of twenty five
dollars ($25.00) for a period expiring six (6) days after the date of said
registration, or in the alternative, a registration fee of three hundred
dollars ($300.00), for a license period of one year from the date of
registration, which may be renewed annually. Any organization which is exempt
from taxation under the internal revenue laws of the United States as a bona
fide fraternal, charitable, benevolent or nonprofit organization shall be
exempt from the payment of the registration fee, and photograph requirements.
(Ord. 11-10, 3-21-2011)
3-14-3: CERTIFICATE:
Each applicant who shows evidence of good character and who pays the fee
provided for herein or who has been exempted from the payment of said fee,
shall be furnished a certificate indicating that he or she has registered and
showing the dates covered by such registration, after the city clerk has had
opportunity to investigate all information furnished to him by the applicant,
said period of investigation not to exceed fourteen (14) days. (Ord. 75-6, 3-3-
1975)
Each person shall at all times while soliciting or canvassing in the city carry
upon his person the registration certificate with a two inch by two inch (2" x
2") portrait photograph attached thereto, and the certificate with attached
photograph shall be exhibited by such registrant whenever he is required to do
so by any police officer or by any person solicited. (Ord. 74-52, 10-21-1974)
3-14-4: EXCEPTIONS:
The provisions of this ordinance shall not apply to officers or employees of
the city, county, state or federal government, or any subdivision thereof, when
on official business. (Ord. 74-52, 10-21-1974)
3-14-5: REVOCATION:
Any such registration may be revoked by the mayor or the chief of police
because of any violation by the registrant of this ordinance or of any other
ordinance of the city, or of any state or federal law, or whenever the
registrant shall cease to possess the qualifications and character required in
this ordinance for the original registration. (Ord. 74-52, 10-21-1974)
CHAPTER 15
AMUSEMENT TAX
SECTION:
3-15-1: Definitions
3-15-2: Tax Imposed
3-15-3: Time Of Payment
3-15-4: Books And Records
3-15-5: Exemptions
3-15-6: Reports
3-15-7: Administration And Enforcement
3-15-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this Chapter, the following terms have the following meanings:
              Any and all mechanical devices of entertainment and games of skill or amusement
AMUSEMENT     operated for gain or for profit, including, but not necessarily limited to, the
DEVICES:      following: video games, other arcade games, billiards and pool tables, pinball
              games, virtual reality games, and computerized games.
              Any and all participatory, spectator and exhibitive diversions and
              entertainments, including but not limited to the following activities: any
              theatrical, dramatic, musical or spectacular performance; motion picture show;
              flower, poultry or animal show; carnival; amusement park rides; animal acts;
              circuses; rodeos; athletic contests; sports or games, including bowling,
              boxing, wrestling, tennis, racquetball, handball, golf, skating, dancing,
AMUSEMENTS:   swimming, racing or riding animals or vehicles, baseball, basketball, softball,
              football, hockey, track and field games, soccer, rugby; billiards and pool
              games; video movies and video games; computer games; and pinball games, arcade
              games and all other mechanical devices of entertainment and games of skill or
              diversion, including amusement devices. Instructional activity, even if the
              subject matter of the instruction might be considered an amusement, shall not
              be considered an amusement for purposes of this Chapter.
              All fees or charges paid in the form of fees or charges for admission to any
              place of amusement and/or for use or rental of any facility, device or
              equipment for the purpose of witnessing, participating in, or utilizing any
              amusement, regardless of whether such fees or charges are characterized as
              admission fees, membership fees, use charges, rental or service charges,
              excluding golf cart rentals. Gross payments shall be exclusive of any tax
              imposed by the United States Government, the state of Illinois, or any other
              governmental unit. A fee or charge which entitles the patrons in any amusement
              or place of amusement operated within the corporate limits of the City to bona
              fide services in addition to or unrelated to the witnessing or participating in
              the amusement shall not be subject to the tax provided for in this Chapter,
              except however:
GROSS         1.   Where a fee or charge is comprised of identifiable components, packages or
PAYMENT:      tiers, the tax provided for in this Chapter shall be imposed on payments of any
              such components, packages or tiers which provide solely for admission to any
              place of amusement and/or for the use or rental of any facility, device or
              equipment for the purpose of witnessing, utilizing or participating in any
              amusement;
              2.   Where payment of a single fee or charge for admission to any place of
              amusement and/or for the use or rental of any facility, device or equipment for
              tire purpose of witnessing or participating in any amusement also entitles the
              patron of the amusement or place of amusement to the incidental use of parking,
              restaurant, bar, refreshment, locker room, changing room, washroom and/or
              shower facilities or services, the tax provided for in this Chapter shall be
              imposed on the payment of such fee or charge, provided tine predominant
              activity of such facility is an amusement.
INSTRUCTIONAL Any activity, the primary objective and characteristic of which is instruction
ACTIVITY:     in the skills, rules and other aspects of the particular activity, and
              participation in the activity is ancillary to the instruction.
PERSON:       Any individual, firm, partnership, association, joint stock company, joint
              venture corporation, unless exempted from application of this Chapter.
              Activities that are traditionally pursued for purposes of health benefits,
              physical rehabilitation and self-improvement, and not primarily for amusement,
PHYSICAL      including, but not necessarily limited to, running (with or without a
FITNESS       treadmill), bicycling (stationary or otherwise), weightlifting and body
ACTIVITIES:   building, aerobic, agility and other workout activities, dieting and
              nutritional programming, personal training activities, yoga, martial arts and
              similar activities.
              Any premises or facility that offers amusements, including amusement devices,
PLACE OF      for gain or profit by a person who is not otherwise exempt under the terms of
AMUSEMENT:    this Chapter, and provided that the predominant activity of such premises or
              facility is an amusement. A premises or facility that predominantly offers
              physical fitness activities shall not be considered a place of amusement.
VIDEO GAMES:  Video tape or video disc copy of a home entertainment game generally offered
              for paid use other than for outright sale to customers.
              Video tape or video disc copy of a motion picture film, television show, or
VIDEO MOVIE:  similar exhibition, generally offered for paid use other than for outright sale
              to customers. (Ord .19-09, 3-4-2019; amd. Ord. 19-15, 5-20-2019)
 
3-15-2: TAX IMPOSED:
   (A)   A tax is imposed on patrons of amusements or places of amusement
within the corporate limits of the City in an amount equal to three percent
(3%) of the gross payments made in the form of fees or charges for admission to
any facility and/or the use or rental of any facility, device or equipment for
the purpose of witnessing or participating in any amusement, irrespective of
whether such fees or charges are characterized as admission fees, membership
fees, service or use charges or rent. Gross payments, as defined in this
Chapter, shall be exclusive of any tax imposed by the United States government,
the state of Illinois, or any other governmental unit.
   (B)   The tax shall be imposed on the privilege of witnessing or
participating in all amusements or places of amusement as a business for
profit, irrespective of whether such amusement or place of amusement is
available generally to the public or requires a membership as a precondition to
admission to participation in or observation of the amusement or place of
amusement.
   (C)   The ultimate incidents of and liability for payment of such tax shall
be borne by the person who seeks participation in, witnessing of, admission to,
any amusement or place of amusement. Such persons shall be referred to in this
Chapter as “patrons”. (Ord. 19-09, 3-4-2019; amd. Ord. 19-15, 5-20-2019)
3-15-3: TIME OF PAYMENT:
   (A)   The tax levied in this Chapter shall be paid in addition to any and
all other taxes and charges. It shall be the duty of the owner, manager, or
operator of every amusement or place of amusement in the City to act as a
trustee for and on account of the City, and to secure such tax from the patron
and pay over to the Local Tax Administrator or designee such tax under
procedures prescribed by the Local Tax Administrator or as otherwise provided
in this Chapter.
   (B)   Every person required to collect the tax shall secure such tax from
the patron at the time of admission, participation fee, rental or other charge
is made for the amusement or place of amusement. The amount due for the tax
shall be stated separately on any and all invoices, receipts, or other
statements or documents, if any, which are generated at the time of the payment
of the fee or charge.
   (C)   The tax collected pursuant to this Chapter by every owner, manager, or
operator of all amusements or places of amusements shall be due and payable on
the fifteenth day of the month following the preceding calendar month during
which the gross payments were received. The tax collected shall be paid to the
Local Tax Administrator or designee and shall be accompanied by the report
required by Section
3-15-6 herein.
   (D)   In the event the amusement tax liability for any month is less than
two hundred dollars ($200.00), the tax for that month shall be paid with the
next monthly payment. The tax report forms shall be delivered to the Local Tax
Administrator at the time taxes are paid.
   (E)   If, for any reason, any tax due pursuant to this Chapter is not paid
when due, penalties and interest thereon shall be imposed in accordance with
the provisions of this Chapter and the remainder of this code. (Ord. 19-09, 3-
4-2019; amd. Ord. 19-15, 5-20-2019)
3-15-4: BOOKS AND RECORDS:
   (A)   Duty to Maintain Records. Each person required to collect the tax
provided for in this Chapter shall, either personally or through authorized
agents, maintain complete books and records covering the operation of the
amusement or place of amusement, indicating in such records all payments made
for the privilege of witnessing, participating or utilizing the amusement or
place of amusement. Such books and records shall be maintained on the premises
wherein any amusement or place of amusement is operated and shall be subject to
inspection by the Local Tax Administrator or his or her authorized agents in
accordance with the audit procedures provided for in Section
1-30-8 of this code.
   (B)   Such books and records which are required to be maintained under the
terms of this Chapter shall be kept for at least a period of three years. (Ord.
19-09, 3-4-2019; amd. Ord. 19-15, 5-20-2019)
3-15-5: EXEMPTIONS:
The tax imposed shall not apply to or be imposed upon the privilege of
witnessing or participating in those amusements and places of amusement the
proceeds of which inure exclusively to the benefit of religious, charitable, or
educational institutions or organizations, or not-for-profit entities, provided
no part of the net earnings are retained or retainable by an owner or person
having an ownership interest, public and private preschools and elementary and
secondary schools, and activities conducted or sponsored by the City. (Ord. 19-
09, 3-4-2019; amd. Ord. 19-15, 5-20-2019)
3-15-6: REPORTS:
On or before the fifteenth day of each month, each person liable for the
collection of the tax shall file with the Local Tax Administrator or designee a
written report in such form as the Local Tax Administrator may from time to
time provide, stating the gross payments collected during the preceding month
in the form of fees or charges, and the tax collected pursuant to this Chapter.
(Ord. 19-09, 3-4-2019; amd. Ord. 19-15, 5-20-2019)
3-15-7: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT:
   (A)   The Local Tax Administrator or designee shall be the administration
and enforcement officer of the tax imposed on behalf of the City. It shall be
the responsibility and duty of the Local Tax Administrator or designee to
collect all amounts due the City from persons responsible for collection of the
tax under this Chapter.
   (B)   The Local Tax Administrator or designee may enter the premises of any
person owning, managing or operating any place of amusement or place where an
amusement is located for the purposes of inspection and examination of its
books and records for the proper administration of this Chapter, and for the
enforcement of the collection of the tax imposed in accordance with the
procedures set forth in this code.
   (C)   It is unlawful for any person to prevent, hinder or interfere with the
Local Tax Administrator or designee in the discharge of the duties under this
section. Further, the City Administrator is authorized to enter into any
intergovernmental agreement with other government agencies, as approved by the
City Council, for inspection reports regarding places of amusement or places
where amusements are located for the determination of compliance under this
Chapter.
   (D)   Whenever any person fails to pay or collect any taxes provided in this
Chapter or fails to comply with any other provision of this Chapter, the City
is authorized to enforce the provisions of this Chapter in any manner
authorized by law or in this code, including through Administrative
Adjudication proceedings provided for in Section
1-4-5 of this code, or to initiate legal action to enforce the payment and
collection of the tax or other compliance with this Chapter in any court of
competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 19-09, 3-4-2019; amd. Ord. 19-15, 5-20-2019)
CHAPTER 16
PLACES FOR EATING TAX
SECTION:
3-16-1: Definitions
3-16-2: Tax Imposed
3-16-3: Books And Records; Inspections; Contents
3-16-4: Transmittal Of Tax Revenue By Owner; Delinquency
3-16-5: Transmittal Of Excess Tax Collections
3-16-6: Registration
3-16-7: Collection
3-16-8: Suspension Of Licenses
3-16-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this Chapter, the following terms have the following meanings:
 
          The consideration received, valued in money, whether received in money or
          otherwise, including cash, credits, property and services, at a place for eating
GROSS     prepared food furnished at the place for eating. Gross receipts do not include
RECEIPTS: amounts paid for federal, state and local taxes, including the tax levied by
          this Chapter, and do not include amounts paid as gratuities for the employees of
          the place for eating.
OWNER:    Any person having an ownership interest in or conducting the operation of a
          place for eating.
          Any natural individual, firm, partnership, association, joint stock company,
PERSON OR joint venture, public or private corporation, limited liability company, club,
PERSONS:  fraternal organization, or a receiver, executor, trustee, conservator or other
          representative appointed by order of any court.
          1.   All premises located within the corporate limits of the City where prepared
          food is sold at retail for immediate consumption, with seating provided for
          consumption of said prepared food on the premises, whether consumed on premises
PLACES    or not, and whether or not such places for eating use is conducted along with
FOR       any other use(s) in a common premises or business establishment.
EATING OR 2.   Includes, but is not limited to, those establishments commonly called a
PLACE FOR restaurant, eating place, drive-in restaurant, buffet, bakery, banquet facility,
EATING:   cafeteria, café, lunch counter, fast food outlet, catering service, coffee shop,
          diner, sandwich shop, soda fountain, bar, cocktail lounge, soft drink parlor,
          ice cream parlor, tea room, delicatessen, hotel including room service, motel
          including room service, or club, or any other establishment which sells at
          retail prepared food for immediate consumption.
          Means and includes any solid, liquid (including both alcoholic and nonalcoholic
PREPARED  liquid), powder or item used or intended to be used for human internal
FOOD:     consumption, whether simple, compound or mixed, and which has been prepared for
          immediate consumption.
          To sell for use of consumption in exchange for a consideration, whether in the
SOLD AT   form of money, credits, barter or any other nature, and not for resale, with
RETAIL:   said transaction being subject to either Illinois retailers’ occupation tax or
          the Illinois service occupation tax. (Ord. 23-21, 12-4-2023)
 
3-16-2: TAX IMPOSED:
   (A)   A tax is imposed upon owners of places for eating in an amount equal
to one and one-half percent (1.50%)of the gross receipts received for prepared
food sold at retail at a place for eating.
   (B)   The owner of a place for eating may collect an amount from persons who
purchase prepared food at theplace for eating which shall reimburse the owner
for the tax imposed on the owner by this Chapter.
   (C)   The tax imposed by this Chapter shall be paid in addition to any and
all other taxes and charges.
   (D)   In the event the prepared food is sold at retail on credit, an owner
shall not be liable for payment of the taximposed by this Chapter on such sale
until said owner receives payment for the sale. (Ord. 23-21, 12-4-2023)
3-16-3: BOOKS AND RECORDS; INSPECTION; CONTENTS:
The Local Tax Administrator or any person designated by him/her as his/her
deputy or representative, inaccordance with the procedures provided for in this
code, may enter the premises of any place for eating forinspection,
examination, copying and auditing of books and records including, but not
limited to, Illinoisretailers’ occupation tax and Illinois service occupation
tax returns filed with the Illinois department of revenue,in order to
effectuate the proper administration of this Chapter, and to assure the
enforcement of the collectionof the tax imposed by this Chapter. To the extent
reasonably possible, said entry shall be done in a manner thatis least
disruptive to the business of the place for eating. It shall be unlawful for
any person to prevent, hinder,or interfere with the Local Tax Administrator or
their duly designated deputies or representatives in thedischarge of their
duties in the performance of this subsection. It shall be the duty of every
owner to keepaccurate and complete books and records to which the Local Tax
Administrator or their deputies orrepresentatives shall at all times have full
access, which records shall include a daily sheet showing the amountof gross
receipts received during that day. (Ord. 23-21, 12-4-2023)
3-16-4: TRANSMITTAL OF TAX REVENUE BY OWNER; DELINQUENCY:
   (A)   he owner or owners of each place for eating shall file tax returns
showing the gross receipts receivedduring each calendar month period upon forms
prescribed by the Local Tax Administrator or his or her designee. Returns for
each calendar month shall be due on or before the first day of the second month
after the taxes have been collected ( e.g., the return for January shall be due
on or before March l; the return for February shall be due on or before April
l; etc.). Notwithstanding the foregoing, in the event that the owner of the
place for eating is allowed to file Illinois retailers’ occupation tax and
Illinois service occupation tax returns with the Illinois department of revenue
at intervals which are greater than monthly, said owner shall be allowed to
file tax returns relative to the tax imposed by this Chapter with the City at
said greater intervals. At the time of the filing of said tax returns, the
owner shall pay to the Local Tax Administrator or his or her designee all taxes
due for the period to which the tax return applies.
   (B)   If, for any reason, any tax due pursuant to this Chapter is not paid
when due, penalties and interest thereon shall be imposed and the owner shall
be subject to suspension of licenses in accordance with the provisions of this
Chapter and the remainder of this code. (Ord. 23-21, 12-4-2023)
3-16-5: TRANSMITTAL OF EXCESS TAX COLLECTIONS:
If any person collects an amount upon a sale not subject to the tax imposed
hereby, but which amount is purported to be the collection of said tax, or if a
person collects an amount upon a sale greater than the amount of the tax so
imposed herein and does not for any reason return the same to the purchaser who
paid the same before filing the return for the period in which such occurred,
said person shall account for and pay over those amounts to the City along with
the tax properly collected. (Ord. 23-21, 12-4-2023)
3-16-6: REGISTRATION:
Every owner maintaining a place for eating in the City shall register with the
Local Tax Administrator or his or her designee upon the later of the date of
adoption of this Chapter by the City Council and the date upon becoming such an
owner. (Ord. 23-21, 12-4-2023)
3-16-7: COLLECTION:
Whenever any person fails to pay or collect any taxes provided in this Chapter
or fails to comply with any other provision of this Chapter, the City is
authorized to enforce the provisions of this Chapter in any manner authorized
by law or in this code, including through Administrative Adjudication
proceedings provided for in Section
1-4-5 of this code, or to initiate legal action to enforce the payment and
collection of the tax or other compliance with this Chapter in any court of
competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 23-21, 12-4-2023)
3-16-8: SUSPENSION OF LICENSES:
If the Mayor or his or her designee, after a hearing, shall find that any owner
has willfully avoided the payment of any tax imposed by this Chapter, he or she
may suspend or revoke all City licenses held by such owner. The owner shall
have an opportunity to be heard at such hearing to be held not less than ten
(10) days after being mailed notice of the time and place where such hearing is
to be held, addressed to the owner at its last known place of business. Any
suspension or revocation of any license(s) shall not release or discharge the
owner from his or her civil liability for the payment of the tax nor from
prosecution for such offense. (Ord. 23-21, 12-4-2023)
CHAPTER 17
MOVIE THEATERS
SECTION:
3-17-1: Definitions
3-17-2: Admission Tax Levied
3-17-3: Collection Of The Tax; Statement And Remittance
3-17-4: Failure To Remit; Penalties For Nonpayment
3-17-5: Determination Of Tax Due By City Clerk
3-17-6: Rules And Regulations
3-17-7: Violations And Penalties
3-17-1: DEFINITIONS:
When used in this Ordinance and unless otherwise distinctly expressed, the
following words and phrases shall have the meanings set out herein:
MOVIE THEATER: Any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out
to the public to be a place primarily for the showing of motion pictures,
whereby the general public is charged a price of admission.
PERSON: Any individual, partnership, corporation, or other association or
entity, trustee or legal representative.
   A corporation which is a wholly owned subsidiary of another licensee
corporation shall be deemed a separate person for purposes of this Ordinance.
PROPRIETOR: Any individual, partnership, corporation, or other association or
entity, trustee or legal representative operating a movie theater within the
City of East Moline, Illinois. (Ord. 76-39, 7-19-1976)
3-17-2: ADMISSION TAX LEVIED:
There is hereby imposed and levied upon every person who pays an admission
charge to any movie theater conducted by a proprietor of a movie theater wholly
within the corporate boundaries of the City of East Moline, Illinois, a local
amusement tax of ten cents ($0.10) on each admission charge.
There shall be paid to the City of East Moline at such time or times as it
shall hereinafter prescribe the sum of ten cents ($0.10) for each person
entering the movie theater of the proprietor upon a ticket of admission. The
proprietor may, if it desires, collect such amount from each ticket holder in
addition to the amount or amounts charged for such ticket of admission.
Accurate records and books shall at all times be kept and maintained by the
proprietor showing the admission tickets issued and used on each day the movie
theater is open to the public. The City or its duly authorized representative
or representatives shall at all reasonable times have access to the admission
records of any proprietor for the purpose of examining and checking the same
and ascertaining whether or not the proper amount has been or is being paid the
City of East Moline as herein provided. The City shall also require, during the
operation of a movie theater within the City, that the proprietor shall execute
and deliver to it a bond, payable to the City of East Moline, in such sum as it
shall determine; not, however, in excess of fifty thousand dollars
($50,000.00), with a surety or sureties to be approved by it, conditioned for
the payment of all sums due and payable or collected by it under this Ordinance
upon admission fees received from the public. The Finance Committee of the City
Council is empowered to determine the amount of said surety bond. (Ord. 76-39,
7-19-1976)
3-17-3: COLLECTION OF THE TAX; STATEMENT AND REMITTANCE:
Every person receiving an admission charge upon which a tax is levied under
this Ordinance shall collect the amount of tax imposed upon the person paying
an admission charge. Said tax shall be deemed to be held in trust by the person
required to collect the same until remitted to the City Clerk as hereinafter
provided. The tax imposed under this Ordinance shall be collected at the time
the admission charge is paid.
Every person collecting any tax imposed by this Ordinance shall on or before
the tenth day of each month file with the City Clerk a statement upon forms
provided by the City Clerk indicating the amount of taxes collected by such
person during the preceding calendar month and such further information as the
City Clerk may deem necessary to determine the amount of the taxes collected
and payable. A remittance for the amount of the tax collected during said
preceding calendar month shall accompany the statement.
Within thirty (30) days after the close of business on December 31 of each
year, a certificate shall be signed by a certified public accountant showing
total admissions and amounts remitted for the preceding calendar year. (Ord.
76-39, 7-19-1976)
3-17-4: FAILURE TO REMIT; PENALTIES FOR NONPAYMENT:
Every person required to collect a tax imposed by this Ordinance who fails to
collect the same or fails to remit the tax shall be personally liable to the
City of East Moline for the amount of the tax. Any person required to collect
and remit the tax imposed by this Ordinance who fails to remit the amount of
the tax when due shall, in addition to all other penalties, pay a penalty of
five percent (5%) of the amount due. For each successive thirty (30) days
elapsing before payment there shall be added an additional penalty of one and
one-half percent (11/2%). (Ord. 76-39, 7-19-1976)
3-17-5: DETERMINATION OF TAX DUE BY CITY CLERK:
If any person required to collect and remit the tax imposed by this Ordinance
fails to file a statement and a remittance, or if the City Clerk has reasonable
cause to believe that an erroneous statement has been filed, the City Clerk may
proceed to determine the amount due to the City of East Moline, and in
connection therewith shall make such investigation and take such testimony and
other evidence as may be necessary; provided, however, that notice and
opportunity to be heard be given any person who may become liable for the
amount owing prior to any determination by the City Clerk. (Ord. 76-39, 7-19-
1976)
3-17-6: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The City Clerk shall have power to adopt rules and regulations not inconsistent
with the provisions of this Ordinance for the purpose of carrying out and
enforcing the payment, collection and remittance of the tax herein levied; and
a copy of such rules and regulations shall be on file and available for public
examination in the City Clerk's office. Failure or refusal to comply with any
rules and regulations promulgated under this Section shall be deemed in
violation of this Ordinance. (Ord. 76-39, 7-19-1976)
3-17-7: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
Every person who wilfully violates any of the provisions of this Ordinance
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be liable
to a fine or penalty of not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more
than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment in the County jail not
to exceed one hundred eighty (180) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment
for each offense. (Ord. 76-39, 7-19-1976)
CHAPTER 18
RAFFLES
SECTION:
3-18-1: Definitions
3-18-2: License Required
3-18-3: Applications
3-18-4: Restrictions On Licenses
3-18-5: Limitations (Rep. by Ord. 03-06, 3-17-2003)
3-18-6: Conduct Of Raffles
3-18-7: Raffles; Manager; Bond
3-18-8: Records
3-18-9: Violation
3-18-1: DEFINITIONS:
When used in this ordinance and unless otherwise distinctly expressed, the
following words and phrases shall have the meanings set out herein:
NET PROCEEDS: The gross receipts from the conduct of raffles, less reasonable
sums expended for prizes, local license fees and other reasonable operating
expenses incurred as a result of operating a raffle.
NONPROFIT, CHARITABLE, EDUCATIONAL, RELIGIOUS, FRATERNAL, VETERANS AND LABOR:
Shall have the same meanings ascribed to them in 230 Illinois Compiled Statutes
15/2.
RAFFLE: A form of lottery, as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/28-2
(b) of the "criminal code" conducted by an organization licensed under this
act, in which:
   (A)   The player pays or agrees to pay something of value for a chance,
represented and differentiated by a number or by a combination of numbers or by
some other medium, one or more of which chances is to be designated the winning
chance;
   (B)   The winning chance is to be determined through a drawing or by some
other method based on an element of chance by an act or set of acts on the part
of persons conducting or connected with the lottery, except that the winning
chance shall not be determined by the outcome of a publicly exhibited sporting
contest.
ROCK ISLAND COUNTY MODEL RAFFLE ORDINANCE: An ordinance in substantially the
same form, and containing the same provisions and limitations as is set forth
in this subject ordinance, to be enacted by any municipality located within
Rock Island County, Illinois, and intended to regulate the conduct of raffles
within the jurisdiction of the respective municipality. (Ord. 81-66, 11-2-1981)
3-18-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to conduct a
raffle or chances in the city without having first obtained a license,
therefor, pursuant to this ordinance, or in violation of the terms of such
license.
   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation who has in his immediate possession a
valid license issued to the person, firm or corporation, by another
municipality or political subdivision located in Rock Island County, Illinois,
which municipality or political subdivision has enacted the Rock Island County
model raffle ordinance, shall be exempt from the requirements of this section
to have obtained a license from the city.
   (C)   No raffle license shall be issued except to persons, firms or
corporations who are residents of or have an office in the licensing
municipality or except those whose raffle drawing is being conducted within the
licensing municipality and except those who are nonprofit, charitable,
educational, religious, fraternal, veterans or labor organization, and which
have been in existence continuously for a period of five (5) years immediately
before making application for a license and which have had during that entire
five (5) year period a bona fide membership engaged in carrying out their
objects.
   (D)   A licensee may rent a premises on which to determine the winning
chance or chances in a raffle only from an organization which is also licensed
under this ordinance. (Ord. 81-66, 11-2-1981)
3-18-3: APPLICATIONS:
   (A)   Application for such licenses shall be made to the city clerk no later
than thirty (30) days prior to the commencement of sales or advertisement of
sale of raffle chances.
   (B)   The application for license must specify the area or areas within the
city in which raffle chances will be sold or issued, the time of determination
of winning chances and the location or locations at which winning chances will
be determined.
   (C)   The application for license must contain a sworn statement attesting
to the not for profit character of the prospective license organization, and
shall be signed by the presiding officer and secretary of the organization.
   (D)   The application for license must state the residence of the applicant
and all addresses of offices within the licensing municipality and, if the
raffle drawing is to be conducted within the licensing municipality, the
address of the location of the drawing.
   (E)   A license authorizes the licensee to conduct raffles as defined in
this ordinance. Each such license is valid for one raffle and may be suspended
or revoked for any violation of this ordinance.
   (F)   A fee of one dollar ($1.00) shall be charged for the making of
application and the issuance of license.
   (G)   Prior to approval, any application which indicates that the sale of
raffle chances would be in an area outside the corporate limits of the city, or
which indicates that the location or locations of determining winning chances
is outside the corporate limits of the city, shall be referred to the licensing
authority of such jurisdiction for comment as to zoning status, licensed status
of location, and compliance with licensing regulations.
   (H)   The city clerk shall act on a license application within thirty (30)
days from the date of application and shall notify all jurisdictions affected
thereby of said action. (Ord. 81-66, 11-2-1981)
3-18-4: RESTRICTIONS ON LICENSES:
No such license shall be issued to:
   (A)   Any person who has been convicted of a felony;
   (B)   Any person who is or has been a professional gambler or gambling
promoter;
   (C)   Any person who has been convicted of a misdemeanor involving moral
turpitude;
   (D)   Any firm or corporation in which a person defined in subsection (A),
(B) or (C) of this section has a proprietary, equitable or credit interest, in
or which such a person is active or employed;
   (E)   Any organization in which a person defined in subsection (A), (B) or
(C) of this section is an officer, director or employee, whether compensated or
not;
   (F)   Any organization in which a person defined in subsection (A), (B) or
(C) of this section is to participate in the management or operation of a
raffle as defined in this act. (Ord. 81-66, 11-2-1981)
3-18-5: LIMITATIONS:
(Rep. by Ord. 03-06, 3-17-2003)
3-18-6: CONDUCT OF RAFFLES:
The conducting of raffles licensed under this ordinance is subject to the
following restrictions:
   (A)   The entire net proceeds of any raffle must be exclusively devoted to
the lawful purposes of the organization permitted to conduct that game.
   (B)   No person except a bona fide member of the sponsoring organization may
participate in the management or operation of the raffle.
   (C)   No person may receive any remuneration or profit for participating in
the management or operation of the raffle; however, this shall not prohibit the
payment of rent or a permit fee for use of facilities to hold a raffle if said
rent or fee is not dependent upon the raffle proceeds and is a binding
obligation upon the parties at the time made.
   (D)   Raffle chances may be sold or issued only within the area specified on
the license and winning chances may be determined only at those locations
specified on the license.
   (E)   No person under the age of eighteen (18) years may participate in the
conducting of raffles or chances. A person under the age of eighteen (18) years
may be within the area where winning chances are being determined only when
accompanied by his parent or guardian. (Ord. 81-66, 11-2-1981)
3-18-7: RAFFLES; MANAGER; BOND:
All operations of and the conduct of raffles shall be under the supervision of
a single raffle manager designated by the organization. The manager shall give
a fidelity bond in the sum of an amount determined by the licensing authority
in favor of the organization conditioned upon his honesty in the performance of
his duties. Terms of the bond shall provide that notice shall be given in
writing to the licensing authority not less than thirty (30) days prior to its
cancellation. The city council may waive this bond requirement upon request
upon the organization, by directing the city clerk to include a waiver
provision in the license issued to an organization under this ordinance,
provided that a license containing such waiver provision shall be granted only
by unanimous vote of the members of the licensed organization. (Ord. 81-66, 11-
2-1981)
3-18-8: RECORDS:
   (A)   Each organization licensed to conduct raffles and chances shall keep
records of its gross receipts, expenses and net proceeds for each single
gathering or occasion at which winning chances are determined. All deductions
from gross receipts for each single gathering or occasion shall be documented
with receipts or other records indicating the amount, a description of the
purchased item or service or other reason for the deduction, and the recipient.
The distribution of net proceeds shall be itemized as to payee, purpose, amount
and date of payment.
   (B)   Gross receipts from the operation of raffles programs shall be
segregated from other revenues of the organization, including bingo gross
receipts, if bingo games are also conducted by the same nonprofit organization
pursuant to license therefor issued by the department of revenue of the state
of Illinois, and placed in a separate account. Each organization shall have
separate records of its raffles. The person who accounts for gross receipts,
expenses and net proceeds from the operation of raffles shall not be the same
person who accounts for other revenues of the organization.
   (C)   Each organization licensed to conduct raffles shall report promptly
after the conclusion of each raffle to its membership, and to the licensing
local unit of government, its gross receipts, expenses and net proceeds from
raffles, and the distribution of net proceeds itemized as required in this
section.
   (D)   Records required by this section shall be preserved for three (3)
years, and organizations shall make available their records relating to
operation of raffles for public inspection at reasonable times and places.
(Ord. 81-66, 11-2-1981)
3-18-9: VIOLATION:
Violation of any provision of this ordinance shall subject the person, firm or
organization to a fine in a sum not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor
more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). (Ord. 81-66, 11-2-1981)
CHAPTER 19
CARNIVALS AND CIRCUSES
SECTION:
3-19-1: Definitions
3-19-2: Permit, License Or Certificate Required
3-19-3: Issuance Of Permit, License Or Certificate
3-19-4: Insurance
3-19-5: Suspension Of License, Permit Or Certificate
3-19-6: Service Of Notices
3-19-7: General Requirements
3-19-8: Applicable Regulations
3-19-9: Fees For Permit, License Or Certificate
3-19-10: Violations
3-19-11: Exemptions
3-19-12: Right To Appeal
3-19-1: DEFINITIONS:
CARNIVAL: An enterprise which offers amusement or entertainment to the public
by means of one or more amusement attractions or amusement rides.
CIRCUS: An enterprise which offers amusement to the public in an arena often
covered by a tent and used for a variety of shows including feats of physical
skill, wild animal acts or exhibitions or performances by jugglers and clowns.
(Ord. 98-5, 3-2-1998)
3-19-2: PERMIT, LICENSE OR CERTIFICATE REQUIRED:
No person shall operate a carnival, circus, traveling show or exhibition who
does not have a valid permit, license or certificate issued by the City of East
Moline. Only a person who complies with the requirements of this Ordinance
shall be entitled to receive or retain such permit, license or certificate. A
valid permit, license or certificate shall be valid for a period not to exceed
seven (7) days per calendar year, and shall be conspicuously posted in view of
the public. (Ord. 98-5, 3-2-1998)
3-19-3: ISSUANCE OF PERMIT, LICENSE OR CERTIFICATE:
Any person desiring to operate a carnival, circus, traveling show or exhibition
shall make written application for a permit, license or certificate with the
Director of Finance, on forms provided by the City a minimum of thirty (30)
days in advance. Additionally, the operator of the carnival, circus, traveling
show or exhibition shall provide an accurate site plan showing the location of
all amusement equipment, food vendors, and other attractions, including
temporary lodging for employees.
Prior to approval of an application for a permit, license or certificate to
operate a carnival, circus, traveling show or exhibition, the City shall review
the site plan, and shall inspect the real property upon which the carnival,
circus traveling show or exhibition is intended to be located.
The City shall issue a permit, license or certificate to the applicant if
review and inspection reveal that the proposed carnival, circus, traveling show
or exhibition complies with the requirements of this Ordinance, as evidenced by
written approval from all City departments as recorded upon the permit
application. (Ord. 98-5, 3-2-1998)
3-19-4: INSURANCE:
No license, permit or certificate shall be issued for conducting a carnival,
circus, traveling show or exhibition until the applicant(s) therefor have
placed on file with the City a certificate(s) of insurance indicating that
there is in effect public liability insurance covering any damages arising out
of the use and operation of any and all devices and facilities operated in
connection with such carnival, circus, traveling show or exhibition. Such
insurance shall be in the minimum amount of one million dollars
($1,000,000.00), per occurrence. (Ord. 98-5, 3-2-1998)
3-19-5: SUSPENSION OF LICENSE, PERMIT OR CERTIFICATE:
The City may, without warning, notice or hearing, suspend any permit, license
or certificate to operate a carnival, circus, traveling show or exhibition, if
the operation of the carnival, circus, traveling show or exhibition otherwise
constitutes a substantial hazard, in the opinion of the City, to the public
health, safety, and general welfare. (Ord. 98-5, 3-2-1998)
3-19-6: SERVICE OF NOTICES:
A notice provided for in this Ordinance is properly served when it is delivered
to the holder or designated representative of the permit, license or
certificate. (Ord. 98-5, 3-2-1998)
3-19-7: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
   (A)   Location: All carnivals, circuses, traveling shows and exhibitions
shall be located on property zoned within a business or industrial district
zone. The perimeter of the carnival, circus, or special event, as defined in
the site plan required for the issuance of the permit, shall be a minimum of
five hundred feet (500') from any residential zone boundary. Appeals for a
variance to this general requirement shall be directed to the East Moline Board
of Zoning Appeals.
   (B)   Toilet Facilities: An adequate supply of separate toilet facilities/
hand wash stations shall be provided for the public, and all employees. Toilet
facilities shall include a minimum of one restroom per one hundred persons
(male and female) and, a minimum of one handicapped unisex restroom, and one
hand wash station for each five (5) restrooms shall be provided. A similar
supply of temporary toilet rooms/hand wash stations shall be provided for
employees, and shall be located in the vicinity of the employee housing.
   (C)   Sewage Disposal: All liquid or solid waste (sewage) shall be disposed
of into Municipal sewer system, or contained in approved holding tank until
unit (holding tank) can be properly emptied. Absolutely no liquid or solid
waste (sewage) shall be improperly discharged upon the ground surface so as to
create an unsanitary condition.
   (D)   Water Supply: A permanently installed stationary point of potable
water distribution shall be capable of providing adequate pressure (as defined
by plumbing code) to all food stands, employee sleeping quarters, travel
trailers, and any other equipment requiring a potable water supply source under
pressure. All food stands shall be connected to a physically separate water
distribution manifold, intended for food stands only. A permanently installed
stationary point of potable water distribution shall be located within fifty
feet (50') of the public amusement area, and shall be equipped with proper
backflow protection devices at all user locations. Under no circumstances shall
water distributions appurtenances cross, hinder, or obstruct any public right
of way.
      1.   A fire hydrant or other water supply source capable of providing the
required fire flow for event structures shall be provided, and shall be
approved by the Fire Department.
      2.   All potable water supply outlets shall be tested for bacterial
quality, and under no circumstances shall any potable water supply outlets be
allowed to provide water to the public until satisfactory water analysis
results are obtained.
   (E)   Water Supply Deposit: A fee of two hundred dollars ($200.00) shall be
paid to the Water Department prior to opening for water usage, and any unused
water usage shall be refunded within forty five (45) days after water account
usage is determined, and upon refund request.
   (F)   Temporary Food Service Establishments: All prepackaged food stands,
mobile food stands, pushcarts, food preparation stands or retail food stands
shall comply with applicable food service regulations adopted by the City
Health Department.
   (G)   Amusement Rides And Attractions: Amusement rides and attractions shall
possess a valid permit issued by the Director of the Illinois Department of
Labor, and all amusement rides and attractions shall be in compliance with
applicable regulations as set forth in 430 Illinois Compiled Statutes 85/2-1 et
seq., Carnival and Amusement Rides Safety Act.
   (H)   Temporary Structures: All tents, canopies, and temporary membrane
structures shall have available for inspection documentation identifying the
structure, its size, fabric type, date last treated with flame retardant
solution, the trade name and type of solution, name of persons and firm that
applied the treatment, and the name and address of the structure owner.
   (I)   Fire Extinguishers: Certified and annually inspected fire
extinguishers rated for the proper application shall be required in all
structures containing: cooking, dining, power generators or transformers,
flammable or combustible liquids, straw or hay, or large quantities of other
combustibles such as paper.
   (J)   Garbage And Refuse (Grounds): Commercial type garbage dumpster(s)
shall be provided and shall be available for use by all vendors. Dumpster(s)
shall be emptied as often as is necessary to keep garbage off the ground and to
allow the lids to be closed tightly. Dumpsters shall be located in an area
designated for garbage and refuse storage only, and not in the general vicinity
of food or amusement areas. Perimeter fencing shall be installed as determined
necessary by the City so as to reasonably control windblown refuse.
The grounds surrounding the food stands shall be kept free of garbage and
litter. An adequate number of lined garbage containers shall be located a
minimum of fifteen feet (15') from food booths, and for public use.
   (K)   Access Roads: Access roads and paths for emergency vehicles shall not
be less than twenty feet (20') in width and have an overhead clearance of not
less than thirteen feet six inches (13'6"). No structure or hazard will be more
than one hundred fifty feet (150') from any point of an emergency access road.
   (L)   Loudspeaker Amplifiers: No carnival, circus, traveling show or
exhibition shall operate any such device within the carnival, circus, traveling
show or exhibition grounds after ten o'clock (10:00) P.M., nor before ten
o'clock (10:00) A.M., prevailing time.
   (M)   Security: Security will be coordinated by the East Moline Police
Department. A security fee will be negotiated, with the sponsor, by the Police
Chief based upon manpower and equipment needs as determined by the Police Chief
to ensure the safety and well-being of the residents of the City of East Moline
as well as any persons attending the event. The issuance of a permit shall be
conditioned upon the required security being provided.
   (N)   Liquor Licenses: Liquor vendors, if applicable, shall be required to
carry dramshop insurance and obtain a City of East Moline and State liquor
license for each day of operation.
   (O)   Gambling: Gambling shall not be permitted.
   (P)   Cleanup: Property upon which such carnival, circus, traveling show or
exhibition is located shall be completely cleaned by the operator within twenty
four (24) hours after closing, and shall be subject to final inspection by the
Health Inspector. (Ord. 98-5, 3-2-1998)
3-19-8: APPLICABLE REGULATIONS:
Nothing in this Ordinance shall restrict the inclusion of additional
requirements as deemed necessary by the Police, Fire, Inspections, and other
appropriate City departments, and for the purpose of protecting the health,
safety and general welfare of the public through enforcement of this Ordinance.
(Ord. 98-5, 3-2-1998)
3-19-9: FEES FOR PERMIT, LICENSE OR CERTIFICATE:
The fee for a permit, license, or certificate to operate a carnival, circus, or
other traveling show or exhibition shall be two hundred dollars ($200.00), and
for a period not to exceed seven (7) consecutive days per calendar year, and
does not include permits for individual food stands which shall be licensed
individually by the Health Department at a fee of twenty dollars ($20.00) each.
(Ord. 98-5, 3-2-1998)
3-19-10: VIOLATIONS:
Violation of any inspections or general requirements of this Ordinance shall
give the City just cause to deny the event to continue, or to deny the operator
any future events within the City of East Moline. Violations of this Ordinance
shall also be punishable under the general penalty provisions of this Code.
(Ord. 98-5, 3-2-1998)
3-19-11: EXEMPTIONS:
a) Family gatherings, such as family reunions, b) sanctioned private or public
school events, c) sanctioned church events, d) sanctioned parades, or
sanctioned Municipal events, and e) permanently constructed event areas with
all utilities and facilities in place, shall be exempt from all requirements
set forth in this Ordinance, unless deemed necessary by the City Health
Inspector for the purpose of protecting the health, safety and general welfare
of the public. (Ord. 98-5, 3-2-1998)
3-19-12: RIGHT TO APPEAL:
Any person aggrieved by the action of the issuing authority in denying,
suspending or revoking a license, other than a decision rendered by the Board
of Zoning Appeals, shall have the following rights of appeal:
   (A)   Within five (5) days, the person aggrieved may file a written appeal
to the City Administrator. The City Administrator shall, within five (5) days,
schedule a hearing, shall take whatever evidence or information is presented,
and shall, within two (2) days thereafter, decide to affirm or reverse the
decision of the issuing authority. If the decision is to reverse, the City
Administrator shall have full power to increase, modify, or revoke the
sanction.
   (B)   If the person is still aggrieved, further appeal to the City
Administrator shall be requested immediately. Such appeal shall be heard by the
East Moline City Council at its next regularly scheduled meeting. Upon hearing
such evidence or information as shall be produced, the Council shall decide
whether to affirm, modify, or reverse the decision of the City Administrator.
This decision shall be considered to be final. (Ord. 98-5, 3-2-1998)
CHAPTER 20
SPECIAL EVENTS
SECTION:
3-20-1: Special Events Permit
3-20-2: Exemptions
3-20-3: Definitions
3-20-4: General Requirements
3-20-5: Inspections
3-20-6: Violations
3-20-1: SPECIAL EVENTS PERMIT:
A temporary gathering of more than one hundred (100) persons anywhere within
the city of East Moline shall require the event organizer to obtain a special
event permit from the city clerk's office. (Ord. 03-16, 5-19-2003)
3-20-2: EXEMPTIONS:
   (A)   Family gatherings, such as family reunions and wedding receptions.
   (B)   Sanctioned school events, both public schools and private schools.
   (C)   Sanctioned church events. (Ord. 03-16, 5-19-2003)
3-20-3: DEFINITIONS:
PRIVATE PROPERTY: Any building, structure or site which is owned, leased,
rented by an individual(s) and is not intended for use by the general public.
This would include, but is not limited to, privately owned residences and their
lots.
PUBLIC PROPERTY: Any building, structure or site which is owned, leased, rented
or used, in whole or in part, by a governmental unit; or any building,
structure or a site that is intended for use by the general public. This would
include, but is not limited to, streets, alleys, parks, and educational,
institutional or social service establishments. (Ord. 03-16, 5-19-2003)
3-20-4: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
   (A)   Application Required: All applications and rental agreements for
special events must be completed and received by the East Moline city clerk
thirty (30) days prior to the event. All application forms shall be provided by
the city clerk.
   (B)   Site Plan: A site plan shall be submitted with every application. The
site plan shall outline the following locations: food and beverage vendors,
restroom facilities, hand washing facilities, garbage cans and dumpsters, live
music areas, fire hydrants, emergency routes, and emergency medical services
(if applicable) also, amusement equipment and any other attractions, including
temporary lodging for employees.
   (C)   Application Fee:
      1.   A one hundred dollar ($100.00) application fee will be required upon
applying for a requested date on public property. Any special event where the
estimated attendance is less than one thousand (1,000) people the application
fee will be fifty dollars ($50.00). The application fee must be paid to the
city clerk's office, and is not refundable if the event is canceled. In
addition special events where the estimated attendance greater than one
thousand (1,000) people may have the one hundred dollar ($100.00) application
fee waived the first time the event is held in East Moline.
      2.   For special events held on public property where the event organizer
typically has more than ten (10) events at a single location, and that property
is not owned by the city, the organizer may opt to pay an annual fee of two
hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) instead of the above mentioned fee. This permit
will expire April 30 of each year and shall be renewed on or before May 1 of
each year. The event must still comply with all other aspects of this ordinance
and the city must be notified when having an event.
      3.   Private property events, as defined in this ordinance, shall not be
required to pay a fee.
   (D)   Code Compliance: The organizer and all vendors of a special event held
in the city of East Moline will be required to comply with this code.
   (E)   Insurance:
      1.   The event organizer and all vendors shall obtain and keep in full
effect throughout the event commercial general liability insurance coverage,
covering the options allowed under the permit with the following limits:
         (a)   Event organizer: One million dollar ($1,000,000.00) limit.
         (b)   Food vendor: One million dollar ($1,000,000.00) limit.
         (c)   Amusement ride vendor: One million dollar ($1,000,000.00) limit.
         (d)   Vendors selling alcohol: Coverage covering the Illinois dramshop
statute endorsed to include the "Iowa" dramshop act: One million dollar
($1,000,000.00) limit.
      2.   Any person or organization using city property shall name the "city
of East Moline" as an additional insured on a primary/noncontributory basis.
      3.   All vendors and the organizer of a special event shall be required
to submit a copy of their certificate of insurance to the city clerk's office
at least ten (10) days prior to the scheduled event.
   (F)   Food And Beverage Vendors:
      1.   Shall comply with the East Moline health ordinance.
      2.   All food and beverage vendors shall be required to apply and pay for
their food and beverage permit at least thirty (30) days prior to the event. In
addition to the regular licensing fee, a twenty five dollar ($25.00) late fee
will be assessed to anyone applying less than thirty (30) days prior to the
event.
      3.   Any food and beverage vendor applying less than ten (10) days prior
to the event shall not be permitted to sell unless the health department has
given the event organizer approval prior to the day of the event.
      4.   At least one Illinois certified food service sanitation manager
(FSSMC), or equivalent, shall be staffed at each vendor station where
potentially hazardous foods are being served. If several vendor stations are
owned or operated by the same person, only one FSSMC shall be required for all.
      5.   A temporary food and beverage permit shall not be required for any
permanently licensed food service facility so long as: a) the foods being
served are within the risk classification they are licensed to sell and b) all
food is being prepared and served within the permanent structure of their
licensed facility.
   (G)   Trash Management: Trash and refuse receptacles shall be provided:
      1.   Commercial type garbage dumpster(s) shall be provided and shall be
available for use by all vendors. Dumpster(s) shall be emptied as often as is
necessary to keep garbage off the ground and to allow the lids to be closed
tightly. Dumpsters shall be located in an area designated for garbage and
refuse storage only, and not in the general vicinity of food or amusement
areas. Perimeter fencing shall be installed as determined necessary by the city
so as to reasonably control windblown refuse.
      2.   An adequate number of lined garbage containers shall be located a
minimum of fifteen feet (15') from food booths for the public.
   (H)   Security: The East Moline police chief will be notified by the city
clerk and be given all information on all special events. Security will be
coordinated by the chief of police of the city of East Moline. The event
organizer and the police chief will negotiate a security plan based upon
manpower and equipment needs as determined by the police chief to ensure the
safety and well being of the residents of the city of East Moline as well as
any persons attending the event. The issuance of a permit shall be conditioned
upon the required security being provided.
   (I)   Fire And Medical Plans: The East Moline fire chief shall be notified
by the city clerk and be given all information on all special events. In
addition, the fire chief, or his designee shall determine if any emergency
medical services are needed during the review of the site plan.
   (J)   Temporary Restroom And Hand Washing Facilities:
      1.   Shall be obtained by the special event organizer.
      2.   Number of facilities required, number of cleanouts, and pumpings
will be determined through a coordinated effort between the health department,
the portable sanitation provider and the event organizer.
      3.   Operator shall provide soap, water and single use towels at each
hand wash station.
      4.   For single user portable toilet units clustered at a single location
at least five percent (5%) but no less than one toilet unit shall be installed
at each cluster whenever typical inaccessible units are provided. Accessible
units shall be identified by the international symbol of accessibility.
      5.   Portable toilet facilities shall be a minimum of one hundred feet
(100') from any food service operation. Where site conditions limit the
placement of portable toilets, the health officer may allow exemptions to these
distances.
      6.   Must be removed within forty eight (48) hours after said event or
will be subject to a ten dollar ($10.00) per unit per day fine.
   (K)   Liquor Vendors: Liquor vendors will be required to obtain all
appropriate liquor licenses required by the city and the state for the event.
   (L)   Gambling Prohibited: Gambling will not be permitted in violation of
city ordinance and state law.
   (M)   Time Limit: Special events will not exceed three (3) days without
permission from the mayor or city council; with exception of the Rock Island
County fair.
   (N)   Cleanup: The organizer of the special event is responsible to make
arrangements for all the after event cleanup in all areas designated by the
site plan. In addition:
      1.   Events Held On City Owned Property: Cleanup shall be completed
within twenty four (24) hours after closing, unless a public safety concern is
present; then it shall be done immediately. A refundable five hundred dollar
($500.00) cleanup fee will be required upon applying for the special event
permit. This refundable fee may be reduced if the estimated attendance is less
than three hundred (300) people and there is no past history. The deposit may
not be returned if any waste not removed from the site within the above
mentioned time frame remains. Additionally, if the cost of cleanup exceeds the
deposit amount the sponsor shall be required to pay for the costs incurred.
      2.   Events Held On Property Not Owned By The City: All cleanup must be
performed within three (3) days following the special event. If cleanup is not
completed within this time frame the owner of the property may then be in
violation of the city's nuisance and/or solid waste ordinance.
   (O)   Permit Approval Or Denial: After all appropriate departments sign off
on the special event permit the city clerk's office will notify the event
organizer of the approval or denial of the permit. If the permit is denied the
reason will also be given.
   (P)   Organizer Responsibility: The organizer of the event shall be
responsible to be knowledgeable of all other applicable city ordinances
relating to the special event. (Ord. 03-16, 5-19-2003)
3-20-5: INSPECTIONS:
   (A)   The East Moline health inspector will be notified of any special event
where food and/or beverages are to be served to ensure strict compliance with
health rules and regulations.
   (B)   The East Moline building inspector will be notified of any special
event for the purpose of inspecting any and all temporary electrical work
performed. An electrical permit shall be required for any temporary or
permanent electrical work performed for any special event. All work is to be
performed by a licensed electrical contractor.
   (C)   Inspection of the grounds will be conducted after the event by the
chief of police or his/her representative, and the health inspector; the
findings shall be reported to the city clerk.
   (D)   The event organizer of the special event will allow a representative
of the city of East Moline to inspect the grounds, whether on public or private
grounds, at various times during the event, to assure compliance with this
ordinance and this code. This representative of the city will not be charged a
fee for entry.
   (E)   Inspection of the grounds will be conducted by the fire chief or his/
her representative for any fire code violations or concerns. (Ord. 03-16, 5-19-
2003)
3-20-6: VIOLATIONS:
Violation of any inspections or general requirements of this ordinance shall
give the city just cause to deny the event to continue, or to deny the
organizer any future events within the city of East Moline. Violations of this
ordinance shall also be punishable under the general penalty provisions of this
code. (Ord. 03-16, 5-19-2003)
CHAPTER 21
TOBACCO PRODUCTS
SECTION:
3-21-1: Definitions
3-21-2: License Required
3-21-3: License Application
3-21-4: License Fee
3-21-5: Signs
3-21-6: Prohibited Sales, Delivery And Possession
3-21-7: Fines, Suspension, Revocation Of License
3-21-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them:
 
                               A product or device not consisting of or
                               containing tobacco that provides for the
                               ingestion into the body of nicotine, whether by
                               chewing, smoking, absorbing, dissolving,
                               inhaling, snorting, sniffing, or by any other
                               means, "Alternative nicotine products" shall
                               include vaporizers, vape pens, hookah pens,
                               electronic cigarettes, e-pipes, and all other
ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE PRODUCTS: ends as defined by the United States Food and
                               Drag Administration. "Alternative nicotine
                               products" excludes any product approved by the
                               United States Food and Drug Administration as a
                               non-tobacco product for sale as a tobacco
                               cessation product, as a tobacco dependence
                               product, or for other medical purposes, and is
                               being marketed and sold solely for the approved
                               purpose.
                               Any substance containing tobacco leaf,
TOBACCO PRODUCTS:              including, but not limited to, cigarettes,
                               cigars, pipe tobacco, snuff, chewing tobacco or
                               dipping tobacco.
                               Any mechanical, electric or electronic, self-
                               service device, which, upon insertion of money,
VENDING MACHINE:               tokens or any other form of payment dispenses
                               tobacco products. (Ord. 03-13, 4-21-2003; amd.
                               Ord. 17-09, 4-17-2017)
 
3-21-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale at retail to give away, deliver
or to keep with the intention of selling at retail, giving away or delivering
tobacco products, or alternative nicotine products within the city without
having first obtained a tobacco dealer's license required by this chapter.
(Ord. 03-13, 4-21-2003; amd. Ord. 17-09, 4-17-2017)
3-21-3: LICENSE APPLICATION:
Application for a license hereunder shall be made in writing to the city
clerk's office on forms provided. (Ord. 03-13, 4-21-2003)
3-21-4: LICENSE FEE:
The fee for a tobacco dealer's license will be one hundred dollars ($100.00)
per year, which will be due on May 1 of each year. Every holder of a license
issued pursuant to this chapter shall immediately post and keep posted while in
force, in a conspicuous location on the premises, the license so issued. (Ord.
03-13, 4-21-2003; amd. Ord. 17-09, 4-17-2017)
3-21-5: SIGNS:
Signs informing the public of the age restrictions provided for herein shall be
posted by every licensee at or near every display of tobacco products, or
alternative tobacco products or upon every vending machine, which offers
tobacco products for sale. Each sign shall be plainly visible. (Ord. 03-13, 4-
21-2003; amd. Ord. 17-09, 4-17-2017)
3-21-6: PROHIBITED SALES, DELIVERY AND POSSESSION:
It shall be unlawful for any person, including any licensee, to sell, offer for
sale, give away or deliver tobacco products, or alternative nicotine products
to any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years.
It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years to
purchase tobacco products, or alternative nicotine products, or to misrepresent
his or her identity or age, or to use any false or altered identification for
the purpose of purchasing tobacco products.
It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years to
possess any tobacco products, or alternative nicotine products; unless the
possession by the person under the age of twenty-one (21) years is under the
direct supervision of a parent or guardian of such person and is in the privacy
of the parent's or guardian's home.
No person under sixteen (16) years of age may sell any tobacco products, or
alternative nicotine products at a retail establishment selling tobacco
products, or alternative nicotine products. This does not apply to a sales
clerk in a family-owned business which can prove that the sales clerk is in
fact a son or daughter of the owner.
It shall be unlawful to sell, offer for sale, give away, or display tobacco
products, or alternative nicotine products for sale at any location where the
consumer can acquire those products through self-service. The licensee will
display all products from behind a sales/service counter so that no consumer
can access tobacco products, alternative nicotine products without the
assistance from an employee of the licensee. This restriction shall not apply
to customer self-service from vending machines as described in section 6-3- 49
of this code.
(Ord. 03-13, 4-21-2003; amd. Ord. 17-09, 4-17-2017; Ord. 22-12, 7-18-2022)
3-21-7: FINES, SUSPENSION, REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
The mayor may suspend or revoke any license issued under the provisions of this
chapter, if he determines that the licensee has violated any of the provisions
of this chapter, and may levy a fine on the licensee. The fine imposed shall
not exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each violation. Each day on which
a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
However, no such license shall be suspended or revoked and no licensee shall be
fined except after a hearing before the mayor, with not less than ten (10) days
written notice to the licensee affording the licensee an opportunity to appear
before the mayor and defend against the charges contained in such notice.
Every act of omission of whatsoever nature, constituting a violation of any of
the provisions of this chapter by any officer, director, manager or other agent
or employee of any licensee shall be deemed and held to be the act of such
licensee.
Any licensee determined by the mayor to have violated any of the provisions of
this chapter shall in addition to any fine imposed, pay to the city the cost of
the hearing before the mayor on such violation. The mayor shall determine the
cost incurred by the city for said hearing, including, but not limited to:
court reporter fees, the cost of transcripts or records, attorney fees, the
cost of preparing and mailing notices and orders and all other miscellaneous
expenses incurred by the city or such lesser sum as the mayor may allow.
The licensee shall pay said cost to the city within thirty (30) days of
notification of the cost by the mayor. Failure to pay said cost within thirty
(30) days is a violation of this chapter and may be the cause for license
suspension or revocation. (Ord. 03-13, 4-21-2003)
CHAPTER 22
PAWNBROKERS
SECTION:
3-22-1: Definition
3-22-2: License Duration, Fee
3-22-3: Hours Of Business, Location
3-22-4: Register
3-22-5: Time Of Redemption Or Removal Of Pledge
3-22-6: Dealings With Minors
3-22-7: Transactions With Intoxicated Persons Or Thieves
3-22-8: Penalties
3-22-1: DEFINITION:
Any person who lends money on deposit or pledge of personal property, bonds,
notes or other valuable things or securities, or who deals in the purchasing of
personal property on condition of selling the same back again at a stipulated
price, is, for the purposes of this chapter, a "pawnbroker". (Ord. 04-01, 2-2-
2004)
3-22-2: LICENSE DURATION, FEE:
   (A)   No person shall exercise or carry on the business of pawnbroker within
the city of East Moline without being duly licensed, by the city.
   (B)   The city clerk shall grant a pawnbroker's license to any person not
convicted of a felony who may apply, and by paying to the city clerk the sum
required for said license. Said license shall be issued for a period of one
year, from May 1 through April 30. The applicant shall pay, one hundred dollars
($100.00) per year as a license fee. (Ord. 04-01, 2-2-2004)
3-22-3: HOURS OF BUSINESS, LOCATION:
   (A)   No person licensed under this chapter shall receive on deposit or
pledge any personal property or other valuable thing before eight o'clock (8:
00) A.M., or after ten o'clock (10:00) P.M.
   (B)   All pawnbroker business activities shall be conducted only in a
business or industrial zoning district. (Ord. 04-01, 2-2-2004)
3-22-4: REGISTER:
   (A)   Each pawnbroker shall maintain in the English language, a book, or
register in which an accurate account and description shall be made of every
transaction at the time of the transaction, and shall contain the date of pawn,
time of pawn, amount pawned for and article pawned (including serial numbers
where applicable), the name and address and driver's license or state ID card
number of the person pledging or pawning each article, complete description and
thumbprints of the person pledging or pawning each article. No entry made in
such register shall be erased, obliterated, or defaced.
   (B)   The register as well as each article or thing of value pawned or
pledged, shall at all reasonable times, be open to inspection by the East
Moline police department.
   (C)   In addition to being subject to inspection as provided above, each
pawnbroker will deliver to the East Moline police department, by twelve o'clock
(12:00) noon of each day, a copy of the register of the prior day's business,
if applicable. Any failure to deliver the register could be cause for
suspension or revocation of the pawnbroker's license. (Ord. 04-01, 2-2-2004)
3-22-5: TIME OF REDEMPTION OR REMOVAL OF PLEDGE:
No personal property received in deposit or pledge by any person licensed under
this chapter, shall be sold or permitted to be redeemed or removed from the
place of business of such licensed person, for a period of twenty four (24)
hours, after a report as required to be delivered to the chief of police shall
have been so delivered. (Ord. 04-01, 2-2-2004)
3-22-6: DEALINGS WITH MINORS:
   (A)   No person licensed under this chapter shall take or receive in pawn or
purchase any article, property or effects from any minor, or claimed by any
minor.
   (B)   A "minor" shall be defined as a person under eighteen (18) years of
age. (Ord. 04-01, 2-2-2004)
3-22-7: TRANSACTIONS WITH INTOXICATED PERSONS OR THIEVES:
No licensee or person employed by the licensee shall take any article from any
person intoxicated, or from any person known to be convicted of theft, or to
have been convicted of larceny or burglary. (Ord. 04-01, 2-2-2004)
3-22-8: PENALTIES:
   (A)   Any violations of the above sections shall subject the licensee to a
fine of not less than seventy five dollars ($75.00) or more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00).
   (B)   After conducting a hearing on said violations, the mayor may revoke or
suspend the license of any pawnbroker.
   (C)   Every act or omission of whatsoever nature, constituting a violation
of any of the provisions of this chapter by any officer, director, manager or
other agent or employee of any licensee shall be deemed and held to be the act
of such licensee. (Ord. 04-01, 2-2-2004)
CHAPTER 23
WASTE HAULERS
SECTION:
3-23-1: Registration And Fees
3-23-1: REGISTRATION AND FEES:
   (A)   Any septic waste hauler wanting to obtain dumping privileges at the
East Moline Regional Wastewater Treatment Plant will be required to register
and provide the following information:
      1.   Billing information (W-9 form requires as part of billing
information);
      2.   Emergency contact information;
      3.   Proof of liability insurance (Min. $100,000.00 property /
$300,000.00 personal injury);
      4.   Proof of worker’s compensation insurance (or sworn statement
applicant has no employees);
      5.   List of trucks with tank volumes;
      6.   List of drivers with relevant information;
      7.   List of other disposal sites used by waste hauler.
   (B)   All septic waste haulers are required to abide by the City of East
Moline’s Sewer Use Ordinance, East Moline’s Dumper Policy, US EPA and IEPA
requirements pertaining to septic waste haulers.
   (C)   All septic waste haulers will be required to pay a $50.00 non-
refundable application fee that will accompany the registration application.
   (D)   If approved, the registration will be valid until January 31 of the
following calendar year at which time the registration must be renewed. (Ord.
18-13, 10-15-2018)
TITLE 4
BUILDING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
BUILDING CODE
SECTION:
4-1-1: Building Codes Adopted By Reference; Permit Fees
4-1-2: Permit And Compliance Bond Requirements
4-1-3: Interpretation
4-1-4: Application
4-1-5: Approval Of Plans
4-1-6: Variations And Appeals
4-1-7: Wrecking And Demolition
4-1-8: Hours Of Operation
4-1-9: Obstruction Of Rights-Of-Way
4-1-10: Safeguards
4-1-1: BUILDING CODES ADOPTED BY REFERENCE; PERMIT FEES:
   (A)   Adoption: The provisions of the International Building Code, 2018
edition, International Residential Code, 2018 edition, International Existing
Building Code, 2018 edition, International Fuel Gas Code, 2018 edition,
International Mechanical Code, 2018 edition, International Energy Conservation
Code, 2018 edition, International Property Maintenance Code, 2018 edition, and
International Swimming Pool and Spa Code, 2018 edition, which are freely
viewable online at http://publicecodes.citation.com/icod/index.htm, and, the
NFPA 70: 2017 National Electrical Code prepared and published by the National
Fire Protection Association are hereby adopted by reference and shall serve as
the Building Code of the City, subject to certain amendments, which are marked
exhibits A through H, as attached to the respective codes, which amendments are
on file in the Office of the Inspection Department. Where a conflict between
any referenced code appears, the more restrictive, as determined by the
Building or Code official, shall apply. (Ord. 18-10, 9-17-2018)
   (B)   Fee Schedule:
      1.   Permit Fees: Building permit fees shall be charged according to the
following schedule:
Total Valuation Permit Fee
Total Valuation             Permit Fee
$100.00 - $500.00           $ 25.00
$501.00 - $600.00           27.00
$601.00 - $700.00           30.00
$701.00 - $800.00           33.00
$801.00 - $900.00           36.00
$901.00 - $1,000.00         40.00
$1,001.00 - $1,100.00       42.00
$1,101.00 - $1,200.00       45.00
$1,201.00 - $1,300.00       48.00
$1,301.00 - $1,400.00       50.00
$1,401.00 - $1,500.00       55.00
$1,501.00 - $1,600.00       57.00
$1,601.00 - $1,700.00       60.00
$1,701.00 - $1,800.00       63.00
$1,801.00 - $1,900.00       65.00
$1,901.00 - $2,000.00       70.00
$2,001.00 - $3,000.00       83.00
$3,001.00 - $4,000.00       100.00
$4,001.00 - $5,000.00       110.00
$5,001.00 - $6,000.00       125.00
$6,001.00 - $7,000.00       140.00
$7,001.00 - $8,000.00       153.00
$8,001.00 - $9,000.00       167.00
$9,001.00 - $10,000.00      180.00
$10,001.00 - $11,000.00     195.00
$11,001.00 - $12,000.00     210.00
$12,001.00 - $13,000.00     223.00
$13,001.00 - $14,000.00     237.00
$14,001.00 - $15,000.00     250.00
$15,001.00 - $16,000.00     265.00
$16,001.00 - $17,000.00     280.00
$17,001.00 - $18,000.00     293.00
$18,001.00 - $19,000.00     307.00
$19,001.00 - $20,000.00     320.00
$20,001.00 - $21,000.00     335.00
$21,001.00 - $22,000.00     350.00
$22,001.00 - $23,000.00     363.00
$23,001.00 - $24,000.00     377.00
$24,001.00 - $25,000.00     390.00
$25,001.00 - $50,000.00     $391.00 plus $10.00/1,000
$50,001.00 - $100,000.00    $644.00 plus $7.00/1,000
$100,001.00 - $500,000.00   $994.00 plus $6.00/1,000
$500,001.00 - $1,000,000.00 $3,234.00 plus $5.00/1,000
$1,000,001.00+              $5,610.00 plus $7.00/1,000
 
(Ord. 07-05, 3-5-2007)
      2.   Other Inspections And Fees:
(a) Inspection outside of normal business hours  $42.00 per hour 1
    (minimum charge - 2 hours)
(b) Reinspection fees assessed under provisions  42.00 per hour1
    of section 305.8
(c) Inspections for which no fee is specifically 42.00 per hour1
    indicated (minimum charge - 1/2 hour)
(d) Additional plan review required by changes,  42.00 per hour1
    additions or revisions
(e) For use of outside consultants for plan      Actual costs2
    checking and inspections or both
(f) Communication towers; new                    $20.00 per foot of height fee
(g) Communication towers; co-locates             $1,200.00 per tower
(h) Communication towers; upgrades/repair work   Use bid price
 
Notes:
   1.    Or the total hourly cost to the jurisdiction, whichever is the
greatest. This cost shall include supervision, overhead, equipment, hourly
wages and fringe benefits of the employees involved.
   2.    Actual costs include administrative and overhead costs.
(Ord. 07-05, 3-5-2007; amd. Ord. 18-10, 9-17-2018)
   (C)   Waiver Of Building Permit Fees: No building permit fees shall be
waived for any person, business, corporation, municipality, charitable or
religious organizations, or any other entity, without specific vote of the City
Council by resolution or ordinance, except that no building permit fee shall be
assessed against a public school district, as a public school district is not
subject to City inspection and Code compliance, and with the further exception
of those building permit fees as exempted under the Enterprise Zone Ordinance 1
. (Ord. 07-05, 3-5-2007)
 
Notes
1 1. See Ordinance 88-22 on file in the Office of the City Clerk.
4-1-2: PERMIT AND COMPLIANCE BOND REQUIREMENTS:
   (A)   Permit Required: It shall be unlawful to erect or construct any
building or structure other than a fence where the cost of such construction
exceeds one hundred dollars ($100.00) or where such building or structure
exceeds one hundred twenty (120) square feet in roof area, or to alter or
remodel any building or structure so as to change the bearing walls, beams,
supports, roof, or expand or diminish the existing floor area, without having
first secured the required permit or permits therefor from the building
inspector.
   (B)   Permit Duration And Extension: The building permit shall be valid for
six (6) months and may be extended for an additional six (6) months without fee
by the building inspector.
   (C)   Permit And Compliance Bond Requirements: Any person, firm or
corporation desiring to engage in the business of any form of building
construction or reconstruction including, but not limited to, concrete and
masonry contracting, demolition contracting, electrical contracting, fire
sprinkler contracting, fire suppression contracting, fire alarm contracting,
general contracting, heating, ventilation and air conditioning contracting,
lawn sprinkler contracting, swimming pool contractors and installers, private
sewage disposal contracting, roofing contracting, sign contracting, siding and
window contracting, and radon mitigation contracting, in the City of East
Moline shall register with the Inspection Department effective June 1 of each
year, and shall file with the Inspection Department a compliance bond, with the
form thereof to be furnished by the building inspector, in the amount of ten
thousand dollars ($10,000.00), conditioned upon the faithful performance of all
the provisions of this Code. This bond is a continuous bond and shall remain in
full force and effect until canceled by notice. The surety shall have the right
to cancel this bond for future liability upon thirty (30) days' written notice
to the City of East Moline.
Plumbing contractors shall provide copy of current State of Illinois contractor
registration and license of plumber of record.
   (D)   Proof Of Insurance Required: General contractors, upon registration,
shall provide the following:
      1.   Proof of liability insurance acceptable to the Finance Department in
the type and amount listed below:
Each applicant shall obtain and maintain for the duration of such registration,
public liability and property damage insurance in the minimum amount and for as
hereby specified: one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for each
occurrence of property damage; and three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00)
for each occurrence of personal injury or bodily harm. Such policy shall
provide that it cannot be canceled except upon written notification to the
Office of the Finance Department at least thirty (30) days prior to the date of
cancellation. Proof shall be a certificate of insurance.
      2.   Proof that the applicant has obtained workers' compensation
insurance or that the applicant is an approved self-insurer of workers'
compensation. Proof shall either be the certificate of insurance from the
insurance provider or the certificate of approval as a self-insurer issued by
the Illinois Industrial Commission. If an applicant is a sole proprietorship or
partnership then the applicant shall not be required to provide proof of
workers' compensation insurance. Such applicant's application shall include a
sworn statement that the applicant has no employees. (Ord. 07-05, 3-5-2007)
      3.   Effective May 1, 2011, the fee for registration shall be sixty
dollars ($60.00) and shall be valid for one year, and the filing fee for
plumbing contractors shall be sixty dollars ($60.00) and shall be valid for one
year. (Ord. 11-15, 4-4-2011)
      4.   A "general contractor" shall be taken to be any person, firm,
partnership, or corporation employed directly by any person, firm, partnership,
or corporation, who erects or reconstructs any building or parts thereof. (Ord.
07-05, 3-5-2007)
4-1-3: INTERPRETATION:
Whenever in the building regulations it is provided that anything must be done
subject to the approval of or discretion of the building official of the City,
this shall be construed to give such officer only the discretion of determining
whether the rules and standards established by ordinance have been complied
with; and no such building official shall have the power to change or alter
such rules or standards in any arbitrary or discriminatory manner.
Provided further, that whenever reference is made, in the Building Code herein
adopted, to the "building official" such term shall mean the building inspector
or other officers of the City designated by the Mayor and City Council as
having the duty to enforce the building regulations of the City. (1962 Code §
14.103)
4-1-4: APPLICATION:
Applications for such permits shall be made to the building inspector and shall
be accompanied by plans and specifications in duplicate showing the work to be
done; such plans shall be verified by the signature either of the owner of the
premises or by the architect or contractor in charge of operations. (1962 Code
§ 14.104)
4-1-5: APPROVAL OF PLANS:
The application, plans and specifications filed by an applicant for a permit
shall be reviewed by the building inspector. Such plans may be reviewed by
other departments of the City to check compliance with the laws and ordinances
under their jurisdiction. If the building inspector is satisfied that the work
described in an application for permit and the plans filed therewith conform to
the requirements of the Building Code as adopted and other pertinent laws and
ordinances, and that the fee specified has been paid, he shall issue a permit
therefor to the applicant. (Ord. 85-36, 10-21-1985)
4-1-6: VARIATIONS AND APPEALS:
   (A)   Variations: It shall be unlawful to vary materially from the submitted
plans and specifications unless such variations are submitted on an amended
plan to the Inspections Department and approved by the building official or
Code official.
   (B)   Appeals: Any owner or agent not in accord with a decision made by the
building official, Code official, or designated person, shall have the right to
appeal from such order or ruling to the Board of Standards and Appeals, as
granted and prescribed in title 2, chapter 4 of this Code. (Ord. 18-10, 9-17-
2018)
4-1-7: WRECKING AND DEMOLITION:
   (A)   Permit: It shall be unlawful to wreck or demolish any building or
structure that is larger than four hundred (400) square feet in floor area or
that is connected to electric, gas, water or sewer service without first
obtaining a permit from the building inspector. The applicant must prove that
all utilities have been disconnected before a permit shall be issued.
   (B)   Fee Schedule:
 
Frame garage or accessory building         $ 25.00
Residential 1 story house                  50.00
Residential greater than 1 story           75.00
Commercial building - 1 story              100.00
Commercial building - greater than 1 story 150.00
Industrial building - 1 story              200.00
Industrial building - greater than 1 story 250.00
 
   (C)   Compliance Bond: Before said demolition permit is granted by the
building inspector, the party applying therefor shall file with the City Clerk
a compliance bond, with the form thereof to be furnished by the building
inspector, in the amount of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) conditioned upon
the faithful performance of the provisions of this Building Code.
   (D)   Disposition Of Materials: The applicant shall certify to the building
inspector that all materials removed from the site shall either be salvaged,
destroyed or deposited in a landfill site approved by the Illinois
Environmental Protection Agency.
   (E)   Transportation Of Materials: The transport of all materials removed
from the site of any nonframe building must be on a route approved by the City.
   (F)   Safety Precautions: All parts of a building or structure shall be
wrecked and removed from the site so that no unsafe conditions nor hazardous
materials remain. All cellars, basements, cisterns, septic tanks or other below
grade cavities shall be completely removed and filled with sand or solid fill
within one foot (1') of finished grade.
   (G)   Site Restoration: The site shall be restored to original grade with
suitable topsoil material, graded to match existing terrain and drainage and
seeded with grass.
Exception: In the event a structure is to be constructed upon the site within
sixty (60) days after the date the demolition permit is issued, then the above
requirements for site restoration need not apply. (Ord. 01-11, 4-16-2001)
4-1-8: HOURS OF OPERATION:
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in construction or demolition
activities in any Residential Zoning District at any time other than between
the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and eight o'clock (8:00) P.M. (Ord. 85-
36, 10-21-1985)
4-1-9: OBSTRUCTION OF RIGHTS-OF-WAY:
No street, alley, nor sidewalk shall be obstructed to vehicle or pedestrian
traffic during the time of building construction or demolition without a permit
from the City Engineer. (Ord. 85-36, 10-21-1985)
4-1-10: SAFEGUARDS:
It shall be the duty of the persons engaged in construction or demolition to
take precautions to assure the safety of pedestrians and property. Warnings,
barricades, lights, temporary roofs over sidewalks, and flagmen shall be used
and maintained whenever necessary to assure public safety. (Ord. 85-36, 10-21-
1985)
CHAPTER 2
HOUSING CODE
SECTION:
4-2-1: Housing Code Adopted By Reference
4-2-2: Housing Inspector
4-2-3: Housing Advisory And Appeals Board
4-2-4: Powers Of Board
4-2-5: Vacant And Foreclosed Property Ordinance Purpose
4-2-6: Definitions
4-2-7: VFPO Guidelines
4-2-8: Registration And Appeals Process
4-2-9: Appeal Process
4-2-10: Remedial Building Plan
4-2-11:    Change Of Ownership
4-2-12:    Enforcement And Penalties
4-2-13:    Exemption
4-2-1: HOUSING CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE:
   The International Code Council, international property maintenance code as
adopted in section
4-1-1 of this title, copy of which is on file in the inspection department
office, is hereby adopted by reference and shall serve as the housing code of
the city, subject to certain amendments, which were recommended by the East
Moline board of appeals, and which are marked exhibit A as attached to the
ordinance codified herein and made a part hereof by reference, which amendments
are on file in the office of the inspection department.
(Ord. 06-13, 6-5-2006; amd. Ord. 10-13, 5-3-2010)
4-2-2: HOUSING INSPECTOR:
   (A)   The position of a "housing inspector" is hereby created, together with
such staff that shall be necessary to enforce the provisions of this code and
the enforcing officer shall be classified as the "housing inspector" of the
city.
   (B)   This office shall be directly responsible to the city engineer and the
housing and advisory appeal board of said city for the duties as defined in
this code by the housing and advisory appeal board and the housing inspector's
service shall be terminated after just cause is shown as determined by his
supervisors aforementioned.
   (C)   All permits or certificates issued pursuant to inspections of this
office shall be signed and approved by the housing inspector, building
inspector, electrical inspector, heating and air conditioning inspector, health
inspector, and the fire chief or his agent, certifying that the premises meet
the requirements of this code. (Ord. 69-15, 4-7-1969)
4-2-3: HOUSING ADVISORY AND APPEALS BOARD:
A board is hereby created to be known as the housing advisory and appeals board
and it shall consist of five (5) citizen members and the city engineer as an ex
officio member. The five (5) citizen members shall be appointed by the mayor by
and with the advice and consent of the city council and they shall include an
engineer, a building contractor, a journeyman trade or craftsman, a
businessman, and a minority group representative. This board shall elect a
chairman from the five (5) citizen members. The terms of the five (5) citizen
members shall be for three (3) years each and shall be staggered terms as
specified by the mayor. The references to the building official in section H-
203 of the uniform building code referring to the housing advisory and appeals
board are hereby deleted and the city engineer shall herewith be inserted in
the place of the building official referred to therein.
(Ord. 69-15, 4-7-1969)
4-2-4: POWERS OF BOARD:
   (A)   The board referred to above shall have the power to hear and decide
appeals from the housing code when a written petition appealing an order or
requirement of the building inspector or his duly authorized representative,
pursuant to regulations of the housing code of the city, is filed by a property
owner or his agent, with the secretary of the housing advisory and appeals
board, specifically, the city engineer.
   (B)   The board shall hold a public hearing on the appeal of the appellant
not more than fifteen (15) days after the date of filing the appeal and said
appeal shall be subject to a twenty five dollar ($25.00) filing fee which shall
cover the cost of publication of the public notice in a newspaper of general
circulation throughout the community.
   (C)   The board shall render all decisions and findings in writing to the
building inspector with a duplicate copy to the appellant and may recommend to
the city council such new legislation as is consistent therewith.
   (D)   The board shall also have the power to establish schedules whereby the
owner, or his agent, of a property or holding shall appeal to the board for an
order or requirement issued by the building inspector or his duly authorized
representative based upon findings of fact according to the individual
circumstances or financial ability of the appellant which can be reasonably and
properly completed to meet the provisions or requirements of this code.
   (E)   An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action
appealed from, unless the building inspector or his duly authorized
representative certifies to the board that by reason of facts stated in the
certificate a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or
property; in such case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by order
which may, on due cause shown, be granted by the board on applications, after
notice to the building inspector by a court of record.
   (F)   The board is hereby empowered to take sworn testimony and all final
administrative decisions of the aforesaid board shall be subject to judicial
review pursuant to the provisions of the administrative review act, approved
May 8, 1945, and all amendments and modifications thereof, and the rules
adopted pursuant thereto.
(Ord. 69-15, 4-7-1969)
4-2-5: VACANT AND FORECLOSED PROPERTY ORDINANCE PURPOSE:
   The purpose of the vacant and foreclosed property ordinance (VFPO) is for
the integrity of the area, general nuisance prevention, property value
retention, health and public safety of the East Moline community. The VFPO
assists staff with assigning responsibility to property owners, financial
institutions, investors, and all interested parties regarding vacant properties
under their care. All parties with an interest in vacant properties shall be
required to register all vacant properties with the City of East Moline
community development department. Six (6) month registration allows staff to
contact property owners in the event of an emergency, safety issues, nuisance
violations, and more importantly direct communication regarding the condition
of the property.
   The VFPO Ordinance shall not be construed to prevent the enforcement of
other applicable ordinances, codes, legislation, and regulations which
prescribe standards other than are provided herein, and in the event of
conflict, the most restrictive shall apply.
(Ord. 24-07, 9-3-2024)
4-2-6: DEFINITIONS:
ABANDON: Any residential or commercial real estate which has been continuously
unoccupied by persons legally in possession for the preceding one (1) year.
Failure to establish or maintain public utilities within the one (1) year shall
be considered abandonment.
APPEAL: Property owners directly affected by the decision of the director, or
his/her designee shall have the right to an appeal. The property owner shall
notify the director in writing within twenty (20) days that he /she is seeking
an appeal to the vacant and foreclosed property ordinance or determination for
modification or denial. The director shall set the date, time, and location of
the meeting. The board of zoning appeals shall hear the appeal.
BUILDING CODES: ICC code standards adopted by the City of East Moline.
BUILDING/STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on
the ground or attached to something having a fixed location on the ground used
or intended for shelter or occupancy. Structures include, but not limited to:
commercial and residential buildings, walls, swimming pools, signs, and fences.
CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP: The transfer of ownership of property from the current
owner(s) to the new owner(s). The new owner(s) shall be required to submit a
vacant building application, action plan and subject to all fees associated
with the VFPO ordinance/application.
COMPLAINT OF FORECLOSURE: Legal procedure lenders file regarding during the
foreclosure process. Information provided regarding the physical address, legal
description, deed or trust, promissory note, the default, amount due, and list
of defendants and describe their interest in the property.
CONTACT INFORMATION: Name, address, emergency phone contact and alternate
contact. The point of contact shall be locally or within the quad city region
that can respond within a twenty-four (24) hour period.
CREDITOR: A federal or state-chartered bank, savings bank, savings and loan
association, credit union, mortgagee and any entity acting on behalf of the
creditor named in the debt obligation including, but not limited to servicers.
DANGEROUS BUILDING: A building defined as a "dangerous building" in the city
building code, as it may be amended. Such buildings are public nuisances.
DWELLING: One family, two family, multiple family, and townhouse intended for
the purpose of habitation.
EXTERIOR PROPERTY AREAS: The open space on the premises and on adjoining
property under the control of owners or operators of such premises.
LOT: A tract of land intended as a unit for the purpose (whether immediate or
future) of development or transfer of ownership. A lot may or may not coincide
with a "lot of records."
MAINTENANCE: Acts of repair and other acts to prevent a decline in the
condition of grounds, structures, and equipment; such that the condition does
not fall below the standards established by this.
OCCUPANT: Any person (including domestic service employees) living and/or
sleeping in a dwelling unit or having possession of a space within a building.
OCCUPIED BUILDING/STRUCTURE: A commercial or residential building/structure
used for the purposes of habitation, storage, or conducting business. Occupied
buildings/structures shall maintain the proper utility services required for
habitation or conducting business which includes electric, heat, sewer, and
water.
PROPERTY OWNER: Any individual, group of individuals, association, corporation,
joint stock association, joint venture, or any other entity in whose name the
legal title to the real estate is recorded.
PUBLIC NUISANCE: A public nuisance will shall be considered either of the
following:
   1.   The physical condition, or uses of any premises regarded as a public
nuisance at common law, under the Illinois compiled statutes, or under this
code; or
   2.   Any physical condition, use or occupancy of any premises or its
appurtenances considered an attractive nuisance to children, including, but not
limited to, abandoned wells, shafts, basements, excavations, and unsafe fences
or structures; or
   3.   Any premises which has unsanitary sewerage or plumbing facilities; or
   4.   Any premises designated by the community development director, or his
or her designee, as unsafe for human habitation or use; or
   5.   Any premises which is manifestly capable of being a fire hazard, or
manifestly unsafe or insecure as to endanger life, limb or property; or
   6.   Any premises which is unsanitary, or which is littered with rubbish or
garbage, or which has an uncontrolled growth of weeds; or
   7.   Any building that is dangerous, in a state of dilapidation,
deterioration or decay; faulty construction; open or vacant and the doors,
windows, or other openings are boarded up or secured, by any means other than
conventional methods used in the design of the building or permitted for new
construction of similar type; damaged by fire to the extent as not to provide
shelter, in danger of collapse or failure and dangerous to anyone on or near
the premises; or
   8.   Any building defined as a "dangerous building" by this section, as it
may be amended.
VACANT: A building, structure, or lot that has been unoccupied for more than
thirty (30) days. To include but not limited to the absence of utilities
provided by the City of East Moline or any other private utility company
supplying electric, heat, sewer, and water.
VFPO APPLICANT: Person or registered agent responsible for applying to the City
of East Moline when a property is vacant for more than thirty (30) days, at any
given time.
VFPO REGISTRATION: The City of East Moline by ordinance number requires all
vacant properties to be registered with the city for the purpose of maintaining
the integrity of the area, general nuisance prevention, property value
retention, health and public safety of the East Moline community. The applicant
shall provide the city with the appropriate contact information of the person
or company responsible for nuisance violation, regular maintenance, and
emergency events.
VFPO REGULATIONS: All vacant properties are subject to the enforcement of the
adopted international code council (ICC) codes adopted by the City of East
Moline and all necessary city codes pertaining to the subject property in
direct violation. All codes shall include the adopted building, electrical,
mechanical, plumbing, property maintenance, fire, storm water, ordinances, city
codes, and zoning codes.
WORKMANLIKE: Whenever the words "workmanlike state of maintenance and repair"
are used in this code, they shall mean that such maintenance and repair shall
be made in a reasonably skillful manner, and by licensed professionals where
required by law and work shall comply with all applicable codes and laws.
(Ord. 24-07, 9-3-2024)
4-2-7: VFPO GUIDELINES:
   (A)   Application: Applicant to submit application to the community
development department if the property is vacant more than (30) days. Vacant
registration includes commercial and residential buildings/structures, vacant
commercial and residential lots, and parcels with no building/structure. A
separate application shall be required for each building/structure, lot or
parcel identified with a separate address or separate property identification
number (PIN).
   (B)   Application Fee: Applicants shall pay to the City of East Moline a
registration fee of one hundred fifty dollars ($150) per residential lot every
six (6) months. Applicants shall pay to the City of East Moline a registration
fee of two hundred dollars ($200) per commercial lot every six (6) months.
   (C)   Application Review: Staff shall review all applications to ensure all
contact information is current and correct.
   (D)   Remedial Plan: The applicant shall submit a detailed plan for regular
maintenance, future construction, and detailed timeline for completion, at the
time of application submittal.
   (E)   Inspections: Staff will conduct random inspections for compliance.
   (F)   Failure To Comply: Failure to comply with the VFPO Ordinance shall
result in fines, abatement orders, liens placed on the property, and any other
legal actions permitted by law.
(Ord. 24-07, 9-3-2024)
4-2-8: REGISTRATION AND APPEALS PROCESS:
   (A)   The City of East Moline vacant and foreclosed property registration
shall be valid for a period of six (6) months. Property owners and/or creditor
are required to register any building, lot, or parcel of land that is vacant
for more than thirty (30) days, at any given time. Each building/structure,
lot, or parcel of land with a separate address or property identification
number (PIN) shall be required to register separately. In addition to
registration, property owners shall submit a plan of action regarding regular
maintenance plan, future construction, and detailed timeline for completion
during the vacancy.
   (B)   Creditors filing a complaint of foreclosure or executing a deed in
lieu of foreclosure on any building, lot, or parcel of land shall be required
to register within thirty (30) days. The creditor shall notify the City of East
Moline of any change of ownership, action plan, maintenance plan schedule, and
any other changes affecting the property.
   (C)   Property owners shall provide the following:
      1.   Name, address and telephone number of owner.
      2.   Name, address and telephone number of any local agent or
representative.
      3.   Name, address and telephone number of all persons with any legal
interest in the property, building and premises.
      4.   Legal description and tax parcel identification number of the
premises on which the building is situated.
      5.   The common address of the building.
      6.   Date on which building became vacant or unoccupied.
      7.   Remedial building plan.
   (D)   At the time of application submittal, property owners and/or creditors
shall pay the required application fee. The fee schedule shall be as follows:
      1.   Vacant Residential Property Registration one hundred fifty ($150)
every six (6) months
      2.   Vacant Commercial Property Registration two hundred dollars ($200)
every six (6) months
   Failure to comply with the City of East Moline vacant and foreclosed
property ordinance (VFPO) shall result in fines, abatement orders, liens placed
on the property, and any other legal actions permitted by law.
(Ord. 24-07, 9-3-2024)
4-2-9: APPEAL PROCESS:
   The director of community development or his/her designee shall have the
authority to review, modify, deny, or approve the proposed vacant building plan
in accordance with the City of East Moline VFPO. If the owner or agent of the
building objects to the modifications or denial made by the director, such
owner or agent shall have the right of appeal to the board of zoning appeals
(BZA) for a final determination. Such an appeal shall be filed with the
director within twenty (20) days of receipt of the director's notice of
modification or denial.
(Ord. 24-07, 9-3-2024)
4-2-10: REMEDIAL BUILDING PLAN:
   (A)   When a building is registered as required herein, the owner or agent
shall submit a remedial building plan. The city, via its community development
director, or his or her designee, may determine the remedial building plan if
the owner or agent fails to file a plan or such plan does not conform with this
chapter. The plan shall contain the following:
      1.   A plan of action to repair any doors, windows or other openings
which are boarded up or otherwise secured by any means other than conventional
methods used in the design of the building or permitted for new construction of
similar type. The proposed repair shall result in openings secured by
conventional methods used in the design of the building or by methods permitted
for new construction of a similar type.
      2.   For buildings and premises thereof, which are identified as being or
containing public nuisances, then the remedial building plan shall contain a
plan of action to remedy such public nuisances.
      3.   For buildings and premises thereof, which are identified as being
code deficient, then the remedial building plan shall contain a plan of action
to remedy such deficiencies.
      4.   For each required plan a time schedule shall be submitted
identifying a date of commencement of repair and date of completion of repair
for each improperly secured opening, identified nuisance and identified code
deficiency.
      5.   When the owner proposes to demolish the building, then the owner
shall submit a plan and time schedule for such demolition.
      6.   A plan of action to maintain the building and premises thereof in
conformance with applicable law.
      7.   A plan of action with a time schedule identifying the date the
building will be habitable and occupied or offered for occupancy or sale. The
time schedule shall include dates of commencement and completion of all actions
required to achieve habitability. No plan which does not provide for compliance
with this chapter, or which will not, as determined by the community
development director, or his or her designee, achieve such compliance within
six (6) months, will be approved.
      8.   All premises upon which unoccupied or vacant buildings are located
and all exteriors shall, at all times, be maintained in compliance with this
code.
      9.   Exterior lighting according to standards established by the
community development director, or his or her designee, and available from the
city.
      10.   A plan shall additionally provide evidence of liability insurance
for the property in a minimum amount of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000).
(Ord. 24-07, 9-3-2024)
4-2-11: CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP:
   The remedial building plan shall remain in effect, notwithstanding a change
in ownership. The new owner is required to file a new registration with the
community development director or his/her designee and supply the name, address
and telephone number of the new owners.
(Ord. 24-07, 9-3-2024)
4-2-12: ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES:
   (A)   Any person found to have violated any provision of this chapter shall
be subject to a minimum fine of one hundred dollars ($100) per day per
violation to a maximum of seven hundred fifty dollars ($750) per day per
violation, in addition to any other legal or equitable remedies available to
the city. Each day shall constitute a new violation. Such other remedies
include, but are not limited to, injunctive relief, application to a court of
competent jurisdiction for a receiver, demolition, or condemnation, contracting
for the repair or purchase of the premises, or foreclosure of any lien the city
may have thereon.
   (B)   A separate and distinct offense shall be committed each day on which
such person or persons shall violate the provisions of this chapter.
   (C)   Nothing herein contained shall prohibit the city from immediately
condemning as provided for in this code a building or taking other immediate
action upon a determination that the building is a public nuisance or poses an
imminent danger to the occupants of the building, or the public, health, safety
and welfare.
(Ord. 24-07, 9-3-2024)
4-2-13: EXEMPTION:
   (A)   The following circumstances may warrant an exemption from registration
and/or payment of fee:
      1.   If the property is habitable wherein ail building systems are in
sound working order which is evidenced by the issuance of a certificate of
occupancy, and the building and grounds are maintained in good order, and the
building is being actively marketed for sale or rental and actively maintained.
Evidence of the property following the City of East Moline, housing code while
marketing for sale or rent shall include but not limited to, retaining a
licensed real estate agent or broker to list the property for sale or rent,
taking out advertisements in various media forms such as, newspapers and online
services, and need to be provided to the community development director or his
or her designee. The director may request additional information, for example
any available photos, price, and agent information.
      2.   An owner submits plans to the director demonstrating that the
property will be completely rehabilitated and restored to productive use and
occupancy within twelve (12) months following the initial property registration
along with a certified letter from a licensed contractor or architect stating
that the property is capable of being completely rehabilitated and restored to
productive use and occupancy within the twelve (12) months following the
initial property registration. In the interim the property is actively
maintained. The director may request additional information, for example any
available photos, plot plan, layout plan etc. Failure to make reasonable
progress within one hundred eighty (180) days of permit issuance will result in
the permit being revoked and subjected to section
4-2-12, Enforcement and Penalties.
      3.   The owner certifies to the designated municipal official that the
vacancy is a result of damage from a natural disaster in the past six (6)
months and the owner is actively seeking insurance proceeds or federal/state
assistance to rehabilitate. The owner is required to update the director
monthly until the property is rehabilitated.
      4.   The owner certifies the vacancy is a result of a fire in the past
thirty (30) days and the owner is actively seeking insurance proceeds to
rehabilitate. The owner is required to update the director monthly until the
property is rehabilitated.
      5.   The owner certifies to the director that the vacancy is not an
abandonment and is utilized as a vacation home, or conversely the property is
vacant while the owner resides at a vacation home and the subject property is
actively maintained.
      6.   The owner is on active duty with any branch of the U.S. Armed
Services. In determining whether a request for exemption should be granted, the
director shall consider the following:
         a.   The applicant's prior record as it pertains to the city's housing
code, building code, or property maintenance code violations;
         b.   The amount of vacant property the applicant currently has within
the city; and the length of time that the building for which the exception is
sought has been vacant.
         c.   The proximity of the vacant property to a school, which requires
additional safety considerations.
(Ord. 24-07, 9-3-2024)
CHAPTER 3
PLUMBING
SECTION:
4-3-1: Adoption Of Plumbing Code
4-3-2: Permit Required
4-3-3: Enforcing Officer
4-3-4: New Plumbing, Exposure For Inspection
4-3-5: Individual Connection To Sewer And/Or Water Required
4-3-6: Standards
4-3-7: Fee Schedules
4-3-8: Prohibition Of Wells For Potable Water Supply
4-3-1: ADOPTION OF PLUMBING CODE:
The most recent edition of the Illinois Plumbing Code shall apply to the
installation, alteration, repair, relocation, addition, replacement, and
maintenance of plumbing systems regulated by the Illinois Plumbing Code within
the City of East Moline. The Uniform Plumbing Code, 2018 edition, which is
freely viewable on line at http://epubs.iapmo.org/2018/UPC/, shall apply to any
and all plumbing and piping systems not regulated by the Illinois Plumbing
Code. In addition, any structure in which a building drain is installed shall
have at least one vent stack carried through the roof and increased to a
minimum size of four inches (4") at a point one foot (1') below the roof line.
It shall be unlawful to install any plumbing fixtures within the City which do
not comply with the above regulations. The plumbing inspector shall keep on
file in his office and make available for inspection by the public, the most
recent copy of Illinois Plumbing Code and amendments as adopted by the City.
(Ord. 18-10, 9-17-2018)
4-3-2: PERMIT REQUIRED:
   (A)   No person shall engage in or perform plumbing in the City without
first obtaining a permit from the plumbing inspector. Permits shall be granted
to those persons eligible under the provisions of "an act in relation to the
licensing and regulation of plumbers, to repeal a certain act therein named and
to prescribe penalties for the violation thereof", approved July 13, 1953, of
the State of Illinois, and to those persons engaged in the sewer cleaning
business. The term "plumbing" is used herein as defined in said Act, as
amended.
   (B)   In order to be eligible to obtain a permit, any person engaging in, or
performing plumbing as a licensed plumber shall be on file in the office of the
plumbing inspector, and furnish satisfactory proof that such person is duly
licensed and registered with the State. All sewer cleaning businesses engaged
to work on a sewer shall be registered with the City. Such person shall file
with his registration a surety bond to be approved by the City Attorney in the
sum of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), conditioned to indemnify and save
harmless the City from the results of any acts of the registry engaging in or
performing plumbing and/or sewer cleaning in the City. Such bonds shall be a
continuous bond. All contractors who work on the interior of a City sewer shall
file with the plumbing inspector of said City a written report setting forth
the location, nature of work and cause, if known, within twenty four (24) hours
of completion of said work. (Ord. 07-05, 3-5-2007)
4-3-3: ENFORCING OFFICER:
The plumbing inspector shall enforce the provisions of the Illinois Plumbing
Code in the City. (Ord. 18-10, 9-17-2018)
4-3-4: NEW PLUMBING, EXPOSURE FOR INSPECTION:
In all buildings hereafter erected, both public and private, and in all
buildings already built or erected wherein any plumbing is hereafter installed
or wherein any sewer connection pipe shall be hereafter repaired or changed,
except for minor repairs, on the sewer side of the trap, the drain, soil
rainwater and other pipe or pipes connected directly or indirectly into any
drain, soil or waste pipe, and all traps shall be exposed for view for
inspection and test by the plumbing inspector, and shall not be covered until
such test is made. (Ord. 97-20, 4-7-1997)
4-3-5: INDIVIDUAL CONNECTION TO SEWER AND/OR WATER REQUIRED:
Every building having plumbing fixtures installed and intended for human
habitation, occupancy, or use on premises abutting on a street, alley or
easement in which there is a public sewer and/or water available within two
hundred feet (200') of the property line, shall have an individual connection
made with the sewer and/or water main within ninety (90) days after the owner
thereof has received notice of availability of sewer and/or water services.
The entire plumbing and drainage system of every building shall be entirely
separate and independent from that of any other building, except in the
situation where there are two (2) buildings on one lot, one in the rear of the
other building. In that situation, if there is no sewer in the alley to which
the rear building can be connected, the sewer, in front, serving the front
building may be extended to serve the rear building. (Ord. 97-20, 4-7-1997)
4-3-6: STANDARDS:
All work done on any plumbing system shall be performed in an efficient and
workmanlike manner, and in accordance with the Illinois Plumbing Code as
adopted by the City. (Ord. 97-20, 4-7-1997; amd. Ord. 18-10, 9-17-2018)
4-3-7: FEE SCHEDULES:
   (A)   Residential Plumbing Fee Schedule:
      1.   In dwelling structures or portions of structures used exclusively
for dwelling purposes, the fee for the first two (2) fixtures shall be twenty
five dollars ($25.00), and shall be an additional ten dollars ($10.00) for each
fixture thereafter.
      2.   The fee for the installation or replacement or relocation of all
domestic water heaters, domestic hot water storage tanks, range boilers, and
all domestic water heating appliances pertaining to plumbing shall be twenty
five dollars ($25.00) for each such fixture.
      3.   The fee for the installation of roof drains shall be twenty five
dollars ($25.00) when piping to such drain is run inside of buildings and
wasted into a storm drain system, including natural storm drain runoff areas
for each location.
      4.   A special fee for the performance of service and maintenance work
shall be five dollars ($5.00) to cover the cost of permit issuance and
inspection of work at each location.
   (B)   Commercial Plumbing Valuation Fee Schedule: In commercial, industrial
and institutional structures, the permit fee shall be based on the valuation of
the entire plumbing installation, which is to be declared on the permit
application. The following fee schedule shall apply:
$1.00 - $1,000.00                     $ 25.00
$1,001.00 - $2,000.00                 30.00
$2,001.00 - $3,000.00                 40.00
$3,001.00 - $4,000.00                 50.00
$4,001.00 - $5,000.00                 60.00
$5,001.00 - $6,000.00                 70.00
$6,001.00 - $7,000.00                 80.00
$7,001.00 - $8,000.00                 90.00
$8,001.00 - $9,000.00                 100.00
$9,001.00 - $10,000.00                110.00
$10,001.00 - $11,000.00               120.00
$11,001.00 - $12,000.00               130.00
$12,001.00 - $13,000.00               140.00
$13,001.00 - $14,000.00               150.00
$14,001.00 - $15,000.00               160.00
$15,001.00 and over add, per thousand 20.00
 
Plus sewer and water at twenty five dollars ($25.00) for each connection and/or
tap.
   (C)   Sanitary Sewer Connections:
      1.   Tap-In Permit Fee: All structures shall be connected to the sanitary
sewer main at the time of completion of construction. There shall be a fee of
twenty five dollars ($25.00) for a permit to cover each tap-in to the City
sanitary sewer mains, or for each connection to an existing stub extension from
the main, to serve the building sewerage system.
      2.   Backflow Prevention Devices: All backflow prevention devices shall
be inspected at the time of installation and shall be certified annually. The
fee for each inspection or certification for this shall be thirty dollars
($30.00).
      3.   Connections To City Water Mains: With respect to all structures,
building lots, subdivisions, etc., there is established a fee of twenty five
dollars ($25.00) for a permit fee to cover each individual tap to the City
water mains, whether for immediate or future use. When taps are made for water
extension to serve individual lots at the time of installation of the water
main system, such taps shall be made by Illinois licensed plumbers who are
bonded to act as contractors by the City of East Moline, Illinois, and proper
permits shall be procured and paid for at that time.
      4.   Extra Trip Charge: All extra trips that are made other than those
required for regulation inspections will be charged at the rate of forty two
dollars fifty cents ($42.50) per trip. This charge shall apply to any trip
occasioned by wrong construction, the use of defective or improper material, or
any call to make inspection before the work to be inspected is ready. (Ord. 07-
05, 3-5-2007)
4-3-8: PROHIBITION OF WELLS FOR POTABLE WATER SUPPLY:
   (A)   Use Of Ground Water As A Potable Water Supply Prohibited: The use, or
attempt to use as a potable water supply, of ground water from within the
corporate limits of the City of East Moline by the installation or drilling of
wells or by any other method is hereby prohibited, including at points of
withdrawal by the City of East Moline.
   (B)   Penalties: Any person violating the provisions of this section shall
be subject to a fine of up to five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each
violation.
   (C)   Definitions:
      PERSON: Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company,
limited liability company, corporation, association, joint stock company,
trust, estate, political subdivision, or any other legal entity, or their legal
representatives, agents or assigns.
      POTABLE WATER: Any water used for human or domestic consumption,
including, but not limited to, water used for drinking, bathing, washing
dishes, preparing foods, watering lawns, or watering gardens in which produce
intended for human consumption is grown.
   (D)   Sump Pump Discharge Excepted: The prohibition as set forth in
subsection (A) of this section shall not prohibit the discharge of water from a
sump pump upon lawns or gardens.
   (E)   Severability: If any provision of this section or its application to
any person or under any circumstances is adjudged invalid, such adjudication
shall not affect the validity of the section as a whole or of any portion not
adjudged invalid. (Ord. 99-9, 3-1-1999)
CHAPTER 4
ELECTRICAL CODE
SECTION:
4-4-1: Electrical Codes Adopted By Reference
4-4-2: Permit And Compliance Bond Requirements
4-4-3: Administration
4-4-4: Procedure
4-4-5: Appeals
4-4-6: Adoption Of Fee Schedule
4-4-7: Electrical Contractor License
4-4-1: ELECTRICAL CODES ADOPTED BY REFERENCE:
The International Code Council, International Code Council Electrical Code
administrative provisions, 2018 edition, and the National Fire Protection
Association, National Electrical Code as adopted in section
4-1-1 of this title, copies of which are on file in the Office of the
Inspection Department, are hereby adopted by reference and shall serve as the
Electrical Code of the City subject to certain amendments, which were
recommended by the East Moline Board of Standards and Appeals and which are
marked exhibit F attached to the ordinance codified herein and made a part
hereof by reference, which amendments are on file in the Office of the
Inspection Department. (Ord. 18-10, 9-17-2018)
4-4-2: PERMIT AND COMPLIANCE BOND REQUIREMENTS:
It shall be unlawful to install electrical wiring and to connect electrical
fixtures, apparatus, or appliances for furnishing light, heat, or power without
having secured a permit from the building inspector.
Any person, firm or corporation desiring to engage in the business of
electrical contracting in the City of East Moline shall file with the City
Clerk a compliance bond, with the form thereof to be furnished by the building
inspector, in the amount of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), conditioned upon
the faithful performance of all the provisions of the National Electrical Code,
as most recently adopted. (Ord. 01-10, 4-16-2001)
4-4-3: ADMINISTRATION:
The building inspector shall have the power and responsibility to administer
the Electrical Code. This includes, but is not limited to, reviewing plans,
issuing permits, inspecting for compliance, interpreting rules and regulations
of the code, requiring compliance with the code, and approving electrical work.
(Ord. 85-40, 11-18-1985)
4-4-4: PROCEDURE:
Application for permits shall be made to the building inspector and shall be
accompanied by necessary plans, information and specifications of the work to
be done as determined by the building inspector. Upon approval of the plans and
payment of the fee, an electrical permit shall be issued. (Ord. 85-40, 11-18-
1985)
4-4-5: APPEALS:
Any owner or his agent not in accord with a decision made in the enforcement of
this code shall have the right to appeal from such order or ruling to the Board
of Standards and Appeals, as granted and prescribed in title 2, chapter 4 of
this City Code. (Ord. 18-10, 9-17-2018)
4-4-6: ADOPTION OF FEE SCHEDULE:
The following fee schedule is hereby adopted for the issuance of all electrical
permits in the City:
ELECTRICAL PERMIT SCHEDULE
CITY OF EAST MOLINE, ILLINOIS
New single-family residence:        
Application fee                    $20.00 plus $0.05 per square foot of
                                   gross habitable floor area
New multi-family residences or      
apartments:
First unit                         $45.00
For each residential unit          25.00
Entrance services and temporary    15.00 each
services
Wiring of additions, rewires, or    
finishing basement and garages:
Application fee                    25.00
Plus each unit                     10.00
Commercial or industrial wiring:    
Application fee                    $50.00 plus 1% of total cost of material
                                   and labor
Wiring of electrical signs:         
Per sign                           $20.00 plus applicable building permit
                                   fee
Reinspection fees (1 hour minimum) $42.50 per hour
 
(Ord. 01-10, 4-16-2001)
4-4-7: ELECTRICAL CONTRACTOR LICENSE:
   (A)   As used in this chapter, the term "electrical contractor" shall mean
and include any person engaged in the business of installing, erecting,
repairing or contracting to install, erect or repair electrical equipment. An
applicant for an electrical contractor license shall be of legal age to conduct
business in the State of Illinois.
   (B)   Except as provided in subsection (C) of this section, before any
person shall engage in the business of electrical contracting in the City, and
before any person now engaged in the business or any class thereof shall
continue in the business of electrical contracting, such person shall be
required to register and be licensed with the City. The license required by
this section shall be issued only to an individual, and not to a corporation or
firm.
   (C)   The following persons shall not be required to register as an
electrical contractor pursuant to subsection (B) of this section, nor shall
they be required to pay a registration fee:
      1.   Electricians employed by an electrical contractor to perform or to
supervise electrical work.
      2.   Persons performing electrical work in their own domiciles, with the
assistance of any member of said owner-occupant's family and household;
however, the electrical inspector shall require a sufficient display of
electrical experience of a practical and elementary character so as to test the
person's knowledge and qualifications of the electrical work to be done in the
interest of safeguarding life and property. The owner-occupant shall obtain a
permit for any such work and shall call for inspection by the City.
   (D)   An electrical contractor who is licensed in any City or village in the
State of Illinois or Iowa shall be required by the City to register, and pay a
fifty dollar ($50.00) registration fee; however, the electrical inspector shall
require a sufficient display of electrical experience of a practical and
elementary character so as to test the knowledge and qualifications of an
electrical contractor subject to this subsection for the electrical work to be
done in the interest of safeguarding life and property.
   (E)   The registration of an electrical contractor, as required by this
section, shall be made in writing to the electrical inspector stating the name
and place of business of the applicant and the name of the representative of
the applicant who will act as supervisor of the work to be done under the
registration.
      1.   The application shall be accompanied by a satisfactory certificate
or other evidence that the applicant or representative thereof has successfully
passed the electrical examination as administered by Experior, 2100 N.W. 53rd
Avenue, Gainesville, FL 32653, or other designated testing agency. Applicant
must have successfully passed such examination within three (3) years prior to
the electrical license being issued.
   (F)   Before any license required by this chapter is issued, the applicant
therefor shall furnish a compliance bond in the penal sum of ten thousand
dollars ($10,000.00). The bond shall be conditioned upon the faithful
performance of the applicant's work in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter. This shall be a continuing bond until canceled by notice. The surety
shall have the right to cancel this bond for future liability upon thirty (30)
days' written notice to the electrical inspector, which notice must be received
by said electrical inspector to be effective.
   (G)   The annual fee for licensing an electrical contractor pursuant to this
section shall be twenty five dollars ($25.00) and shall be valid for an annual
period commencing on May 1 to April 30 of the following year, and shall remain
in force and effect for that period of time, unless revoked for cause.
   (H)   No person permitted to register under the provisions of this section
shall install or repair electrical equipment for electric light, heat, or power
purposes after the expiration of the registration or after the registration
shall have been revoked pursuant to this section, unless the registration or
renewal thereof shall have been received.
   (I)   License holder must have taken twelve (12) hours of update courses
within one year of adoption of any new or revised code for each code change and
must submit a certificate of completion prior to renewal of license.
   (J)   A license required by this section is prohibited from being loaned,
rented, assigned or transferred. (Ord. 01-10, 4-16-2001)
CHAPTER 5
FIRE LIMITS
SECTION:
4-5-1: Boundaries
4-5-2: Exterior Coverings
4-5-3: Repairs
4-5-1: BOUNDARIES:
The fire limits of the City shall include all areas zoned for any use other
than single-family residence use. (M.C. 1962, sec. 14.201)
4-5-2: EXTERIOR COVERINGS:
It shall be unlawful to construct or erect any building or structure or portion
thereof or addition thereto in the fire limits unless the exterior walls and
roof of such building or structure are covered or constructed of nonflammable
materials; provided, that this shall not operate to prohibit the construction
of temporary one story buildings for the use of builders during construction of
the fire-proof structure; wooden fences not over eight feet (8') high; piazzas
or balconies not exceeding ten feet (10') in width or extending more than three
feet (3') above the second story floor beams; bay windows when covered with
incombustible material. (M.C. 1962, sec. 14.202; amd. 1974 Code)
4-5-3: REPAIRS:
It shall be unlawful to repair any existing frame building within the fire
limits after the same shall be damaged by any cause to fifty percent (50%) of
its value, unless such building is made to conform to the provisions of the
foregoing Section. (M.C. 1962, sec. 14.203)
CHAPTER 6
HOUSE NUMBERING
SECTION:
4-6-1: Numbers Required
4-6-2: Chart
4-6-3: Violation
4-6-1: NUMBERS REQUIRED:
All lots, buildings and structures in the City shall be numbered in accordance
with the chart on file in the office of the Building Inspector. (M.C. 1962,
sec. 11.301)
4-6-2: CHART:
The Building Inspector shall keep a chart, showing the proper street number of
every lot in the City, which shall be open to inspection by any interested
person. (M.C. 1962, sec. 11.302)
It shall be the duty of the owner and occupant of every building, structure,
and mobile home in the City to have placed thereon, in a place visible from the
street, figures at least two and one- half inches (21/2") high, showing the
proper number assigned thereto. (Ord. 75-33, 8-18-1975)
4-6-3: VIOLATION:
Any person failing to so number any house owned or occupied by him, after
receiving notice so to do from the Building Inspector, shall be subject to
penalty as provided by Section
1-4-1 of this Code. (M.C. 1962, sec. 111.303)
CHAPTER 7
DANGEROUS BUILDINGS
SECTION:
4-7-1: Adoption Of Regulations
4-7-2: Prohibition (Rep. by Ord. 86-1, 1-6-1986)
4-7-3: Abatement
4-7-4: Violation
4-7-5: Appeals
4-7-1: ADOPTION OF REGULATIONS:
The International Property Maintenance Code as adopted in section
4-1-1 of this title, a copy of which is on file in the Inspection Department
Office, is hereby adopted by reference as the East Moline Code for the
Abatement of Dangerous Buildings and as the code governing the abatement of
dangerous, or unsafe, buildings in the City of East Moline. Any provisions of
65 Illinois Compiled Statutes shall be subject to the requirements and
procedures of said chapter 65, and subject to section
4-7-3 of this chapter. (Ord. 18-10, 9-17-2018)
4-7-2: PROHIBITION:
(Rep. by Ord. 86-1, 1-6-1986)
4-7-3: ABATEMENT:
Whenever the Code official, building official, Fire Chief, or their designated
person, shall be of the opinion that any building or structure in the City is a
dangerous, or unsafe, building, they shall notify the owner, or owner's
authorized agent, and abate the property in the manner proscribed in chapter 1
of the International Property Maintenance Code. If the owner has failed to put
such building in a safe condition or demolish it within thirty (30) days after
receipt of notice, the City Attorney is hereby empowered to file, on behalf of
the City, an application to the Circuit Court of Rock Island County for an
order authorizing the City to demolish, repair or cause the demolition or
repair of the subject building, pursuant to 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-
3-1. (Ord. 18-10, 9-17-2018)
4-7-4: VIOLATION:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter or permitting any dangerous
building, or any building or structure to remain in a dangerous condition, or
to remain in the fire limits, without remodeling as above provided for, after
it has been damaged to the extent of fifty percent (50%) of its value, shall be
subject to penalty as provided by section
1-4-1 of this Code. (1962 Code § 14.305)
4-7-5: APPEALS:
Any owner or his agent not in accord with a decision made in the enforcement of
this code shall have the right to appeal from such order or ruling to the Board
of Standards and Appeals, as granted and prescribed in title 2, chapter 4 of
this City Code. (Ord. 18-10, 9-17-2018)
CHAPTER 8
MOVING BUILDINGS
SECTION:
4-8-1: Permit Required
4-8-2: Approval; Fee
4-8-3: Bond
4-8-4: Lights And Warnings
4-8-5: Wires, Cutting
4-8-6: Fire Alarm Wires
4-8-1: PERMIT REQUIRED:
No person, firm or corporation shall move any building, on, through, or over
any street, alley, sidewalk or other public place in the City without having
obtained a permit therefor from the Mayor and City Council. Applications for
such permits shall be made in writing so the Clerk can and shall state thereon
the proposed route and the number of days it is intended that the building
shall occupy any portion of any street, alley, sidewalk, or other public place.
(M.C. 1962, sec. 14.401)
4-8-2: APPROVAL; FEE:
Upon approval of the intended route by the Mayor and Council, a fee of ten
dollars ($10.00) for each day or fraction thereof that it is intended that the
building shall occupy any such portion of any such public place shall be paid
to the Clerk and the permit issued. Additional payment of twenty dollars
($20.00) for each day or fraction thereof over and above the time stated on the
permit during which any building shall occupy any such public place shall be
paid. (M.C. 1962, sec. 14.402)
4-8-3: BOND:
Every person applying for a permit under this Chapter shall submit with his
application a cash bond with a lawful corporate surety to be approved by the
Mayor and Council, conditioned on his compliance with all the provisions of
this Chapter, and agreeing to pay and holding the City harmless from any claim
which may be made against it by reason of the occupation of any street, alley,
sidewalk, or other public place by the building or structure moved. (M.C. 1962,
sec. 14.403)
4-8-4: LIGHTS AND WARNINGS:
Whenever a street or alley is blocked by a house or structure which is being
moved, warnings to that effect shall be placed by the Police Department so as
to warn vehicles and persons from entering that portion of the street so
blocked.
The persons moving any building through the streets shall keep warning signs
and lanterns or lights on the building so as to guard against any person or
vehicle from colliding with it. (M.C. 1962, sec. 14.404)
4-8-5: WIRES, CUTTING:
Whenever it shall be necessary to interfere with wires or cables of a public
utility in moving a building the terms of any special or franchise ordinance
governing shall apply and the bond therein specified shall be given. If no such
terms apply then the Mayor shall estimate the expense of fixing the wires and
the bond to be given to cover such expense. (M.C. 1962, sec. 14.405)
4-8-6: FIRE ALARM WIRES:
When any moving building shall approach any fire alarm wire or pole which shall
be endangered by the removal of such building or structure, it shall be the
duty of the mover to notify the Fire Chief at least six (6) hours before
reaching such wire or pole so that they may be removed or cared for by the City
authorities. (M.C. 1962, sec. 14.406)
CHAPTER 9
SIGN ORDINANCE
SECTION:
4-9-1: Purpose And Intent
4-9-2: Definitions
4-9-3: General Regulations
4-9-4: Structural And Fabrication Regulations
4-9-5: Signs Not To Constitute Traffic Hazard
4-9-6: Attached Signs
4-9-7: Freestanding Signs
4-9-8: Roof Signs
4-9-9: Temporary Signs
4-9-10: Permitted Signs For Nonconforming Uses
4-9-11: Prohibited Signs
4-9-12: Removal Of Signs
4-9-13: Administration And Appeal
4-9-14: Penalties
4-9-15: Separability
4-9-16: Conflict Clause
4-9-17: Effective Date
4-9-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
This Sign Ordinance is hereby enacted by the City of East Moline, Illinois, to
assure compatibility of signs with surrounding land usage, to conserve property
value in all districts, to protect the public investment in streets and
highways, to promote the safety and recreational value of public travel, and to
strengthen the economy of the City. All signs hereinafter erected or
maintained, except official, traffic and street signs, shall conform to the
provisions of this Ordinance. (Ord. 86-23, 12-1-1986)
4-9-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this Ordinance unless the context otherwise indicates:
ATTACHED PROJECTING SIGN: Any sign which is attached to a building or other
structure and extends beyond the surface of that portion of the building or
structure to which it is attached.
ATTACHED SIGN: A sign which is bolted, nailed, painted, or in any way affixed
to an outside building wall.
ATTACHED WALL SIGN: All flat signs of solid face construction which are placed
against a building or other structure and attached to the exterior front, rear,
or side wall of any building, or other structure.
BILLBOARD: Any sign which directs attention to a business, commodity, service
or activity not necessarily conducted, sold or offered upon the premises where
such sign is located.
ERECT: To build, construct, attach, hang, place, suspend, or affix signs.
FACIA SIGN: A single-face attached sign which is attached flat against and
parallel to its supporting wall.
FACING: The surface of the sign upon, against, or through which the message is
displayed or illustrated on the sign.
FLASHING SIGN: A sign, the illumination of which is not kept constant in
intensity at all times when in use. Illuminated signs which indicate the time,
temperature, weather, or similar public service information shall not be
considered "flashing signs".
FREESTANDING ELEVATED SIGN: Any sign supported by a metal pole or poles placed
into the ground with the base line of the sign not less than ten feet (10')
above the ground over which it is erected.
FREESTANDING GROUND SIGN: Any sign supported by uprights or braces placed into
or upon the ground with the base line of the sign not more than ten feet (10')
above the ground over which it is erected, and not attached to any building.
FREESTANDING SIGN: As regulated by this Ordinance, any sign supported by
uprights or braces placed into the ground and not attached to any building or
structure other than said braces or uprights.
ILLUMINATED SIGN: Any sign which has characters, letters, figures, designs, or
outline illuminated by electric lights or luminous tubes as part of the sign
proper.
INCOMBUSTIBLE MATERIAL: Any material which will not ignite at or below a
temperature of one thousand two hundred degrees Fahrenheit (1,200°F) and will
not continue to burn or glow at that temperature.
INDIRECTLY ILLUMINATED SIGN: Any illuminated, nonflashing sign whose
illumination is derived from an external, artificial lighting source.
MARQUEE SIGN: Any sign attached to, or an integral part of, a hood or canopy of
permanent construction projecting from the wall of a building over the entrance
to that building. For the purpose of this Ordinance, marquee signs shall be
considered as attached signs when determining the allowable square foot areas
and total square foot area of all permitted signs, and shall be of the facia
type. No marquee sign shall extend more than two feet (2') above the marquee
structure.
OBSOLETE SIGN: Any on-premises sign or facing which no longer advertises a bona
fide business conducted or product sold on the premises.
ON-PREMISES SIGN: Any sign identifying the occupant of the property upon which
it is located and/or advertising goods or services available thereon.
PERSON: Any human being, firm, legal entity, partnership, association,
corporation, company, or organization of any kind.
ROOF SIGN: As regulated by this Ordinance, any sign erected, constructed, and
maintained wholly upon or over the roof of any building with the principal
means of support on the roof structure.
SIGN: A name, identification, description, display, or illumination which is
affixed to, painted, or represented directly or indirectly, upon a building,
structure, or piece of land which advertises or directs attention to an object,
product, place, activity, person, institution, organization, or a business.
SIGN AREA: Sign area shall include the extreme points or edges of the sign,
excluding molding and the supporting structure which does not form a part of
the sign proper. The area of a sign composed of characters or words attached
directly to a building or wall surface shall be the smallest triangles or
parallelograms which enclose a related group of words, symbols, characters, or
figures. All faces of a multiple-faced sign shall be included in computing sign
area, except for back-to-back outdoor advertising and double-face on-premises
signs, the area of which shall be taken as the area of one face if the two (2)
faces are of equal area, or as the area of the larger face if the two (2) faces
are of unequal area.
TEMPORARY SIGN: Any sign which is of a movable nature which advertises
products, places, services, or things not commonly advertised on permanent
structures. (Ord. 86-23, 12-1-1986; amd. Ord. 99-21, 6-7-1999)
4-9-3: GENERAL REGULATIONS:
   (A)   Exemptions: The provisions and regulations of this Ordinance shall not
apply to the following signs:
      1.   House and business numbers identifying the address of a parcel of
land.
      2.   Announcement or professional signs and nameplates in residential
zoning districts identifying the occupant of a parcel of land and not exceeding
one square foot in area.
      3.   Memorial signs or tablets, names of buildings, and date of erection
when cut into any masonry surface or when constructed of metal.
      4.   Flags bearing the official design of a nation, state, municipality,
educational institution, or nonprofit organization.
      5.   Traffic or other municipal signs such as legal notices, railroad
crossings, danger, and other emergency signs as may be approved by the city
council.
      6.   Community special event signs approved by the city council.
      7.   Bulletin boards not over twelve (12) square feet in area for public,
charitable or religious institutions when the same are located on the premises
of said institutions set back ten feet (10') from all property lines.
      8.   Signs used exclusively for traffic direction, on private streets or
in parking areas, not exceeding ten (10) square feet in area and not
illuminated. Such sign shall be placed so as not to cause traffic or pedestrian
hazards.
      9.   Nonelectric or electric signs which do not require approval by the
electrical inspector inside buildings which are visible from the outside, and
all other signs inside buildings which are not visible from the outside.
      10.   Community information signs advertising events or promotions not
conducted on the premises which are sponsored by religious, charitable,
business or other associations and organizations.
      11.   Credit card signs or stickers affixed to windows. (Ord. 86-23, 12-
1-1986)
   (B)   Permits Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to erect,
structurally alter, or relocate within the city of East Moline any "sign" as
defined in this ordinance, except temporary signs, without first obtaining an
erection permit from the building inspector and making payment of the fee as
required by this section. All signs that have electrical provisions shall, in
addition, be subject to the provisions of the electrical code and the permit
fees required thereunder. (Ord. 86-23, 12-1-1986; amd. Ord. 00-16, 4-3-2000)
      1.   Every applicant, before being granted an erection permit hereunder,
shall pay a permit fee for each such sign and sign structure regulated by this
ordinance. Unless otherwise specified in this ordinance, each sign shall be
considered a separate structure requiring its own permit. Permit fees shall be
calculated in accordance with the fee schedule of subsection
4-1-1(B) of this title. (Ord. 86-23, 12-1-1986; amd. Ord. 00-16, 4-3-2000; Ord.
03-15, 5-5-2003)
      2.   The owner of any building to which a sign is to be attached, said
sign to encroach or hang over public right of way shall, before any permit be
granted for construction or installation of said sign, furnish the city of East
Moline satisfactory evidence of liability insurance coverage in an amount of
not less than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) liability coverage on
account of any one accident, from an insurance company authorized to do
business in the state, with an endorsement thereon holding the city of East
Moline harmless from any claims or causes of action arising out of the
installation or maintenance of said sign. The owner of any building to which a
sign has been attached prior to the passage of this ordinance, which said sign
encroaches or hangs over public right of way, shall comply with the insurance
requirements of this section within thirty (30) days after the enactment of
this ordinance.
      3.   It shall be the duty of the building inspector, upon the filing of
an application for an erection permit, to examine such plans, specifications
and other data relating to the proposed sign and sign structure. If it appears
that the proposed sign and sign structure is in compliance with all the
requirements of the building code, this ordinance and all other laws and
ordinances of the city of East Moline, he or she shall then issue the erection
permit. If the work authorized under an erection permit has not been completed
within twelve (12) months after date of issuance, said permit shall become null
and void, except that if good cause is shown, the building inspector may extend
the permit for not more than two (2) consecutive six (6) month periods.
      4.   The application for an erection permit of a sign in which electrical
wiring and connections are to be used shall be submitted to the electrical
inspector. The electrical inspector shall examine the plans and specifications
respecting all wiring and connections to determine if the same complies with
the electrical code to the city of East Moline and he or she shall issue an
electrical permit if the said plans and specifications comply with said code.
   (C)   Application For Erection Permit: Application for erection permits
shall be made upon blanks provided by the building inspector and shall contain
or have attached thereto the following information:
      1.   Name, address, and telephone number of the person erecting the sign.
      2.   Location of building, structure, or lot to which or upon which the
sign is to be attached or erected.
      3.   Name, address, and telephone number of the applicant.
      4.   Written consent of the owner or authorized representative of the
building, structure, or land to which or on which the sign is to be erected.
      5.   When requested by the building inspector, blueprints or drawings of
the plans and/or specifications and method of construction, attachment to the
building or in the ground, and the position of the sign in relation to nearby
buildings, structures, or other signs.
      6.   When requested by the building inspector, a copy of stress sheets
and calculations showing that sign and sign structure are designed for dead
load and wind pressure in any direction in the amount required by this and
other laws and ordinances of the city of East Moline.
      7.   Location and size of the proposed sign.
      8.   Proof of insurance policy of bond.
      9.   Such other information as the building inspector may require to show
full compliance with this and all other ordinances of the city.
   (D)   Revocation Of Permit: The building inspector or electrical inspector
is hereby authorized and empowered to revoke any permit issued by him or her
upon failure of the holder thereof to comply with any provisions of this
ordinance. (Ord. 86-23, 12-1-1986; amd. Ord. 00-16, 4-3-2000)
4-9-4: STRUCTURAL AND FABRICATION REGULATIONS:
All signs shall be built, constructed, and erected in accordance with the
building code, other ordinances of the city of East Moline, and the
"Maintenance And Improvement Manual" published by the Outdoor Advertising
Association of America, Inc.
   (A)   Design Of Signs: Every freestanding elevated sign including the
frames, poles or supports and footings and every attached projecting sign
including frames, braces and supports thereof shall be designed by a structural
or manufacturer's engineer in conformance with wind pressure and dead load
requirements established in this ordinance and in accordance with the Building
Code and other ordinances of the City of East Moline.
   (B)   Erection Of Signs: Every elevated freestanding sign shall be erected
under the supervision of an experienced construction superintendent or
manufacturer's representative capable of interpreting the construction and
erection drawings required in order to assure conformance with all provisions
of this Ordinance.
   (C)   Markings On Signs: In addition to sign marking, as required in the
Electrical Code, every sign hereafter erected shall have permanently affixed on
the exterior of the sign the date of erection and the permit number, which
shall not be covered in any future reconditioning or painting of said sign.
   (D)   Treating Required: The owner of any sign (existing or proposed) shall
be required to have it properly painted, galvanized, or otherwise treated to
prevent rust and deterioration of all parts and supports of the said sign.
   (E)   Wind Pressure And Dead Load Requirements: All signs shall be designed
and constructed to withstand wind pressure and to receive dead loads as
required in the Building Code or any other ordinance of the City of East
Moline.
   (F)   No Glass Permitted: No glass shall be permitted except in the lighting
mechanism.
   (G)   Lights: Lights shall be permitted on signs providing they are made of
corrosion-resistant materials. The lights shall be provided with proper lenses
concentrating the illumination upon the area of the sign and preventing glare
upon the street or adjacent property. All lighted signs in residential zoning
districts, or on property which adjoins or abuts a residentially- used property
along the front or side lot lines, shall be of the illuminated type.
   (H)   Electrical Connections: All electrical connections shall be weather
tight.
   (I)   Movable Parts To Be Secure: Any movable part of any sign, such as the
cover of a service opening, shall be securely fastened.
   (J)   Face Of Sign Shall Be Smooth: All signs or other advertising
structures which are constructed at the property line, or within five feet (5')
thereof, and are less than ten feet (10') above the ground over which they are
located shall not have a surface with nails, tacks or wires that protrude
therefrom, except electrical reflectors and devices which may extend over the
top and in front of the advertising structures.
   (K)   Letter To Be Secured: All letters, figures, characters or
representations in cutout or irregular form maintained in conjunction with,
attached to, or superimposed upon any sign shall be safely and securely built
or attached to the sign structure and shall comply with the Building Code
requirements.
   (L)   Materials Required: The support structures of all freestanding
elevated and roof signs for which a permit is required under this Ordinance
shall be constructed of incombustible material, excluding trim. The facings of
freestanding elevated and roof signs and facings and supports of freestanding
ground, attached projecting, attached wall, and outdoor advertising signs are
allowed to be constructed of combustible materials if it is determined that
they do not increase the fire hazard of the structure.
   (M)   Supplementary Signs: No supplementary sign or other appendage may be
hung from or supported by an approved sign or its supports if it will adversely
affect the structure of the approved sign or make the approved sign
nonconforming. (Ord. 86-23, 12-1-1986)
4-9-5: SIGNS NOT TO CONSTITUTE TRAFFIC HAZARD:
No sign as regulated by this Ordinance shall be erected at the intersection of
any street, alley or driveway in such a manner as to obstruct free and clear
vision; or at any location where, by reason of the position, shape or color, it
may interfere with, obstruct the view of, or be confused with any authorized
traffic sign, signal, or device; or which makes use of the words Stop, Look,
Danger, or any other word, phrase, symbol, or character in such manner as to
interfere with, mislead, or confuse traffic. (Ord. 86-23, 12-1-1986)
4-9-6: ATTACHED SIGNS:
   (A)   Location And Size:
      1.   An attached projecting sign shall not project more than nine feet
six inches (9'6") or two-thirds (2/3) the width of the sidewalk, whichever is
less. Every attached projecting sign shall be placed at least ten feet (10')
above the public sidewalk over which it is erected, and a distance not greater
than two feet (2') from the face of the wall to which it is attached, measuring
from the point of the sign nearest hereto, nor shall any sign or part thereof
extend nearer the curb line than two feet (2'). Every attached projecting sign
erected over public driveways and thoroughfares shall be placed not less than
fifteen feet (15') above the level of same.
      2.   Attached on-premises signs may have an aggregate area of two (2)
square feet for each lineal foot of building frontage facing a street, but the
maximum total area of all permitted on-premises attached signs shall not exceed
nine hundred (900) square feet per establishment per street facing. Permitted
signs may be placed on any facade of the building. The printed copy or graphics
portion of a facia sign shall not exceed eighty percent (80%) of any linear
frontage of the building.
      3.   Outdoor advertising signs shall not exceed six hundred seventy five
(675) square feet per face with extensions allowed up to two hundred twenty
five (225) square feet. On streets and highways within the jurisdiction of this
Ordinance no outdoor advertising sign may be established within one hundred
feet (100') of any other outdoor advertising sign facing the same direction
measured on the same side of the same street. Such spacing between structures
does not apply to structures separated by buildings or other structures in such
a manner that only one sign located within the above mentioned spacing distance
is visible from the highway at any one time.
      4.   No attached sign shall extend more than four feet (4') above the
facade of the building to which it is attached. A sign which is attached
parallel to any building or structure shall not project beyond the ends of the
wall to which it is attached.
      5.   In the case of a lot or building facade with frontage on more than
one street, attached signs may be permitted on each street in accordance with
the regulations of this Ordinance. In no case shall allowable sign area be
transferred from one street-facing facade to another street-facing facade.
      6.   Attached signs identifying commercial uses in residential zoning
districts approved by the Board of Zoning Appeals shall be of the facia type,
shall not exceed fifteen (15) square feet in area, and shall be limited to one
sign (attached or freestanding) on the premises of said use.
      7.   Attached signs identifying churches, fraternities, or other similar
uses in residential zoning districts shall not exceed twenty five (25) square
feet in area.
      8.   Attached signs for special use permits granted by the City Council
shall be allowed only when authorized by said Council, and shall conform to the
requirements of subsection
4-9-10(A)4 of this Chapter.
      9.   If the projecting attached sign is illuminated, the reflectors shall
be provided with the proper glass lenses concentrating the illumination upon
the area of the sign and preventing glare upon the street or adjacent property.
      10.   The distance measured between the principal faces of any attached
projecting sign shall not exceed eighteen inches (18").
      11.   No attached projecting sign shall be secured with wire, strips of
wood or nails, nor shall any projecting sign be hung or secured to any other
sign.
      12.   All attached wall signs shall be safely and securely attached to
the building wall by means of metal anchors, bolts, or expansion screws of not
less than three-eighths inch (3/8") in diameter embedded in said wall at least
five inches (5"); provided, however, that such signs may rest in, or be bolted
to strong, heavy metal brackets or saddles set not over six feet (6') apart,
each of which shall be securely fixed to the wall as hereinbefore provided. In
no case shall any attached wall sign be secured with wire, strips of wood or
nails. (Ord. 86-23, 12-1-1986)
4-9-7: FREESTANDING SIGNS:
   (A)   Location And Size:
      1.   Freestanding signs are permitted in business, industrial and
conservation zoning districts.
      2.   Freestanding signs shall conform to the height regulations of the
Zoning Ordinance with a maximum height of forty feet (40'). However, within six
hundred sixty feet (660') of the interstate highway, exit ramps excluded, one
sign on a standard per premises may be erected to exceed the forty foot (40')
limitation providing it does not exceed a height of five feet (5') above the
center line of the nearest pavement, ramps excluded, of the interstate road and
can be seen from said point.
      3.   Freestanding on-premises signs and their supporting structures are
permitted within one foot (1') of the front property line when the area of such
sign is not greater than one hundred (100) square feet. For each additional ten
(10) square feet in area such sign shall be set back an additional one foot
(1'). Outdoor advertising signs shall be no nearer the street than the building
line established by law.
      4.   No freestanding sign shall be nearer than two feet (2') to any other
sign, building or structure, providing, however, that a sign of continuous
panels shall be considered as one sign for this provision.
      5.   Freestanding on-premises signs may have an aggregate area not
exceeding two (2) square feet for each lineal foot of lot frontage up to a
maximum area of nine hundred (900) square feet. (Ord. 86-23, 12-1-1986)
      6.   Billboards shall be permitted only within B-3 General Business
Districts, I-1 Light Industrial Districts and I-2 General Industrial Districts,
on unimproved lots only, in which case, they shall be limited to not more than
one billboard for a lot of six hundred foot (600') frontage or less and to only
one additional sign for each six hundred feet (600') of additional lot frontage
and at least six hundred feet (600') apart. (Billboards may be set back-to-back
1,200 feet apart.) Billboards shall be limited to twenty five feet (25') in
length and height and three hundred (300) square feet in sign area. No
billboard shall be erected within fifty feet (50') of an adjoining residential
use district. All billboards shall be set back twenty five feet (25') from any
portion of a City street or right-of-way line and be placed not closer than ten
feet (10') from any side property line. (Ord. 99-21, 6-7-1999)
      7.   In the case of a lot with frontage on more than one street,
freestanding signs in accordance with paragraphs 3, 4, and 5 above may be
permitted on each street. In no case shall allowable sign area be transferred
from one street frontage to another street frontage.
      8.   Freestanding signs identifying churches, fraternities, or other
similar uses in residential zoning districts shall not exceed thirty (30)
square feet in area.
      9.   Freestanding signs identifying commercial uses in residential zoning
districts approved by the Board of Zoning Appeals shall not exceed thirty (30)
square feet in area nor six feet (6') in height from the top of the sign to the
ground, shall be limited to one sign (attached or freestanding) on the premises
of said use, and shall be set back at least ten feet (10') from all lot lines.
      10.   Freestanding signs for special use permits granted by the City
Council shall be allowed only when authorized by said Council, and shall
conform to the requirements of subsection
4-9-10(A)4 of this Chapter.
      11.   Freestanding signs shall have an open space not less than two feet
(2') between the base line of said sign and the ground level. This open space
may be filled in with a platform or decorative lattice work which does not
close off more than one-half (1/2) of any square foot of such open space.
      12.   No part of a freestanding sign shall be located over the public
right of way.
      13.   The area around pole, or between poles, or similar supports of
freestanding elevated signs, shall be kept open for maximum visibility to
conform in all respects to provisions in Section
4-9-5 of this Chapter. (Ord. 86-23, 12-1-1986)
4-9-8: ROOF SIGNS:
   (A)   Location And Size:
      1.   Roof signs are permitted only in business, industrial and
conservation zoning districts.
      2.   For the purpose of this Ordinance, roof signs shall be considered as
attached signs when determining the allowable square foot area and total square
foot area of all permitted signs.
   (B)   Erection:
      1.   No roof sign shall be erected or maintained with the face thereof
nearer than five feet (5') to the outside wall toward which the sign faces;
however, if the sign is under twenty (20) square feet, it shall not be erected
with the face thereof nearer than one foot (1') to the outside wall toward
which the sign faces.
      2.   All roof signs shall have a space at least five feet (5') in height
between the base of the sign and the roof level, and have at least five feet
(5') clearance between the vertical supports thereof.
      3.   Every roof sign shall be thoroughly secured to the building by iron
or other metal anchors, bolts, supports, rods, or braces. When erected upon
buildings which are not constructed entirely of fireproof material, the bearing
plates of said sign shall bear directly upon masonry walls and intermediate
steel columns in the building. No roof sign shall be supported or anchored to
the wooden framework of a building.
   (C)   Inspection Of Roof: No sign shall be placed upon a roof unless said
roof has been determined by an architectural or structural engineer to have
sufficient strength to carry said sign. A statement to the effect that the roof
has been inspected and determined to have sufficient strength to safely carry
the proposed sign together with the signature and seal of the architectural or
structural engineer making said inspection shall be placed upon or attached to
all plans for proposed roof signs before a permit will be issued. (Ord. 86-23,
12-1-1986)
4-9-9: TEMPORARY SIGNS:
   (A)   Location And Size:
      1.   Temporary signs which advertise real estate for sale, rent, or
lease, or advertise a subdivision being developed, shall be restricted to six
(6) square feet in area when located on residentially-zoned property of less
than two (2) acres, and shall be removed upon completion of the sale, rent, or
lease of the property or sale of all lots in the subdivision. Such signs shall
be located on the property, and shall be located not less than ten feet (10')
from any street right-of-way line.
      2.   Temporary signs which advertise real estate for sale, rent, or
lease, or advertise a subdivision being developed shall be restricted to ninety
six (96) square feet in area, when located on property of two (2) or more
acres. Said signs shall be located on the property, shall be located not less
than ten feet (10') from any street right-of-way line, and shall be removed
upon completion of the sale, rent, or lease of the property or sale of all lots
in the subdivision.
      3.   Temporary signs which advertise contractors, engineers, developers,
architects, etc., for a site being developed shall be restricted to a total
area of ninety six (96) square feet and must be located not less than ten feet
(10') from any street right-of-way line or in conformance with the setback
regulations of the zoning district in which it is located, whichever is least
restrictive. Such signs shall be located on the site being developed, and shall
be removed upon the completion of the development and issuance of an occupancy
permit by the Building Inspector.
      4.   Non-electric temporary signs placed in windows of buildings with
commercial or industrial uses which advertise sales, specials, or closeouts,
shall not be restricted to illumination by normal lighting of the building.
Such signs shall be removed upon termination of the sale, special, or closeout.
      5.   Temporary signs may be erected pertaining to the candidacy of
Federal, State and local elected officials or other voting issues but shall not
exceed six (6) square feet per face in residential zoning districts and thirty
two (32) square feet in other zoning districts. Said signs may be erected not
more than thirty (30) days preceding the elections and shall be removed within
three (3) days after the election.
      6.   Other temporary signs approved by the Building Inspector shall not
exceed thirty two (32) square feet per face unless specified differently
elsewhere, or sixty four (64) square feet total, if the sign has more than one
facing. This sixty four (64') square feet must be divided among the faces.
Setback shall be zero feet (0'). Permits for other temporary signs shall
authorize the erection of said signs and their maintenance for a period not
exceeding thirty (30) days.
   (B)   Erection: Every temporary sign shall be attached to a wall or pole
with steel cables, bolts, other suitable fastenings or firmly affixed into the
ground so as to prevent movement. (Ord. 86-23, 12-1-1986)
4-9-10: PERMITTED SIGNS FOR NONCONFORMING USES:
   (A)   Signs Permitted Upon Approval: A sign or signs pertaining to a
nonconforming use on the premises may be permitted upon approval by the Board
of Zoning Appeals only after all of the following conditions are satisfied, and
only if a sign would be allowed on the premises if said use were properly
zoned.
      1.   It is the intent of this Section to allow nonconforming uses to have
one sign for the purpose of identification but because of the nature of
nonconforming uses they shall be more restricted than those permitted for
permitted uses. All signs under this Section shall comply with all other
applicable sections of this Ordinance.
      2.   Signs on nonconforming uses may be replaced only with signs of the
same size or smaller, at the same location on the building or premises (or in a
less conspicuous location) and of the same lighting (or less), but shall not be
violative of any other Section of this Ordinance.
      3.   Only one sign shall be permitted on the premises of a nonconforming
use except signs regulatory for parking areas.
      4.   If no sign existed on the premises during the six (6) months
immediately preceding application for a sign permit under this Section, the
following regulations shall apply:
         (a)   A freestanding or attached sign shall not exceed fifteen (15)
square feet in area.
         (b)   A freestanding sign shall not exceed six feet (6') in height
from the top of the sign to the ground, and shall be set back at least ten feet
(10') from all lot lines.
         (c)   An attached sign shall be of the facia type only.
         (d)   No flashing lights or rotating signs shall be allowed.
         (e)   No roof signs shall be allowed. (Ord. 86-23, 12-1-1986)
4-9-11: PROHIBITED SIGNS:
   (A)   Signs Not Permitted: The following signs shall not be permitted,
erected, or maintained in any zoning district.
      1.   Signs illuminated by strobe lighting.
      2.   Any sign which obstructs free passage from one part of a roof to any
other part and free ingress or egress from a required door, window, fire
escape, roof opening, or other required exit-way. (Ord. 86-23, 12-1-1986)
4-9-12: REMOVAL OF SIGNS:
It is the intent of this Section to recognize that the eventual elimination, as
expeditiously as it is reasonable, of existing signs that are not in conformity
with the provisions of this Ordinance is as much a subject of health, safety
and welfare as is the prohibition of new signs that would violate the
provisions of this Ordinance. It is also the intent of this Section that any
elimination of nonconforming, obsolete, unsafe and unlawful signs shall be
affected so as to avoid any unreasonable invasion of established private
rights.
   (A)   Prohibited Signs: All signs prohibited by Section
4-9-11 of this Ordinance shall be removed or made conforming within ninety (90)
days of the adoption of this Ordinance.
   (B)   Nonconforming Signs: A nonconforming sign may be continued and shall
be maintained in good condition, but it shall not be:
      1.   Changed to another nonconforming sign.
      2.   Structurally altered, except for normal maintenance and copy changes
as long as maintenance does not exceed twenty five percent (25%) of the
replacement value of the sign at any one time.
      3.   Expanded.
      4.   Reestablished after damage or destruction if the estimated expense
of reconstruction exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the appraised replacement cost
as determined by the Building Inspector.
      5.   Moved to another location unless brought into conformance.
   (C)   Unsafe And Unlawful Signs: If the Building Inspector finds that any
sign regulated herein is structurally unsafe; constitutes a hazard to safety or
health by reason of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, or abandonment; is
not kept in good repair; is capable of causing electrical shocks to persons
likely to come in contact with it; or is unlawfully installed, erected, or
maintained, he or she shall give written notice to the permittee and/or owner
thereof. If the permittee and/or owner fails to remove or alter the structure
so as to comply with the standard herein set forth within ten (10) days after
such notice, said sign shall be removed or altered to comply by the Building
Inspector at the expense of the permittee or owner of the property upon which
it is located. (Ord. 86-23, 12-1-1986)
4-9-13: ADMINISTRATION AND APPEAL:
   (A)   Administration: This Ordinance shall be administered by the Building
Inspector and Electrical Inspector, each according to his or her obvious
responsibilities according to the meaning of the language contained herein.
Upon a presentation of proper credentials, these persons or their duly
authorized representatives may enter at reasonable times any building,
structure, or premises in the City of East Moline to perform any duty imposed
upon them by this Ordinance.
   (B)   Right Of Appeal: Any person aggrieved by any ruling of any person
charged with the administration of this Ordinance may take an appeal to the
appropriate appeal board; Building Code Board of Appeals, Electrical Code
Board, or the Board of Zoning Appeals.
   (C)   Jurisdiction:
      1.   Appeals taken from requests relating to construction shall be filed
with the Building Inspector or the Electrical Inspector, as the case may be,
shall be subject to the procedures established by those respective commissions,
and are not subject to the provisions of this Section.
      2.   In addition to the jurisdiction authorized it in Section
2-5-3 of this Code, the Board of Zoning Appeals, hereinafter referred to as the
"Board", is hereby vested with the following jurisdiction and authority.
         (a)   To hear and decide appeals from and review any order,
requirement, decision, or determination made by any person charged with the
administration of this Ordinance, except appeals relating to construction as
identified under subsection (C)1 of this Section. The Board may reverse or
affirm wholly or partly, or may modify or amend the order, requirement,
decision, or determination appealed from to the extent and in the manner that
the Board may decide to be fitting and proper on the premises, and to that end,
the Board shall also have all the power of the officer from whom the appeals
are taken.
         (b)   To hear and decide all matters referred to it or upon which it
is required to pass under this Ordinance.
         (c)   To hear and pass upon applications for variances from a strict
application of the terms of this Ordinance, in the manner and subject to the
standards set out in subsection (F) of this Section.
   (D)   Provision Of Regulations: The creation, membership, meeting rules,
application process and fee, and stay of proceedings provisions for the Board
as established under the City Code shall apply to all appeals and variances
from the Sign Ordinance.
   (E)   Hearing Of Appeals:
      1.   An appeal of a decision shall be taken within thirty five (35) days
after such decision is made.
      2.   All final administrative decisions of the Board under this Section
shall be subject to judicial review pursuant to the provisions of the
"Administrative Review Act" of the State of Illinois, approved May 8, 1945, and
all amendments and modifications thereof, and the rules adopted pursuant
thereto. The term "administrative decision" is defined as in the
"Administrative Review Act".
   (F)   Variances:
      1.   The Board may vary the application of this Ordinance in harmony with
its general purpose and intent, in accordance with the procedure set forth
herein, where there are practical difficulties or particular hardships in the
way of carrying out the strict letter of any provisions of this Ordinance. Any
such variance shall be granted only after a public hearing before the Board.
      2.   A variance may be granted only when special circumstances involving
size, shape, topography, location, or surroundings affect the property referred
to in the application, when denial of said application would cause unreasonable
or unnecessary hardship, and when said sign will not cause substantial injury
to the value of other property in the vicinity nor be detrimental to the public
safety or welfare and the neighborhood in which it is located.
   (G)   Decisions Of The Board: All decisions and findings of the Board, on
appeal or upon application for a variance, after a hearing, shall, in all
instances, be final administrative determinations and shall be subject to
review by court as may be provided by law. (Ord. 86-23, 12-1-1986)
4-9-14: PENALTIES:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this Ordinance shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined not less
than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00).
Each day such violation is committed, or permitted to continue shall constitute
a separate offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder. (Ord. 86-23, 12-
1-1986)
4-9-15: SEPARABILITY:
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of this
Ordinance is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of
competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and
independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the
remaining portions thereof. (Ord. 86-23, 12-1-1986)
4-9-16: CONFLICT CLAUSE:
All ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed
insofar as they do so conflict. (Ord. 86-23, 12-1-1986)
4-9-17: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage and
approval, as required by law. (Ord. 86-23, 12-1-1986)
CHAPTER 10
SWIMMING POOLS
SECTION:
4-10-1: Adopted By Reference
4-10-2: Private Pool
4-10-3: Location
4-10-4: Permit Required
4-10-5: Drawings, Plans And Permits
4-10-6: Recirculation Pools
4-10-7: Materials
4-10-8: Structural Design
4-10-9: Walk Areas
4-10-10: Barriers
4-10-11: Steps Or Ladders
4-10-12: Skimmers
4-10-13: Water Supply
4-10-14: Inlets
4-10-15: Outlets
4-10-16: Recirculation System And Appurtenances
4-10-17: Electrical Requirements
4-10-18: Safety Precautions
4-10-19: Inspection
4-10-20: Appeals
4-10-1: ADOPTED BY REFERENCE:
The International Code Council, International Swimming Pool and Spa Code as
adopted in section
4-1-1 of this title, copy of which is on file in the Inspection Department
Office, is hereby adopted by reference and shall serve as the Swimming Pools
Code of the City, subject to certain amendments, which are marked exhibit H as
attached to the ordinance codified herein and made a part hereof by reference,
which amendments are on file in the Office of the Inspection Department. (Ord.
18-10, 9-17-2018)
4-10-2: PRIVATE POOL:
The term "swimming pool" is hereby defined as a receptacle for water, or an
artificial pool of water having a depth at any point of more than two feet
(2'), intended for the purpose of immersion or partial immersion intended for
the purpose of human beings, and including all appurtenant equipment. (1962
Code § 27.1002)
4-10-3: LOCATION:
No portion of a swimming pool outside a building shall be located at a distance
less than eight feet (8') from any side or rear property line or building line.
Pumps, filters and pool water disinfection equipment installations shall be
located at a distance not less than eight feet (8') from any side property
line. (1962 Code § 27.1003)
4-10-4: PERMIT REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful to proceed with the construction, installation,
enlargement or alteration of any private residential swimming pool and
appurtenances within the City unless permits therefor shall have first been
obtained from the building inspector. (1962 Code § 27.1004)
4-10-5: DRAWINGS, PLANS AND PERMITS:
   (A)   All drawings and plans for the construction, installation, enlargement
or alteration of any swimming pool and appurtenances shall first be presented
to the building inspector for examination and approval as to proper location
and construction.
   (B)   All plans and drawings shall be drawn to scale of not less than one-
eighth inch (1/8") to one foot (1') on paper or cloth, in ink, or by some
process that will not fade or obliterate. All distances and dimensions shall be
accurately figured and drawings made explicit and complete, showing the lot
line, and including information pertaining to the pool, walk, and fence
construction, water supply system, drainage and water disposal systems, and all
appurtenances pertaining to the swimming pool. Detail plans and vertical
elevations shall also be provided in accordance with the Building Code.
   (C)   All private residential swimming pools, appurtenances, water supply
and drainage systems shall be constructed in conformity with the approved
plans. (1962 Code § 27.1005)
4-10-6: RECIRCULATION POOLS:
All swimming pools shall be of the recirculation type in which circulation of
the water is maintained through the pool by pumps; the water drawn from the
pool being clarified and disinfected before being returned to the pool. (1962
Code § 27.1006)
4-10-7: MATERIALS:
Swimming pool walls and floors shall be constructed of any impervious material
which will provide a tight tank with white or light colored finish and easily
cleaned surfaces. The floor or bottom surface of the pool shall have a nonslip
finish as smooth as possible. The side and end walls of a pool shall present a
smooth finish and shall be vertical to a depth of at least six feet (6') or
shall have a slope or curvature meeting one of the following conditions:
   (A)   The pool wall may be vertical for thirty inches (30") from the water
level, below which the wall may be curved to the bottom with a radius at any
point equal to the difference between the depth at that point, and thirty
inches (30").
   (B)   To a depth of six feet (6'), except as in subsection (A) of this
section, the wall's slope shall not be less than one foot (1') horizontal in
six feet (6') vertical. (1962 Code § 27.1007)
4-10-8: STRUCTURAL DESIGN:
Swimming pools shall be designed to withstand the water pressure from within
and to resist the pressure of the earth when the pool is empty, to a pressure
of two thousand two hundred (2,200) pounds per square foot. The slope of the
bottom of any part of a pool in which the water is less than five feet (5') in
depth shall not be more than one foot (1') in each ten feet (10'). The maximum
slope where water is five feet (5') or more in depth shall not exceed one foot
(1') in two feet (2'). (1962 Code § 27.1008)
4-10-9: WALK AREAS:
Unobstructed walk areas not less than thirty six inches (36") wide shall be
provided to extend entirely around the pool. The walk area shall be constructed
of impervious material, and the surfaces shall be of such as to be smooth and
easily cleaned and of nonslip construction. The slope of the walks shall have a
pitch of at least one-fourth inch (1/4") to the foot (1'), designed so as to
prevent back drainage from entering the pool. (1962 Code § 27.1009)
4-10-10: BARRIERS:
All outdoor swimming pools shall be completely enclosed by an approved barrier.
All barrier openings or points of entry into pool area enclosure shall be
equipped with gates. The barrier and gates shall be four feet (4') in height
above the grade level and shall be constructed of an approved material. All
gates shall be equipped with self-closing and self-latching devices placed at
the top of the gate. Fence posts shall be decay or corrosion-resistant and
shall be set in concrete bases. (Ord. 18-10, 9-17-2018)
4-10-11: STEPS OR LADDERS:
Two (2) or more means of egress in the form of steps or ladders shall be
provided for all swimming pools. At least one such means of egress shall be
located on a side of the pool at both the deep end and shallow end of the pool.
Treads of steps and ladders shall be constructed of nonslip material and at
least three inches (3") wide for their full length. Steps and ladders shall
have a handrail on both sides. (1962 Code § 27.1011)
4-10-12: SKIMMERS:
In every swimming pool, at least one skimming device shall be provided for each
eight hundred (800) square feet of surface area or fraction thereof. Skimmers
shall be located at least thirty feet (30') apart. Handholds shall be provided
and consist of a bull-nosed coping not over two and one-half inches (21/2")
thick for the two inches (2") or an equivalent approved handhold. The handhold
must be no more than nine inches (9") above the normal water line. Skimming
devices shall be built into the pool wall, shall adequately remove floated oils
and waste and shall meet the following general specifications:
   (A)   Each skimmer shall be designed for a flow-through rate of at least
thirty (30) gallons per minute and a total capacity of all skimmers on any pool
shall be at least fifty percent (50%) of the required flow of the recirculation
system.
   (B)   They shall be automatically adjustable to variations in water level
over a range of at least three inches (3").
   (C)   An easily removable and cleanable basket or screen through which all
overflow water must pass shall be provided to trap large solids.
   (D)   The skimmer shall be provided with a device to prevent airlock in the
suction line. If an equalizer pipe is used, it shall provide an adequate amount
of make-up water for pump suction should the water of the pool drop below the
air level. This pipe shall be at least two inches (2") in diameter and shall be
located at least one foot (1') below the lowest overflow level of the skimmer.
   (E)   An equalizer line shall be provided with a valve that will remain
tightly closed under normal operating conditions, but will automatically open
at a differential of not more than four inches (4") between the pool level and
the level of the overflow tank.
   (F)   The overflow weir shall be of sufficient length to maintain a rate of
flow of at least twenty (20) gallons per minute for lineal foot of weirlip.
(1962 Code § 27.1012)
4-10-13: WATER SUPPLY:
No source of water other than that secured from the City water works
distribution system shall be used in swimming pools. (1962 Code § 27.1013)
4-10-14: INLETS:
   (A)   Swimming pool water recirculation system inlet shall be located so as
to produce so far as possible uniform circulation of water throughout the pool
without the existence of dead spots and to carry pool bottom deposits to the
outlets, and shall discharge at a minimum depth of ten inches (10") below the
pool overflow level. Minimum of one recirculation system inlet shall be
provided for every six hundred fifteen (615) square feet of surface area of the
pool.
   (B)   Pools shall be equipped with suitable facilities for adding make-up
water as needed. There shall be no physical connection between the water supply
line and the pool system. If the make-up water is added directly to the pool,
the outlet shall be at least six inches (6") above the upper rim of the pool.
If the make-up water line discharges to a surge or balancing tank, the point of
discharge shall be at least six inches (6") above the rim of the tank. If a
hose connection from a sill cock or other plumbing fixture is to be used for
supplying make-up water, then an approved vacuum breaker shall be installed
between the sill cock or control valve at the fixture and the hose connection.
The vacuum breaker shall be installed at a height not less than seven feet six
inches (7'6") above the floor, platform or ground upon which a person would
stand when operating the sill cock or control valve. Maximum size of the fill
pipe shall be two inches (2").
   (C)   The systems supplying recirculated water and make-up water to the pool
shall be constructed in conformance with the ordinances relating to plumbing.
(1962 Code § 27.1014)
4-10-15: OUTLETS:
   (A)   In swimming pools, thirty feet (30') in width or less, water
circulation system outlets shall be located so as to provide at least one
outlet at the deepest point in the pool. If the pool width is more than thirty
feet (30'), multiple outlets shall be provided and spaced not more than thirty
feet (30') apart, nor closer than four feet (4') to any wall. All pool drain
outlets shall be equipped with gratings having an area of openings not less
than four (4) times the cross- sectional area of the outlet pipe. The gratings
shall be of such design so they cannot be readily removable by bathers and will
not injure bathers' fingers. One outlet shall be provided for each eight
hundred (800) square feet of surface area.
   (B)   Pools shall be equipped with facilities for completely emptying the
pool and the discharge of the pool water to the sewer shall be at a rate not
exceeding two hundred (200) gallons per minute. No direct connection shall be
made to the sewer.
   (C)   Water drained from the pool shall not be discharged to the sewer
system during periods of rain or storms. At no time shall the rate of drain
water discharge exceed a flow of two hundred (200) gallons per minute. (1962
Code § 27.1015)
4-10-16: RECIRCULATION SYSTEM AND APPURTENANCES:
   (A)   The swimming pools' recirculation systems shall consist of plumbing
equipment, hair and lint catcher, filters, together with the necessary pipe
connections to the pool inlets and outlets, facilities and pipe connections
necessary for backwashing filters, and facilities and equipment for
disinfecting the pool water.
   (B)   Every swimming pool shall have a recirculating system with an hourly
capacity equal to the pool volume divided by eight (8).
   (C)   The recirculation system pump shall have sufficient capacity to
discharge the volume of water required for an eight (8) hour turnover of the
pool against the maximum head in the recirculating system.
   (D)   The pump used for backwashing filters shall have sufficient capacity
to provide a filter backwash rate of at least twelve (12) gallons per minute
per square foot of filter area.
   (E)   A hair and lint catcher or strainer shall be installed on the suction
side of the circulation pump to prevent hair, lint and other extraneous matter
from reaching the pump and filters. Hair and lint catchers shall be so designed
that they can be easily dismantled for the cleaning and inspection and shall be
so located as to be easily accessible for cleaning. The design features shall
be as follows: water passed through the strainer from the outside; the strainer
is made of noncorrosive material; the width or diameter of strainer openings
shall be not more than one-eighth inch (1/8"); the area of the strainer
openings shall be at least five (5) times the cross-sectional area of the inlet
pipe to the strainer.
   (F)   Recirculating systems shall contain rapid pressure filters. Sufficient
filter area shall be provided to filter the entire contents of the pool in
eighteen (18) hours at the rate of not more than three (3) gallons per square
foot of filter area per minute. The filter backwashing facilities shall be
sufficient to backwash at a rate of twelve (12) gallons per minute per square
foot of filter area. All backwash water and effluents shall be discharged to
the sewer through an indirect connection. Pressure filters shall be equipped
with readily accessible air relief valves, loss of head or pressure gauges on
the inlet and outlet pipes, and an access head or hold large enough to permit
inspection, maintenance and repair work. Sight glasses that can be easily
removed for cleaning shall be provided in the effluent line from the filter
units.
   (G)   Equipment shall be provided for the disinfection of all pool water.
Any disinfection method using materials other than chlorine compounds shall be
subject to the approval of the building inspector. Disinfection equipment
installed for the use of chlorine compounds shall have sufficient capacity to
maintain a minimum free chlorine residual of five-tenths (0.5) parts per
million. The disinfectant shall be introduced into the recirculation system
ahead of the filters.
   (H)   Gaseous chlorination systems shall not be made use of as a
disinfection method for pool water. (1962 Code § 27.1016)
4-10-17: ELECTRICAL REQUIREMENTS:
   (A)   All electrical installations provided for, installed, and used in
conjunction with private residential swimming pools, shall be in conformance
with the ordinances regulating electrical installations.
   (B)   No current carrying electrical conductors shall cross private
residential swimming pools, either overhead or underground or within fifteen
feet (15') of such pools.
   (C)   All metal fences, enclosures or railings near or adjacent to swimming
pools, which might become electrically alive as a result of contact with broken
overhead conductors from any other cause, shall be effectively grounded. (1962
Code § 27.1017)
4-10-18: SAFETY PRECAUTIONS:
Every swimming pool shall be equipped with one or more throwing ring buoys not
more than fifteen inches (15") in diameter and having sixty feet (60') of
three-sixteenth inch (3/16") manila line attached, and one or more light but
strong poles with blunted ends and not less than twelve feet (12') in length,
for making reach assists or rescues. (1962 Code § 27.1018)
4-10-19: INSPECTION:
The building inspector periodically shall inspect all swimming pools to
determine whether or not the provisions of the ordinances regarding health,
sanitation and safety applicable thereto are being complied with. (1962 Code §
27.1019)
4-10-20: APPEALS:
Any owner or his agent not in accord with a decision made in the enforcement of
this code shall have the right to appeal from such order or ruling to the Board
of Standards and Appeals, as granted and prescribed in title 2, chapter 4 of
this City Code. (Ord. 18-10, 9-17-2018)
CHAPTER 11
MECHANICAL CODE
SECTION:
4-11-1: Mechanical Codes Adopted By Reference
4-11-2: Permit And Compliance Bond Requirements
4-11-3: Administration And Appeals
4-11-4: Procedure
4-11-5: Fee Schedule
4-11-6: Mechanical Contractor License
4-11-1: MECHANICAL CODES ADOPTED BY REFERENCE:
The International Code Council, International Mechanical Code, and Fuel Gas
Code, as adopted in section
4-1-1 of this title, copies of which are on file in the Office of the
Inspection Department, are hereby adopted by reference and shall serve as the
Mechanical Code of the City subject to certain amendments, which were
recommended by the East Moline Board of Standards and Appeals and which are
marked exhibit D attached to the ordinance codified herein and made a part
hereof by reference, which amendments are on file in the Office of the
Inspection Department. (Ord. 18-10, 9-17-2018)
4-11-2: PERMIT AND COMPLIANCE BOND REQUIREMENTS:
Except as exempted, no mechanical system regulated by this chapter shall be
installed, altered, replaced, or remodeled unless a separate mechanical permit
is first obtained from the plumbing inspector.
Any person, firm or corporation desiring to engage in the business of the
installation or maintenance of heating, air conditioning or ventilation
equipment in the City of East Moline shall file with the City Clerk a
compliance bond, with the form thereof furnished by the plumbing inspector, in
the amount of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), conditioned upon the faithful
performance of all the provisions of the Mechanical Code, as most recently
adopted and a copy of the contractor's current license. (Ord. 01-13, 5-7-2001)
4-11-3: ADMINISTRATION AND APPEALS:
   (A)   The Code official, building official, or plumbing inspector, shall
have the power and responsibility to administer the Mechanical Code. This
includes, but is not limited to: reviewing plans, issuing permits, inspecting
construction for compliance with regulations, interpreting rules and
regulations contained in the code, and requiring compliance with code
standards.
   (B)   Any owner or agent not in accord with a decision made by the Code
official, building official, or plumbing inspector, shall have the right to
appeal from such order or ruling to the Board of Standards and Appeals, as
granted and prescribed in title 2, chapter 4 of this City Code. (Ord. 18-10, 9-
17-2018)
4-11-4: PROCEDURE:
   (A)   Applications for permits shall be made to the plumbing inspector and
shall be accompanied by the necessary plans, information, and specifications of
the work to be done as determined by the plumbing inspector. Upon approval of
the plans by the inspector and payment of the permit fee, a mechanical permit
shall be issued.
   (B)   The plumbing inspector shall require such changes or modifications to
the plans and specifications as are necessary to comply with the Building Code.
(Ord. 01-13, 5-7-2001)
4-11-5: FEE SCHEDULE:
Mechanical permit fees shall be charged according to the following schedule:
   (A)   Mechanical Permit Fees:
HVAC system:
New single-family dwelling          $100.00  
New 2-family dwelling               150.00   
New multi-family residence          100.00  plus $50.00 for each additional
                                            unit
Commercial and industrial building  50.00   plus 1 percent of material and
                                            labor
Miscellaneous service work on
furnaces, duct work, air            25.00    
conditioning, etc., over $100.00
Furnace:                                     
Up to 100,000 BTU                   30.00    
101,000 BTU and up                  40.00    
Suspended, recessed or floor        30.00    
mounted heaters
Installation or replacement of      20.00    
vents (chimney)
Repair, installation, or
replacement of accessory furnace    20.00    
appliances and controls
Boilers:                                     
To and including 100,000 BTU        30.00    
101,000 BTU to and including        40.00    
500,000 BTU
501,000 BTU to and including        42.00    
1,000,000 BTU
1,001,000 BTU to and including      53.00    
1,750,000 BTU
1,751,000 BTU and up                80.00    
A/C units:                                   
To and including 3 ton              30.00    
To and including 15 ton             40.00    
To and including 30 ton             42.00    
To and including 50 ton             55.00    
Over 50 ton                         80.00    
Ventilation (multiduct) other than  30.00    
heat or A/C
Ventilation fan (single duct) other 25.00    
than heat or A/C
Commercial hood type I or II        35.00    
Installation or relocation of       65.00    
commercial incinerator
Gas piping system up to 4 outlets   20.00    
Fireplace (gas or wood burning):             
Fireplace new construction gas or   20.00    
wood
Other inspections and fees:                  
Inspections outside of normal
business hours (minimum charge - 2  42.50   per hour1
hours)
Reinspection fees assessed under    42.50   per inspection1
provision of section 116.6
 
Note:
1.   Or the total hourly cost to the jurisdiction, whichever is the greatest.
This cost shall include supervision, overhead, equipment, hourly wages and
fringe benefits of the employees involved.
   (B)   Plan Review Fees: When a plan or other data are required to be
submitted by the mechanical code, a plan review fee shall be paid at the time
of submitting plans and specifications for review. The plan review fees for
mechanical work shall be equal to twenty five percent (25%) of the total permit
fee as set forth in subsection (A) of this section. When plans are incomplete
or changed so as to require additional plan review, an additional plan review
fee shall be charged at the rate shown in subsection (A) of this section.
   (C)   Fee: An investigation fee, in addition to the permit fee, shall be
collected whether or not a permit is then or subsequently issued. The
investigation fee shall be equal to the amount of the permit fee that would be
required by this code if a permit were to be issued. The payment of such
investigation fee shall not exempt any person from compliance with all other
provisions of this code nor from any penalty prescribed by law.
   (D)   Reinspections: A reinspection fee may be assessed for each inspection
or reinspection when such portion of work for which inspection is called is not
complete or when required corrections have not been made. (Ord. 07-05, 3-5-
2007)
4-11-6: MECHANICAL CONTRACTOR LICENSE:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to install, erect, alter, repair,
service, reset, or replace any system, or parts or appurtenances thereto
regulated by the mechanical code unless such person or member of the firm or
corporation shall first have obtained a mechanical license pursuant to this
section, or unless such person or the firm or corporation has regularly and
steadily in said person, firm or corporation's employ been a holder of a
mechanical license, as issued by another municipality which has adopted
standards equal to or greater than those adopted herein, as determined by the
plumbing inspector. The holder of the mechanical license shall be the
authorized representative of the person, firm or corporation in all matters
pertaining to this chapter.
   (B)   The owner-occupant of a single dwelling house may, with the assistance
of any member of said owner-occupant's family and household, personally carry
on in said house any work governed by this chapter without the license required
by subsection (A) of this section; however, the said owner-occupant shall
obtain a permit for any such work and shall call for an inspection by the city
as provided in this chapter.
   (C)   An applicant for a mechanical contractor license shall be of legal age
to conduct business in the state of Illinois, shall have a minimum of five (5)
years' experience in mechanical work under the supervision of a licensed
mechanical contractor, or shall be a graduate mechanical engineer having not
less than one year of experience in mechanical construction. The five (5)
years' experience requirement may be reduced by one year providing the
applicant has satisfactorily completed a course of study, such as four (4)
years' apprenticeship or its equal, as recognized by the board of standards and
appeals.
   (D)   The license required by this section shall be issued only to an
individual, and not to a corporation or firm.
   (E)   1. No license required by this section shall be issued until the
applicant therefor has established proper qualifications and has successfully
completed an examination, conducted by a nationally recognized testing agency,
as designated by the city administrator.
      2.   There shall be a nonrefundable examination fee of fifty dollars
($50.00) which shall cover the cost of administering the examination. The
examination fee shall be paid in advance of scheduling the examination. The
examination fee shall be charged for each subsequent examination.
   (F)   Before any permit is issued under a license required by this section,
the applicant therefor shall furnish a license and code compliance bond in the
penal sum of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), with a surety to be approved by
the plumbing inspector or designee thereof. The bond shall be conditioned upon
faithful performance of the applicant's work in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter and for all work performed under the license sought. This shall
be a continuing bond until canceled by notice. The surety shall have the right
to cancel this bond for future liability upon sixty (60) days' written notice
to the plumbing inspector, or designee thereof.
If no bond is provided, the license will remain valid, but inactive, and no
permits will be issued until the required bond is provided thereby activating
the license.
   (G)   The annual fee for licensing a mechanical contractor pursuant to this
section shall be fifty dollars ($50.00). The license shall be valid for a one
year period commencing January 1.
   (H)   An applicant for a license required by this section, having fully
complied with the provisions of this chapter and having successfully passed the
examination required by this section, shall, upon recommendation of the
plumbing inspector, be issued the license sought.
Any licensee under this section shall, upon payment of the renewal fee of fifty
dollars ($50.00), be issued a renewal of the license for the second and
subsequent year. However, on the failure of any such licensee to apply for and
to pay for a renewal of the license on or before January 1 following the
expiration of such licensee's previous year's license, the licensee shall
forfeit the existing license and it shall be unlawful to perform any work
governed by this chapter until such time as a renewal license is issued.
Any license issued pursuant to this section which has been forfeited pursuant
to this section for nonpayment of the renewal fee, may be reinstated upon the
payment of the annual renewal fee, plus ten dollars ($10.00) for each month or
portion thereof that the license was forfeited up to a maximum of six (6)
months after which the individual must apply and be examined.
It shall be unlawful for any person to act as, engage in, or to otherwise
represent to be a mechanical contractor, unless such person's authorized
representative shall first obtain a mechanical license issued pursuant to this
section.
   (I)   In the case of a firm or corporation employing the holder of a
mechanical license issued pursuant to this section, both the firm or
corporation and the mechanical licensee shall be responsible for all violations
of this chapter.
   (J)   Each licensee under this section shall offer the purchaser of
mechanical equipment, and shall make available, a commitment to provide
personnel and equipment for future twenty four (24) hour service on the
equipment installed by said licensee, for a period of one year. (Ord. 01-13, 5-
7-2001)
CHAPTER 12
DEVELOPMENT IN FLOODPLAIN AREAS
SECTION:
4-12-1: Purpose
4-12-2: Definitions
4-12-3: Base Flood Elevation
4-12-4: Duties Of The Responsible Official
4-12-5: Floodplain Development Permit
4-12-6: Preventing Increased Flood Heights And Resulting Damages
4-12-7: Protecting Buildings
4-12-8: Subdivision Requirements
4-12-9: Public Health And Other Standards
4-12-10: Carrying Capacity And Notification
4-12-11: Variances
4-12-12: Disclaimer Of Liability
4-12-13: Penalty
4-12-14: Abrogation And Greater Restrictions
4-12-1: PURPOSE:
This ordinance is enacted pursuant to the police powers granted to this city by
the Illinois municipal code 1  in order to accomplish the following purposes:
   (A)   To prevent unwise developments from increasing flood or drainage
hazards to others;
   (B)   To protect new buildings and major improvements to buildings from
flood damage;
   (C)   To promote and protect the public health, safety, and general welfare
of the citizens from the hazards of flooding;
   (D)   To lessen the burden on the taxpayer for flood control, repairs to
public facilities and utilities, and flood rescue and relief operations;
   (E)   To maintain property values and a stable tax base by minimizing the
potential for creating blight areas;
   (F)   To make federally subsidized flood insurance available; and
   (G)   To preserve the natural characteristics and functions of watercourses
and floodplains in order to moderate flood and storm water impacts, improve
water quality, reduce soil erosion, protect aquatic and riparian habitat,
provide recreational opportunities, provide aesthetic benefits and enhance
community and economic development. (Ord. 10-05, 3-1-2010)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/1-2-1, 5/11-12-12, 5/11-30-2, 5/11-30-8, 5/11-31-2.
4-12-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this ordinance, the following definitions are adopted:
BASE FLOOD: The flood having a one percent (1%) probability of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year. The base flood is also known as the 100-year flood.
The base flood elevation at any location is as defined in section
4-12-3 of this chapter.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE): The elevation in relation to mean sea level of the
crest of the base flood.
BASEMENT: That portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground
level) on all sides.
BUILDING: A walled and roofed structure, including gas or liquid storage tank,
that is principally aboveground, including manufactured homes, prefabricated
buildings and gas or liquid storage tanks. The term also includes recreational
vehicles and travel trailers installed on a site for more than one hundred
eighty (180) days per year.
CRITICAL FACILITY: Any facility which is critical to the health and welfare of
the population and, if flooded, would create an added dimension to the
disaster. Damage to these critical facilities can impact the delivery of vital
services, can cause greater damage to other sectors of the community, or can
put special populations at risk.
Examples of critical facilities where flood protection should be required
include: emergency services facilities (such as fire and police stations),
schools, hospitals, retirement homes and senior care facilities, major roads
and bridges, critical utility sites (telephone switching stations or electrical
transformers), and hazardous material storage facilities (chemicals,
petrochemicals, hazardous or toxic substances).
DEVELOPMENT: Any manmade change to real estate including, but not necessarily
limited to:
   (A)   Demolition, construction, reconstruction, repair, placement of a
building, or any structural alteration to a building;
   (B)   Substantial improvement of an existing building;
   (C)   Installation of a manufactured home on a site, preparing a site for a
manufactured home, or installing a travel trailer on a site for more than one
hundred eighty (180) days per year;
   (D)   Installation of utilities, construction of roads, bridges, culverts or
similar projects;
   (E)   Construction or erection of levees, dams, walls or fences;
   (F)   Drilling, mining, filling, dredging, grading, excavating, paving, or
other alterations of the ground surface;
   (G)   Storage of materials including the placement of gas and liquid storage
tanks, and channel modifications or any other activity that might change the
direction, height, or velocity of flood or surface waters.
"Development" does not include routine maintenance of existing buildings and
facilities, resurfacing roads, or gardening, plowing, and similar practices
that do not involve filling, grading, or construction of levees.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed or buildings to be constructed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations
adopted by a community.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: The preparation
of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of
utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the
pouring of concrete pads).
FEMA: Federal emergency management agency.
FLOOD: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of
normally dry land areas from the overflow, the unusual and rapid accumulation,
or the runoff of surface waters from any source.
FLOOD FRINGE: That portion of the floodplain outside of the regulatory
floodway.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP: A map prepared by the federal emergency management
agency that depicts the floodplain or special flood hazard area (SFHA) within a
community. This map includes insurance rate zones and may or may not depict
floodways and show base flood elevations.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY: An examination, evaluation and determination of flood
hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations.
FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION (FPE): The elevation of the base flood plus one foot
(1') of freeboard at any given location in the floodplain.
FLOODPLAIN AND SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA): These two (2) terms are
synonymous. Those lands within the jurisdiction of the city of East Moline, the
extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city of East Moline, or that may be
annexed into the city of East Moline, that are subject to inundation by the
base flood. The floodplains of the city of East Moline are generally identified
as such on panel numbers 140, 145, 175, 330 and 335 of the countywide flood
insurance rate map of Rock Island County prepared by the federal emergency
management agency and dated April 5, 2010. Floodplain also includes those areas
of known flooding as identified by the community.
The floodplains of those parts of unincorporated Rock Island County that are
within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city of East Moline or that may
be annexed into the city of East Moline are generally identified as such on the
flood insurance rate map prepared for Rock Island County by the federal
emergency management agency and dated April 5, 2010.
FLOODPROOFING: Any combination of structural or nonstructural additions,
changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to
real estate, property and their contents.
FLOODPROOFING CERTIFICATE: A form published by the federal emergency management
agency that is used to certify that a building has been designed and
constructed to be structurally dry floodproofed to the flood protection
elevation.
FLOODWAY: That portion of the floodplain required to store and convey the base
flood. The floodway for the floodplains of the Mississippi River and the Rock
River shall be as delineated on the countywide flood insurance rate map of Rock
Island County prepared by FEMA and dated April 5, 2010. The floodways for each
of the remaining floodplains of the city of East Moline shall be according to
the best data available from federal, state, or other sources.
FREEBOARD: An increment of elevation added to the base flood elevation to
provide a factor of safety for uncertainties in calculations, future watershed
development, unknown localized conditions, wave actions and unpredictable
effects such as those caused by ice or debris jams.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE: Any structure that is:
   (A)   Listed individually in the national register of historic places or
preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the national register.
   (B)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior
as contributing to the historic district or a district preliminarily determined
by the secretary to qualify as a registered historic district.
   (C)   Individually listed on the state inventory of historic places by the
Illinois historic preservation agency.
   (D)   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places that has
been certified by the Illinois historic preservation agency.
IDNR/OWR: Illinois department of natural resources/office of water resources.
LOWEST FLOOR: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor. Provided that such
enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable nonelevation design requirements of section
4-12-7 of this chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure transportable in one or more sections, that is
built on a permanent chassis and is designed to be used with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to required utilities.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land
divided into two (2) or more lots for rent or sale.
NFIP: National flood insurance program.
NEW CONSTRUCTION: Structures for which the start of construction commenced on
or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a
community and includes any subsequent improvements of such structures.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed or buildings to be constructed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
completed on or after the effective date of the floodplain management
regulations adopted by a community.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE OR TRAVEL TRAILER: A vehicle which is:
   (A)   Built on a single chassis;
   (B)   Four hundred (400) square feet or less in size;
   (C)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty
truck and designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use.
REPETITIVE LOSS: Flood related damages sustained by a structure on two (2)
separate occasions during a ten (10) year period for which the cost of repairs
at the time of each such flood event on the average equals or exceeds twenty
five percent (25%) of the market value of the structure before the damage
occurred.
SFHA: See definition of Floodplain And Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA).
START OF CONSTRUCTION: Includes substantial improvement and means the date the
building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair,
reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement or other improvement, was
within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means
either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site,
such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the
construction of columns or any work beyond the stage of excavation or placement
of a manufactured home on a foundation. For a substantial improvement, actual
start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or
other structural part of a building whether or not that alteration affects the
external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE: See definition of Building.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the
cumulative percentage of damage during the life of the building equals or
exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred regardless of actual repair work performed. Volunteer labor and
materials must be included in this determination. The term includes "repetitive
loss buildings" (see definition of Repetitive Loss).
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or
improvement of a structure taking place during the life of the building in
which the cumulative percentage of improvements:
   (A)   Equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the
structure before the improvement or repair is started, or
   (B)   Increases the floor area by more than twenty percent (20%).
"Substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of
any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building commences,
whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the
structure. This term includes structures which have incurred repetitive loss or
substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work done.
The term does not include:
   (A)   Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing
state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely
necessary to assure safe living conditions, or
   (B)   Any alteration of a structure listed on the national register of
historic places or the Illinois register of historic places.
VIOLATION: The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure
or other development without the required federal, state, and/or local permits
and elevation certification is presumed to be in violation until such time as
the documentation is provided. (Ord. 10-05, 3-1-2010)
4-12-3: BASE FLOOD ELEVATION:
This ordinance's protection standard is the base flood. The best available base
flood data are listed below. Whenever a party disagrees with the best available
data, the party shall finance the detailed engineering study needed to replace
the existing data with better data and submit it to FEMA and IDNR/OWR for
approval prior to any development of the site.
   (A)   The base flood elevation for the floodplains of the Mississippi River
and the Rock River shall be as delineated on the 100-year flood profiles in the
countywide flood insurance study of Rock Island County prepared by the federal
emergency management agency and dated April 5, 2010.
   (B)   The base flood elevation for each floodplain delineated as an "AH
zone" or "AO zone" shall be that elevation (or depth) delineated on the
countywide flood insurance rate map of Rock Island County.
   (C)   The base flood elevation for each of the remaining floodplains
delineated as an "A zone" on the countywide flood insurance rate map of Rock
Island County shall be according to the best data available from federal, state
or other sources. Should no other data exist, an engineering study must be
financed by the applicant to determine base flood elevations.
   (D)   The base flood elevation for the floodplains of those parts of
unincorporated Rock Island County that are within the extraterritorial
jurisdiction of the city of East Moline, or that may be annexed into the city
of East Moline, shall be as delineated on the 100-year flood profiles in the
flood insurance study of Rock Island County prepared by the federal emergency
management agency and dated April 5, 2010. (Ord. 10-05, 3-1-2010)
4-12-4: DUTIES OF THE RESPONSIBLE OFFICIAL:
The director of engineering shall be responsible for the general administration
of this ordinance and ensure that all development activities within the
floodplains under the jurisdiction of the city of East Moline meet the
requirements of this ordinance. Specifically, the director of engineering
shall:
   (A)   Process floodplain development permits in accordance with section
4-12-5 of this chapter;
   (B)   Ensure that all development in a floodway (or a floodplain with no
delineated floodway) meets the damage prevention requirements of section
4-12-6 of this chapter;
   (C)   Ensure that the building protection requirements for all buildings
subject to section
4-12-7 of this chapter are met and maintain a record of the "as built"
elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) or floodproof certificate;
   (D)   Assure that all subdivisions and annexations meet the requirements of
section
4-12-8 of this chapter;
   (E)   Ensure that water supply and waste disposal systems meet the public
health standards of section
4-12-9 of this chapter;
   (F)   If a variance is requested, ensure that the requirements of section
4-12-11 of this chapter are met and maintain documentation of any variances
granted;
   (G)   Inspect or coordinate inspection, of all development projects and take
any and all penalty actions outlined in section
4-12-13 of this chapter as necessary to ensure compliance with this ordinance;
   (H)   Assure that applicants are aware of and obtain any and all other
required local, state, and federal permits;
   (I)   Notify IDNR/OWR and any neighboring communities prior to any
alteration or relocation of a watercourse;
   (J)   Provide information and assistance to citizens upon request about
permit procedures and floodplain construction techniques;
   (K)   Cooperate with state and federal floodplain management agencies to
coordinate base flood data and to improve the administration of this ordinance;
   (L)   Maintain for public inspection base flood data, floodplain maps,
copies of state and federal permits, and documentation of compliance for
development activities subject to this ordinance;
   (M)   Perform or coordinate the inspection of sites to ensure compliance
with this ordinance and make substantial damage determinations for structures
within the floodplain; and
   (N)   Maintain the accuracy of floodplain maps including notifying IDNR/OWR
and/or submitting information to FEMA within six (6) months whenever a
modification of the floodplain may change the base flood elevation or result in
a change to the floodplain map. (Ord. 10-05, 3-1-2010)
4-12-5: FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMIT:
No person, firm, corporation, or governmental body not exempted by law shall
commence any development in the floodplain without first obtaining a floodplain
development permit from the director of engineering. The director of
engineering shall not issue a floodplain development permit if the proposed
development does not meet the requirements of this ordinance.
   (A)   The application for floodplain development permit shall be accompanied
by:
      1.   Drawings of the site, drawn to scale showing property line
dimensions;
      2.   Existing grade elevations and all changes in grade resulting from
excavation or filling;
      3.   The location and dimensions of all buildings and additions to
buildings;
      4.   The elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) of all
proposed buildings subject to the requirements of section
4-12-7 of this chapter; and
      5.   Cost of project or improvements as estimated by a licensed engineer
or architect. A signed estimate by a contractor may also meet this requirement.
   (B)   Upon receipt of an application for a floodplain development permit,
the director of engineering shall compare the elevation of the site to the base
flood elevation. Any development located on land that can be shown by survey
data to be higher than the current base flood elevation and which has not been
filled after the date of the site's first flood insurance rate map is not in
the floodplain and therefore not subject to the requirements of this ordinance.
Conversely, any development located on land shown to be below the base flood
elevation and hydraulically connected, but not shown on the current flood
insurance rate map, is subject to the provisions of this ordinance.
The director of engineering shall maintain documentation of the existing ground
elevation at the development site and certification that this ground elevation
existed prior to the date of the site's first flood insurance rate map
identification.
The director of engineering shall be responsible for obtaining from the
applicant copies of all other federal, state, and local permits, approvals or
permit not required letters that may be required for this type of activity. The
director of engineering shall not issue a permit unless all other federal,
state, and local permits have been obtained. (Ord. 10-05, 3-1-2010)
4-12-6: PREVENTING INCREASED FLOOD HEIGHTS AND RESULTING DAMAGES:
Within any floodway identified on the countywide flood insurance rate map, and
within all other floodplains where a floodway has not been delineated, the
following standards shall apply:
   (A)   Except as provided in subsection (B) of this section, no development
shall be allowed which, acting in combination with existing and anticipated
development will cause any increase in flood heights or velocities or threat to
public health and safety. The following specific development activities shall
be considered as meeting this requirement:
      1.   Bridge and culvert crossings of streams in rural areas meeting the
following conditions of the Illinois department of natural resources, office of
water resources statewide permit number 2:
         (a)   The crossing will not result in an increase in water surface
profile elevation in excess of 1.0 feet, and
         (b)   The crossing will not result in an increase in water surface
profile elevation in excess of one-half (0.5) feet at a point one thousand feet
(1,000') upstream of the proposed structure.
         (c)   There are no buildings in the area impacted by the increases in
water surface profile.
         (d)   The proposed bridge or culvert crossing will not involve
straightening, enlarging, or relocating the existing channel.
         (e)   The design must be certified by a licensed professional engineer
in the state of Illinois and the designs must meet the conditions of an IDNR/
OWR permit.
         (f)   The design must be certified by a second licensed professional
engineer.
      2.   Barge fleeting facilities meeting the following conditions of IDNR/
OWR statewide permit number 3:
         (a)   The permit is only applicable when deadmen, pier cells, or other
similar anchorage devices have been permitted by the U.S. army corps of
engineers.
      3.   Aerial utility crossings meeting the following conditions of IDNR/
OWR statewide permit number 4:
         (a)   The utility line must be constructed above the existing 100-year
flood elevation or attached to an existing bridge.
         (b)   A utility line attached to an existing bridge shall be
constructed above the low cord elevation of the bridge.
         (c)   No supporting towers or poles shall be located in a river, lake
or stream.
         (d)   Supporting towers including foundation and poles shall be
designed and located so as to not cause an obstruction of flood flows by
trapping debris.
         (e)   All disturbed areas shall be returned to preconstruction grades
and revegetated.
         (f)   All Illinois commerce commission, national electrical safety
code, and federal requirements must be met.
      4.   Minor boat docks meeting the following conditions of IDNR/OWR
statewide permit number 5:
         (a)   The boat dock must not extend more than fifty feet (50') into a
waterway and no more than one-fourth (1/4) of the width of the waterway and
shall not extend beyond the navigational limits established by the IDNR and
corps of engineers.
         (b)   The width of the boat dock shall not be more than ten feet
(10').
         (c)   For L-shaped or T-shaped docks, the length of that portion
parallel to the shoreline must not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the
landowner's shoreline frontage nor fifty feet (50').
         (d)   Docks must be aligned so as not to cross the projection of
property lines into the waterway or come within ten feet (10') of the projected
property line.
         (e)   Dock posts must be marked by reflective devices.
         (f)   The boat dock must be securely anchored to prevent detachment
during times of high wind or water.
         (g)   Metal drums or containers may not be used as buoyancy units
unless they are filled with flotation foam. Containers which previously stored
pesticides, herbicides, or any other toxic chemicals are not permissible.
         (h)   This permit does not authorize any other related construction
activity such as shore protection or fill.
         (i)   Nonfloating boat docks must be constructed in a manner which
will minimize obstruction to flow.
         (j)   At any future date, the permittee must agree to make necessary
modifications to the dock as determined by the IDNR or corps of engineers.
      5.   Minor, nonobstructive activities meeting the following conditions of
IDNR/OWR statewide permit number 6:
         (a)   The following activities (not involving fill or positive change
in grade) are covered by this permit:
            (1)   The construction of underground utility lines, wells, or
septic tanks not crossing a lake or stream.
            (2)   The construction of light poles, signposts, and similar
structures.
            (3)   The construction of sidewalks, driveways, athletic fields
(excluding fences), patios, and similar structures.
            (4)   The construction of properly anchored, unwalled, open
structures such as playground equipment, pavilions, and carports.
            (5)   The placement of properly anchored buildings not exceeding
seventy (70) square feet in size, nor ten (10) square feet in any dimension.
Only one such building on a property is authorized by this statewide permit.
            (6)   The raising of existing buildings, provided no changes are
made to the outside dimensions of the building and the placement of fill is not
involved.
      6.   Outfall structures and drainage ditch outlets meeting the following
conditions of IDNR/OWR statewide permit number 7:
         (a)   Any outfall structure, including any head wall or end section,
shall not extend riverward or lakeward of the existing adjacent natural bank
slope or adjacent bank protection.
         (b)   The velocity of the discharge shall not exceed the scour
velocity of the channel soil, unless channel erosion would be prevented by the
use of riprap or other design measures.
         (c)   Outlets from drainage ditches shall not be opened to a stream
until the ditch is vegetated or otherwise stabilized to minimize stream
sedimentation.
         (d)   Disturbance of streamside vegetation shall be kept to a minimum
during construction to prevent erosion and sedimentation. All disturbed
floodway areas, including the stream banks, shall be restored to their original
contours and seeded or otherwise stabilized upon completion of construction.
      7.   Underground pipeline and utility crossings meeting the conditions of
IDNR/OWR statewide permit number 8:
         (a)   In all cases, the crossing shall be placed beneath the bed of
the river, lake or stream and, unless the crossing is encased in concrete or
entrenched in bedrock, a minimum of three feet (3') of cover shall be provided.
The river, lake or stream bed shall be returned to its original condition.
         (b)   Disturbance of streamside vegetation shall be kept to a minimum
during construction to prevent erosion and sedimentation. All disturbed
floodway areas, including stream banks, shall be restored to their original
contours and seeded or otherwise stabilized upon completion of construction.
         (c)   Any utility crossing carrying material which may cause water
pollution, as defined by the environmental protection act 1 , shall be provided
with shutoff valves on each side of the body of water to be crossed.
         (d)   If blasting is to be utilized in the construction of the
crossing, the permittee shall notify the IDNR/OWR at least ten (10) days prior
to the blasting date to allow monitoring of any related fish kills.
      8.   Bank stabilization projects meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR
statewide permit number 9:
         (a)   Only the following materials may be utilized in urban areas:
stone and concrete riprap, steel sheet piling, cellular blocks, fabric formed
concrete, gabion baskets, rock and wire mattresses, sand/cement filled bags,
geotechnical fabric materials, natural vegetation and treated timber. "Urban
areas" are defined as: Areas of the state where residential, commercial, or
industrial development currently exists or, based on land use plans or
controls, is expected to occur within ten (10) years. (The department should be
consulted if there is a question of whether or not an area is considered
urban.)
         (b)   In addition to the materials listed in subsection (A)8(a) of
this section, other materials (e.g., tire revetments) may be utilized in rural
areas provided all other conditions of this permit are met.
         (c)   The following materials shall not be used in any case: auto
bodies, garbage or debris, scrap lumber, metal refuse, roofing materials,
asphalt or other bituminous materials, or any material which would cause water
pollution as defined by the environmental protection act 2 .
         (d)   The affected length of shoreline, stream bank, or channel to be
protected shall not exceed, either singularly or cumulatively, one thousand
feet (1,000').
         (e)   All material utilized shall be properly sized or anchored to
resist anticipated forces of current and wave action.
         (f)   Materials shall be placed in a way which would not cause erosion
or the accumulation of debris on properties adjacent to or opposite the
project.
         (g)   Materials shall not be placed higher than the existing top of
the bank.
         (h)   Materials shall be placed so that the modified bank full width
and cross sectional area of the channel will conform to or be no more
restrictive than that of the natural channel upstream and downstream of the
site.
For projects involving continuous placement of riprap along the bank, toe of
the bank or other similar applications, in no case shall the cross sectional
area of the natural channel be reduced by more than ten percent (10%) nor the
volume of material placed exceed two (2) cubic yards per linear foot of the
stream bank or shoreline. The bank may be graded to obtain a flatter slope and
to lessen the quantity of material required.
         (i)   If broken concrete is used, all protruding materials such as
reinforcing rods shall be cut flush with the surface of the concrete and
removed from the construction area.
         (j)   Disturbance of vegetation shall be kept to a minimum during
construction to prevent erosion and sedimentation. All disturbed areas shall be
seeded or otherwise stabilized upon completion of construction.
         (k)   In the case of sea walls and gabion structures on lakes, the
structure shall be constructed at or landward of the water line as determined
by the normal pool elevation, unless:
            (1)   It is constructed in alignment with an existing sea wall(s)
or gabion structure(s), and
            (2)   The volume of material placed, including the structure, would
not exceed two (2) cubic yards per linear foot.
         (l)   Excess material excavated during the construction of the bank or
shoreline protection shall be placed in accordance with local, state, and
federal laws and rules, shall not be placed in a floodway.
      9.   Accessory structures and additions to existing residential buildings
meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR statewide permit number 10:
         (a)   The accessory structure or building addition must comply with
the requirements of the local floodplain ordinance.
         (b)   The principal structure to which the project is being added must
have been in existence on the effective date of this permit (July 25, 1988).
         (c)   The accessory structure or addition must not exceed five hundred
(500) square feet in size and must not deflect floodwaters onto another
property, and
         (d)   Must not involve the placement of any fill material.
         (e)   No construction shall be undertaken in, or within fifty feet
(50') of the bank of the stream channel.
         (f)   The accessory structure or addition must be properly anchored to
prevent its movement during flood conditions.
         (g)   Only one accessory structure or addition to an existing
structure shall be authorized by this permit; plans for any subsequent addition
must be submitted to IDNR/OWR for review.
         (h)   Disturbances of vegetation shall be kept to a minimum during
construction to prevent erosion and sedimentation. All disturbed floodway areas
shall be seeded or otherwise stabilized upon completion of construction.
      10.   Minor maintenance dredging activities meeting the following
conditions of IDNR/OWR statewide permit number 11:
         (a)   The affected length of the stream shall not either singularly or
cumulatively exceed one thousand feet (1,000').
         (b)   The project shall not include the construction of any new
channel; all work must be confined to the existing channel or to reestablishing
flows in the natural stream channel, and
         (c)   The cross sectional area of the dredged channel shall conform to
that of the natural channel upstream and downstream of the site.
         (d)   Dredged or spoil material shall not be disposed of in a wetland
and shall be either:
            (1)   Removed from the floodway;
            (2)   Used to stabilize an existing bank provided no materials
would be placed higher than the existing top of bank and provided the cross
sectional area of the natural channel would not be reduced by more than ten
percent (10%), nor the volume of material placed exceed two (2) cubic yards per
linear foot of stream bank;
            (3)   Used to fill an existing washed out or scoured floodplain
area such that the average natural floodplain elevation is not increased;
            (4)   Used to stabilize an existing levee provided the height of
the levee would not be increased nor its alignment changed;
            (5)   Placed in a disposal site previously approved by the
department in accordance with the conditions of the approval; or
            (6)   Used for beach nourishment, provided the material meets all
applicable water quality standards.
         (e)   Disturbance of streamside vegetation shall be kept to a minimum
during construction to prevent erosion and sedimentation. All disturbed
floodway areas, including the stream banks, shall be seeded or otherwise
stabilized upon completion of construction.
      11.   Bridge and culvert replacement structures and bridge widening
meeting the following conditions of IDNR/OWR statewide permit number 12:
         (a)   A licensed professional engineer shall determine and document
that the existing structure has not been the cause of demonstrable flood
damage. Such documentation shall include, at a minimum, confirmation that:
            (1)   No buildings or structures have been impacted by the
backwater induced by the existing structure, and
            (2)   There is no record of complaints of flood damages associated
with the existing structure.
         (b)   A licensed professional engineer shall determine that the new
structure will provide the same or greater effective waterway opening as the
existing structure. For bridge widening projects the existing piers and the
proposed pier extensions must be in line with the direction of the approaching
flow upstream of the bridge.
         (c)   The project shall not include any appreciable raising of the
approach roads. (This condition does not apply if all points on the approaches
exist at an elevation equal to or higher than the 100-year frequency flood
headwater elevation as determined by a FEMA flood insurance study completed or
approved by IDNR/OWR.)
         (d)   The project shall not involve the straightening, enlargement or
relocation of the existing channel of the river or stream except as permitted
by the department's statewide permit number 9 (minor shoreline, channel and
stream bank protection activities) or statewide permit number 11 (minor
maintenance dredging activities).
         (e)   The permittee shall maintain records of projects authorized by
this permit necessary to document compliance with the above conditions.
      12.   Temporary construction activities meeting the following conditions
of IDNR/OWR statewide permit number 13:
         (a)   No temporary construction activity shall be commenced until the
individual permittee determines that the permanent structure (if any) for which
the work is being performed has received all required federal, state and local
authorizations.
         (b)   The term "temporary" shall mean not more than one construction
season. All temporary construction materials must be removed from the stream
and floodway within one year of their placement and the area returned to the
conditions existing prior to the beginning of construction. Any desired
subsequent or repetitive material placement shall not occur without the review
and approval of the IDNR/OWR.
         (c)   The temporary project shall be constructed such that it will not
cause erosion or damage due to increases in water surface profiles to adjacent
properties. For locations where there are structures in the upstream
floodplain, the temporary project shall be constructed such that all water
surface profile increases, due to the temporary project, are contained within
the channel banks.
         (d)   This permit does not authorize the placement or construction of
any solid embankment or wall such as a dam, roadway, levee, or dike across any
channel or floodway.
         (e)   No temporary structure shall be placed within any river or
stream channel until a licensed professional engineer determines and documents
that the temporary structure will meet the requirements of special condition
number 3 of this statewide permit. Such documentation shall include, at a
minimum, confirmation that no buildings or structures will be impacted by the
backwater induced by the temporary structure.
         (f)   The permittee shall maintain records of projects authorized by
this permit necessary to document compliance with the above condition.
         (g)   Disturbance of vegetation shall be kept to a minimum during
construction to prevent erosion and sedimentation. All disturbed areas shall be
seeded or otherwise stabilized upon completion of the removal of the temporary
construction.
         (h)   Materials used for the project shall not cause water pollution
as defined by the environmental protection act 3 .
      13.   Any development determined by IDNR/OWR to be located entirely
within a flood fringe area shall be exempt from state floodway permit
requirements.
   (B)   Other development activities not listed in subsection (A) of this
section may be permitted only if:
      1.   A permit has been issued for the work by IDNR/OWR (or written
documentation is provided that an IDNR/OWR permit is not required), or
      2.   Sufficient data has been provided to FEMA when necessary, and
approval obtained from FEMA for a revision of the regulatory map and base flood
elevation. (Ord. 10-05, 3-1-2010)
 
Notes
1 1. 415 ILCS 5.
2 2. 415 ILCS 5.
3 1. 415 ILCS 5.
4-12-7: PROTECTING BUILDINGS:
   (A)   In addition to the damage prevention requirements of section
4-12-6 of this chapter, all buildings located in the floodplain shall be
protected from flood damage below the flood protection elevation. This building
protection requirement applies to the following situations:
      1.   Construction or placement of a new building or alteration or
addition to an existing building valued at more than one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) or seventy (70) square feet.
      2.   Substantial improvements or structural alterations made to an
existing building that increase the floor area by more than twenty percent
(20%) or equal or exceed the market value by fifty percent (50%). Alteration
shall be figured cumulatively during the life of the building. If substantially
improved, the existing structure and the addition must meet the flood
protection standards of this section.
      3.   Repairs made to a substantially damaged building. These repairs
shall be figured cumulatively during the life of the building. If substantially
damaged, the entire structure must meet the flood protection standards of this
section.
      4.   Installing a manufactured home on a new site or a new manufactured
home on an existing site. (The building protection requirements do not apply to
returning a manufactured home to the same site it lawfully occupied before it
was removed to avoid flood damage.)
      5.   Installing a travel trailer or recreational vehicle on a site for
more than one hundred eighty (180) days per year.
      6.   "Repetitive loss" to an existing building as defined in section
4-12-2 of this chapter.
   (B)   Residential or nonresidential buildings can meet the building
protection requirements by one of the following methods:
      1.   The building may be constructed on permanent land fill in accordance
with the following:
         (a)   The lowest floor (including basement) shall be at or above the
flood protection elevation.
         (b)   The fill shall be placed in layers no greater than six inches
(6") before compaction and should extend at least ten feet (10') beyond the
foundation before sloping below the flood protection elevation.
         (c)   The fill shall be protected against erosion and scour during
flooding by vegetative cover, riprap, or other structural measure.
         (d)   The fill shall be composed of rock or soil and not incorporated
debris or refuse material, and
         (e)   Shall not adversely affect the flow of surface drainage from or
onto neighboring properties and when necessary, stormwater management
techniques such as swales or basins shall be incorporated.
      2.   The building may be elevated on solid walls in accordance with the
following:
         (a)   The building or improvements shall be elevated on stilts, piles,
walls, crawl space, or other foundation that is permanently open to
floodwaters.
         (b)   The lowest floor and all electrical, heating, ventilating,
plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and utility meters shall be located at
or above the flood protection elevation.
         (c)   If walls are used, all enclosed areas below the flood protection
elevation shall address hydrostatic pressures by allowing the automatic entry
and exit of floodwaters. Designs must either be certified by a licensed
professional engineer or by having a minimum of one permanent opening on each
wall no more than one foot (1') above grade with a minimum of two (2) openings.
The openings shall provide a total net area of not less than one square inch
for every one square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding below the base
flood elevation, and
         (d)   The foundation and supporting members shall be anchored,
designed, and certified so as to minimize exposure to hydrodynamic forces such
as current, waves, ice, and floating debris.
            (1)   All structural components below the flood protection
elevation shall be constructed of materials resistant to flood damage.
            (2)   Water and sewer pipes, electrical and telephone lines,
submersible pumps, and other service facilities may be located below the flood
protection elevation provided they are waterproofed.
            (3)   The area below the flood protection elevation shall be used
solely for parking or building access and not later modified or occupied as
habitable space, or
            (4)   In lieu of the above criteria, the design methods to comply
with these requirements may be certified by a licensed professional engineer.
      3.   The building may be constructed with a crawl space located below the
flood protection elevation provided that the following conditions are met:
         (a)   The building must be designed and adequately anchored to resist
flotation, collapse, and lateral movement of the structure resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy.
         (b)   Any enclosed area below the flood protection elevation shall
have openings that equalize hydrostatic pressures by allowing for the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters. A minimum of one opening on each wall having a
total net area of not less than one square inch per one square foot of enclosed
area. The openings shall be no more than one foot (1') above grade.
         (c)   The interior grade of the crawl space below the flood protection
elevation must not be more than two feet (2') below the lowest adjacent
exterior grade.
         (d)   The interior height of the crawl space measured from the
interior grade of the crawl space to the top of the foundation wall must not
exceed four feet (4') at any point.
         (e)   An adequate drainage system must be installed to remove
floodwaters from the interior area of the crawl space within a reasonable
period of time after a flood event.
         (f)   Portions of the building below the flood protection elevation
must be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage, and
         (g)   Utility systems within the crawl space must be elevated above
the flood protection elevation.
   (C)   Nonresidential buildings may be structurally dry floodproofed (in lieu
of elevation) provided a licensed professional engineer certifies that:
      1.   Below the flood protection elevation the structure and attendant
utility facilities are watertight and capable of resisting the effects of the
base flood.
      2.   The building design accounts for flood velocities, duration, rate of
rise, hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces, the effects of buoyancy, and the
impact from debris and ice.
      3.   Floodproofing measures will be incorporated into the building design
and operable without human intervention and without an outside source of
electricity.
      4.   Levees, berms, floodwalls and similar works are not considered
floodproofing for the purpose of this subsection.
   (D)   Manufactured homes or travel trailers to be permanently installed on
site shall be:
      1.   Elevated to or above the flood protection elevation in accordance
with subsection (B) of this section, and
      2.   Anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement by being
tied down in accordance with the rules and regulations of the Illinois mobile
home tie-down act issued pursuant to 77 Illinois administrative code section
870.
   (E)   Travel trailers and recreational vehicles on site for more than one
hundred eighty (180) days per year shall meet the elevation requirements of
subsection (D) of this section unless the following conditions are met:
      1.   The vehicle must be either self-propelled or towable by a light duty
truck.
      2.   The hitch must remain on the vehicle at all times.
      3.   The vehicle must not be attached to external structures such as
decks and porches.
      4.   The vehicle must be designed solely for recreation, camping, travel,
or seasonal use rather than as a permanent dwelling.
      5.   The vehicle's largest horizontal projections must be no larger than
four hundred (400) square feet.
      6.   The vehicle's wheels must remain on axles and inflated.
      7.   Air conditioning units must be attached to the frame so as to be
safe for movement of the floodplain.
      8.   Propane tanks as well as electrical and sewage connections must be
quick disconnect and above the 100-year flood elevation.
      9.   The vehicle must be licensed and titled as a recreational vehicle or
park model, and
      10.   Must either:
         (a)   Be entirely supported by jacks, or
         (b)   Have a hitch jack permanently mounted, have the tires touching
the ground and be supported by blocks in a manner that will allow the blocks to
be easily removed by use of the hitch jack.
   (F)   Garages, sheds or other minor accessory structures constructed
ancillary to an existing residential use may be permitted provided the
following conditions are met:
      1.   The garage or shed must be nonhabitable.
      2.   The garage or shed must be used only for the storage of vehicles and
tools and cannot be modified later into another use.
      3.   The garage or shed must be located outside of the floodway or have
the appropriate state and/or federal permits.
      4.   The garage or shed must be on a single-family lot and be accessory
to an existing principal structure on the same lot.
      5.   Below the base flood elevation, the garage or shed must be built of
materials not susceptible to flood damage.
      6.   All utilities, plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical
must be elevated above the flood protection elevation.
      7.   The garage or shed must have at least one permanent opening on each
wall not more than one foot (1') above grade with one square inch of opening
for every one square foot of floor area.
      8.   The garage or shed must be less than ten thousand dollars
($10,000.00) in market value or replacement cost whichever is greater or less
than five hundred (500) square feet.
      9.   The structure shall be anchored to resist flotation and overturning.
      10.   All flammable or toxic materials (gasoline, paint, insecticides,
fertilizers, etc.) shall be stored above the flood protection elevation.
      11.   The lowest floor elevation should be documented and the owner
advised of the flood insurance implications. (Ord. 10-05, 3-1-2010)
4-12-8: SUBDIVISION REQUIREMENTS:
The East Moline city council shall take into account hazards, to the extent
that they are known, in all official actions related to land management use and
development.
   (A)   New subdivisions, manufactured home parks, annexation agreements,
planned unit developments, and additions to manufactured home parks and
subdivisions shall meet the damage prevention and building protection standards
of sections
4-12-6 and
4-12-7 of this chapter. Any proposal for such development shall include the
following data:
      1.   The base flood elevation and the boundary of the floodplain, where
the base flood elevation is not available from an existing study, the applicant
shall be responsible for calculating the base flood elevation;
      2.   The boundary of the floodway when applicable; and
      3.   A signed statement by a registered professional engineer that the
proposed plat or plan accounts for changes in the drainage of surface waters in
accordance with the plat act 1 .
Streets, blocks, lots, parks and other public grounds shall be located and laid
out in such a manner as to preserve and utilize natural streams and channels.
Wherever possible the floodplains shall be included within parks or other
public grounds. (Ord. 10-05, 3-1-2010)
 
Notes
1 1. 765 ILCS 205/2.
4-12-9: PUBLIC HEALTH AND OTHER STANDARDS:
   (A)   Public health standards must be met for all floodplain development. In
addition to the requirements of sections
4-12-6 and
4-12-7 of this chapter, the following standards apply:
      1.   No development in the floodplain shall include locating or storing
chemicals, explosives, buoyant materials, flammable liquids, pollutants, or
other hazardous or toxic materials below the flood protection elevation unless
such materials are stored in a floodproofed and anchored storage tank and
certified by a professional engineer or floodproofed building constructed
according to the requirements of section
4-12-7 of this chapter.
      2.   Public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas and electric
shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage.
      3.   Public sanitary sewer systems and water supply systems shall be
located and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters
into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters.
      4.   New and replacement on site sanitary sewer lines or waste disposal
systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or
contamination from them during flooding. Manholes or other aboveground openings
located below the flood protection elevation shall be watertight.
      5.   Construction of new or substantially improved critical facilities
shall be located outside the limits of the floodplain. Construction of new
critical facilities shall be permissible within the floodplain if no feasible
alternative site is available. Critical facilities constructed within the SFHA
shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated or structurally dry
floodproofed to the 500-year flood frequency elevation or three feet (3') above
the level of the 100-year flood frequency elevation whichever is greater.
Floodproofing and sealing measures must be taken to ensure that toxic
substances will not be displaced by or released into floodwaters. Access routes
elevated to or above the level of the base flood elevation shall be provided to
all critical facilities.
   (B)   All other activities defined as "development" shall be designed so as
not to alter flood flows or increase potential flood damages. (Ord. 10-05, 3-1-
2010)
4-12-10: CARRYING CAPACITY AND NOTIFICATION:
For all projects involving channel modification, fill, or stream maintenance
(including levees), the flood carrying capacity of the watercourse shall be
maintained.
In addition, the city of East Moline shall notify adjacent communities in
writing thirty (30) days prior to the issuance of a permit for the alteration
or relocation of the watercourse. (Ord. 10-05, 3-1-2010)
4-12-11: VARIANCES:
Whenever the standards of this ordinance place undue hardship on a specific
development proposal, the applicant may apply to East Moline zoning board of
appeals for a variance. The East Moline zoning board of appeals shall review
the applicant's request for a variance and shall submit its recommendation to
the East Moline city council. The East Moline city council may attach such
conditions to granting of a variance as it deems necessary to further the
intent of this ordinance.
   (A)   No variance shall be granted unless the applicant demonstrates that
all of the following conditions are met:
      1.   The development activity cannot be located outside the floodplain.
      2.   An exceptional hardship would result if the variance were not
granted.
      3.   The relief requested is the minimum necessary.
      4.   There will be no additional threat to public health, safety or
creation of a nuisance.
      5.   There will be no additional public expense for flood protection,
rescue or relief operations, policing, or repairs to roads, utilities, or other
public facilities.
      6.   The applicant's circumstances are unique and do not establish a
pattern inconsistent with the intent of the NFIP, and
      7.   All other state and federal permits have been obtained.
   (B)   The East Moline zoning board of appeals shall notify an applicant in
writing that a variance from the requirements of the building protection
standards of section
4-12-7 of this chapter which would lessen the degree of protection to a
building will:
      1.   Result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to twenty
five dollars ($25.00) per one hundred dollars ($100.00) of insurance coverage;
      2.   Increase the risk to life and property; and
      3.   Require that the applicant proceed with knowledge of these risks and
that the applicant acknowledge in writing the assumption of the risk and
liability.
   (C)   Variances to the building protection requirements of section
4-12-7 of this chapter which are requested in connection with reconstruction,
repair, or alteration of a historic site or historic structure as defined in
"historic structures", may be granted using criteria more permissive than the
requirements of sections
4-12-6 and
4-12-7 of this chapter subject to the conditions that:
      1.   The repair or rehabilitation is the minimum necessary to preserve
the historic character and design of the structure.
      2.   The repair or rehabilitation will not result in the structure being
removed as a certified historic structure. (Ord. 10-05, 3-1-2010)
4-12-12: DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY:
The degree of protection required by this ordinance is considered reasonable
for regulatory purposes and is based on available information derived from
engineering and scientific methods of study. Larger floods may occur or flood
heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This ordinance does not
imply that development either inside or outside of the floodplain will be free
from flooding or damage. This ordinance does not create liability on the part
of the city of East Moline or any officer or employee thereof for any flood
damage that results from proper reliance on this ordinance or any
administrative decision made lawfully thereunder. (Ord. 10-05, 3-1-2010)
4-12-13: PENALTY:
Failure to obtain a permit for development in the floodplain or failure to
comply with the conditions of a permit or a variance shall be deemed to be a
violation of this ordinance. Upon due investigation, the director of
engineering may determine that a violation of the minimum standards of this
ordinance exists. The director of engineering shall notify the owner in writing
of such violation.
   (A)   If such owner fails after ten (10) days' notice to correct the
violation:
      1.   The city of East Moline shall make application to the circuit court
for an injunction requiring conformance with this ordinance or make such other
order as the court deems necessary to secure compliance with this ordinance.
      2.   Any person who violates this ordinance shall upon conviction thereof
be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00) for each offense.
      3.   A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or
on which a violation occurs or continues, and
      4.   The city of East Moline shall record a notice of violation on the
title of the property.
   (B)   The director of engineering shall inform the owner that any such
violation is considered a wilful act to increase flood damages and therefore
may cause coverage by a standard flood insurance policy to be suspended.
The director of engineering is authorized to issue an order requiring the
suspension of the subject development. The stop work order shall be in writing,
indicate the reason for the issuance, and shall order the action, if necessary,
to resolve the circumstances requiring the stop work order. The stop work order
constitutes a suspension of the permit.
No site development permit shall be permanently suspended or revoked until a
hearing is held by the East Moline zoning board of appeals. Written notice of
such hearing shall be served on the permittee and shall state:
      1.   The grounds for the complaint, reasons for suspension or revocation,
and
      2.   The time and place of the hearing.
At such hearing the permittee shall be given an opportunity to present evidence
on their behalf. At the conclusion of the hearing, the East Moline zoning board
of appeals shall determine whether the permit shall be suspended or revoked.
   (C)   Nothing herein shall prevent the city of East Moline from taking such
other lawful action to prevent or remedy any violations. All costs connected
therewith shall accrue to the person or persons responsible. (Ord. 10-05, 3-1-
2010)
4-12-14: ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS:
This ordinance repeals and replaces other ordinances adopted by the East Moline
city council to fulfill the requirements of the national flood insurance
program including: ordinance 02-30, dated September 3, 2002. However, this
ordinance does not repeal the original resolution or ordinance adopted to
achieve eligibility in the program. Nor does this ordinance repeal, abrogate,
or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. Where this
ordinance and other ordinance easements, covenants or deed restrictions
conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall
prevail. (Ord. 10-05, 3-1-2010)
TITLE 5
FIRE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
FIRE DEPARTMENT
SECTION:
5-1-1: Creation Of Fire Department
5-1-2: Fire Chief
5-1-3: Duties Of Fire Chief
5-1-4: Appointments
5-1-5: Discharge
5-1-6: Rules And Regulations
5-1-7: Commands
5-1-8: Functions Of The Department
5-1-9: Fires
5-1-10: Property At Fires
5-1-11: Causes Of Fires
5-1-12: Arrests
5-1-13: Fire Protection Tax
5-1-14: Fire Inspector (Rep. by Ord. 19-29, 11-4-2019)
5-1-15: Fee For Nonresidents
5-1-1: CREATION OF FIRE DEPARTMENT:
   There is hereby created the fire department, an executive department of the
city. The fire department shall consist of the fire chief who shall be the
chief of the department, an executive assistant to the fire chief, three (3)
shift Battalion chiefs, nine (9) company officers, nine (9) fire apparatus
engineers, thirteen (13) firefighters and such other members as may be
determined from time to time by the council.
(Ord. 00-28, 8-21-2000; amd. Ord. 19-29, 11-4-2019)
5-1-2: FIRE CHIEF:
There is hereby created the office of fire chief, who shall be appointed by the
mayor, by and with the approval of the city council, and who shall serve in
such capacity for an indefinite term, and who may be removed and discharged by
the mayor. In such case the mayor shall file with the city council the reasons
for such removal or discharge, which removal or discharge shall not become
effective unless confirmed by a majority vote of the corporate authorities.
The position of fire chief shall not necessarily be by appointment from among
members of the fire department.
No appointee who was, immediately preceding such appointment, an employee of
the fire department, shall lose his status in the department by such
appointment, but said appointee, at the time he is replaced and removed from
the position of chief, shall revert back to the same status held prior to such
appointment. (Ord. 99-33, 6-21-1999)
5-1-3: DUTIES OF FIRE CHIEF:
The fire chief shall be chief of the fire department, and shall be responsible
for the care of the apparatus belonging thereto and the conduct of the members.
He shall keep such records and make such reports showing the activities of his
department as may be required by the mayor and council. (1962 Code § 8.003)
5-1-4: APPOINTMENTS:
All members of the fire department, except the chief, after examination, shall
be appointed by the board of fire and police commissioners, subject to a one
year probationary period and promotions shall be made in the same manner as is
provided by statute. Any person who is appointed as a member of the fire
department after adoption hereof shall establish residency within a nineteen
and one-half (19.5) mile radius of city hall, 915 16th Avenue, East Moline,
Illinois, within a period of two (2) years from and after the date of his/her
commencement of employment with the city. (Ord. 14-02, 3-17-2014)
5-1-5: DISCHARGE:
No firefighter, except the chief, shall be discharged except after a hearing
before the fire and police commission as provided by statute. (Ord. 00-28, 8-
21-2000)
5-1-6: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
   The fire chief may make rules and regulations for the hours of duty,
uniforms, vacations and conduct of the members and volunteers, which shall be
binding on all such firefighters while on duty.
(Ord. 00-28, 8-21-2000; amd. Ord. 19-29, 11-4-2019)
5-1-7: COMMANDS:
The fire chief, and in his absence the duty officer, shall have charge of the
members of the department and all apparatus; and the firefighters shall obey
the orders of the superior officers of the department while on duty. (Ord. 00-
28, 8-21-2000)
5-1-8: FUNCTIONS OF THE DEPARTMENT:
It shall be the duty of the fire department and its members to develop,
implement and enforce programs designed to protect the lives and property of
the citizens of the city of East Moline from the adverse effects of fire,
medical emergencies and hazardous conditions. (Ord. 98-20, 5-4-1998)
5-1-9: FIRES:
It shall be the duty of all spectators at fires to obey the orders of the
members of the fire department on duty there with respect to keeping away from
the scene of the fire or the handling or interference with the apparatus of the
department. (1962 Code § 8.009)
5-1-10: PROPERTY AT FIRES:
The members of the fire department shall have charge of property removed from
the scene of a fire by them to avoid loss or damage, until the same is turned
over to the owner or agent of the owner thereof. (1962 Code § 8.010)
5-1-11: CAUSES OF FIRES:
It shall be the duty of the chief of the fire department to investigate into
the cause of any accidental or destructive fire occurring in the city; and in
case there is a reason to suspect that there was any criminal act or violations
of a city code provision in connection therewith, he shall report the same to
the appropriate authorities. (Ord. 98-20, 5-4-1998)
5-1-12: ARRESTS:
The fire chief and all fire officers shall have the power and authority to
arrest any person at or near the scene of an accidental or destructive fire for
any interference with the fire department in the performance of its duties, or
for the commission of any crime or provision of this code in connection with
the fire. (Ord. 00-28, 8-21-2000)
5-1-13: FIRE PROTECTION TAX:
   A tax is hereby imposed for the purpose of fire protection in this city of
four hundred ninety four thousand dollars (494,000) at a rate of 0.1999% of the
value, as equalized or assessed by the Department of Revenue of all taxable
property therein for the first year in which this tax is levied, with a maximum
rate of 0.2000 percent of the value as equalized or assessed by the Department
of Revenue, as approved by ordinance 02-17, for all the provisions of Chapter
65, Section 5/11-7-3 of the Illinois Compiled Statutes.
(Ord., 12-17-2012; amd. Ord., 12-3-2018; Ord., 12-2-2019; Ord., 12-21-2020;
Ord., 12-20-2021)
5-1-14: FIRE INSPECTOR:
(Rep. by Ord. 19-29, 11-4-2019)
5-1-15: FEE FOR NONRESIDENTS:
The East Moline fire department is hereby allowed to bill nonresidents of East
Moline for services rendered by the East Moline fire and EMS departments.
(Ord. 04-39, 11-15-2004)
CHAPTER 2
FIRE CODE
SECTION:
5-2-1: Adoption
5-2-2: Permits
5-2-2.1: Permits, Fees, And Expiration
5-2-2.2: Registration And Bonding
5-2-2.3: Operational Permits
5-2-2.4: Sale Of Combustible Novelties Restricted To Persons Sixteen Years Of
Age Or Older
5-2-3: Establishment, Duties Of Bureau Of Fire Prevention (Rep. by Ord. 19-29,
11-4-2019)
5-2-4: Definitions
5-2-5: Establishment Of Limits (Rep. by Ord. 19-29, 11-4-2019)
5-2-5.1: Storage Of Flammable Or Combustible Liquids In Outside Aboveground
Tanks Prohibited (Rep. by Ord. 19-29, 11-4-2019)
5-2-5.2: Storage Of Liquefied Petroleum Gases Prohibited (Rep. by Ord. 19-29,
11-4-2019)
5-2-5.3: Storage Of Explosives And Blasting Agents Prohibited (Rep. by Ord. 19-
29, 11-4-2019)
5-2-5.4: Storage Of Compressed Natural Gas Prohibited (Rep. by Ord. 19- 29, 11-
4-2019)
5-2-6: Standards
5-2-7: Amendments
5-2-8: Modifications
5-2-9: Appeals
5-2-10: New Materials, Processes Or Occupancies; Permits
5-2-11: Violation
5-2-12: Repeal Of Conflicting Ordinances
5-2-13: Validity
5-2-14: Date Of Effect
5-2-1: ADOPTION:
   There is hereby adopted by the city council of the city of East Moline, for
the purpose of prescribing regulations governing conditions hazardous to life
and property from fire or explosion, that certain code known as the
international fire code, recommended by the International Code Council, being
particularly the 2018 edition thereof, and the whole thereof, including
appendices B, C, D, E, F, G, H, I, J, K, L, M and N save and except such
portions as are hereinafter deleted, modified or amended by section 5-2-7 of
this chapter, which code is available for inspection at the office of the fire
chief. The 2018 edition international fire code is hereby adopted and
incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein, and shall be effective
within the city of East Moline, from the effective date hereof.
   This ordinance and the references herein shall constitute the fire
prevention code for the city of East Moline. Copies of said code may be
purchased at cost from the city inspection department.
(Ord. 11-13, 4-4-2011; amd. Ord. 19-29, 11-4-2019)
5-2-2: PERMITS:
5-2-2.1: PERMITS, FEES, AND EXPIRATION:
   (A)   All permits covered or required by the fire prevention code are for
the purpose of giving the bureau of fire prevention more effective control over
hazardous conditions regulated by said code. (Ord. 00-15, 4-3-2000)
   (B)   All permits to be issued by the fire chief shall not be granted unless
the applicant or his agent has paid for and received a receipt from the bureau
of fire prevention. (Ord. 07-01, 2-20-2007)
   (C)   All permits issued pursuant to the fire prevention code shall be
effective for a period of one year from the date of issuance unless specified
otherwise. (Ord. 00-15, 4-3-2000)
   (D)   All permits issued under authority of section 105, "Permits", of the
international fire code and listed below as "operational permits", require
payment of the herein established fee of ten dollars ($10.00) to cover the cost
of filing, processing and issuing the required permit certificate as contained
in the fire prevention code and all other permits as may be determined
necessary according to section
5-2-10 of this chapter. (Ord. 02-60, 12-16-2002)
   (E)   All permits issued for the installation or modification of fire
sprinkler, fire suppression or fire alarm systems shall be as per the permit
procedures outlined for "general contractors" by title 4, chapter 1 of this
code.
(Ord. 00-15, 4-3-2000; amd. Ord. 19-29, 11-4-2019)
5-2-2.2: REGISTRATION AND BONDING:
All fire sprinkler, fire suppression system, and fire alarm system contractors
installing or modifying systems within the city of East Moline shall be subject
to the same registration and bonding requirements listed for "general
contractors" in title 4 of this code. (Ord. 00-15, 4-3-2000)
5-2-2.3: OPERATIONAL PERMITS:
   Operational permits as specified in section 105.6 shall be required at the
discretion of the fire chief.
(Ord. 19-24, 11-4-2019)
5-2-2.4: SALE OF COMBUSTIBLE NOVELTIES RESTRICTED TO PERSONS SIXTEEN YEARS OF
AGE OR OLDER:
The sale of combustible novelties shall be restricted to persons sixteen (16)
years of age or older. "Combustible novelties" shall be defined as follows:
snake or glowworm pellets; smoke devices; trick noisemakers known as "party
poppers", "booby traps", "snappers", "trick matches", "cigarette loads" and
"auto burglar alarms"; sparklers; toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns, or other
devices in which paper or plastic caps containing twenty five hundredths grains
or less of explosive compound are used, providing they are so constructed that
the hand cannot come in contact with the cap when in place for the explosion;
and toy pistol paper or plastic caps which contain less than twenty hundredths
grains of explosive mixture. The person conducting the sale of such combustible
novelties shall verify the age of the purchaser. In the event the person
selling such combustible novelties is found guilty of selling to a person under
the age of sixteen (16) years, that person shall be subject to revocation of
the permit for the sale of combustible novelties. (Ord. 04-22, 6-21-2004)
5-2-3: ESTABLISHMENT, DUTIES OF BUREAU OF FIRE PREVENTION:
(Rep. by Ord. 19-29, 11-4-2019)
5-2-4: DEFINITIONS:
   (A)   Wherever the word "jurisdiction" is used in the international fire
code, it shall be held to mean the city of East Moline. (Ord. 02-60, 12-16-
2002)
   (B)   Wherever the term "corporation counsel" is used in the international
fire code, it shall be held to mean the attorney for the city of East Moline.
(Ord. 00-15, 4-3-2000; amd. Ord. 02-60, 12-16-2002; Ord. 19-29, 11-4-2019)
5-2-5: ESTABLISHMENT OF LIMITS:
5-2-5.1: STORAGE OF FLAMMABLE OR COMBUSTIBLE LIQUIDS IN OUTSIDE ABOVEGROUND
TANKS PROHIBITED:
(Rep. by Ord. 19-29, 11-4-2019)
5-2-5.2: STORAGE OF LIQUEFIED PETROLEUM GASES PROHIBITED:
(Rep. by Ord. 19-29, 11-4-2019)
5-2-5.3: STORAGE OF EXPLOSIVES AND BLASTING AGENTS PROHIBITED:
(Rep. by Ord. 19-29, 11-4-2019)
5-2-5.4: STORAGE OF COMPRESSED NATURAL GAS PROHIBITED:
(Rep. by Ord. 19-29, 11-4-2019)
5-2-6: STANDARDS:
   All National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) codes and standards
referenced by the fire code, as adopted, shall be interpreted to mean the most
current version readily available. An older version may be utilized only if the
fire chief deems that the newer one is impractical in its application and the
intent of the fire code is achieved.
(Ord. 02-60, 12-16-2002; amd. Ord. 19-29, 11-4-2019)
5-2-7: AMENDMENTS:
Delete section 109, Board Of Appeals, international fire code, 2018 edition, to
show that appeals will be as per city ordinance section
5-2-9.
Amend section 110.4 to show that the fine for failure to comply will be as per
city ordinance section
1-4-1: General Penalty.
Add section 903.4.2 Alarm Devices
The outside sprinkler alarm notification device shall be an approved bell/
strobe.
Amend section 905.4 #6 starting at line 3 to read, "...or the most remote
portion of a sprinklered floor or story is more than 150 feet (45 720 mm) from
a hose connection,"
Delete 903.2.8 (Deletes the requirement for residential sprinkler system in new
one and two family dwellings).
(Ord. 07-01, 2-20-2007; amd. Ord. 19-29, 11-4- 2019)
5-2-8: MODIFICATIONS:
The fire chief shall have power to modify any of the provisions of the fire
prevention code upon application in writing by the owner or lessee, or his duly
authorized agent, when there are practical difficulties in the way of carrying
out the strict letter of the code, provided that the spirit of the code shall
be observed, public safety secured, and substantial justice done. The
particulars of such modifications when granted or allowed and the decision of
the fire chief of the bureau of fire prevention thereon shall be entered upon
the records of the department and a signed copy shall be furnished to the
applicant.
(Ord. 00-15, 4-3-2000; amd. Ord. 19-29, 11-4-2019)
5-2-9: APPEALS:
   Whenever the chief of the fire department shall disapprove any application
or refuse to grant a permit for, or when it is claimed that the provisions of
the code do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of the code have been
misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal from the decision
of the chief of the fire department to the board of standards and appeals, as
granted in title 2, chapter 4 of this city code, within thirty (30) days from
the date of the decision appealed.
(Ord. 00-15, 4-3-2000)
5-2-10: NEW MATERIALS, PROCESSES OR OCCUPANCIES; PERMITS:
   The board of standards and appeals, the chief of the fire shall act as a
committee to determine and specify, after giving affected persons an
opportunity to be heard, any new materials, processes or occupancies, which
shall require permits, in addition to those now enumerated in said code. The
chief of the bureau of fire prevention shall post such list in a conspicuous
place in his office, and distribute copies thereof to interested persons.
(Ord. 00-15, 4-3-2000; amd. Ord. 19-29, 11-4-2019)
5-2-11: VIOLATION:
   (A)   Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the fire
prevention code hereby adopted or fails to comply therewith, or who shall
violate or fail to comply with any order made thereunder, or who shall build in
violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and
approved thereunder, or any certificate or permit issued thereunder, and from
which no appeal has been taken, or who shall fail to comply with such an order
as affirmed or modified by the chief of the fire department or by a court of
competent jurisdiction, within the time fixed herein, shall severally for each
and every such violation and noncompliance respectively, be guilty of a
misdemeanor and subject to penalty as provided for by section
1-4-1 of this code. The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not
excuse the violation or permit it to continue; and all such persons shall be
required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable
time; and when not otherwise specified, each ten (10) days that prohibited
conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate offense.
   (B)   The application of the above provisions shall not be held to prevent
the enforced removal of prohibited conditions. (Ord. 00-15, 4-3-2000)
5-2-12: REPEAL OF CONFLICTING ORDINANCES:
All former ordinances or parts thereof conflicting or inconsistent with the
provisions of this ordinance or of the fire code as adopted and amended herein
are hereby repealed. (Ord. 00-15, 4-3-2000; amd. Ord. 02-60, 12-16-2002)
5-2-13: VALIDITY:
The city council hereby declares that should any section, paragraph, sentence
or word of this ordinance or of the fire code, as adopted and amended herein,
be declared for any reason to be invalid, it is the intent of the city council
that it would have passed all other portions of this ordinance independent of
the elimination herefrom of any such portion as may be declared invalid. (Ord.
00-15, 4-3-2000; amd. Ord. 02-60, 12-16-2002)
5-2-14: DATE OF EFFECT:
This ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and after approval as
required by law. (Ord. 00-15, 4-3-2000)
CHAPTER 3
FIRE ALARM BUSINESSES, SYSTEMS AND USERS
SECTION:
5-3-1: Title
5-3-2: Definitions
5-3-3: Penalty
5-3-4: Purpose
5-3-5: Standards And Regulations
5-3-6: Audible Alarms
5-3-7: Prohibited Systems
5-3-8: Fire Alarms
5-3-9: Responsibility For Alarm Response
5-3-10: Permits
5-3-11: Notice Of Information Change
5-3-12: Appeals Procedure
5-3-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the EAST MOLINE CITY ORDINANCE
REGULATING FIRE ALARM BUSINESSES, SYSTEMS, AND USERS. (Ord. 07-10, 8-6-2007)
5-3-2: DEFINITIONS:
ALARM AGENT: Any person who is employed by an alarm business, either directly
or indirectly, whose duties include selling, maintaining, leasing, servicing,
repairing, altering, replacing, moving or installing on or in any building,
structure or facility, any alarm system. Exemption: The provisions of this
chapter do not apply to a person who engages in the manufacture or sale of an
alarm system from a fixed location and who neither visits the location where
the alarm system is to be installed, nor designs the scheme for physical
location and installation of the alarm system in a specific location.
ALARM BUSINESS: The business by any individual, partnership or corporation or
other entity of selling, leasing, maintaining, inspecting, servicing,
repairing, moving or installing any alarm system in or on any building,
structure or facility. Exemption: Said definition shall not apply to persons
engaged solely in the manufacture or sale of alarm system components from a
fixed location, and who do not install, alter, maintain, service or plan the
alarm system for a specific location.
ALARM SYSTEM: Any mechanical or electrical device which is designed or used for
the detection of fire or its byproducts in a building, structure or facility or
for alerting others of a fire hazard within a building, structure or facility,
or both; and which emits a sound or transmits a signal or message when actuated
and to which the fire department personnel are expected to respond. In this
chapter, the term "alarm system" shall include the terms "audible alarm",
"automatic dialing device" and "fire alarm system" as those terms are
hereinafter defined. Exemption: The provisions of this chapter shall not apply
to those detection devices and systems that are not monitored by an alarm
business.
ANSWERING SERVICE: A telephone answering business providing among its services
receiving, on a continuous basis through trained employees, emergency signals
from alarm systems, and thereafter immediately relaying the message by live
voice over a signal channel circuit to the communications center of the police
and fire departments.
APPELLANT: A person who perfects an appeal pursuant to this chapter.
AUDIBLE ALARM: A device designed for the detection of fire or its byproducts on
premises, which generates an audible sound on the premises when it is actuated.
This audible alarm may or may not be combined with a method of transmitting a
signal to a remote point. Exemption: The provisions of this chapter are not
applicable to audible alarms affixed to motor vehicles.
AUTOMATIC DIALING DEVICE: An alarm system, which automatically sends over
regular telephone lines, by direct connection or otherwise, a prerecorded voice
message or coded signal indicating the existence of the emergency situation
that the alarm system is designed to detect.
CENTRAL STATION SYSTEM: A system or group of systems, usually operated from its
customers by a person, in which the operations of protected circuits and
devices are transmitted to, recorded in, maintained and supervised from a
central station having trained operators and guards in attendance at all times,
that have the duty to take appropriate action upon receipt of a signal or
message including the relaying of messages by a signal channel circuit to the
communications center of the police and fire departments.
CITY: The city of East Moline or its authorized employees or agents.
FALSE ALARM: The intentional or unintentional activation of an alarm system
through mechanical failure, malfunction, improper installation or the
negligence of the owner or lessee of an alarm system or of his employees or
agents which necessitates response by the East Moline fire department where an
actual fire or emergency does not exist. Such terminology does not include, for
example, alarms caused by tornados, earthquakes or other violent conditions.
FIRE CHIEF: The chief of the fire department of the city of East Moline, or his
authorized representative.
MODIFIED CENTRAL STATION: An office to which remote alarm and supervisory
signaling devices are connected, where operators supervise the circuits and
relay the message by a "signal channel circuit" to the communications center of
the police and fire departments.
NUISANCE ALARM: An alarm caused by mechanical failure, malfunction, improper
installation, or lack of proper maintenance.
PRIMARY TRUNK LINE: A telephone line leading into the communications center of
the police and fire departments, that is for the purpose of handling emergency
calls on a person to person basis, and which line is identified by a specific
listing among the emergency numbers in a telephone directory issued by the
telephone company serving the city.
PROTECTED PREMISES: That part of a building, structure or facility to which
protection is afforded by an alarm system.
SUBSCRIBER: A person who buys and/or leases, or otherwise obtains an alarm
signaling system and thereafter contracts with or hires an alarm business to
monitor and/or service the alarm device. (Ord. 07-10, 8-6-2007)
5-3-3: PENALTY:
The minimum fine for a violation of the provisions of this chapter, unless
otherwise provided, shall be fifty dollars ($50.00). In the event a person is
issued a notice of a violation of this chapter and does not wish to contest
said allegations prior to the time a complaint is issued for said violation,
the person accused may pay to the city finance office a penalty in the sum of
fifty dollars ($50.00) for and in full satisfaction of said violation. (Ord.
07-10, 8-6-2007)
5-3-4: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide minimum standards and regulations
applicable to fire alarm systems, alarm businesses, alarm agents and alarm
users and to provide for punishment of violations of the provisions of this
chapter. (Ord. 07-10, 8-6-2007)
5-3-5: STANDARDS AND REGULATIONS:
The fire chief shall enforce reasonable minimum standards and regulations for
the construction and maintenance of all fire alarm systems installed within the
city as provided in NFPA 72 (the national fire alarm code handbook). All
devices shall meet or exceed such standards, regulations and adopted codes
before their operation is allowed within the city. The fire chief may require
inspection and approval of all alarm systems installed within the city. (Ord.
07-10, 8-6-2007)
5-3-6: AUDIBLE ALARMS:
All alarm systems that emit an audible signal that may be heard by persons
outside the protected building, structure or facility shall conform to the
following requirements:
   (A)   Every person maintaining an audible alarm shall provide the fire chief
with the names and telephone numbers of the persons to be notified to render
repairs or service and secure the premises during any hour of the day or night
that the alarm system is activated. It is the responsibility of every person
maintaining an alarm system to assure that the names and telephone numbers
recorded with the fire department are kept current.
   (B)   No person shall install an audible alarm system, which creates a sound
similar to that of an emergency vehicle siren or a civil defense warning
system. (Ord. 07-10, 8-6-2007)
5-3-7: PROHIBITED SYSTEMS:
   (A)   Automatic Dialing Devices: No alarm system using an automatic dialing
device will be allowed to send a prerecorded voice message or coded signal over
a primary trunk line or direct line into the communications center of the
police and fire departments.
   (B)   Panic Alarm: Panic or trouble alarms used to signal the need for help,
medical assistance or any other activity other than an actual fire will be
allowed. (Ord. 07-10, 8-6-2007)
5-3-8: FIRE ALARMS:
No alarm system equipment, unless city owned and operated, shall transmit any
message on the fire base radio frequency. (Ord. 07-10, 8-6-2007)
5-3-9: RESPONSIBILITY FOR ALARM RESPONSE:
Every person who has on his premises under his control or ownership an alarm
system, audible or silent, shall, upon notification that the alarm system is
giving a signal, proceed within thirty (30) minutes to the premises and render
all necessary services, provided, however, that the owner of the premises may
enter into an agreement with an alarm business to respond in his stead.
   (A)   Failure to respond to notification of an activated alarm shall be
considered a violation of this provision and shall result in a penalty of fifty
dollars ($50.00).
   (B)   The members of the fire department shall respond as promptly as
possible to any and all alarm actuations. However, there will be a service
charge for excessive false alarms or nuisance alarms to which the fire
department is required to respond. There shall be no penalty for the first
false alarm by the system in any one fiscal year. Thereafter there shall be a
penalty for each false alarm in said fiscal year in the amount of one hundred
fifty dollars ($150.00). (Ord. 07-10, 8-6-2007)
5-3-10: PERMITS:
There shall be no permit required of any alarm businesses, alarm agents or
subscribers for the purposes of this chapter. The provisions of this chapter
shall not affect the provisions of any other article within the code of
ordinances of the city of East Moline and the required permitting as called for
under any other provisions contained therein. (Ord. 07-10, 8-6-2007)
5-3-11: NOTICE OF INFORMATION CHANGE:
Whenever any change occurs relating to the written information requested by
this chapter, the subscriber shall give written notice thereof to the fire
prevention division of the fire department within fifteen (15) days after such
change or at any hearing conducted under this chapter if such hearing is
conducted before the notice has been given. (Ord. 07-10, 8-6-2007)
5-3-12: APPEALS PROCEDURE:
   (A)   The appellant shall have a period of ten (10) days after the issuance
of a complaint for violation in order to present to the chief of the fire
department or his designee as to the circumstances surrounding the incident,
which the appellant considers to be beyond the control of the system user or
its alarm agent. The chief shall have the authority to dismiss the complaint of
violation upon good cause shown.
   (B)   Failure to file a letter of appeal within the said fifteen (15) days
shall constitute a waiver of appellant's right to review, but the city
administrator, in his discretion, may nevertheless grant such review.
   (C)   If the city administrator affirms the decision of the chief of the
fire department, the appellant may have a hearing before the mayor, under the
rules of the Illinois administrative procedure act on said matter. If the city
administrator does not approve the decision of the chief, he shall transmit
this decision to the chief, who will comply with same. (Ord. 07-10, 8-6-2007)
TITLE 6
POLICE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
POLICE DEPARTMENT
SECTION:
6-1-1: Creation Of Police Department
6-1-2: Office Of Chief Created
6-1-3: Appointments
6-1-4: Duties Of Chief
6-1-5: Duties Of Department
6-1-6: Community Service Officer
6-1-7: Detective Bureau
6-1-8: Serving Process
6-1-9: Conduct Of Members
6-1-10: Witness Fees
6-1-11: Rules And Regulations
6-1-12: Special Police
6-1-13: Discharge Of Members
6-1-14: Stolen Property; Custody Of
6-1-15: Police Dog
6-1-16: Police Protection Tax
6-1-17: Police Line
6-1-18: Parking Control Officer
6-1-19: Law Enforcement Disposition Of Property
6-1-20: Unreasonable Noise
6-1-1: CREATION OF POLICE DEPARTMENT:
There is hereby created a police department of the city. The police department
shall consist of the chief of police, a command staff, and such number of
patrolmen as may be provided for from time to time by the city council. (Ord.
06-06, 2-21-2006)
6-1-2: OFFICE OF CHIEF CREATED:
There is hereby created the office of chief of police, who shall be appointed
by the mayor, by and with the approval of the city council, and who shall serve
in such capacity for an indefinite term, and who may be removed and discharged
by the mayor. In such case the mayor shall file with the city council the
reasons for such removal or discharge, which removal or discharge shall not
become effective unless confirmed by a majority vote of the corporate
authorities.
The position of chief of the police department shall not necessarily be by
appointment from among members of the police department.
No appointee, who was, immediately preceding such appointment, an employee of
the police department, shall lose his status in the department of such
appointment, but said appointee, at the time he is replaced and removed from
the position of chief, shall revert back to the same status held prior to such
appointment. (Ord. 99-34, 6-21-1999)
6-1-3: APPOINTMENTS:
All members of the police department, except the chief, after examination,
shall be appointed by the board of fire and police commissioners, subject to an
eighteen (18) month probationary period and promotions shall be made in the
same manner, as provided by statute. Any person who is appointed as a member of
the police department after adoption hereof shall establish residency within a
twenty-five (25) mile radius (by air) of city hall, 915 16th Avenue, East
Moline, Illinois, within a period of eighteen (18) months from and after the
date of his/her commencement of employment with the city. (Ord. 14-03, 3-17-
2014; amd. Ord. 19-05, 2-19-2019; Ord. 24-04, 5-6-2024)
6-1-4: DUTIES OF CHIEF:
The chief of police shall be the keeper of the city jail, and shall have
custody of all persons incarcerated therein. He shall keep such records and
make such reports concerning the activities of his department as may be
required by statute or by the city council. The chief shall be responsible for
the performance by the police department of all its functions, and all persons
who are members of the department shall serve subject to the orders of the
chief of police. (1962 Code § 7.004)
6-1-5: DUTIES OF DEPARTMENT:
It shall be the duty of the members of the police department to see to the
enforcement of all the provisions of this code and all statutes applicable
herein; and to preserve order and prevent infractions of the law and arrest
violators thereof. (1962 Code § 7.005)
6-1-6: COMMUNITY SERVICE OFFICER:
   (A)   Creation Of Position: There is hereby created the position of
community service officer who shall perform the duties of office under the
supervision of the chief of police. The employee shall be compensated and shall
receive employee benefits in accordance with the labor grade classification as
determined by the city council. The community service officer shall perform
such duties as are assigned by the chief of police, in addition to those duties
related to animal control.
   (B)   Badge Of Office: While on duty the community service officer shall
wear a shield engraved "Community Service Officer" as an emblem of the
authority of office.
   (C)   Supervision Of Animal Shelter And Other Facilities: The community
service officer shall have responsibility for the care, custody, control and
supervision of the animal shelter of the city and of all dogs and cats confined
and impounded therein, and shall have responsibility for the care and custody
and control of all trucks and other paraphernalia used for the impounding of
dogs and cats. The community service officer shall be furnished with a vehicle,
gasoline and equipment.
   (D)   Impoundment Of Animals; Records: The community service officer shall
impound, or cause to be impounded, and shall dispose of according to the
provisions of this code, all animals running at large within the city and shall
keep a record of every animal so impounded, describing the kind of animal, the
breed, color and sex, together with the time and place the animal was captured
or received and the final disposition made of each animal, together with such
other information as may be available.
The community service officer shall have the power to issue citations to
persons in violation of any ordinance of this code, and it shall be the duty of
office to issue a citation for any offense for which the community service
officer has reasonable grounds to believe has been committed. (Ord. 96-26, 11-
18-1996)
6-1-7: DETECTIVE BUREAU:
There is hereby created a division of the police department to be known as the
detective bureau, which shall have supervision of all matters pertaining to the
investigation of criminal matters. The detective bureau shall be composed of a
lieutenant who shall serve as officer in charge of the detective bureau, and
such other subordinate officers as the chief of police shall assign to such
detective bureau as are considered qualified by experience and training to
properly perform the functions of said office. The chief of police may remove
such officer from assignment to the detective bureau if in the opinion of the
chief of police such officer is not properly performing his duties. The members
of said bureau shall be under the general supervision and direction of the
chief of police and be subject to the same rules and regulations as other
members of the police department. (Ord. 98-21, 5-4-1998)
6-1-8: SERVING PROCESS:
No member of the police department except the chief shall serve any process
except on command of the chief of the police department. (M.C. 1962, sec.
7.006)
6-1-9: CONDUCT OF MEMBERS:
It shall be the duty of every member of the police department to conduct
himself in a proper and law-abiding manner at all times, and to avoid the use
of unnecessary force. Each member of the department shall obey the orders and
directions of his superior. (M.C. 1962, sec. 7.007)
6-1-10: WITNESS FEES:
Any member of the police department shall appear as witness whenever this is
necessary in a prosecution for a violation of a code provision or of any state
or federal law. No such member shall retain any witness fee for service as
witness in any action or suit to which the city is a party; and fees paid for
such services shall be turned over to the chief of police, who shall deposit
the same with the city treasurer. (M.C. 1962, sec. 7.008)
6-1-11: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The chief of police may make or prescribe such rules and regulations for the
conduct and guidance of the members of the police department as he shall deem
advisable, and such rules, when approved by the council, shall be binding on
such members. (M.C. 1962, sec. 7.009)
6-1-12: SPECIAL POLICE:
Any person of good character having the ability to perform the duties which are
required, may be appointed as a special policeman by the chief of police;
provided that, except upon authorization by the council, no such special
policeman shall be entitled to any compensation from the city nor shall such
special policeman be considered an employee of the city by reason of such
appointment.
Special policemen shall obey all rules of the police department applicable to
them, and may be deprived of their appointment by the chief at any time. (M.C.
1962, sec. 7.010)
6-1-13: DISCHARGE OF MEMBERS:
No policeman, except the chief, shall be discharged except after a hearing
before the fire and police commission, as is provided by statute. (1962 Code §
7.011)
6-1-14: STOLEN PROPERTY; CUSTODY OF:
The chief of police shall be the custodian of all lost and abandoned or stolen
property in the city. (1962 Code § 7.012)
6-1-15: POLICE DOG:
It shall be unlawful for any person wilfully or maliciously to torture,
torment, beat, kick, strike, mutilate, injure, disable or kill any dog used by
the police department of the city in the performance of the functions or duties
of such department or to interfere with or meddle with any such dog while being
used by said department or any officer or member thereof. Any person violating
any provision of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord.
68-21, 9-16-1968)
6-1-16: POLICE PROTECTION TAX:
A tax is hereby imposed for the purpose of Police Protection in this city of
one million twenty thousand dollars ($1,020,000.00) at a rate of 0.3999 percent
of the value, as equalized or assessed by the Department of Revenue of all
taxable property therein for the first year in which this tax is levied, with a
maximum rate of 0.4000 percent of the value as equalized or assessed by the
Department of Revenue, as approved by referendum on November 2, 1993, pursuant
to the provisions for the increase of the police protection tax under Chapter
65, Section 5/11-1-5.1 of the Illinois Compiled Statutes. (Ord., 12-17-2012;
amd. Ord., 12-3-2018; Ord., 12-2-2019; Ord., 12-21-2020; Ord., 12-20-2021)
6-1-17: POLICE LINE:
   (A)   Police Line Authorized: The police are hereby authorized to
circumscribe any area by establishing police lines to prohibit any person from
entering that circumscribed area for the purpose of protecting evidence,
property, or the public safety in situations of explosions, floods, mob
actions, parades, catastrophes, natural disasters, or similar situations.
   (B)   Prohibited Crossing Of A Police Line: Whoever enters an area
circumscribed by a police line or crosses a police line after receiving,
immediately prior to such entry, notice by a police officer that such entry is
forbidden, or remains within the area circumscribed by a police line after
receiving notice from a police officer commits a petty offense and shall be
subject to a fine of not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than five
hundred dollars ($500.00).
   (C)   Notice To Establish A Police Line: A person has received notice from a
police officer if he has been notified personally, either orally or in writing,
or if a printed or written notice forbidding such entry has been conspicuously
posted or exhibited on the circumscribed area. (Ord. 76-38, 7-19-1976)
6-1-18: PARKING CONTROL OFFICER:
   (A)   Creation Of Position: There is hereby created the position of parking
control officer. The parking control officer shall be appointed by the chief of
police by and with the advice and consent of the city council and shall perform
his duties under the supervision of the chief of police. The position shall be
a full time position.
   (B)   Duties: It shall be the duty of the parking control officer to patrol,
by foot or vehicle, the controlled parking areas of the city so as to enforce
parking restrictions according to ordinance. The parking control officer shall
have the power to issue citations to persons in violation of any parking or
traffic regulation ordinance of this code and it shall be his duty to issue a
citation for any offense which he has reasonable grounds to believe has been
committed. The parking control officer shall be responsible for all processing
of citations issued.
   (C)   Salary: The salary of the parking control officer shall be as
established by the city council from time to time.
   (D)   Miscellaneous: The community service officer shall perform his duties
under the supervision of the chief of police, and for purposes of conforming to
the city personnel policy shall be classified as a nonsupervisory employee
rather than a city department head or city officer. (Ord. 81-25, 2-16-1981)
6-1-19: LAW ENFORCEMENT DISPOSITION OF PROPERTY:
   (A)   Application Of Ordinance: This ordinance is applicable to all personal
property or lawful United States currency of which possession is transferred to
the East Moline police department, under circumstances supporting a reasonable
belief that such property or currency was abandoned or lost by the owner, found
by another in a public place, stolen or otherwise illegally possessed.
   (B)   Inquiry And Notice To Owner: Such property believed to be abandoned,
lost, or stolen or otherwise illegally possessed shall be retained in custody
by the Chief of Police, or his designated agent, as an officer of the East
Moline Police Department, who shall make reasonable inquiry and efforts to
identify and notify the owner or other person entitled to possession thereof,
and shall return the property after such person provides reasonable and
satisfactory proof of his ownership or right to possession and reimburse the
Department for all reasonable expenses of such custody.
   (C)   Sale Of Unclaimed Personal Property: If the identity or location of
the owner or other person entitled to possession of the personal property has
not been ascertained within six (6) months after the Police Department obtains
such possession, the Chief of Police shall effectuate the sale of the property
for cash to the highest bidder at a public auction, notice of which shall be
published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation in Rock Island
County at least ten (10) days prior to the auction. The Chief of Police may in
his discretion transfer the property to a department within the City for its
use, if he determines such use would be in the best interests of the City.
Proceeds of such sale shall be delivered to the City Clerk and deposited to the
City's General Fund.
   (D)   Disposition Of Unclaimed Currency: If the identity or location of the
owner or other person entitled to possession of the lawful currency has not
been ascertained within six (6) months after the Police Department obtains such
possession, the Chief of Police shall deliver such currency to the person who
originally transferred possession of the currency to the Police Department.
   (E)   Damages Occasioned By Acts Or Omissions: No person shall be
responsible for consequent damages to another occasioned by an act or omission
in compliance with this Ordinance. (Ord. 94-19, 10-3-1994)
6-1-20: UNREASONABLE NOISE:
   (A)   General Provisions. No person, enterprise, or other legal entity shall
electronically amplify any sound, or make any noise by means of any electronic
amplifier, which exceeds the relevant sound level established in this Article
of the East Moline City Code at the property line of the property upon which
the loudspeakers or other amplification devices are located. Additionally, no
person, enterprise, or other legal entity shall allow the exterior
amplification of sound or exterior music to be produced, either manually or
electronically, during the following day’s of the week after the following
hours:
      1.   Sunday through Thursday between the hours of 10:00 PM and 6:00 AM
(exclusive of the evenings prior to New Year’s Day, Memorial Day, Independence
Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day).
      2.   Friday, Saturday and holidays (evenings prior to New Year’s Day,
Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day)
between the hours of 12:00 AM and 6:00 AM.
      3.   Each resident of a dwelling unit who is present within that dwelling
unit or upon the premises of that dwelling unit when such sound is amplified or
generated shall be responsible for the generation of that sound or noise
pursuant to the provisions of this section. However it shall be a specific
defense to a violation of this provision that a resident of the dwelling unit
attempted to remedy the situated and was precluded from doing so or was
incapacitated or otherwise unable to remedy the situation.
      4.   Each business proprietor and each business manager who is present
upon the premises of the business from which sound is amplified or generated
shall be responsible for the generation of that sound or noise pursuant to the
provisions of this section.
      5.   Certain exceptions, restrictions and standards for site-generated
ambient sound.
         (a)   For purposes of this subsection (A)5., the term ambient sound
level means the sound level of all-encompassing sound associated with a given
environment, being usually a composite of sound from many or differing sources
generated from a single parcel or property or a single commercial activity.
         (b)   A holder of a liquor license which operates a permanent outdoor
facility as an integral part of the licensed premises may provide, as part of
the operation of the outdoor facility, television and/or recorded music
broadcasts at the outdoor facility on Friday, Saturday and holidays (evenings
prior to New Year’s Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day,
Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day) after 12:00 AM until the closing hour
regulated by the applicable liquor license if, and only if the ambient sound
level does not exceed 50 decibels on the C weighting scale (dBC) at the
property lines of the licensed premises.
      6.   The provisions of this section do not apply to sounds generated by
authorized emergency vehicles, to vehicle horns sounded as a danger warning
signal, to audible police alarm devices, to fire alarms or to sound made on
property belonging to or leased or managed by a federal, state or local
governmental body and made by an activity of that governmental body or by
others pursuant to a contract, lease or permit granted by such governmental
body.
   (B)   Trash Haulers.
      1.   No person shall make any trash pick-up with a truck which has a
compactor or the capacity to raise and dump dumpsters in any area zoned for
residential or business uses between the hours of 10:00 PM and 6:00 AM, and no
employer shall fail to prevent its employee from violating this subsection
while the employee is driving a trash truck owned by or under the control of
the employer. For the purposes of this subsection, testimony that the name of a
business which holds itself out as being in the business of trash collection as
written on the collection vehicle shall be prima facie evidence that the trash
truck was owned by or was under the control of the employer so identified.
      2.   Variances. Trash haulers may apply to the City Administrator for a
variance of the provisions of subsections (b) of this section for Business
District locations. Possession of a valid variance shall be a specific defense
to any charge under subsection (b) of this section if the act complained of was
within the variance granted. The City Administrator may grant all or a part of
any requested variance and may place such conditions upon any variance granted
as are reasonably suited to limit the harmful effects of the variance. The
variances shall be granted only if the applicant can demonstrate to the City
Administrator’s satisfaction:
         (a)   That the location in question is sufficiently removed from any
residential use that the noise of trash collection will not disturb anyone in
their residence, including without limitation, hotel and motel accommodations;
or
         (b)   That the location in question cannot feasibly be serviced during
the permitted hours and that the variance is the least necessary to permit
trash collection while still assuring nearby residents reasonable nocturnal
quiet.
   (C)   Excessive Sound Levels.
      1.   Except as authorized elsewhere in this ordinance, no person shall:
a. Operate any type of vehicle, machine or device;
         (b)   Carry on any activity; or
         (c)   Promote or facilitate the carrying on of any activity which
consistently make sound in excess of the level specified in this section. For
the purposes of this section, “Consistently” means a continuous noise level
exceeding the level specified for a duration longer than five cumulative
minutes in any hour. Incidental noise infrequently exceeding the level
specified does not constitute a violation of this section.
      2.   Sound from a vehicular source located on private property or within
the public right-of- way shall not exceed 80 decibels on the C weighting scale
(dBC), except that the sound from a vehicle with a manufacturer’s gross weight
rating of 10,000 pounds and above operated on a prescribed truck route at all
time or elsewhere within the City during the hours of 6:00AM to 6:00PM on
Monday through Saturday may exceed 80 dBC but may not exceed 100 dBC. The sound
shall be measured at a distance of at least 25 feet from the vehicle located
within the public right-of-way.
      3.   Except as provided below, sound from any source, other than a moving
vehicular source located within the public right-of-way, shall not exceed 75
dBC on the weighting scale (dBC).
         (a)   Sound from construction work for which a building permit has
been issued is exempt from this ordinance for construction activity that is
taking place between the hours of 7:00AM and 7:00PM or as otherwise expressed
on the permit.
         (b)   Sound caused by governmental agencies for emergency repair work
on public infrastructure is exempt from this ordinance.
         (c)   Sound caused by small motorized equipment used in the
maintenance or repair of property, (e.g., lawn mowers, snowblowers, weed
trimmers, etc.) is exempt from this ordinance.
         (d)   Sound from a racetrack permitted by the Mayor or City Council is
exempt from this ordinance.
         (e)   Under no circumstances shall amplified sound be considered as
construction work activity.
         (f)   Sound from a source regulated by this subsection:
            (1)   Originating from private property shall be measured at or
outside the property line of the property on which the sound source is located;
            (2)   Originating from public property may be measured on that
property so long as the measurement is taken at least 25 feet from the source,
or it may be measured at or outside the property line of the property on which
the sound source is located, and
            (3)   For the purpose of this ordinance, a leasehold shall be
deemed a property, and its boundary shall be deemed a property line. (Ord. 21-
10, 8-16-2021)
CHAPTER 2
AUXILIARY POLICEMEN
SECTION:
6-2-1: Appointments
6-2-2: Not Members Of Police Department
6-2-3: Powers And Duties
6-2-4: Firearms
6-2-5: Training Course
6-2-6: Compensation
6-2-1: APPOINTMENTS:
The Mayor is hereby authorized to appoint fifteen (15) auxiliary policemen as
employees, subject to the advice and consent of the City Council. Prior to
appointment, all proposed auxiliary policemen shall be fingerprinted and their
fingerprints shall be checked with the Federal Bureau of Identification,
Washington, D.C. for any possible criminal record. No person shall be appointed
as an auxiliary policeman if he has been convicted of a felony or other crime
involving moral turpitude. The appointment of any or all auxiliary policemen
may be terminated by the Mayor, subject to the advice and consent of the City
Council. (Ord. 69-7, 2-17-1969)
6-2-2: NOT MEMBERS OF POLICE DEPARTMENT:
Such auxiliary policemen shall not be members of the regular Police Department
of the City. Auxiliary policemen shall be residents of the City. Identification
symbols worn by such auxiliary policemen shall be different and distinct from
those used by the regular Police Department and shall be selected and chosen by
the Chief of Police of the City. Auxiliary policemen shall at all times during
the performance of their duties, be subject to the direction and control of the
Chief of Police of the City. (Ord. 69-7, 2-17-1969)
6-2-3: POWERS AND DUTIES:
Auxiliary policemen shall have the following powers and duties, when properly
assigned and on duty:
   (A)   Aid or direct traffic in the Municipality.
   (B)   Aid in control of natural or manmade disasters.
   (C)   To aid in case of civil disorder.
   (D)   To perform normal and regular police duties when assigned by the Chief
of Police on occasions when it is impracticable for members of the regular
Police Department to perform normal and regular police duties.
   (E)   To arrest or cause to be arrested, with or without process, all
persons who break the peace, or are found to be violating any provision of this
Code or any criminal law of the State.
   (F)   To commit arrested persons for examination.
   (G)   If necessary, to detain arrested persons in custody overnight or
Sunday in any safe place, or until they can be brought before the proper City
officer.
   (H)   To exercise all other powers as conservators of the peace that the
corporate authorities may prescribe.
   (I)   To serve and execute all warrants for the violation of City Code
provisions, or the State Criminal Law, within the limits of the City, and for
this purpose to have all the common law and statutory powers of sheriffs. (Ord.
69-7, 2-17-1969)
6-2-4: FIREARMS:
Auxiliary policemen shall not carry firearms except with the permission of the
Chief of Police of the City and then only when in uniform and in the
performance of their duties. (Ord. 69-7, 2-17-1969)
6-2-5: TRAINING COURSE:
Auxiliary policemen, prior to entering upon any of their duties, shall receive
a course of training in the use of weapons and other police procedures by the
Chief of Police. Such course of training shall be not less than eighty (80)
hours in duration. Upon completion of the course of training, the Chief of
Police shall file a certificate attesting to the auxiliary policeman's
completion of said course, with the City Clerk. (Ord. 69-7, 2-17-1969)
6-2-6: COMPENSATION:
Auxiliary policemen shall be paid at the rate of two dollars ($2.00) per hour
for each hour of service performed, provided such service is performed at the
direction of the Chief of Police. (Ord. 69-7, 2-17-1969)
CHAPTER 3
MISDEMEANORS
SECTION:
6-3-1: Abandoned Refrigerators
6-3-2: Advertising; Advertising Matter
6-3-3: Articles On Windows
6-3-4: Bonfires
6-3-5: Burning Of Leaves Or Refuse
6-3-6: Combustible Refuse
6-3-7: Debris On Streets
6-3-8: Deposit Of Grass, Rubbish On Streets
6-3-9: Discharge Of Weapons; Possession Of Explosive Materials
6-3-10: Disorderly Conduct
6-3-11: Disturbing Assemblages
6-3-12: False Alarms (Rep. by Ord. 94-12, 6-20-1994)
6-3-13: Fences
6-3-14: Public Fighting
6-3-15: Gambling
6-3-16: Indecent Publications
6-3-17: Injure, Deface Public Property
6-3-18: Loitering For Drug Activities
6-3-19: Loitering
6-3-20: Missiles
6-3-21: Negligent Or Reckless Smoking
6-3-22: Obstructing Stairways Or Exits
6-3-23: Pinball Machines
6-3-24: Posting Bills
6-3-25: Profanity
6-3-26: Scaffolds
6-3-27: Closing Hours Of City Parks
6-3-28: Unlawful Assemblages
6-3-29: Unwholesome Business (Rep. by Ord. 98-21, 5-4-1998)
6-3-30: Vagrants, Mendicants
6-3-31: Whistles
6-3-32: Windblown Refuse
6-3-33: Commercial Delivery Vehicles
6-3-34: Drug Paraphernalia
6-3-35: Theft
6-3-36: Theft From Coin Operated Machines
6-3-37: Retail Theft
6-3-38: Possession Of Cannabis
6-3-39: Assault
6-3-40: Battery
6-3-41: Resisting Or Obstructing A Peace Officer
6-3-42: Criminal Trespass To A Vehicle
6-3-43: Criminal Trespass To Land
6-3-44: Criminal Damage To Property
6-3-45: Contributing To Delinquency Of A Child
6-3-46: Public Indecency
6-3-47: Prostitution
6-3-48: Truancy
6-3-49: Prohibition Of Cigarette Vending Machines In Public Places
6-3-50: Sale Of Tobacco To Minors
6-3-51: Graffiti
6-3-52: Public Urination
6-3-53: Smoking
6-3-54: Vehicle Sound Amplification Systems
6-3-55: Possession Of Weapons And Ammunition
6-3-56: Social Host Liability For Underage Alcohol And Drug Use
6-3-57: Operation Of Automobile Race After 10:15 p.m.
6-3-1: ABANDONED REFRIGERATORS:
It shall be unlawful to abandon any refrigerator, freezer, or icebox in any
place accessible to the public without first removing the doors of such
refrigerator, freezer or icebox. (1962 Code § 28.002)
Any person violating the provisions of this ordinance shall be subject to a
fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00), nor more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00). (Ord. 83-5, 1-17-1983)
6-3-2: ADVERTISING; ADVERTISING MATTER:
   (A)   Advertising: It shall be unlawful to advertise any unlawful business
or article in the city and it shall be unlawful to injure or deface any lawful
advertisement or notice. (1962 Code § 28.018)
   (B)   Placing Advertising Matter In Motor Vehicles: It shall be unlawful for
any person whether a licensed billposter or not, to distribute handbills,
circulars, dodgers, pamphlets, cards, pictures or any advertising matter of any
kind whatsoever, by placing the same in or upon any motor vehicle standing or
parked in the public streets of the city. (1962 Code § 28.024)
6-3-3: ARTICLES ON WINDOWS:
It shall be unlawful to place a movable article on any window ledge or other
place abutting on a public street, alley or other place at a height above four
feet (4') from the ground in such a manner that the same can be or is in danger
of falling onto any such street, sidewalk, alley or other public place. (M.C.
1962, sec. 28.029)
6-3-4: BONFIRES:
   (A)   Permit Required: No person shall kindle or maintain any bonfire or
rubbish fire or authorize any such fire to be kindled or maintained on or in
any public street, alley or other public place in the city, without having
first secured a permit from the fire chief.
   (B)   Location Restricted: No person shall kindle or maintain any bonfire or
rubbish fire or authorize any such fire to be kindled or maintained on any
private land unless:
      1.   The location is not less than fifty feet (50') from any structure
and adequate provision is made to prevent fire from spreading to within fifty
feet (50') of any structure or building.
      2.   The fire is contained in any approved waste burner with closed top,
located safely not less than fifteen feet (15') from any structure.
      3.   Such fires are attended.
   (C)   Chief May Prohibit: The chief of the fire department may prohibit any
or all bonfires and outdoor rubbish fires when atmospheric conditions or local
circumstances make such fires hazardous.
   (D)   Kindling Of Fire On Land Of Others: No person shall kindle a fire upon
the land of another without permission of the owner thereof or his agent. (M.C.
1962, sec. 28.013)
6-3-5: BURNING OF LEAVES OR REFUSE:
   (A)   It shall be lawful to burn dry leaves in the city of East Moline on
Mondays, Wednesdays, and Saturdays, between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00)
A.M. through five o'clock (5:00) P.M.
   (B)   Burning of leaves shall not be conducted within twenty five feet (25')
of any structure or other combustible material.
   (C)   A garden hose or a bucket of water shall be readily available for use
at the burning site.
   (D)   Burning of leaves shall be constantly attended by a competent person
until the fire is completely extinguished. (Ord. 91-30, 10-7-1991)
   (E)   No person shall kindle, maintain or cause to be kindled or maintained,
any fire on city right of way, street, avenue, alley, drainage ditch, easement
or park. (Ord. 05-32, 11-7-2005)
   (F)   The fire chief or his agent may prohibit burning of leaves when
atmospheric conditions or local circumstances make such fires hazardous.
   (G)   Burning of rubbish or trash is strictly prohibited in the city of East
Moline. Rubbish shall include paper products, garbage, or waste material from
construction, demolition, or renovation of buildings. (Ord. 91-30, 10-7-1991)
   (H)   Any person, business or municipality may burn landscape waste, or
conduct other open burning, only upon obtaining, after application, a permit,
as required, from the Illinois environmental protection agency, and in
accordance with the international fire code, 2000 edition, and upon issuance of
a permit, as required, by the appropriate city code enforcement official. The
lawful burning of leaves, in accordance with the provisions of this section,
shall not be prohibited by this subsection. (Ord. 05-32, 11-7-2005)
   (I)   Permits are not required for small fires kindled in or upon the
ground, or in a barbecue pit, exterior fireplace or cookout device. (Ord. 91-
30, 10-7-1991)
6-3-6: COMBUSTIBLE REFUSE:
It shall be unlawful to permit or store any combustible refuse in such a way as
to create a fire hazard or to store or throw any refuse of any kind in an
alley, street or public way in the city. (M.C. 1962, sec. 28.012)
6-3-7: DEBRIS ON STREETS:
It shall be unlawful to throw or deposit any glass, tacks, nails or other
similar articles on any street, alley or sidewalk or other place in the city.
(1962 Code § 28.017)
6-3-8: DEPOSIT OF GRASS, RUBBISH ON STREETS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to dump or deposit or cause to be dumped or
deposited, any grass, leaves, branches or other things in the roadway or gutter
of any public street in the city. (1962 Code § 28.026)
6-3-9: DISCHARGE OF WEAPONS; POSSESSION OF EXPLOSIVE MATERIALS:
   (A)   Discharge Of Weapons: It shall be unlawful to discharge any firearm or
air gun, BB gun, or any toy gun projecting lead or metal missiles, paintballs,
or any other dangerous projectile within the city limits, except in a regularly
established shooting gallery or at a city sanctioned event. This section shall
not be construed to prohibit any officer of the law from discharging a firearm
in the performance of his duty or for any citizen from using a firearm to
lawfully defend himself, or another. It shall also be unlawful to shoot any bow
or to discharge any arrow within the city limits. (Ord. 04-05, 2-17-2004)
   (B)   Possession Of Explosive Materials: It shall be unlawful for any person
to knowingly use, sell, manufacture, purchase, possess, or transport any
explosive material or device, or any chemical or substance, used to mix with
another chemical or substance, in order to create or cause an explosion,
whether flammable or not. Explosive materials or devices shall include any
bomb, bombshell, grenade, bottle or other vessel containing an explosive
material or substance such as, but not limited to: black powder bombs, Molotov
cocktails, artillery projectiles, or MacGyver bombs. Provided, this section
shall not be construed to prohibit any officer of the law or governmental
employee from using or possessing explosive materials or substances in the
performance of his duty; nor to prohibit any citizen of the United States from
the use or possession of explosive materials or substances when properly
licensed to do so, or when lawfully engaged in a duly licensed or regulated
business or profession.
   (C)   Penalty Clause: Any person violating the provisions of this ordinance
shall be subject to a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00), nor
more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). (Ord. 94-25, 9-19-1994)
6-3-10: DISORDERLY CONDUCT:
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit disorderly conduct. A person
commits disorderly conduct when he knowingly does any act in such unreasonable
manner as to alarm or disturb another and to provoke a breach of the peace. A
person commits disorderly conduct when he knowingly transmits in any manner to
any peace officer, public officer or public employee a report to the effect
that an offense has been committed, knowing at the time of such transmission
that there is no reasonable grounds for believing that such an offense has been
committed; or transmits in any manner to the police department or fire
department of any municipality or fire protection district, or any privately
owned and operated ambulance service, a false request for an ambulance,
emergency medical technician ambulance or emergency medical technician
paramedic or an emergency fire protection response, knowing at the time there
is no reasonable grounds for believing that such assistance is required. Any
person violating the provisions of this ordinance shall be subject to a fine of
not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars
($500.00). (Ord. 97-35, 7-7-1997)
6-3-11: DISTURBING ASSEMBLAGES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to disturb any lawful assemblage or
gathering in the city. (1962 Code § 28.009)
6-3-12: FALSE ALARMS:
(Rep. by Ord. 94-12, 6-20-1994)
6-3-13: FENCES:
It shall be unlawful to construct any fence on an area zoned for residence
purposes only, to a height greater than six feet (6') above ground level, or to
construct on such area any fence to a height greater than three feet (3')
between the building line, where set by ordinance, and the street. (Ord. 81-57,
7-20-1981)
6-3-14: PUBLIC FIGHTING:
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly start a fight, or to fight
with another, without legal justification in any public place in the city.
(Ord. 86-9, 4-22-1986)
6-3-15: GAMBLING:
It shall be unlawful to gamble or attend any gambling resort or to make any
bet, lottery or gambling hazard, or to buy or sell any chances or tickets in
any gambling game, arrangement or device.
It shall be unlawful to possess any gambling device or paraphernalia with the
intent to use the same for an unlawful purpose; and any such device may be
confiscated by any member of the police department.
It shall be unlawful to maintain or patronize any establishment maintained for
a gambling house or resort anywhere in the city or within one mile thereof.
It shall be unlawful to advertise any gambling house or resort in any street,
alley or other public place within the city. (1962 Code § 28.001)
The above prohibition of gambling, and possession of gambling devices or
paraphernalia, shall not apply to video gaming, or video gaming devices, as
authorized by the Illinois legislature, and as licensed by the Illinois gaming
board, which shall be allowed. (Ord. 12-10, 6-18-2012)
Any person violating the provisions of this ordinance shall be subject to a
fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00), nor more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00). (Ord. 83-5, 1-17-1983)
6-3-16: INDECENT PUBLICATIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to exhibit, sell, print, offer to
sell, give away, circulate, publish, distribute or attempt to distribute in the
city, any obscene book, magazine, pamphlet, paper, writing, card, image,
instrument, statue, drawing or other article which is obscene. "Obscene", for
the purposes of this section is defined as follows: Whether to the average
person, applying contemporary standards of the community in which the act in
question occurred, the dominant theme of the material, taken as a whole,
appeals to a shameful, unnatural, impure, unlawful or morbid interest in
nudity, sex or excretions.
It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to sell, lend, give away,
exhibit, offer to sell, circulate, publish, distribute or attempt to distribute
within the city to any child under the age of seventeen (17) years, any book,
pamphlet, magazine, newspaper, story paper, comic book or other printed paper
devoted or principally made up of detailed descriptions of criminal acts,
justification or unlawful excuse of criminal acts, glorification or exultation
of crimes or criminals, criminal news, police reports or pictures, descriptions
or stories of deeds of bloodshed, violence, crime or lust. (1962 Code § 38.027)
6-3-17: INJURE, DEFACE PUBLIC PROPERTY:
It shall be unlawful for anyone to injure, deface or interfere with any
property belonging to the city without proper authority from the mayor and
council. (1962 Code § 11.903)
6-3-18: LOITERING FOR DRUG ACTIVITIES:
   (A)   Acts Prohibited: It is unlawful for any person to loiter in, on or
near any thoroughfare or place open to the public or near any public or private
place in a manner and under circumstances manifesting the purpose of engaging
in drug related activity defined as offenses in the Illinois controlled
substances act, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 570.
   (B)   Circumstances: Among circumstances that may be considered in
determining whether such purpose is manifested are that the person:
      1.   Is a known drug user, possessor or seller. For purpose of this
chapter, a "known unlawful drug user, possessor or seller" is a person who has,
within the knowledge of the arresting officer, been convicted in any court
within this state or any other state of any violation involving the use,
possession or sale of any of the substances referred to in the Illinois
controlled substances act, or such person has been convicted of any violation
of any of the provisions of said sections or substantially similar laws of any
political subdivision of this state or of any other state; or person who
displays physical characteristics of drug intoxication or usage, such as
"needle tracks"; or a person who possesses drug paraphernalia pursuant to
section
6-3-34 of this chapter;
      2.   Is currently subject to an order prohibiting his or her presence in
a high drug activity geographic area;
      3.   Behaves in such a manner as to raise a reasonable suspicion that he
or she is about to engage in or is then engaged in an unlawful drug related
activity, including, by way of example only, acting as a "lookout";
      4.   Is physically identified by the officer as a member of a "gang", or
association which has as its purpose illegal drug activity;
      5.   Transfers small objects or packages for currency in a furtive
fashion;
      6.   Tries to conceal himself or herself or any object which reasonably
could be involved in an unlawful drug related activity;
      7.   Is in an area that is known for unlawful drug use and trafficking;
      8.   Is on or in premises that have been reported to law enforcement as a
place suspected of unlawful drug activity;
      9.   Is in or within six feet (6') of any vehicles registered to a known
unlawful drug user, possessor, or seller, or a person for whom there is an
outstanding warrant for a crime involving drug related activity.
   (C)   Enforcement: Enforcement of this chapter shall be by an officer of the
East Moline police department and shall also be granted to the quad city
metropolitan enforcement group. (Ord. 93-20, 3-15-1993)
6-3-19: LOITERING:
   (A)   Definition: As used in this Section, "loitering" shall mean remaining
idle in essentially one location and shall include the colloquial expression
"hanging around".
   (B)   Certain Types Of Loitering Prohibited: No person shall loiter in a
public place in such manner as to:
      1.   Create or cause to be created a danger of a breach of the peace;
      2.   Create or cause to be created any disturbance or annoyance to the
comfort and repose of any person;
      3.   Obstruct the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles;
      4.   Obstruct, molest or interfere with any person lawfully in any public
place.
This paragraph shall include the making of unsolicited remarks of an offensive,
disgusting or insulting nature or which are calculated to annoy or disturb the
person to, or in whose hearing, they are made.
   (C)   Request To Leave: Whenever the presence of any person in any public
place is causing or is likely to cause any of the conditions enumerated in
subsection (B) of this Section, any police officer may order that person to
leave that place. Any person who shall refuse to leave after being ordered to
do so by a police officer shall be guilty of a violation of this Section. (Ord.
74-62, 11-18-1974)
   (D)   Penalty: Any person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of
this Ordinance shall be subject to a fine not less than ten dollars ($10.00)
nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) and a separate offense shall be
deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues. (Ord. 75-39, 9-22-1975)
6-3-20: MISSILES:
It shall be unlawful to cast, throw or propel any missile on any street, alley
or other public place. (M.C. 1962, sec. 28.016)
6-3-21: NEGLIGENT OR RECKLESS SMOKING:
It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke, attempt to light or to smoke any
cigarette, cigar or other form of tobacco in such a manner as to carelessly,
recklessly or negligently set fire to any bedding, furniture, curtains, drapes
or any household fittings in any sleeping room or rooms of any hotel, rooming
house, lodging house or other place of public abode, so as to endanger life or
property in any way. (M.C. 1962, sec. 28.035)
6-3-22: OBSTRUCTING STAIRWAYS OR EXITS:
It shall be unlawful to obstruct or permit the obstruction of any stairway,
aisle, corridor or exit in any office building, factory, hotel, school, church,
theater, assembly hall, lodge or other public hall, or any building used by two
(2) or more tenants or families in such a manner that it interferes with the
free use of such stairway, aisle, corridor or exit. (M.C. 1962, sec. 28.031)
6-3-23: PINBALL MACHINES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or maintain in any tavern,
restaurant or other place of public resort in the City, any pinball game
machine or other machine or game in which a coin or token is inserted and which
is designed to test the skill and for the amusement of the operator or player
thereof, excepting therefrom, the coin-in-the-slot operated amusement devices
which return to the player thereof no money or property or right to receive
money or property. (Ord. 66-4, 4-4-1966)
6-3-24: POSTING BILLS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to post any bills or advertisements on any
public property without the authority of the City Council; and it shall be
unlawful to post any bill or advertisement on any property without the written
consent of the owner thereof. (M.C. 1962, sec. 28.022)
6-3-25: PROFANITY:
It shall be unlawful to use profanity on any street, alley or other public
place in the City. (M.C. 1962, sec. 28.005)
6-3-26: SCAFFOLDS:
Any scaffold or ladder placed in such a way that the overhang can fall onto any
public street, alley or other public place in the City, shall be firmly
constructed and safeguarded; and it shall be unlawful to place or leave any
tools or articles on any such place in such a manner that the same can fall
onto any such street, sidewalk, alley or other public place from a height
greater than four feet (4'). (M.C. 1962, sec. 28.028)
6-3-27: CLOSING HOURS OF CITY PARKS:
All City parks shall close at the hour as designated by Park Board rules and
regulations. Said closing hour shall be posted at the entrance of each park. It
shall be unlawful for any person to be present in any City park after the
posted closing hour. Any person convicted of a violation of this Section shall
be fined in a sum not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00). (Ord. 75-45, 11-3-1975)
6-3-28: UNLAWFUL ASSEMBLAGES:
It shall be unlawful to collect, gather or be a member of any disorderly crowd,
or any crowd gathered for any unlawful purpose. (M.C. 1962, sec. 28-019)
6-3-29: UNWHOLESOME BUSINESS:
(Rep. by Ord. 98-21, 5-4-1998)
6-3-30: VAGRANTS, MENDICANTS:
It shall be unlawful for mendicants or vagrants to frequent any depot, store,
theater, street, alley, sidewalk, park or other place publicly frequented in
the City.
Any person found sleeping in any such place, and who has not any established
domicile or residence shall be considered to be a vagrant. (M.C. 1962, sec.
28.032)
6-3-31: WHISTLES:
It shall be unlawful to blow or cause to be blown any steam whistle of any
stationary engine or steam engine in the City except as a signal for starting
or stopping work or in emergencies to avoid injury to persons or property.
(M.C. 1962, sec. 28.030)
6-3-32: WINDBLOWN REFUSE:
It shall be unlawful to deposit or leave any refuse or material in such a place
or condition that it can be blown by the wind so as to be scattered or cause
clouds of dust or particles; and it shall be unlawful to permit the escape of
soot, ashes or other solid products or results of combustion so as to be
windblown or scattered. (M.C. 1962, sec. 28.015)
6-3-33: COMMERCIAL DELIVERY VEHICLES:
It shall be unlawful to load or unload commercial delivery vehicles, units or
semitrailers within two hundred feet (200') of any area zoned for residential
purposes, between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:
00) A.M. (Ord. 80-39, 10-6-1980)
6-3-34: DRUG PARAPHERNALIA:
   (A)   Definition Of Drug Paraphernalia:
      1.   The term "drug paraphernalia" means all equipment, products and
materials of any kind which are used, intended for use, or designed for use, in
planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing,
compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing,
packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting,
inhaling, or otherwise introducing into the human body a controlled substance
in violation of 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 550/1 et seq., and 570/100.
         (a)   Kits used, intended for use, or designed for use in planting,
propagating, cultivating, growing or harvesting of any species of plant which
is a controlled substance or from which a controlled substance can be derived;
         (b)   Kits used, intended for use, or designed for use in
manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, or preparing
controlled substances;
         (c)   Isomerization devices used, intended for use, or designed for
use in increasing the potency of any species of plant which is a controlled
substance;
         (d)   Testing equipment used, intended for use, or designed for use in
identifying, or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of
controlled substances;
         (e)   Scales and balances used, intended for use, or designed for use
in weighing or measuring controlled substances;
         (f)   Diluents and adulterants, such as quinine hydrochloride,
mannitol, mannite, dextrose and lactose, used, intended for use, or designed
for use in cutting controlled substances;
         (g)   Separation gins and sifters used, intended for use, or designed
for use in removing twigs and seeds from, or in otherwise cleaning or refining
marihuana;
         (h)   Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons and mixing devices used,
intended for use, or designed for use in compounding controlled substances;
         (i)   Capsules, balloons, envelopes and other containers used,
intended for use, or designed for use in packaging small quantities of
controlled substances;
         (j)   Containers and other objects used, intended for use, or designed
for use in storing or concealing controlled substances;
         (k)   Hypodermic syringes, needles and other objects used, intended
for use, or designed for use in parenterally injecting controlled substances
into the human body;
         (l)   Objects used, intended for use, or designed for use in
ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing marihuana, cocaine, hashish, or
hashish oil into the human body, such as:
            (1)   Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic or ceramic
pipes with or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads, or punctured
metal bowls;
            (2)   Carburetion tubes and devices;
            (3)   Water pipes;
            (4)   Smoking and carburetion masks;
            (5)   Roach clips; meaning objects used to hold burning material,
such as a marihuana cigarette that has become too small or too short to be held
in the hand;
            (6)   Miniature cocaine spoons, and cocaine vials;
            (7)   Chamber pipes;
            (8)   Carburetor pipes;
            (9)   Electric pipes;
            (10)   Air-driven pipes;
            (11)   Chillums;
            (12)   Bongs;
            (13)   Ice pipes or chillers.
      2.   In determining whether an object is drug paraphernalia, a court or
other authority should consider, in addition to all other logically relevant
factors, the following:
         (a)   Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the object
concerning its use;
         (b)   Prior convictions, if any, of any owner, or of anyone in control
of the object, under any State or Federal law relating to any controlled
substance;
         (c)   The proximity of the object, in time and space, to a direct
violation of 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 550/1 et seq., and 570/100;
         (d)   The proximity of the object to controlled substances;
         (e)   The existence of any residue of controlled substances on the
object;
         (f)   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of the owner, or
of anyone in control of the object, to deliver it to persons whom he knows, or
should reasonably know, intend to use the object to facilitate a violation of
720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 550/1 et seq., and 570/100; the innocence of an
owner, or of anyone in control of the object, as to a direct violation of 720
Illinois Compiled Statutes 550/1 et seq., and 570/100, shall not prevent a
finding that the object is intended for use, or designed for use as drug
paraphernalia.
         (g)   Instructions, oral or written, provided with the object
concerning its use;
         (h)   Descriptive materials accompanying the object which explain or
depict its use;
         (i)   National and local advertising concerning its use;
         (j)   The manner in which the object is displayed for sale;
         (k)   Whether the owner, or anyone in control of the object, is a
legitimate supplier of like or related items to the community, such as a
licensed distributor or dealer of tobacco products;
         (l)   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of sales of the
object(s) to the total sales of the business enterprise;
         (m)   The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the object in the
community;
         (n)   Expert testimony concerning its use.
   (B)   Possession Of Drug Paraphernalia: It is unlawful for any person to
use, or to possess with intent to use, drug paraphernalia to plant, propagate,
cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process,
prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest,
inhale, or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance in
violation of 560 Illinois Compiled Statutes 550/1 et seq., and 570/100.
   (C)   Manufacture Or Delivery Of Drug Paraphernalia: It is unlawful for any
person to deliver, possess with intent to deliver, drug paraphernalia, knowing,
or under circumstances where one reasonably should know, that it will be used
to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert,
produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain,
conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce into the human body a
controlled substance in violation of 560 Illinois Compiled Statutes 550/1 et
seq., and 570/100.
   (D)   Delivery Of Drug Paraphernalia To A Minor: Any person eighteen (18)
years of age or over who violates subsection (C) of this Section by delivering
drug paraphernalia to a person under eighteen (18) years of age who is at least
three (3) years his junior is guilty of a special offense.
   (E)   Advertisement Of Drug Paraphernalia: It shall be unlawful for any
person to place in any newspaper, magazine, handbill, or other publication any
advertisement, knowing, or under circumstances where one reasonably should
know, that the purpose of the advertisement, in whole or in part, is to promote
the sale of objects designed or intended for use as drug paraphernalia.
   (F)   Penalty: Except for violation of subsection (D) of this Section, all
violations of this Ordinance shall be punishable as provided in Section
1-4-1 of this Code.
   (G)   Forfeiture: All drug paraphernalia as defined by subsection (A) of
this Section shall be subject to forfeiture as provided in 560 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 550/12 and 570/505. (Ord. 82-4, 1-4-1982)
6-3-35: THEFT:
   (A)   Definitions: All the terms and phrases used herein shall have the same
meaning as ascribed to them in the Criminal Code (720 ILCS 5/15-1 et seq., and
5/16-1 et seq.) and amendments thereto; except, should the term "person" be
limited therein to natural persons who have attained the age of seventeen (17)
years or more, said limitation is specifically excluded herein, and the term
"person" is made applicable to all natural persons who have attained the age of
thirteen (13) years or more.
   (B)   Offense Of Theft: A person commits the offense of theft when he
knowingly:
      1.   Obtains or exerts unauthorized control over property of the owner;
or
      2.   Obtains by deception control over property of the owner; or
      3.   Obtains by threat control over property of the owner; or
      4.   Obtains control over stolen property knowing the property to have
been stolen by another or under such circumstances as would reasonably induce
him to believe that the property was stolen; and
      5.   Intends to deprive the owner permanently of the use or benefit of
the property; or
      6.   Knowingly uses, conceals, or abandons the property in such a manner
as to deprive the owner permanently of such use or benefit; or
      7.   Uses, conceals, or abandons the property knowing such use,
concealment, or abandonment probably will deprive the owner permanently of such
use or benefit;
   (C)   Exceptions: It shall be an offense under this Section whenever the
property involved is a firearm or exceeds one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00)
in value or whenever the property is obtained by theft from a person. (Ord. 82-
4, 1-4-1982)
   (D)   Penalty: Any person violating the provisions of this Ordinance shall
be subject to a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00), nor more
than five hundred dollars ($500.00). (Ord. 83-5, 1-17-1983)
6-3-36: THEFT FROM COIN-OPERATED MACHINES:
   (A)   Definitions: All the terms and phrases used herein shall have the same
meaning as ascribed to them in the Criminal Code (720 ILCS 5/15-1 et seq., and
5/16-1 et seq.) and amendments thereto; except, should the term "person" be
limited therein to natural persons who have attained the age of seventeen (17)
years or more, said limitation is specifically excluded herein, and the term
"person" is made applicable to all natural persons who have attained the age of
thirteen (13) years or more.
   (B)   Offense Of Theft From Coin-Operated Machines: A person commits the
offense of theft from coin-operated machines when he knowingly and without
authority and with intent to commit theft from such machine, opens, breaks
into, tampers with or damages a coin-operated machine. (Ord. 82-4, 1-4-1982)
   (C)   Penalty: Any person violating the provisions of this Ordinance shall
be subject to a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00), nor more
than five hundred dollars ($500.00). (Ord. 83-5, 1-17-1983)
6-3-37: RETAIL THEFT:
   (A)   Definitions: All the terms and phrases used herein shall have the same
meaning ascribed to them in the Criminal Code (720 ILCS 5/16A-1 et seq.) and
amendments thereto; except should the term "person" be limited therein to
natural persons who have attained the age of seventeen (17) years or more, said
limitation is specifically excluded herein, and the term "person" is made
applicable to all natural persons who have attained the age of thirteen (13)
years or more.
   (B)   Offense Of Retail Theft: A person commits the offense of retail theft
when he knowingly:
      1.   Takes possession of, carries away, transfers or causes to be carried
away or transferred, any merchandise displayed, held, stored or offered for
sale in a retail mercantile establishment with the intention of retaining such
merchandise or with the intention of depriving the merchant permanently of the
possession, use, or benefit of such merchandise without paying the full retail
value of such merchandise, or
      2.   Alters, transfers, or removes any label, price tag, marking, indicia
of value or any other markings which aid in determining value affixed to any
merchandise displayed, held, stored, or offered for sale, in a retail
mercantile establishment and attempts to purchase such merchandise personally
or in consort with another at less than the full retail value with the
intention of depriving the merchant of the full retail value of such
merchandise; or
      3.   Transfers any merchandise displayed, held, stored, or offered for
sale, in a retail mercantile establishment from the container in or on which
such merchandise is displayed to any other container with the intention of
depriving the merchant of the full retail value of such merchandise; or
      4.   Under-rings with the intention of depriving the merchant of the full
retail value of the merchandise; or
      5.   Removes shopping cart from the premises of retail mercantile
establishment without the consent of the merchant given at the time of such
removal with the intention of depriving the merchant permanently of the
possession, use, or benefit of such cart; or
      6.   And with the intent to commit an offense as specified above in
subsection (B)1, (B)2, (B)3, (B)4 or (B)5 of this Section, he does any act
which constitutes a substantial step toward the commission of that offense.
However, it is not an offense hereunder when the full retail value exceeds one
hundred fifty dollars ($150.00).
   (C)   Presumption: If any person conceals upon his person or among his
belongings, unpurchased merchandise displayed, held, stored, or offered for
sale in a retail mercantile establishment and removes the merchandise beyond
the last known station for receiving payments for that merchandise in that
retail mercantile establishment; such person shall be presumed to have
possessed, carried away, or transferred such merchandise with the intention of
retaining it or with the intention of depriving the merchant permanently of the
possession, use, or benefit of such merchandise without paying the full retail
value of such merchandise.
   (D)   Detention: Any merchant who has reasonable grounds to believe that a
person has committed retail theft may detail such person, in or off the
premises of a retail mercantile establishment, in a reasonable manner and for a
reasonable length of time for all or any of the following purposes:
      1.   To request identification;
      2.   To verify such identification;
      3.   To make reasonable inquiry as to whether such person has in his
possession unpurchased merchandise and to make reasonable investigation of the
ownership of such merchandise.
      4.   To inform a peace officer of the detention of the person and
surrender that person to the custody of a peace officer;
      5.   When such person is a minor, to inform a peace officer, the parents,
guardian, or other private person interested in the welfare of that minor of
this detention and to surrender custody of such minor to such person.
A merchant may make a detention as permitted hereinabove off the premises of a
retail mercantile establishment only if such detention is pursuant to an
immediate pursuit of such person.
   (E)   Affirmative Defense: A detention performed pursuant to and in
accordance with this Section does not constitute an arrest or an unlawful
restraint and this Section may be pleaded in way of an affirmative defense to
false arrest, false imprisonment, or any other cause of action for damages or
liability where the essence of said cause is the detention made pursuant
hereto. (Ord. 82-3, 1-4-82)
   (F)   Any person violating the provisions of this Ordinance shall be subject
to a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00), nor more than five
hundred dollars ($500.00). (Ord. 83-5, 1-17-1983)
6-3-38: POSSESSION OF CANNABIS:
   (A)   Definitions: All the terms and phrases used herein shall have the same
meaning as ascribed to them in the Cannabis Control Act (720 ILCS 550/1 et
seq.) and amendments thereto; except, should the term "person" be limited
therein to natural persons who have attained the age of seventeen (17) years or
more, said limitation is specifically excluded herein, and the term "person" is
made applicable to all natural persons who have attained the age of thirteen
(13) years or more.
   (B)   Offense Of Possession Of Cannabis: A person commits the offense of
possession of cannabis by knowingly possessing ten (10) grams or less of any
substance containing cannabis unless permitted or authorized to do so pursuant
to the Cannabis Control Act 1 . (Ord. 82-5, 1-4-1982)
   (C)   Any person violating the provisions of this Ordinance shall be subject
to a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00), nor more than five
hundred dollars ($500.00). (Ord. 83-5, 1-17-1983)
 
Notes
1 1. 720 ILCS 550/1 et seq.
6-3-39: ASSAULT 1 :
   (A)   Offense Of Assault: A person commits assault when, without lawful
authority, he engages in conduct which places another in reasonable
apprehension of receiving a battery.
   (B)   Penalty: A person convicted of the offense of assault shall be fined
in a sum not less than fifty dollars ($50.00), nor more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00). (Ord. 83-4, 1-17-1983)
 
Notes
1 2. See also Section 6-3-14 of this Chapter.
6-3-40: BATTERY 1 :
   (A)   Offense Of Battery: A person commits battery if he intentionally or
knowingly, without legal justification and by any means:
      1.   Causes bodily harm to an individual; or
      2.   Makes physical contact of an insulting or provoking nature with an
individual.
   (B)   Penalty: A person convicted of the offense of battery shall be fined
in a sum not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00). (Ord. 83-4, 1-17-1983)
 
Notes
1 3. See also Section 6-3-14 of this Chapter.
6-3-41: RESISTING OR OBSTRUCTING A PEACE OFFICER:
   (A)   Offense Of Resisting Or Obstructing A Peace Officer: It shall be
unlawful for any person to knowingly resist or obstruct the performance by one
known to that person to be a peace officer of any authorized act within the
officer's official capacity.
   (B)   Penalty: A person convicted of the offense of resisting or obstructing
a peace officer shall be fined in a sum not less than one hundred dollars
($100.00), nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). (Ord. 83-4, 1-17-1983)
6-3-42: CRIMINAL TRESPASS TO A VEHICLE:
   (A)   Offense Of Criminal Trespass To A Vehicle: It shall be unlawful for
any person to knowingly and without authority enter any vehicle, aircraft or
watercraft or any part thereof without the consent of the owner.
   (B)   Penalty: A person convicted of the offense of criminal trespass to a
vehicle shall be fined a sum not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than
five hundred dollars ($500.00). (Ord. 83-4, 1-17-1983)
6-3-43: CRIMINAL TRESPASS TO LAND:
   (A)   Offense Of Criminal Trespass To Land: It shall be unlawful for any
person to enter upon the land or any part thereof of another after receiving,
immediately prior to such entry, notice from the owner or occupant that such
entry is forbidden or to remain upon the land of another after receiving notice
from the owner or occupant to depart. A person has received notice from the
owner or occupant if he has been notified personally, either orally or in
writing, or if a printed or written notice forbidding such entry has been
conspicuously posted or exhibited at the main entrance to such land or the
forbidden part thereof.
   (B)   Penalty: A person convicted of the offense of criminal trespass to
land shall be fined a sum not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than
five hundred dollars ($500.00). (Ord. 83-4, 1-17-1983)
6-3-44: CRIMINAL DAMAGE TO PROPERTY:
   (A)   Offense Of Criminal Damage To Property: It shall be unlawful for any
person to knowingly damage any property of another without the consent of such
other person.
   (B)   Penalty: A person convicted of the offense of criminal damage to
property shall be fined a sum not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor
more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). (Ord. 83-4, 1-17-1983)
6-3-45: CONTRIBUTING TO DELINQUENCY OF A CHILD:
   (A)   Offense Of Contributing To Delinquency Of A Child: It shall be
unlawful for any person to knowingly or wilfully cause, aid or encourage any
minor child to be or to become a delinquent child. A "delinquent child" is
defined as any minor person who before his or her seventeenth birthday has
violated or attempted to violate any Federal or State law or Municipal
ordinance.
   (B)   Penalty: A person convicted of the offense of contributing to
delinquency of a child shall be fined a sum not less than one hundred dollars
($100.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). (Ord. 83-4, 1-17-1983)
6-3-46: PUBLIC INDECENCY:
   (A)   Offense Of Public Indecency: Any person who performs any of the
following acts in a public place commits a public indecency:
      1.   An act of sexual intercourse; or
      2.   An act of deviate sexual conduct; or
      3.   A lewd exposure of the body done with intent to arouse or to satisfy
the sexual desire of another person; or
      4.   A lewd fondling or caress of the body of another person of either
sex.
   (B)   Definition: "Public place" means any place where the conduct may
reasonably be expected to be viewed by others.
   (C)   Penalty: Any person convicted of the offense of public indecency shall
be fined in a sum not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five
hundred dollars ($500.00). (Ord. 83-4, 1-17-1983)
6-3-47: PROSTITUTION:
   (A)   Offense Of Prostitution: It shall be unlawful for any person to
perform, offer or agree to perform any act of sexual intercourse or any act of
deviant sexual conduct for money.
   (B)   Penalty: Any person convicted of the offense of prostitution shall be
fined in a sum not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than five
hundred dollars ($500.00). (Ord. 83-4, 1-17-1983)
6-3-48: TRUANCY:
   (A)   Definitions 1 :
    CHRONIC OR HABITUAL TRUANT: A child subject to compulsory school attendance
and who is absent without valid cause from such attendance for ten percent
(10%) or more of the previous one hundred eighty (180) regular attendance days.
   DROPOUT: Any child enrolled in grades one through twelve (12) whose name has
been removed from the district enrollment roster for any reason other than his
death, extended illness, graduation or completion of a program of studies and
who has not transferred to another public or private school.
   RELIGION: For the purpose of this section, includes all aspects of religious
observance and practice, as well as belief.
   TRUANT: A child subject to compulsory school attendance and who is absent
without valid cause from such attendance for a school day or portion thereof.
   TRUANT MINOR: A chronic truant to whom supportive services, including
prevention, diagnostic, intervention and remedial services, alternative
programs and other school and community resources have been provided and have
failed to result in the cessation of chronic truancy, or have been offered and
refused.
   VALID CAUSE FOR ABSENCE: Illness, observance of a religious holiday, death
in the immediate family, family emergency, and shall include such other
situations beyond the control of the student as determined by the board of
education in each district, or other such circumstances which cause reasonable
concern to the parent for the safety or health of the student. (Ord. 99-44, 10-
4-1999)
   (B)   Truancy Prohibited:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any person enrolled in any of grades one
through twelve (12), in a public, private or parochial school within the city
of East Moline, Illinois, to absent himself or herself from attendance without
"valid cause". Any person who shall so absent himself or herself shall be
guilty of the offense of truancy and be subject to the penalties hereinafter
set forth in subsection (B)4 of this section. (Ord. 00-48, 1-16-2001)
      2.   Any person having custody or control of a child subject to the
provisions of this section, to whom notice has been given of the child's
truancy, and who knowingly and wilfully permits such a child to persist in his
truancy within that school year, upon conviction thereof shall be guilty of a
class C misdemeanor and shall be subject to not more than thirty (30) days'
imprisonment and/or fine of up to five hundred dollars ($500.00) 2  (source: PA
80-908).
      3.   Any person who induces or attempts to induce any child to be absent
from school unlawfully, or who knowingly employs or harbors, while school is in
session, any child absent unlawfully from school for three (3) consecutive
school days, is guilty of a class C misdemeanor 3  (source: PA 77-2267). (Ord.
99-44, 10-4-1999)
      4.   Any person over the age of thirteen (13), or the parent or legal
guardian of a person under the age of thirteen (13), who violates this
ordinance shall be subject to a citation. The citation shall be paid at the
East Moline Police Station in the amount of:
 
First offense                         $25.00
First offense if paid within 24 hours 15.00
Second and subsequent offenses        50.00
 
In the event that payment is not made within thirty (30) days, the person
violating this section must appear in court and will be subject to a fine of
not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars
($500.00).
If the citation indicates so, a person charged with a second or subsequent
violation may be required to appear in court and be subject to a fine of not
less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00).
(Ord. 11-02, 1-18-2011)
      5.   Any duly appointed and authorized truant officer for any school
district within the city of East Moline or any subdivision thereof, or any
peace officer, shall have authority to sign all complaints and charge any
violations of this ordinance that take place within the city of East Moline.
(Ord. 99-44, 10-4-1999)
 
Notes
1 1. 105 ILCS 5/26-2a.
2 1. 105 ILCS 5/26-10.
3 2. 105 ILCS 5/26-11.
6-3-49: PROHIBITION OF CIGARETTE VENDING MACHINES IN PUBLIC PLACES:
   (A)   Except as provided in subsection (B) of this section, no person, firm
or corporation shall distribute or sell cigarettes or other tobacco products by
the use of a vending machine, or install or maintain a vending machine with the
intent to make such distributions or sales.
   (B)   The following establishments, businesses, clubs and facilities may
maintain cigarette or tobacco product vending machines on their premises:
      1.   A private business establishment licensed as a liquor dealer by the
city of East Moline, and/or a privately owned and operated club or association
requiring a paid membership.
      2.   Factories, private businesses, offices or other private facilities
not open to the general public.
      3.   Facilities to which persons under the age of eighteen (18) years are
not permitted access.
   (C)   No cigarette or tobacco product vending machine can be placed in a
doorway or any other area which is easily accessible to minors.
   (D)   For purposes of this section, "vending machines" shall mean any
automated, self-service device which, upon insertion of money, tokens, or any
other form of payment, dispenses cigarettes or other tobacco products.
   (E)   Any person convicted of a violation of this section shall be fined in
a sum not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00). (Ord. 91-20, 7-15-1991)
6-3-50: SALE OF TOBACCO TO MINORS:
Prohibition: No minor under eighteen (18) years of age shall buy or be in
possession of, any tobacco products, or alternative nicotine products. No
person shall sell, buy for, distribute samples of, or furnish any tobacco
products, or alternative nicotine products, to any minor under eighteen (18)
years of age. (Ord. 14-01, 3-3-2014; amd. Ord. 17-09, 4-17-2017)
6-3-51: GRAFFITI:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place graffiti upon the real or
personal, public or private, property of another. It shall not be a defense
that the owner/occupant has given permission where the graffiti tends to incite
violence.
   (B)   "Graffiti" shall be defined as any sign, symbol, marking, drawing,
name, initial, word, diagram, sketch, picture or letter placed upon the real or
personal property of an owner without the owner's express, written permission.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for the owner and/or occupant of fixed real or
personal property located within the public view to place or give permission to
place graffiti, as otherwise defined in subsection (B) of this section, on said
real or personal property, if the graffiti tends to incite violence by
referring to gang or criminal activity, depicts or expresses obscenity as
defined by ordinances, or contains defamatory material about a public or
private person, except as otherwise allowed by law.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any person to possess, while in any public
building or facility, or while on private property, any of the following
materials with the intent to use such material(s) to violate subsections (B)
and/or (C) of this section: spray paint containers, paint, ink, marking pens
containing nonwater soluble fluid, brushes, applicators or other materials for
marking, scratching or etching.
   (E)   Upon being notified, in writing, by the city of East Moline, the
property owner upon which graffiti has been illegally placed shall remove the
graffiti within fifteen (15) days of the date of notice. By written request,
this time period may be waived by the chief of police or designee thereof, due
to weather conditions. The property owner may also request assistance, in
writing, for the graffiti removal based on the owner's inability to perform
removal. Failure to remove the graffiti within the specified time shall permit
the city of East Moline to summarily abate this nuisance by removing the
graffiti as prescribed in this chapter and the cost thereof shall be assessed
to the owner. The penalty upon conviction for the offense of failure to remove
graffiti shall be a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than
five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense, and each day such failure
shall continue shall be considered a separate offense and fines shall be
assessed accordingly.
   (F)   The penalty for violating subsection (A) of this section shall be a
fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars
($500.00). The offender may also be ordered by the court, in addition to fines,
to pay restitution to the property owner for the costs of restoring the
property to its condition before the graffiti was applied.
   (G)   The penalty for violating subsection (C) of this section shall be a
fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars
($500.00) for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on
each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
   (H)   The penalty for violating subsection (D) of this section shall be a
fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars
($500.00).
   (I)   Public service work including, but not limited to, cleaning graffiti
at locations within the city of East Moline may be required by the court for
persons convicted of violating subsection (A), (C), or (D) of this section, in
addition to or in lieu of fines or penalties described in subsections (F), (G)
and (H) of this section.
   (J)   Enforcement of this chapter shall be by an officer of the East Moline
police department and shall also be granted to the quad city metropolitan
enforcement group. (Ord. 96-24, 10-7-1996)
6-3-52: PUBLIC URINATION:
It shall be unlawful for any person to urinate or defecate on any street,
alley, sidewalk, parkway, public parking lot or other public place other than
in a facility designed for that purpose.
The enforcement provisions of the above shall not apply to those individuals
who may not be able to adequately control the bodily functions that control
urination or defecation due to a verified medical condition. (Ord. 07-11, 9-4-
2007)
6-3-53: SMOKING:
   (A)   Definitions: For the purposes of this section, the following terms
shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them:
    BAR: An establishment that is devoted to the serving of alcoholic beverages
for consumption by guests on the premises and that derives no more than ten
percent (10%) of its gross revenue from the sale of food consumed on the
premises. "Bar" includes, but is not limited to, taverns, nightclubs, cocktail
lounges, adult entertainment facilities, and cabarets.
   DEPARTMENT: The Illinois department of public health.
   EMPLOYEE: A person who is employed by an employer in consideration for
direct or indirect monetary wages or profits or a person who volunteers his or
her services for a nonprofit entity.
   EMPLOYER: A person, business, partnership, association, or corporation,
including a municipal corporation, trust, or nonprofit entity, that employs the
services of one or more individual persons.
   ENCLOSED AREA: All space between a floor and a ceiling that is enclosed or
partially enclosed with: 1) solid walls or windows, exclusive of doorways, or
2) solid walls with partitions and no windows, exclusive of doorways, that
extend from the floor to the ceiling, including, without limitation, lobbies
and corridors.
   ENCLOSED OR PARTIALLY ENCLOSED SPORTS ARENA: Any sports pavilion, stadium,
gymnasium, health spa, boxing arena, swimming pool, roller rink, ice rink,
bowling alley, or other similar place where members of the general public
assemble to engage in physical exercise or participate in athletic competitions
or recreational activities or to witness sports, cultural, recreational, or
other events.
   GAMING EQUIPMENT OR SUPPLIES: Gaming equipment/supplies as defined in the
Illinois gaming board rules of the Illinois administrative code.
   GAMING FACILITY: An establishment utilized primarily for the purposes of
gaming and where gaming equipment or supplies are operated for the purposes of
accruing business revenue.
   HEALTHCARE FACILITY: An office or institution providing care or treatment of
diseases, whether physical, mental, or emotional, or other medical,
physiological, or psychological conditions, including, but not limited to,
hospitals, rehabilitation hospitals, weight control clinics, nursing homes,
homes for the aging or chronically ill, laboratories, and offices of surgeons,
chiropractors, physical therapists, physicians, dentists, and all specialists
within these professions. "Healthcare facility" includes all waiting rooms,
hallways, private rooms, semiprivate rooms, and wards within healthcare
facilities.
   PLACE OF EMPLOYMENT: Any area under the control of a public or private
employer that employees are required to enter, leave, or pass through during
the course of employment, including, but not limited to, entrances and exits to
places of employment, including a minimum distance, as set forth in subsection
(G) of this section, of fifteen feet (15') from entrances, exits, windows that
open, and ventilation intakes that serve an enclosed area where smoking is
prohibited; offices and work areas; restrooms; conference and classrooms;
breakrooms and cafeterias; and other common areas. A private residence or home
based business, unless used to provide licensed childcare, foster care, adult
care, or other similar social service care on the premises, is not a "place of
employment".
   PRIVATE CLUB: A not for profit association that: 1) has been in active and
continuous existence for at least three (3) years prior to the effective date
of this ordinance, whether incorporated or not, 2) is the owner, lessee, or
occupant of a building or portion thereof used exclusively for club purposes at
all times, 3) is operated solely for a recreational, fraternal, social,
patriotic, political, benevolent, or athletic purpose, but not for pecuniary
gain, and 4) only sells alcoholic beverages incidental to its operation. For
purposes of this definition, "private club" means an organization that is
managed by a board of directors, executive committee, or similar body chosen by
the members at an annual meeting, has established bylaws, a constitution, or
both to govern its activities, and has been granted an exemption from the
payment of federal income tax as a club under 26 USC 501.
   PRIVATE RESIDENCE: The part of a structure used as a dwelling, including,
without limitation: a private home, townhouse, condominium, apartment, mobile
home, vacation home, cabin, or cottage. For the purposes of this definition, a
hotel, motel, inn, resort, lodge, bed and breakfast or other similar public
accommodation, hospital, nursing home, or assisted living facility shall not be
considered a private residence.
   PUBLIC PLACE: That portion of any building or vehicle used by and open to
the public, regardless of whether the building or vehicle is owned in whole or
in part by private persons or entities, the city of East Moline, or any other
public entity and regardless of whether a fee is charged for admission,
including a minimum distance, as set forth in subsection (G) of this section,
of fifteen feet (15') from entrances, exits, windows that open, and ventilation
intakes that serve an enclosed area where smoking is prohibited. A "public
place" does not include a private residence unless the private residence is
used to provide licensed childcare, foster care, or other similar social
service care on the premises. A "public place" includes, but is not limited to,
hospitals, restaurants, retail stores, offices, commercial establishments,
elevators, indoor theaters, libraries, museums, concert halls, public
conveyances, educational facilities, nursing homes, auditoriums, enclosed or
partially enclosed sports arenas, meeting rooms, schools, exhibition halls,
convention facilities, polling places, private clubs, gaming facilities, all
government owned vehicles and facilities, including buildings and vehicles
owned, leased, or operated by the city of East Moline or city subcontract,
healthcare facilities or clinics, enclosed shopping centers, retail service
establishments, financial institutions, educational facilities, ticket areas,
public hearing facilities, public restrooms, waiting areas, lobbies, bars,
taverns, bowling alleys, skating rinks, reception areas, and no less than
seventy five percent (75%) of the sleeping quarters within a hotel, motel,
resort, inn, lodge, bed and breakfast, or other similar public accommodation
that are rented to guests, but excludes private residences.
   RESTAURANT: 1. An eating establishment, including, but not limited to,
coffee shops, cafeterias, sandwich stands, and private and public school
cafeterias, that gives or offers for sale food to the public, guests, or
employees, and
      2.   A kitchen or catering facility in which food is prepared on the
premises for serving elsewhere.
"Restaurant" includes a bar area within the restaurant.
   RETAIL TOBACCO STORE: A retail establishment that derives more than eighty
percent (80%) of its gross revenue from the sale of loose tobacco, plants or
herbs and cigars, cigarettes, pipes and other smoking devices for burning
tobacco and related smoking accessories and in which the sale of other products
is merely incidental. "Retail tobacco store" does not include a tobacco
department or section of a larger commercial establishment or any establishment
with any type of liquor, food, or restaurant license.
   SMOKE OR SMOKING: The carrying, smoking, burning, inhaling, or exhaling of
any kind of lighted pipe, cigar, cigarette, hookah, weed, herbs, or any other
lighted smoking equipment.
   (B)   Prohibited Acts: No person shall smoke in a public place or in any
place of employment or within fifteen feet (15') of any entrance to a public
place or in any place of employment. No person may smoke in any vehicle owned,
leased, or operated by the city or any political subdivision of the city.
Smoking is prohibited in indoor public places and workplaces unless
specifically exempted by subsection (F) of this section.
   (C)   Posting Of Signs; Removal Of Ashtrays:
      1.   "No Smoking" signs or the international "no smoking" symbol,
consisting of pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red
circle with a red bar across it, shall be clearly and conspicuously posted in
each public place and place of employment where smoking is prohibited by this
ordinance by the owner, operator, manager, or other person in control of that
place.
      2.   Each public place and place of employment where smoking is
prohibited by this ordinance shall have posted at every entrance a conspicuous
sign clearly stating that smoking is prohibited.
      3.   All ashtrays shall be removed from any area where smoking is
prohibited by this ordinance by the owner, operator, manager, or other person
having control of the area.
   (D)   Smoking Prohibited In Student Dormitories: Notwithstanding any other
provision of this ordinance, smoking is prohibited in any portion of the living
quarters, including, but not limited to, sleeping rooms, dining areas,
restroom, laundry areas, lobbies, and hallways, of a building used in whole or
in part as a student dormitory that is owned and operated or otherwise utilized
by a public or private institution of higher education.
   (E)   Designation Of Other Nonsmoking Areas: Notwithstanding any other
provision of this ordinance, any employer, owner, occupant, lessee, operator,
manager, or other person in control of any public place or place of employment
may designate a nonenclosed area of a public place or place of employment,
including outdoor areas, as an area where smoking is prohibited provided that
such employer, owner, lessee, or occupant shall conspicuously post signs
prohibiting smoking in the manner described in subsection (C) of this section.
   (F)   Exemptions: Notwithstanding any other provision of this ordinance,
smoking is allowed in the following areas:
      1.   Private residences or dwelling places, except when used as a
childcare, adult daycare, or healthcare facility or any other home based
business open to the public.
      2.   Retail tobacco stores as defined in subsection (A) of this section
in operation prior to the effective date of this ordinance. The retail tobacco
store shall annually file with the department and the local liquor control
commissioner for the city of East Moline by January 31 an affidavit stating the
percentage of its gross income during the prior calendar year that derived from
the sale of loose tobacco, plants, or herbs and cigars, cigarettes, pipes, or
other smoking devices for smoking tobacco and related smoking accessories. Any
retail tobacco store that begins operation after the effective date of this
ordinance may only qualify for an exemption if located in a freestanding
structure occupied solely by the business and smoke from the business does not
migrate into an enclosed area where smoking is prohibited.
      3.   Private and semiprivate rooms in nursing homes and long term care
facilities that are occupied by one or more persons, all of whom are smokers
and have requested in writing to be placed or to remain in a room where smoking
is permitted and the smoke shall not infiltrate other areas of the nursing
home.
      4.   Hotel and motel sleeping rooms that are rented to guests and are
designated as smoking rooms, provided that all smoking rooms on the same floor
must be continuous and smoke from these rooms must not infiltrate into
nonsmoking rooms or other areas where smoking is prohibited. Not more than
twenty five percent (25%) of the rooms rented to guests in a hotel or motel may
be designated as rooms where smoking is allowed. The status of rooms as smoking
or nonsmoking may not be changed, except to permanently add additional
nonsmoking rooms.
   (G)   Entrances, Exits, Windows, And Ventilation Intakes: Smoking is
prohibited within a minimum distance of fifteen feet (15') from entrances,
exits, windows that open, and ventilation intakes that serve an enclosed area
where smoking is prohibited under this ordinance so as to ensure that tobacco
smoke does not enter the area through entrances, exits, open windows, or other
means.
   (H)   Violations:
      1.   A person, corporation, partnership, association or other entity who
violates subsection (B) of this section shall be fined pursuant to this
section. Each day that a violation occurs is a separate violation.
      2.   A person who smokes in an area where smoking is prohibited under
subsection (B) of this section shall be fined in an amount that is not less
than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and not more than two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00). A person who owns, operates, or otherwise controls a public place or
place of employment that violates subsection (B) of this section shall be
fined: a) not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for the first
violation, b) not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for the second
violation within one year after the first violation, and c) not less than two
thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) for each additional violation within
one year after the first violation.
      3.   All violations of this ordinance may be prosecuted within the
municipal code enforcement system (MUNICES).
   (I)   Injunction: The department, a state certified local public health
department, the city of East Moline, or any individual personally affected by
repeated violations may institute, in a circuit court, an action to enjoin
violations of this ordinance. (Ord. 08-02, 2-4-2008)
6-3-54: VEHICLE SOUND AMPLIFICATION SYSTEMS:
   (A)   Prohibited: No driver of any motor vehicle within the city of East
Moline shall operate or permit the operation of any sound amplification system
which can be heard outside the vehicle from seventy five feet (75') or more,
when the vehicle is present upon a highway, unless such system is being
operated to request assistance or warn of a hazardous situation. This section
does not apply to authorized emergency vehicles.
   (B)   Penalty: Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be
subject to a fine of not less than seventy five dollars ($75.00) and not more
than three hundred dollars ($300.00). In the event a person accused with a
violation of this section does not wish to contest the allegation, said person
may pay to the city of East Moline police headquarters, within seven (7) days
of the issuance of the notice of violation, a penalty in the sum of one hundred
dollars ($100.00), which payment shall be in full satisfaction of the
violation. (Ord. 09-02, 2-17-2009)
6-3-55: POSSESSION OF WEAPONS AND AMMUNITION 1 :
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to sell, manufacture, purchase, possess or carry
any bludgeon, blackjack, slingshot, sandclub, sandbag, metal knuckles or other
knuckle weapon regardless of its composition, throwing star, or any knife,
commonly referred to as a switchblade knife, which has a blade that opens
automatically by hand pressure applied to a button, spring or other device in
the handle of the knife, or a ballistic knife, which is a device that propels a
knifelike blade as a projectile by means of a coil spring, elastic material or
compressed gas.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to carry or possess with intent to use the same
unlawfully against another, a dagger, dirk, billy club, dangerous knife, razor,
stiletto, broken bottle or other piece of glass, stun gun or taser or any other
dangerous or deadly weapon or instrument of like character.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful to carry or possess any pistol, revolver, stun
gun, taser or other firearm unless that person possesses a currently valid
firearm owner's identification card, unless said weapon is broken down in a
nonfunctioning state.
   (D)   Subsections (A), (B), and (C) of this section shall not apply to law
enforcement officers or security officers of a school, college or university or
to students carrying or possessing firearms for use in training courses,
parades, hunting, target shooting on school ranges, or otherwise with the
consent of school authorities and which firearms are transported unloaded
enclosed in a suitable case, box or transportation package.
   (E)   No person may acquire or possess any firearm, stun gun, or taser
within the city limits without having in his or her possession a firearm
owner's identification card previously issued in his or her name by the
department of state police under the provisions set forth in 430 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 65.
   (F)   No person may acquire or possess firearm ammunition within the city
limits without having in his or her possession a firearm owner's identification
card previously issued in his or her name by the department of state police
under the provisions set forth in 430 Illinois Compiled Statutes 65.
   (G)   Subsections (E) and (F) of this section shall not apply to law
enforcement officers, members of the military acting in official duties,
members of the military acting in ceremonial duties with blank ammunition,
nonresident hunters with nonresident hunting licenses where hunting is
permitted, or nonresidents whose firearms are unloaded and in an enclosed case.
   (H)   Hunting will be allowed on individual parcels larger than sixty (60)
acres that are zoned Agricultural. All hunters must follow Illinois Department
of Natural Resources Rules and Regulations for deer, small game, and upland
hunting on qualified parcels. (Ord. 09-13, 7-6-2009; amd. Ord. 17-02, 1-17-
2017)
 
Notes
1 1. 720 ILCS 5/24; 430 ILCS 65.
6-3-56: SOCIAL HOST LIABILITY FOR UNDERAGE ALCOHOL AND DRUG USE:
   (A)   Definitions: For the purpose of this chapter, the following
definitions shall apply specifically to this Section, provided that the
definitions set forth in the Illinois Liquor Control Act of 1935 (235 ILCS 5/1-
1, et. seq.) or elsewhere in this Code are not intended to be superseded, but
supplemented herewith.
            Ethyl alcohol, hydraled oxide of ethyl, or spirts of wine, whiskey, rum, brandy, gin
ALCOHOL:    or any other distilled spirits including dilutions and mixtures thereof from
            whatever source or by whatever process produced
            Alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer and every liquid or solid containing alcohol,
ALCOHOLIC   spirits, wine, beer and which contains one-half of one percent or more of alcohol by
BEVERAGE:   volume and which is fit for beverage purposes either alone or when diluted, mixed,
            or combined with other substances.
CONVEYANCE: Any vehicle, trailer, watercraft or container operated for the transportation of
            person or property.
EVENT OR    Any group of three or more persons who have assembled or gathered together for a
GATHERING:  social occasion or other activity.
HOST:       To aid, conduct, allow, entertain, organize, supervise, control or permit a
            gathering or event.
ILLICIT     Any drug, substance or compound prohibited by law, including drugs prescribed by a
DREGS:      physician which are in possession of or used by someone other than the person whom
            the drug was prescribed.
            Any person having legal custody of a juvenile:
PARENT:        1.   As a natural, adoptive parent, or step-parent;
               2.   As a legal guardian; or
               3.   As a person to whom legal custody has been given by order of the court.
PERSON:     Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, corporation or any association of one
            or more individuals.
            Any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access and
PUBLIC      includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways and the common areas of schools,
PLACE:      hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, transport facilities, parks,
            businesses or parking lots.
            Controlling access to alcoholic beverages at the event or gathering; controlling the
            quantity of alcoholic beverages at the event or garnering; verifying the age of
            persons attending the event or gathering by inspecting driver's licenses or other
            government-issued identification cards to ensure that minors do not consume
REASONABLE  alcoholic beverages while at the event or gathering; and supervising the activities
STEPS:      of minors at the event or gathering calling for police assistance in the event
            people under twenty-one (21) are in possession of alcohol at the event or gathering
            or advising law enforcement in advance of departing one's residence that the owner
            will be away and no underage person is authorized to be present and consume alcohol
            at the owners' residence.
RELIGIOUS   The possession, consumption and dispensation of alcohol or any alcoholic beverage
CEREMONY:   for the purpose of conducting any bona fide rite or religious ceremony.
            Any home, yard, farm, field, land, apartment, condominium, hotel or motel room or
RESIDENCE   other dwelling unit, or a hall or meeting room, park or any other place of assembly,
OR          public or private, whether occupied as a dwelling or specifically for a party or
PREMISES:   other social function, and whether owned, leased, rented, or used with or without
            permission or compensation.
            The costs associated with responses by law enforcement, fire or other emergency
            response providers to an event of gathering, including but not limited to:
               1.   Salaries and benefits of law enforcement, code enforcement, fire or other
            emergency response personnel for the amount of time spent responding to, remaining
            at, or otherwise dealing with an event or gathering, and the administrative costs
RESPONSE    attribute to such response;
COSTS:         2.   Costs of any medical treatment for any law enforcement, fire or other
            emergency response personnel injured responding to, remaining at, or otherwise
            dealing with an event or garnering;
               3.   Costs of repairing any city equipment or property damaged, or the cost of
            the use of any such equipment, in responding to, remaining at, or leaving the scene
            of an event of gathering.
UNDERAGE    Any individual under twenty-one (21) years of age.
PERSON:
 
   (B)   Prohibited conduct and responsibilities of persons hosting an event or
gathering: except as permitted by state law, it is unlawful for any person(s)
to:
      1.   Host, permit, allow, or fail to take reasonable steps to prevent an
event or gathering:
         (a)   At any residence, premises, or on any other private or public
property or in any conveyance over which that person has control or a
reasonable opportunity to control;
         (b)   Where illicit drugs, alcohol, alcoholic beverages are present;
         (c)   When the person knows or reasonably should know that an underage
person will or does:
            (1)   Consume any illicit drugs, alcohol, or alcoholic beverages;
or
            (2)   Possess any illicit drugs, alcohol or alcoholic beverages.
         (d)   The person fails to take reasonable steps to prevent possession
or consumption by the underage person(s).
      2.   A person who hosts an event of gathering does not have to be present
at the event or gathering to be liable under this section.
      3.   A person who hosts an event or gathering shall be rebuttably
presumed to have actual or constructive knowledge that underage persons have
consumed illicit drugs, alcohol or alcoholic beverages if such person is
present at the location of the event of gathering at the time an underage
person consumes illicit drugs, alcohol or any alcoholic beverages.
      4.   It is the affirmative duty of any person who hosts an event or
gathering at his or her residence or premises, public place, or any other
residence or premises under his or her control, or in any conveyance under his
or her control, to take all reasonable steps to prevent the consumption of
illicit drugs, alcohol or alcoholic beverages by any underage person at such
event or garnering.
      5.   A person who hosts an event or gathering shall be deemed to have
actual or constructive knowledge that an underage person has consumed or is
consuming illicit drugs, alcohol or alcoholic beverages at the event or
garnering if the person has not taken all reasonable steps to prevent the
consumption of illicit drugs, alcohol or alcoholic beverages by underage
persons.
      6.   A person who hosts an event of gathering shall not be in violation
of this section if her or she:
         (a)   Seeks assistance from the City Police Department or other law
enforcement agency to remove any person who refuses to abide by the person's
performance of the duties imposed by this section; or
         (b)   Terminates the event or gathering because the person has been
unable to prevent underage person from consuming illicit drugs, alcohol or
alcoholic beverages despite having taken all reasonable steps to do so, as long
as such request or termination is made before any other person makes a
complaint to the City Police Department or other law enforcement agency about
the event or gathering.
      7.   This section shall not apply to conduct involving the use of alcohol
or alcoholic beverages that occur at a religious ceremony or exclusively
between an underage person and his or her parent.
      8.   A person is responsible for and subject to penalties, for violating
this section if the person intentionally aids, advises, hires, counsels,
conspires with or otherwise procures another person in hosting an event or
gathering where that person has actual or constructive knowledge that underage
person will be consuming alcohol, alcoholic beverages or illicit drugs at such
event or gathering.
   (C)   Penalties:
      1.   Responsible for Costs: Any person found to be in violation of this
section shall be responsible for any and all response costs.
      2.   Fines: Any person who violates or assists in the violations of this
section shall be deemed to have committed a petty offense and shall be fined
not more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each such violation.
Each day on which, or during which, a violation occurs shall constitute a
separate offense.
         (a)   The first violation of this section shall be punishable by a
fine of not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) nor more than seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00).
         (b)   The second violation of this section by the same person, within
a twelve month period, shall be punishable by a fine of no less than five
hundred dollars ($500.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00).
         (c)   A third or subsequent violation of this section by the same
person, within a twelve month period, shall be punishable by a fine of seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00).
      3.   Enforcement: Violations of this section may be enforced by issuance
of a notice of violation for the fine and response costs amounts and/or by
issuance of a notice to appear. (Ord. 17-15, 6-19-2017)
6-3-57: OPERATION OF AUTOMOBILE RACE AFTER 10:15 P.M.
   (A)   Definitions: For purposes of this section, the following words shall
having the meanings set forth below unless the context clearly indicates
otherwise:
 
AUTOMOBILE RACE: An amusement event whereby automobiles or other motor vehicles
                 are driven competitively against each other or against time.
PERSON:          Any individual, partnership, corporation, or other association
                 or entity, trustee or legal representative.
PROPRIETOR:      Any person operating an automobile race.
 
   (B)   Prohibition: No proprietor shall conduct or operate an automobile race
within the City of East Moline after 10:15 P.M.
   (C)   Penalty: Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be
subject to a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and not more
than seven hundred and fifty dollars ($750.00). Said violation shall be deemed
a misdemeanor. (Ord. 19-10, 3-4-2019)
CHAPTER 4
ANIMALS
SECTION:
6-4-1: Cruelty To Animals
6-4-2: Dangerous Animals
6-4-2.1: Definitions
6-4-2.2: General Regulations; Fine
6-4-2.3: Impoundment And Disposition
6-4-2.4: Bites And Attacks
6-4-2.5: Dogs And Cats Running At Large
6-4-2.6: Administrative Hearing
6-4-2.7: Keeping Of Dangerous Dogs
6-4-2.8: Keeping Of Vicious Dogs
6-4-3: Noises
6-4-4: Strays
6-4-5: Killing Dangerous Animals
6-4-6: Diseased Animals
6-4-7: Housing
6-4-8: Location Of Animal Run, Pen, Etc.
6-4-9: Hindering Officer Impounding Animals
6-4-10: Dangerous Reptiles Prohibited From Sale
6-4-11: Shooting Or Molesting Birds
6-4-12: Beekeeping Within City Is Prohibited
6-4-13: Animal Trapping
6-4-14: Excessive Or Habitual Violations
6-4-1: CRUELTY TO ANIMALS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to be cruel to any animal. Cruelty to an
animal shall consist of one of the following acts:
   (A)   By overloading, overdriving, overworking, cruelly beating, torturing,
tormenting, mutilating, or cruelly killing any animal, or causing or knowingly
allowing the same to be done.
   (B)   By failing to provide any animal in a person's charge or custody as
owner or otherwise with a sufficient quantity of good quality, wholesome food
and water or with adequate shelter and protection from the weather.
   (C)   By failing to provide veterinary care when needed to prevent
suffering.
   (D)   By abandoning any animal in a pound, veterinary clinic or on the
premises of another or any place where an animal may become a public charge or
may suffer hunger, injury, or exposure.
   (E)   By failing to provide humane care and treatment.
   (F)   By selling, offering for sale, bartering, or giving away as a pet or
novelty any rabbit or any other animal which has been dyed, colored, or
otherwise treated to impart an artificial color thereto.
   (G)   By knowingly poisoning or causing to be poisoned any dog or other
domestic animal except by a licensed veterinarian or humane shelter or pound.
   (H)   By promoting, conducting, carrying on, advertising, collecting money
for or in any other manner assisting or aiding in the presentation for purposes
of sport, wagering, or entertainment any show, exhibition, program, or other
activity involving a fight between two (2) or more animals or the intentional
killing of any animal or by engaging in any act including attending such a
show, exhibition, program or other activity which may be reasonably said to
further such illegal activity including each and every act prohibited by 510
Illinois Compiled Statutes 70/4.01.
The East Moline community service officer, or any officer of the East Moline
police department, has the authority to enter upon any private property and
seize for safekeeping any animal that is found in any of the conditions found
under the cruelty to animal ordinance of the city of East Moline. The animal
shall be removed and placed in the East Moline animal shelter, or other place
of safekeeping, at the owner's expense.
The owner or responsible person for any animal seized by the city of East
Moline must take corrective action within seven (7) days of the seizure to have
the animal returned. Any animal held after the seventh day will be eligible for
adoption by the public or destroyed. (Ord. 04-15, 5-3-2004)
6-4-2: DANGEROUS ANIMALS:
6-4-2.1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this section
6-4-2, the following terms shall have, unless the context indicates otherwise,
the meanings ascribed to them:
ANIMAL: Any animal, poultry, bird, reptile or any other dumb creature, but does
not include any human being.
ANIMAL CONTROL FACILITY: Any facility operated by or under contract for the
state of Illinois, Rock Island County, or the city of East Moline, Illinois,
for the purpose of impounding or harboring seized, stray, homeless, abandoned
or unwanted dogs, cats and other animals, and also means any veterinary
hospital or clinic operated by a veterinarian or veterinarians licensed under
the veterinary medicine and surgery practice act of 1994 1  and amendments
thereto which operates for the above mentioned purpose in addition to its
customary purposes.
ANIMAL SHELTER: A facility operated, owned or maintained by a duly incorporated
humane society, animal welfare society, or other nonprofit organization for the
purpose of providing for and promoting the welfare, protection, and humane
treatment of animals. "Animal shelter" also means any veterinary hospital or
clinic operated by a veterinarian or veterinarians licensed under the
veterinary medicine and surgery practice act of 1994 2  and amendments thereto
which operates for the above mentioned purpose in addition to its customary
purposes.
CAT: Except where specifically distinguished, includes all animals of the
feline species of the age of four (4) months or older.
CHIEF OF POLICE: The chief of the city of East Moline police department or his
or her designee.
CITY: The city of East Moline, Illinois, a municipal corporation.
CITY CODE: The city of East Moline code of ordinances.
COMMUNITY SERVICE OFFICER: Any employee of the community service section of the
city of East Moline police department having responsibility for animal control
within the city, and shall include his or her designees.
COMMUNITY SERVICE SECTION: The community service section of the city of East
Moline police department.
CONFINE, CONFINED OR CONFINEMENT: The restriction of an animal at all times by
such animal's owner or keeper to an escape proof building or other enclosure
separate from other animals and the public.
DANGEROUS ANIMAL: Any "animal", as defined herein, of any species considered to
be ferocious, mischievous or intractable at common law, including lions,
tigers, other jungle, desert or mountain cats, bears, elephants, wolves, foxes,
raccoons, monkeys, apes, poisonous or constrictor snakes or lizards and shall
also mean any animal of any other species, but excluding dogs, known to its
owner to be dangerous or any animal which has given its owner or possessor
reason to know that it is dangerous.
DANGEROUS DOG: Any individual dog which when either unmuzzled, unleashed,
attended or unattended by its owner or keeper, or a member of the owner's or
keeper's family, in a vicious or terrorizing manner, approaches, in an apparent
attitude of attack, any person upon a street, sidewalk or any public grounds or
places, or any property other than the property of the animal's owner or
keeper.
DEPARTMENT: The city of East Moline police department.
DOG: Except where specifically distinguished, includes all animals of the
canine species of the age of four (4) months or older.
ENCLOSURE: A fence or structure of at least six feet (6') in height, forming or
causing an enclosure suitable to prevent the entry of young children and
suitable to confine a vicious dog in conjunction with other measures which may
be taken by the owner or keeper, such as tethering, and which shall be securely
enclosed and locked and designed with secure sides, top and bottom and shall be
designed to prevent the animal from escaping from the enclosure.
FOUND TO BE A DANGEROUS DOG: The chief of police has, after notice and an
opportunity to be heard by the dog's owner or keeper, determined that the dog
is a "dangerous dog" as defined in this section and has entered a written order
based on that determination.
FOUND TO BE A VICIOUS DOG: The chief of police has, after notice and an
opportunity to be heard by the dog's owner or keeper, determined that the dog
is a "vicious dog" as defined in this section and has entered a written order
based on that determination.
GUARD OR SENTRY DOG: A dog specifically trained and used primarily to perform
guard, sentry or other security duty including, without limitation, defending,
patrolling, or protecting property, life or safety, at a commercial
establishment, and registered with the animal control officer of the East
Moline police department; however, this definition does not include personally
owned pets kept on private residential property that also provide security.
GUIDE OR SUPPORT DOG: A dog specifically trained and used to perform services
for the sight or hearing impaired or to provide support services for a disabled
person.
HAS BEEN BITTEN: A person or animal has been seized with the teeth or jaws of
another animal so that the person or animal seized has been nipped, gripped,
wounded or pierced and further means and includes any contact of animal saliva
with any break or abrasion of the skin of the person or animal.
IMPOUND, IMPOUNDED OR IMPOUNDMENT: Confinement at the Rock Island County animal
control facility or at a licensed veterinarian's place of business.
INOCULATION: The injection, subcutaneously or in such other manner as may be
approved by the Illinois department of agriculture of an antirabies vaccine
meeting standards approved by the Illinois department of agriculture or by the
United States department of agriculture.
KENNEL OPERATOR: Any person who operates an establishment, other than an animal
control facility, veterinary hospital, or animal shelter, where dogs or dogs
and cats are maintained for boarding, training or similar purposes for a fee or
compensation; or who sells, offers to sell, exchange, or offers for adoption
with or without charge dogs or dogs and cats which he has produced and raised.
A person who owns, has possession of, or harbors four (4) or less females
capable of reproduction, shall not be considered a kennel operator.
LEASH: A cord, rope, strap or chain no longer than six feet (6') in length
which shall be securely fastened to the collar or harness of an animal and
shall be of sufficient strength to keep the animal under control.
LICENSED VETERINARIAN: A veterinarian duly licensed as such under the laws of
the state of Illinois or of any other state which, by law, provides for the
licensing of veterinarians.
MUZZLED: The practice of preventing an animal from opening its mouth fully by
means of any commercially manufactured muzzle or other humane device approved
by a community service officer.
OWNER OR KEEPER: Means and includes any person, including any individual,
partnership, society, association, corporation, firm or other legal entity, or
any public or private institution, who:
   (A)   Has a right of property in an animal;
   (B)   Harbors or keeps an animal;
   (C)   Has an animal in the person's care;
   (D)   Acts as custodian of an animal; or
   (E)   Knowingly suffers or permits any dog or cat to remain on or about any
premises within the city under said person's charge or control.
PEACE OFFICER: Any city of East Moline police officer or any other law
enforcement officer with authority to act within the jurisdiction of the city.
PET SHOP OPERATOR: Any person who sells, offers to sell, exchange, or offers
for adoption with or without charge or donation dogs, cats, birds, fish,
reptiles, or other animals customarily obtained as pets in the state of
Illinois. However, a person who sells only such animals that he has produced
and raised shall not be considered a pet shop operator under this section
6-4-2 and a veterinary hospital or clinic operated by a veterinarian or
veterinarians licensed under the veterinary medicine and surgery practice act
of 1994 3  and amendments thereto shall not be considered a pet shop operator
under this section
6-4-2.
RUN LINE: The system of tying a dog in place with either rope or chain having a
tensile strength of at least three hundred (300) pounds and which allows the
dog freedom of movement only on the property of the dog's owner or keeper.
RUNNING AT LARGE OR AT LARGE: Any time an animal is:
   (A)   Off its owner's or keeper's property, is not confined within a vehicle
being driven or parked upon the street while subject to the control of a
competent person, and is not controlled by a leash and "at heel" beside a
competent person to whose commands the animal is obedient; or
   (B)   On its owner's or keeper's property without being contained on the
property by means of a fence, chain, leash, competent supervision, or other
visible means of restraint sufficient to protect persons or animals not on that
property.
VICIOUS DOG: (A) Any individual dog that when unprovoked bites or attacks a
human being or other animal either on public or private property;
   (B)   Any individual dog with a known propensity, tendency or disposition to
attack without provocation, to cause injury or to otherwise endanger the safety
of humans or domestic animals;
   (C)   Any individual dog that has a trait or characteristic and a generally
known reputation for viciousness, dangerousness or unprovoked attacks upon
humans or other animals, unless handled in a particular manner or with special
equipment;
   (D)   Any individual dog that attacks a human being or domestic animal
without provocation; or
   (E)   Any individual dog which has been found to be a dangerous dog upon
three (3) separate occasions by a court or an administrative hearing unit of
competent jurisdiction as set forth in this section
6-4-2.
However, no dog shall be deemed vicious if it bites, attacks, or menaces an
adult trespasser on the property of its owner or keeper, or harms or menaces
anyone who has tormented or abused it, or is a professionally trained dog for
law enforcement duties. Vicious dogs shall not be classified in a manner that
is specific as to breed.
WILD ANIMAL: Any naturally wild animal. (Ord. 06-21, 9-18-2006)
 
Notes
1 1. 225 ILCS 115/1 et seq.
2 1. 225 ILCS 115/1 et seq.
3 1. 224 ILCS 115/1 et seq.
6-4-2.2: GENERAL REGULATIONS; FINE:
   (A)   Except for purposes of a public exhibition upon seven (7) days' prior
written notice to and prior written authorization from the chief of police, no
person shall possess any dangerous animal in the city, and no person shall
permit any dangerous animal within the city for such public exhibition to run
at large nor shall any person lead such an animal with a leash, whether the
animal is muzzled or unmuzzled, on any street or in any public place within the
city.
   (B)   Any person violating this section shall be subject to a mandatory fine
of not less than seventy five dollars ($75.00) plus court costs, nor more than
seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) plus court costs. (Ord. 06-21, 9-18-2006)
6-4-2.3: IMPOUNDMENT AND DISPOSITION:
   (A)   Dangerous animals not in compliance with this section
6-4-2 are subject to impound by the department and disposal as provided in this
section
6-4-2. If such animal cannot be safely taken up and impounded, the animal may
be slain or dispatched by any peace officer.
   (B)   In all cases where an animal slain or dispatched pursuant to this
section has bitten any person or animal, it shall be the duty of the community
service officer or peace officer to treat the carcass and head as it would any
animal displaying symptoms of rabies.
   (C)   In addition to the impound and disposal procedures set forth in this
section, any person violating this section shall be subject to a mandatory fine
of not less than seventy five dollars ($75.00) plus court costs, nor more than
seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) plus court costs. (Ord. 06-21, 9-18-2006)
6-4-2.4: BITES AND ATTACKS:
   (A)   Any person owning or keeping a dog or cat or other animal which bites
or attacks or approaches a person on a street, sidewalk or public place in an
apparent attitude of attack shall immediately report the same in writing to the
department.
   (B)   Any person who has been bitten or so attacked or approached by a dog,
cat or other animal shall file a written report of such event with the
department within twenty four (24) hours after such event occurred.
   (C)   Reports made pursuant to subsections (A) and (B) of this section shall
include the name of the person completing the report, the victim's name,
address and telephone number; the animal's owner's or keeper's name, address
and telephone number; a description of the animal; the location where the bite,
attack, or approach occurred and the date and time of same; the description and
location of the wound, if any; the name of the victim's treating physician, if
any; and, if the bite, attack, or approach occurred on the property of the
animal's owner or keeper, the purpose for which the victim was on the owner's
or keeper's property.
   (D)   Any animal that has bitten any human being is subject to impound by
the department and disposal as provided in this section
6-4-2. (Ord. 06-21, 9-18-2006)
6-4-2.5: DOGS AND CATS RUNNING AT LARGE:
   (A)   No person shall permit any dog or cat to run at large or be at large
within the city. Any dog or cat found running at large within the city is
subject to apprehension and impound by the department and disposal as provided
in this section
6-4-2. No dog confined as a result of running at large will be released until
proof of rabies vaccination and a valid license has been provided to the animal
shelter facility.
   (B)   For purposes of this section, "permit" means any of the following:
      1.   To affirmatively permit or allow;
      2.   Inaction by one who knew or should have known the dog or cat was at
large and failed to end the "at large" behavior;
      3.   Placement of the dog or cat in a physical location or a set of
circumstances such that it is unreasonable to assume the animal will not run at
large or be at large. (Ord. 06-21, 9-18-2006)
6-4-2.6: ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING:
   (A)   Notice: The date of service of any notice under this section shall be
either the date of personal service or three (3) days from the date that the
notice was mailed.
   (B)   Impound: If a community service officer or peace officer determines
that probable cause exists to believe that a dog is a dangerous dog, the
community service officer or peace officer shall order the dog's owner or
keeper to confine the dog pending an administrative hearing. Failure to obey
said order constitutes a violation of this section, at which time the city may
take possession of the dog, and confine the dog pending an administrative
hearing. The owner or keeper of the dog shall be responsible for the cost of
impoundment pending the hearing. If a community service officer or peace
officer determines that probable cause exists to believe that a dog is a
vicious dog, the dog shall be impounded. Any owner or keeper of any dog
impounded under this section shall be responsible for the costs incurred during
the period of impoundment, such as food, veterinary care, and board, unless
following an administrative hearing the dog is found not to be vicious. A dog
impounded under this section will not be returned to the owner or keeper or any
other person unless following an administrative hearing the dog is found not to
be vicious. Dogs found to be vicious will be euthanized by the community
service section, or turned over by the city to an appropriate agent or agency
for euthanization. Any owner or keeper shall further be responsible for all
costs incurred by the city in euthanizing the vicious dog.
   (C)   Administrative Hearing To Be Conducted: An administrative hearing
shall be conducted to determine whether or not the dog is a dangerous dog or a
vicious dog.
   (D)   Notice And Time For Hearing: The owner or keeper of the dog shall be
served with a notice of the administrative hearing, either personally or by
first class mail to the owner's or keeper's last known address. The
administrative hearing shall be held promptly within not less than five (5)
working days nor more than fifteen (15) working days following service of the
notice upon the owner or keeper of the dog. The service of a notice to appear
in the circuit court on an ordinance violation charge, even if that notice
refers to charges of vicious or dangerous dogs, shall not start the running of
the clock for the administrative hearing process.
   (E)   Conduct Of Hearing: The administrative hearing shall be open to the
public and shall be recorded by a tape recorder, stenographer, or other
reliable means. The chief of police shall serve as the hearing officer. The
hearing officer may admit into evidence all relevant evidence, including
incident reports and the affidavits of witnesses, and live testimony. The
hearing officer shall determine, based upon a preponderance of the evidence,
whether or not the dog is a dangerous dog or a vicious dog. If the notice of
the administrative hearing charged that the dog is vicious but does not charge
that the dog is dangerous, the hearing officer may nevertheless determine that
the dog is dangerous rather than vicious, if the evidence so warrants.
   (F)   Notice Of Determination: The dog's owner or keeper shall be notified
in writing of the hearing officer's determination either personally or by first
class mail to the owner's or keeper's last known address.
      1.   If the hearing officer determines that the dog is neither dangerous
nor vicious, the owner or keeper may redeem the dog, if impounded, as otherwise
provided in this section
6-4-2. The owner or keeper shall not be required to pay those daily impoundment
fees that are attributable solely to the pendency of the administrative hearing
but shall be required to pay all other fees.
      2.   If the hearing officer determines that the dog is dangerous, the
owner or keeper may redeem the dog, subject to the requirements of section
6-4-2.7 of this chapter.
      3.   If the hearing officer determines that the dog is vicious, the
animal may not be redeemed, and the notice of determination shall also state
that the dog shall be euthanized within five (5) working days of the date of
the notice unless the owner or keeper requests a stay of ten (10) working days
during which to file a complaint for court review of the hearing officer's
determination pursuant to the provisions of the Illinois administrative review
law, 735 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3-101 et seq., and amendments thereto.
   (G)   Failure To Appear: If the dog's owner or keeper cannot be found or
fails to appear in person or by legal counsel for the administrative hearing,
the hearing officer shall make a determination by default, without need of any
testimony or other evidence, that the dog is vicious or dangerous, as well as
abandoned, and the dog shall be euthanized without further notice to the owner
or keeper.
   (H)   Euthanasia: Upon the hearing officer's determination that the dog is
vicious, it shall be euthanized after five (5) working days from the date of
the notice of determination to the owner or keeper, unless the owner or keeper
within that time period delivers to the office of the chief of police a request
to stay the euthanasia for a period of ten (10) working days for the purpose of
filing a complaint for court review of the hearing officer's determination
pursuant to the provisions of the Illinois administrative review law, 735
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3-101 et seq., and amendments thereto. If, at the
end of that period, the city has not received notice that a complaint has been
filed, the dog shall be euthanized without further notice to the owner or
keeper.
   (I)   Appeal: Any person aggrieved by the hearing officer's decision may
appeal to the circuit court pursuant to the provisions of the Illinois
administrative review law, 735 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3-101 et seq., and
amendments thereto. (Ord. 06-21, 9-18-2006)
6-4-2.7: KEEPING OF DANGEROUS DOGS:
   (A)   No person shall own, keep or harbor any dog found to be a dangerous
dog inconsistently with this section within the city. A dog found to be a
dangerous dog and kept in a manner which violates this section is hereby
declared a nuisance and is subject to impound by the department and disposal as
provided in this section
6-4-2.
   (B)   The owner or keeper of a dog found to be a dangerous dog must post in
clear view at all times, and at the most conspicuous or prominent point of
entry to the property, a sign indicating the presence of a dangerous dog on the
property. The sign shall be at least eight and one-half inches by eleven inches
(81/2" x 11") in size, and shall contain in words and pictures a clear
indication that a dangerous dog is on the property.
   (C)   A dog found to be a dangerous dog must be muzzled and controlled by a
leash of no more than three feet (3') in length and of appropriate strength
whenever the dog is not contained within the owner's or keeper's residence or
an enclosure located on the owner's or keeper's property from which the dog
cannot escape. A dog found to be a dangerous dog must be spayed or neutered
within fourteen (14) days of the date of the written notice of determination,
and the owner or keeper must provide written proof of such spaying or neutering
to the community service section.
   (D)   No person shall transfer, sell or give away to any person within the
city any dog that has been found to be a dangerous dog, unless the transferor,
prior to the transfer, informs the receiving party of the finding and notifies
the community service section or department of the pertinent details of the
transfer, including, without limitation, the address where the dog will be
located after the transfer.
A dog found to be a dangerous dog on a second occasion, shall be secured in an
enclosure located on the owner's or keeper's property from which the dog cannot
escape.
   (E)   Any owner or keeper of a dog found to be a dangerous dog must, within
fourteen (14) days of the date of the hearing officer's determination that the
dog is dangerous, present said dog to the city's animal control facility for
the purpose of injecting a computer microchip ("microchip") which identifies
the dog and contains information concerning the fact that the dog has been
found to be a dangerous dog. The dog's owner or keeper shall be responsible for
paying the reasonable costs associated with injecting the microchip. Failure to
present said dog to the city's "animal control facility" as herein described
shall be deemed a violation of this code.
   (F)   In addition to the impound and disposal procedures set forth in this
section, any person violating this section shall be subject to a mandatory fine
of not less than seventy five dollars ($75.00) plus court costs, nor more than
seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) plus court costs, and to any and all
other legal and equitable remedies available to the city by law to abate said
nuisances. (Ord. 06-21, 9-18-2006)
6-4-2.8: KEEPING OF VICIOUS DOGS:
   (A)   No person shall own, keep, harbor, sell, abandon, or give away any dog
found to be a vicious dog within the city, whether or not owned by such person,
except to relinquish the dog for impoundment. Such dogs are hereby declared
nuisances and are subject to impound by the department and disposal as provided
in this section
6-4-2.
   (B)   In addition to the impound and disposal procedures set forth in this
section, any person violating this section shall be subject to a mandatory fine
of not less than seventy five dollars ($75.00) plus court costs, nor more than
seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) plus court costs, and to any and all
other legal and equitable remedies available to the city by law to abate said
nuisances. (Ord. 06-21, 9-18-2006)
6-4-3: NOISES:
It shall be unlawful to harbor or keep any animal which disturbs the peace by
loud noises at any time of the day or night. (Ord. 04-15, 5-3-2004)
6-4-4: STRAYS:
It shall be unlawful to permit any cattle, horses, swine, sheep, goats or
poultry to run at large in the city. Any such animal running at large in any
public place in the city shall be impounded in the manner provided in chapter 5
of this title. It shall be further unlawful to picket or tie any such animal in
any street of the city for the purpose of grazing or feeding. (Ord. 04-15, 5-3-
2004)
6-4-5: KILLING DANGEROUS ANIMALS:
The members of the police department and the community service officer are
authorized to kill any dangerous animal of any kind when it is necessary for
the protection of any person or property. (Ord. 04-15, 5-3-2004)
6-4-6: DISEASED ANIMALS:
   (A)   Running At Large Prohibited; Examination Required: No domestic animal
afflicted with an infectious or communicable disease shall be allowed to run at
large, or to be exposed in any public place, or any other place whereby the
health of man or animal may be affected. The community service officer and/or
health inspector shall require the owner of such animal diseased, or suspected
of disease, to be examined by a veterinarian of the owner's choice, and at the
owner's expense to determine the presence or absence of communicable disease.
   (B)   Results Of Exam Reported: It shall be the duty of the examining
veterinarian to report to the community service officer, and/or health
inspector, the results of such animal examination upon completion of necessary
testing or observation.
   (C)   Preventing Spread Of Disease: It shall be the duty of the health
inspector to secure disposition of such diseased animal, should the
veterinarian fail to report, and to make necessary recommendations, if needed,
to prevent further spread of disease. (Ord. 04-15, 5-3-2004)
6-4-7: HOUSING:
   A.   No person shall cause or allow any stable, pen, coop or place where any
animal is or may be kept to become unclean, emit foul odors, or unwholesome.
Chickens must be well cared for, fed, and watered in a manner that does not
attract vermin or contribute to the breeding of insects.
   B.   It shall be unlawful to keep or raise any exotic animals, exotic
reptiles, swine or pigs, horses, cows, goats, sheep, roosters, breeding rabbits
or other fowl within the city limits of East Moline.
   C.   Chickens shall be permitted with the written approval of the city.
Landowners or tenants seeking to house or raise chickens must first apply and
be approved by the city. Applicants shall meet the following criteria:
      1.   File an application seeking to house or raise chickens which
includes a twenty-five dollars ($25.00) registration fee. Registration renewal
is required annually.
      2.   The maximum number of animals shall not exceed four (4).
      3.   Provide adequate housing, shelter, enclosure.
         (a)   Shall be designed to provide safe and healthy living conditions
for chickens within a minimum of four (4) squared feet per bird.
         (b)   Shall be properly secure on all sides, provides adequate
ventilation, and access points to allow proper cleaning of the structure and
feeding of the birds.
         (c)   The housing, shelter, or enclosure shall be in the rear of the
yard and adhere to the required setbacks.
            (1)   Chickens, fowls, or their housing shall not be within fifty
feet (50') of any adjoining structure or lot line.
            (2)   No animal run, pen, shed or house hereafter erected, repaired
or reconstructed shall be permitted within twenty-five feet (25') of a
neighboring building or structure designed for or permitting human habitation.
         (d)   The housing, shelter, or encloser and surrounding area must be
properly maintained. All trash and accumulated droppings shall be removed in a
timely manner.
      4.   Predators, Rodents, Insects And Parasites: The applicant shall take
necessary action to reduce the attraction of predators and rodents and the
potential infestation of insects and parasites. Chickens found to be infested
with insects and parasites. Chickens found to be infested with insects and
parasites that may result in unhealthy conditions to human habitation shall be
removed at the request of the city official or his/her designee.
      5.   Odor And Noise Impact:
         (a)   Odors from chickens, chicken manure or other chicken related
substances shall not be perceptible beyond the boundaries of the permitted
tract of land.
         (b)   Chicken Noises. It shall be unlawful to harbor or keep any
animal which disturbs the peace by loud noises at any time of the day or night.
      6.   Chickens At Large:
         (a)   No chickens or other fowls shall be permitted to be at-large.
         (b)   Chickens shall not be permitted to roam off the applicant’s
property.
         (c)   Chickens must be contained in the housing, shelter, or enclosure
at all times.
      7.   Feed And Water:
         (a)   Chickens shall be provided with access to feed and clean water
at all times. The feed and water shall beunavaible to rodents, wild birds and
predators.
      8.   Unlawful Acts:
         (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep chickens in
violation of any provision of this chapter or any other provision of the East
Moline, Illinois code of ordinances.
         (b)   It shall be unlawful for any owner, renter or leaseholder of
property to allow chickens to be kept on the property in violation of the
provisions of this chapter.
         (c)   No person shall keep chicken inside a single-family dwelling
unit, multifamily dwelling unit(s) or rental unit.
         (d)   No person shall slaughter any chickens within the City of East
Moline, Illinois.
         (e)   No person shall keep a rooster.
         (f)   No person shall keep chickens on a vacant or uninhabited tract
of land.
         (g)   Any person found in violation of the section shall be subject to
chapter, general penalty, and fee schedule.
   D.   Current landowners or tenants legally conforming to section
6-4-7: Housing, Ordinance 04-15, 5-3-2004, prior to the amendments shall be
grandfathered. The passing of this section shall not exclude the annual housing
registration with the City of East Moline.
(Ord. 04-15, 5-3-2004; amd. Ord. 25-03, 2-3-2025)
6-4-8: LOCATION OF ANIMAL RUN, PEN, ETC.:
No animal run, pen, shed or house hereafter erected, repaired or reconstructed
shall be permitted within twenty five feet (25') of a neighboring building or
structure designed for or permitting human habitation. (Ord. 04-15, 5-3-2004)
6-4-9: HINDERING OFFICER IMPOUNDING ANIMALS:
No person shall hinder, delay or obstruct any community service officer or law
enforcement officer engaged in taking to the animal shelter any animal liable
to be impounded. (Ord. 04-15, 5-3-2004)
6-4-10: DANGEROUS REPTILES PROHIBITED FROM SALE:
   (A)   No person shall have a right of property in, keep, harbor, care for,
act as custodian of, or maintain in his/her possession, any dangerous animal
except at a properly maintained zoological park, federally licensed exhibit,
circus, veterinary hospital or animal refuge in an escape proof enclosure.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to own any poisonous or life threatening
reptiles. A "life threatening reptile" shall mean any member of the crocodilian
family or any constricting snake over six feet (6') in length which shall
include, but not be limited to, a boa, python and anaconda. A "poisonous
reptile" shall mean any type of venomous snake.
   (C)   If there appears to be imminent danger to the public, any dangerous
animal found not in compliance with the provisions of this ordinance shall be
subject to seizure and may immediately be placed in an approved facility. Upon
the conviction of a person for a violation of subsection (A) of this section,
the animal with regard to which the conviction was obtained shall be
confiscated and placed in an approved facility, with the owner thereof to be
responsible for all costs connected with the seizure and confiscation of such
animal. (Ord. 04-15, 5-3-2004)
6-4-11: SHOOTING OR MOLESTING BIRDS:
The shooting, or molesting of birds in any manner, or the robbing of any bird's
nest by any person is hereby declared to be an offense, unless the birds are
deemed to be a nuisance. The city will have sole authority to make the decision
whether any bird or birds is/are a nuisance and what course of action will be
taken in dealing with the problem. (Ord. 04-15, 5-3-2004)
6-4-12: BEEKEEPING WITHIN CITY IS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain any bees, beehives or
apiaries within the city. (Ord. 04-15, 5-3-2004)
6-4-13: ANIMAL TRAPPING:
It shall be unlawful to use any type of leg holding animal trap or other animal
trap that could cause cruelty to animals within the city limits without the
written approval from the conservation department of the state of Illinois. It
shall be unlawful to operate a live trap without a permit from the department
of agriculture. (Ord. 04-15, 5-3-2004)
6-4-14: EXCESSIVE OR HABITUAL VIOLATIONS:
   (A)   Whenever the owner of an animal is convicted of three (3) or more
violations of this chapter, or violations in combination, regarding one or more
pets, the community service officer may apply for a court order directing the
removal of one or more such animals from the owner and placing said animal for
adoption or otherwise to dispose of said animal in a humane manner.
   (B)   When the owner of an animal is convicted of a violation of this
chapter regarding inhumane treatment of animals, the community service officer
may deem the owner unfit and apply to the court for an order banning said owner
from owning or having pets in his or her care for a set period of time. After
that time has elapsed, said owner will again be allowed to own or care for
animals after a thorough investigation by the community service officer or
state humane investigator.
   (C)   When the owner of an animal has been banned from owning or having
animals in his or her care, information shall be forwarded to all other animal
control officers, shelters, community service officers, and humane
investigators in Rock Island County. (Ord. 04-15, 5-3-2004)
CHAPTER 5
DOGS AND CATS
SECTION:
6-5-1: License Required
6-5-2: Running At Large (Rep. by Ord. 06-22, 9-18-2006)
6-5-3: Impounding (Rep. by Ord. 06-22, 9-18-2006)
6-5-4: Care Of Impounded Animals
6-5-5: Dog Or Cat Bite (Rep. by Ord. 06-22, 9-18-2006)
6-5-6: Penalty
6-5-7: Limitation On Number Of Animals
6-5-8: Control Of Animal Wastes
6-5-9: Dogfights And Other Animal Fights
6-5-10: Burial Of Dead Animals
6-5-11: Confinement In Motor Vehicle
6-5-12: Removal Of Collars, Tags Or Leashes
6-5-13: Female Dogs Or Cats In Heat
6-5-14: Indecent Exhibition Of Animals
6-5-15: Shelter And Protection From Weather
6-5-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be the duty of every person owning, keeping or harboring any dog or
cat in the city to obtain a current rabies shot for each dog or cat owned, and
within thirty (30) days after doing so, to register each dog or cat owned with
the Rock Island County animal control office, Rock Island County Building, 1504
3rd Avenue, Rock Island, Illinois.
   (A)   The license tag shall be attached to a substantial collar or harness
which shall be kept on the dog or cat at all times during the term for which
the license is issued.
   (B)   Any person or persons walking their dog(s) or cat(s) on any public or
private place, street, alley or sidewalk must be able to produce a Rock Island
County license tag which is securely attached to the collar or harness of such
pet. Failure to produce said Rock Island County license tag will be in
violation of this section and a citation will be issued. (Ord. 04-15, 5-3-2004)
6-5-2: RUNNING AT LARGE:
(Rep. by Ord. 06-22, 9-18-2006)
6-5-3: IMPOUNDING:
(Rep. by Ord. 06-22, 9-18-2006)
6-5-4: CARE OF IMPOUNDED ANIMALS:
Animals which are kept in the city pound shall be humanely treated and fed;
such pound shall be under the charge of the chief of police who shall be
responsible for the care and custody of the same. Unredeemed animals shall be
transferred to the Rock Island County animal shelter within three (3) days
after the impound date of the animal. (Ord. 04-15, 5-3-2004)
6-5-5: DOG OR CAT BITE:
(Rep. by Ord. 06-22, 9-18-2006)
6-5-6: PENALTY:
Any owner or keeper of an animal found convicted of a violation of this chapter
shall be fined in a sum not less than seventy five dollars ($75.00). (Ord. 04-
15, 5-3-2004)
6-5-7: LIMITATION ON NUMBER OF ANIMALS:
It shall be unlawful to harbor or keep more than three (3) dogs or three (3)
cats, or any combination thereof, anywhere in the city.
Any person harboring or keeping more than three (3) dogs or three (3) cats
shall be licensed by the Illinois department of agriculture as a kennel
operator. (Ord. 04-15, 5-3-2004)
6-5-8: CONTROL OF ANIMAL WASTES:
No person owning, harboring, keeping or controlling any dog or other domestic
animal or pet shall cause, suffer or allow such animal to soil, defile,
defecate on or commit any nuisance on any common thoroughfare, sidewalk,
passageway, bypath, play area, or any places where people congregate or walk,
or upon any public property whatsoever, or upon any private property. The
restriction in this section shall not apply to public property when the owner
or person in control of such animal complies with the following conditions:
   (A)   The person who so curbs such animal shall immediately remove all feces
deposited by such animal by any sanitary method.
   (B)   The feces removed from the aforementioned designated areas shall be
disposed of by the person owning, harboring, keeping, or controlling any animal
curbed in accordance with the provisions of this section in a sanitary manner
approved by the local health authority.
   (C)   The storage, collection, accumulation, discharge or deposition of any
fecal matter, feces, and similar materials in any place or on property so as to
threaten the health or safety of the individual or the public or to be
conducive to the breeding of flies, rats or other vermin, or to the prejudice
of others.
   (D)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this
ordinance shall be fined not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more
than seventy five dollars ($75.00) plus court costs for each offense. (Ord. 04-
15, 5-3-2004)
6-5-9: DOGFIGHTS AND OTHER ANIMAL FIGHTS:
It shall be unlawful to instigate, promote, advertise, collect money, cause or
procure any dogfight, cockfight, or any public sport, wagering, entertainment,
or private fighting or the intentional killing of any animals within the city
of East Moline. (Ord. 04-15, 5-3-2004)
6-5-10: BURIAL OF DEAD ANIMALS:
It shall be unlawful for the owner or possessor of any animal which may die
within the city to leave the animal unburied for more than twelve (12) hours
after its death, or for anyone to bring and leave the carcass of any dead
animal within the city. It shall be unlawful for anyone to bury any animal upon
public property within the city. If an animal is buried on the owner's private
property it shall be buried at a minimum depth of three feet (3'). (Ord. 04-15,
5-3-2004)
6-5-11: CONFINEMENT IN MOTOR VEHICLE:
No owner or person shall confine any animal in a motor vehicle in such a manner
that places it in a life or health threatening situation by exposure to a
prolonged period of extreme heat or cold, without proper ventilation or other
protection from such heat or cold. In order to protect the health and safety of
an animal, a community service officer or law enforcement officer who has
probable cause to believe that this section is being violated shall have
authority to enter such motor vehicle by any reasonable means under the
circumstances after making a reasonable effort to locate the owner or person.
(Ord. 04-15, 5-3-2004)
6-5-12: REMOVAL OF COLLARS, TAGS OR LEASHES:
It shall be unlawful for any person, other than the community service officer,
a police officer, or any owner, to remove the collar, inoculation tag or leash
from any dog or cat within the city without the consent of the owner or keeper
of the dog or cat. (Ord. 04-15, 5-3-2004)
6-5-13: FEMALE DOGS OR CATS IN HEAT:
No owner or keeper of any female dog or cat shall permit the dog or cat to be
in other than an enclosed structure or within an enclosure while in "heat". Any
female dog or cat while in "heat" found outside an enclosed structure or
enclosure, whether on the property of the owner or not, shall be taken up and
impounded in the city's animal shelter and the dog or cat shall be disposed of,
or may be redeemed upon payment of the same fees and in the same manner as dogs
and cats may be redeemed which have been impounded. (Ord. 04-15, 5-3-2004)
6-5-14: INDECENT EXHIBITION OF ANIMALS:
No person shall in any manner instigate, cause, procure or assist in any
indecent or immoral show of exhibition of any animal within the limits of the
city. (Ord. 04-15, 5-3-2004)
6-5-15: SHELTER AND PROTECTION FROM WEATHER:
Owner's duties as listed in the Illinois state humane care for animals act and
as pertains to the Rock Island County control ordinance, shall include:
   (A)   Shelter From Sunlight: When sunlight is likely to cause overheating or
discomfort, sufficient shade shall be provided to allow all animals/pets kept
outdoors to protect themselves from the direct rays of the sun.
   (B)   Shelter From Rain Or Snow: Animals/pets kept outdoors shall be
provided with access to shelter to allow them to remain dry during rain or
snow.
   (C)   Shelter From Cold Weather: Shelter shall be provided for all animals/
pets kept outdoors to afford comfort and protection to such animals appropriate
for the local climatic conditions and the animal/pet species concerned.
   (D)   Shelter From Extreme Heat Or Cold: Shelter that is provided in an
enclosed area such as enclosed porch or vehicle, shall not cause danger,
distress or discomfort to the animal.
   (E)   Drainage: A suitable method shall be provided to rapidly eliminate
excess water to prevent damp, wet or muddy environment.
   (F)   Proper Shelter: "Proper shelter and protection from weather" shall be
defined for a dog or cat as a moisture proof building, with dry floor and
adequate clean bedding material. A horse shall have a building of at least
three (3) walls and a roof. It shall have a dry floor with clean and adequate
bedding of straw, chips or other suitable material. (Ord. 06-22, 9-18-2006)
CHAPTER 6
CURFEW
SECTION:
6-6-1: Curfew Hours
6-6-2: Permitting Curfew Violation
6-6-3: Detaining Child
6-6-4: Delinquent Or Mendicant Children
6-6-5: Penalty
6-6-1: CURFEW HOURS:
It is unlawful for a person less than seventeen (17) years of age to be present
at or upon any public assembly, building, place, street or highway at the
following times:
Between 12:01 A.M. and 6:00 A.M. Saturday;
Between 12:01 A.M. and 6:00 A.M. Sunday;
Between 11:00 P.M. on Sunday to Thursday, inclusive, and 6:00 A.M. the
following day, unless:
   (A)   Accompanied or supervised by a parent, legal guardian, or other
responsible companion of twenty one (21) years of age approved by a parent or
legal guardian; or
   (B)   Participating in, going to, or returning from:
      1.   Lawful employment; or
      2.   A school sanctioned activity; or
      3.   A religious event; or
      4.   An emergency involving the protection of a person or property from
an imminent threat of serious bodily injury or substantial damages; or
      5.   An activity involving the exercise of the child's rights protected
under the first amendment to the United States constitution or article I,
sections 3, 4, and 5 of the constitution of the state of Illinois, or both,
such as religious freedom, freedom of speech and the right of assembly; or
      6.   An activity conducted by a nonprofit or governmental entity that
provides recreation, education, training, or other care under the supervision
of one or more adults; or
   (C)   Engaged in interstate or international travel from a location outside
Illinois to another location outside Illinois. (Ord. 04-09, 4-5-2004)
6-6-2: PERMITTING CURFEW VIOLATION:
It shall be unlawful for anyone having the legal care and custody of any
person, as described above, to allow or permit such person to go or be upon any
public street, alley or other public place in the city in the nighttime as
restricted in the preceding section, except in case of necessity. (M.C. 1962,
sec. 27.102)
6-6-3: DETAINING CHILD:
Every member of the police force while on duty is hereby authorized to detain
any such minor wilfully violating the provisions of section
6-6-1 of this chapter until the parent or guardian of the child shall take him
into custody; but such officer shall immediately upon taking custody of the
child communicate with the parent or guardian. (M.C. 1962, sec. 27.103)
6-6-4: DELINQUENT OR MENDICANT CHILDREN:
If it shall appear that any child taken into custody for a violation of section
6-6-1 of this chapter is growing up in mendicancy or vagrancy, or is
incorrigible, for lack of proper parental care or has no home, proper
proceedings shall be taken to have such child placed in the care of a state
institution as provided by statute. (M.C. 1962, sec. 27.104)
6-6-5: PENALTY:
Any person convicted of a violation of this chapter shall be fined in a sum not
less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00).
(Ord. 75-41, 10-20-1975)
CHAPTER 7
PUBLIC GATHERINGS
SECTION:
6-7-1: Regulations
6-7-2: Inspections
6-7-3: Exits
6-7-4: Seats
6-7-5: Doors
6-7-6: Notice
6-7-1: REGULATIONS:
It shall be unlawful to hold, manage or conduct any meeting or entertainment of
any kind in the City, in any premises other than a building constructed in full
compliance with the provisions of this Code and laws pertaining thereto for
auditorium, theater or lodge room purposes, excepting in compliance with the
provisions of this Chapter. (M.C. 1962, sec. 27.701)
6-7-2: INSPECTIONS:
No such gathering or entertainment shall be held or presented in any premises
other than a building as described in the preceding Section, unless such
premises have been examined by the Fire Marshal or Building Inspector not more
than three (3) days before the date of such gathering and found to be free from
any fire hazard and found to be suitable for the purpose. No structure enclosed
by a roof shall be used for such purpose unless the same is constructed of
nonflammable materials; provided, that tents or structures covered by canvas or
similar mater as may be so used as to be rendered fire resistive. (M.C. 1962,
sec. 27.702)
6-7-3: EXITS:
Adequate unobstructed exits shall be provided in all premises used for such
purposes to permit rapid egress of all persons attending, and there shall be at
least two (2) separate exits located at least thirty feet (30') from each
other. There shall be two (2) lineal feet of doorway or exit space for each one
hundred (100) people accommodated. (M.C. 1962, sec. 27.703)
6-7-4: SEATS:
Any stands or rows from seats used in such premises shall be so constructed as
to be safe for the use designed, and shall be sufficiently strong to carry the
same weight and stress as is required for the construction of the auditorium
floors of the theater buildings, not less than one hundred (100) pounds per
square foot.
It shall be unlawful to admit to any such premises a number of persons to
exceed the actual number of seats maintained for their accommodation. (M.C.
1962, sec. 27.704)
6-7-5: DOORS:
All doors or gates on exits from premises used for such purposes shall open
outward and no such exit shall be constructed or locked so that egress from
inside the premises is blocked. (M.C. 1962, sec. 27.705)
6-7-6: NOTICE:
It shall be the duty of any person or persons conducting, calling for or
managing any gathering in any premises other than a theater, lodge room or
auditorium building constructed as provided in Section
6-7-1 of this Chapter, to notify the Clerk of the date of such intended
performance at least ten (10) days before the meeting is to take place; upon
such notice the Fire Marshal or the Building Inspector shall inspect the
premises to determine whether or not they comply with the provisions hereof.
Any permit issued for any such gathering shall be subject to the condition that
this Chapter be fully complied with, whether or not such condition is embodied
in the permit. (M.C. 1962, sec. 27.706)
CHAPTER 8
SOUND AMPLIFIERS
SECTION:
6-8-1: License Required
6-8-2: Application
6-8-3: Issuance Of License
6-8-4: Restrictions
6-8-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful to maintain or operate any loud speaker or amplifier
connected with any radio, phonograph, microphone or other public street or
public place without having first obtained a license therefor. (M.C. 1962, sec.
27.901)
6-8-2: APPLICATION:
Any person desiring a license for the use or operation of such a device shall
file an application therefor with the City Clerk upon a form provided by him,
setting forth the name and address of the applicant, the name and address of
the owner of such device, the date upon which it is intended to be used, and
such other information as may be prescribed. (M.C. 1962, sec. 27.902)
6-8-3: ISSUANCE OF LICENSE:
Such licensee shall issue (the payment of the license fee) as provided above,
(to the City Clerk) and shall permit the use of any such device subject to the
terms and conditions of this Chapter, upon only the date specified on such
license and no other. (M.C. 1962, sec. 27.903)
6-8-4: RESTRICTIONS:
No licensee shall use, operate or employ any such device within the City limits
on Sunday or after the hour of eight o'clock (8:00) P.M. prevailing time, of
any day, or before the hour of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. prevailing time of any
day; no licensee shall use, operate or employ any such device within a radius
of two (2) blocks from any hospital or within the radius of two (2) blocks from
any church or other place of public worship while services are being held
therein.
This Section shall not apply to radios in homes or in private pleasure
vehicles, when the same are operated in such a manner as not to be audible at a
distance of fifty feet (50') from such vehicle nor to noise devices, bands or
other musical devices used in any public parade or procession which is operated
under a permit in accordance with the provisions of this Code.
No person shall cause or permit to be emanated or emitted from any such device
any loud, obscene, profane or indecent language or sounds, or any false
representation of any matter, product or project advertised thereby, the sale
of which is prohibited by law. (M.C. 1962, sec. 27.904)
CHAPTER 9
BETTING MESSENGER SERVICES
SECTION:
6-9-1: Betting Messenger Service Illegal
6-9-1: BETTING MESSENGER SERVICE ILLEGAL:
No person for profit shall agree to take or agree to attempt to take into or
within the City of East Moline another's parimutuel bet to be transmitted or
delivered to any race track. The general penalty provisions of this Code shall
be applied upon a violation of this Section. (Ord. 76-70, 12-6-1976)
CHAPTER 10
BURGLAR AND HOLDUP ALARM BUSINESSES, SYSTEMS AND USERS
SECTION:
6-10-1: Definitions
6-10-2: Penalty
6-10-3: Purpose
6-10-4: Standards And Regulations Prescribed By Police Chief
6-10-5: Audible Alarms
6-10-6: Prohibited Systems
6-10-7: Automatic Dialing Device; Intermediary Services
6-10-8: Police Alarms
6-10-9: Responsibility For Alarm Response
6-10-10: Services Available
6-10-11: Liability Of City
6-10-12: Conflict Of Interest
6-10-13: Alarm Permits, Generally
6-10-14: Application, Form
6-10-15: Fees
6-10-16: Failure To Pay Ad Valorem Taxes
6-10-17: Issuance, Renewal Of Permit
6-10-18: Suspension Or Revocation, Violation Of Chapter
6-10-19: Suspension Or Revocation Procedure
6-10-20: Appeal Procedure
6-10-21: Surrender Of Permit
This Chapter shall be known and may be cited as the EAST MOLINE CITY ORDINANCE
REGULATING BURGLAR AND HOLDUP ALARM BUSINESSES, SYSTEMS AND USERS.
6-10-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this Chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their
derivations shall have the meaning given herein:
ALARM AGENT: Any person who is employed by an alarm business, either directly
or indirectly, whose duties include selling, maintaining, leasing, servicing,
repairing, altering, replacing, moving or installing on or in any building,
structure or facility, any alarm system. Exemption: The provisions of this
Chapter do not apply to a person who engages in the manufacture or sale of an
alarm system from a fixed location and who neither visits the location where
the alarm system is to be installed nor designs the scheme for physical
location and installation of the alarm system in a specific location.
ALARM BUSINESS: The business by any individual, partnership or corporation or
other entity of selling, leasing, maintaining, inspecting, servicing,
repairing, moving or installing any alarm system in or on any building,
structure or facility. Exemption: Said definition shall not apply to persons
engaged solely in the manufacture or sale of alarm system components from a
fixed location and who do not install, alter, maintain, service or plan the
alarm system for a specific location.
ALARM SYSTEM: Any mechanical or electrical device which is designed or used for
the detection of an unauthorized entry into a building, structure or facility
or for altering others of the commission of an unlawful act within a building,
structure or facility, and signaling the presence of smoke, heat or fire on a
protected premises, or any combination thereof; and which emits a sound or
transmits a signal or message when actuated and to which police are expected to
respond. In this Chapter, the term "alarm system" shall include the terms
"audible alarm", "automatic dialing device", "burglary alarm system" and
"holdup alarm system" as those terms are hereinafter defined.
ANSWERING SERVICE: A telephone answering business providing among its services
receiving, on a continuous basis through trained employees, emergency signals
from alarm systems, and thereafter immediately relaying the message by live
voice over a signal channel circuit to the communication center of the Police
Department.
APPELLANT: A person who perfects an appeal pursuant to this Chapter.
APPLICANT: A person, firm or corporation that files an application for a new or
renewal permit as provided in this Chapter.
AUDIBLE ALARM: A device designed for the detection of unauthorized entry on
premises which generates an audible sound on the premises when it is actuated.
This audible alarm may or may not be combined with a method of transmitting a
signal to a remote point. Exemption: The provisions of this Chapter are not
applicable to audible alarms affixed to motor vehicles.
AUTOMATIC DIALING DEVICE: An alarm system which automatically sends over
regular telephone lines, by direct connection or otherwise, a prerecorded voice
message or coded signal indicating the existence of the emergency situation
that the alarm system is designed to detect.
BURGLAR ALARM SYSTEM: A method of detecting and signaling the presence, entry
or attempted entry of an intruder into protected premises.
CENTRAL STATION SYSTEM: A system or group of systems, usually operated from its
customers by a person, in which the operations of protected circuits and
devices are transmitted to, recorded in, maintained and supervised from a
central station having trained operators and guards in attendance at all times,
that have the duty to take appropriate action upon receipt of a signal or
message including the relaying of messages by a signal channel circuit to the
communications center of the Police Department.
CITY: The City of East Moline or its authorized employees or agents.
DIRECT ALARM SYSTEM: An alarm system which has the capability of transmitting
signals to and receiving them at the communications center of the East Moline
Police Department.
FALSE ALARM: The intentional or unintentional activation of an alarm system
through mechanical failure, malfunction, improper installation or the
negligence of the owner or lessee of an alarm system or of his employees or
agents which necessitates response by the East Moline Police Department where
an attempted or actual burglary or holdup does not exist. Such terminology does
not include, for example, alarms caused by tornadoes, earthquakes, power surges
or other violent conditions.
HOLDUP ALARM SYSTEM: An alarm system signaling a robbery or attempted robbery.
MODIFIED CENTRAL STATION: An office to which remote alarm and supervisory
signaling devices are connected, where operators supervise the circuits and
relay the messages by a "signal channel circuit" to the communications center
of the Police Department.
POLICE CHIEF: The Chief of the Police Department of the City of East Moline, or
his authorized representative.
PRIMARY TRUNKLINE: A telephone line leading into the communications center of
the Police Department, that is for the purpose of handling emergency calls on a
person-to-person basis, and which line is identified by a specific listing
among the emergency numbers in a telephone directory issued by the telephone
company serving the City.
PROTECTED PREMISES: That part of a building, structure or facility to which
protection is afforded by an alarm system.
SIGNAL CHANNEL CIRCUIT: A telephone service that only provides a two-way
telephone service from one location to another location. In the police station,
it will be used to report emergency signals from an "answering service", a
"central station" or from a "modified central station" to the police
communication center on a person-to-person basis.
SUBSCRIBER: A person who buys and/or leases, or otherwise obtains an alarm
signaling system and thereafter contracts with or hires an alarm business to
monitor and/or service the alarm device. (Ord. 88-45, 9-19-1988)
6-10-2: PENALTY:
The minimum fine for a violation of the provisions of this Chapter shall be
fifty dollars ($50.00). In the event a person is charged with a violation of
this Chapter and does not wish to contest said allegations prior to the time a
complaint is issued for said violation, the person charged may pay to the City
at police headquarters a penalty in the sum of twenty five dollars ($25.00) for
and in full satisfaction of said violation. (Ord. 88-45, 9-19-1988)
6-10-3: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this Chapter is to provide minimum standards and regulations
applicable to burglary and holdup alarm systems, alarm businesses, alarm agents
and alarm users; require permits therefor; establish fees; and provide for
punishment of violations of provisions as defined in this Chapter. (Ord. 88-45,
9-19-1988)
6-10-4: STANDARDS AND REGULATIONS PRESCRIBED BY POLICE CHIEF:
The Police Chief may prescribe reasonable minimum standards and regulations for
the construction and maintenance of all alarm systems installed within the
City. All devices shall meet or exceed such standards and regulations before
permits may be issued pursuant to this Chapter. The Police Chief may require
inspection and approval of all alarm systems installed within the City. (Ord.
88-45, 9-19-1988)
6-10-5: AUDIBLE ALARMS:
All alarm systems that emit an audible signal that may be heard by persons
outside the protected building, structure or facility shall conform to the
following requirements:
   (A)   Every person maintaining an audible alarm shall provide the Police
Chief with the names and telephone numbers of the persons to be notified to
render repairs or service and secure the premises during any hour of the day or
night that the alarm system is activated. It is the responsibility of every
person maintaining an alarm system to assure that the names and telephone
numbers recorded with the Police Department are kept current.
   (B)   No person shall install an audible alarm system which creates a sound
similar to that of an emergency vehicle siren or a civil defense warning
system.
   (C)   No person shall install an audible alarm system which does not
automatically discontinue emitting an audible sound within one-half (1/2) hour
after it is activated. (Ord. 88-45, 9-19-1988)
6-10-6: PROHIBITED SYSTEMS:
   (A)   Automatic Dialing Devices: No alarm system using an automatic dialing
device will be allowed to send a prerecorded voice message or coded signal over
a primary trunkline or direct line into the communications center of the Police
Department.
   (B)   Panic Alarm: Panic or trouble alarms used to signal any type of fight,
disturbance or any other activity other than an actual or attempted burglary or
holdup will not be allowed. (Ord. 88-45, 9-19-1988)
6-10-7: AUTOMATIC DIALING DEVICE; INTERMEDIARY SERVICES:
   (A)   Persons owning or leasing an automatic dialing device may have the
device interconnected to a telephone line transmitting directly to:
      1.   A central station;
      2.   A modified central station; or
      3.   A licensed answering service.
   (B)   The relaying of messages by intermediate services to the Police
Department shall be over a signal channel circuit on a person-to-person basis,
or a primary trunk line.
   (C)   The Police Chief may limit the number of "signal channel circuits"
that come into the communications center of the Police Department. (Ord. 88-45,
9-19-1988)
6-10-8: POLICE ALARMS:
No alarm system equipment, unless police-owned and operated, shall transmit any
message on the police base radio frequency. (Ord. 88-45, 9-19-1988)
6-10-9: RESPONSIBILITY FOR ALARM RESPONSE:
Every person who has on premises under control or ownership an alarm system,
audible or silent, shall, upon notification that the alarm system is giving a
signal, proceed immediately to the premises and render all necessary service.
Provided, however, that the owner or person in control of the premises may
enter into an agreement with an alarm business to respond in his stead. (Ord.
88-45, 9-19-1988)
6-10-10: SERVICES AVAILABLE:
Each alarm business shall have qualified alarm agents and supplies and
equipment so located as to be able to respond to a request for repair or
adjustment on any alarm system that such an alarm business sold, maintained, or
inspected within four (4) hours of the request for this service. They shall
respond within four (4) hours of the request except that if the request occurs
within the hours that protected premises is open for business or otherwise
substantially occupied, repair or adjustment may be made at any time prior to
closing of the protected premises. (Ord. 88-45, 9-19-1988)
6-10-11: LIABILITY OF CITY:
The City shall take every reasonable precaution to assure that alarm signals
received by the City are given appropriate attention and are acted upon with
dispatch. Nevertheless, the City shall not be liable for any defects in
operation of any alarm devices or signal line system, for any failure of
neglect to respond appropriately upon receipt of an alarm from such a source,
nor for the failure or neglect of any person without a permit issued pursuant
to this Chapter, in connection with the installation and operation of
equipment, the transmission of alarm signals or the delaying of such signals.
In the event the City finds it necessary to disconnect a defective automatic
protective device or signaling device, the City shall incur no liability by
such action. (Ord. 88-45, 9-19-1988)
6-10-12: CONFLICT OF INTEREST:
No employee of the Police Department nor member of any such employee's
immediate family shall have any interest, directly or indirectly, in any alarm
business within the limits of the City. No such employee or member of his
immediate family shall be employed by an alarm business, subject to the
provisions of this Chapter. (Ord. 88-45, 9-19-1988)
6-10-13: ALARM PERMITS, GENERALLY:
   (A)   Alarm System Permit: No person shall possess or use an alarm system
without first applying for and receiving an alarm system permit from the City
Clerk therefore in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter. The permit
shall be kept on the premises where the alarm is located. The City Clerk may
issue an appropriate identification number and establish requirements for its
posting.
In the event a permittee owns and operates more than one alarm system within
the City, one permit shall be issued authorizing all alarm systems within the
City, with one permit fee being assessed. The penalty provisions of subsection
6-10-18(B)5 of this Chapter shall apply to each alarm system as issued under
the permit.
   (B)   Direct Alarm System Permit: No direct alarm system shall be permitted
within the Police Department except such as is connected to an indicator panel
installed in uniform consoles with uniform operation within the communication
facilities of such Department pursuant to a permit issued in accordance with
the provisions of this Chapter.
      1.   An owner or lessee of an alarm system may authorize an alarm
business or alarm agent to connect such system to an indicator panel installed
in the communication facilities of the Police Department in accordance with
this Chapter, upon first obtaining a permit therefor.
      2.   If the location of the communication facilities of the Police
Department shall be changed at any time, the cost of moving any alarm system or
parts thereof shall be borne by permittees.
      3.   The City Clerk may limit the number of such permits and may set
standards and regulations governing direct alarm systems. (Ord. 88-45, 9-19-
1988)
6-10-14: APPLICATION, FORM:
   (A)   Requirements: Applications for all permits required under this Chapter
shall be on a form prescribed by the City Clerk and may request such
information as is necessary to evaluate and act upon the permit application.
Application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable requisite fee. The fee is
established to cover part of the cost of investigating and processing the
applications and permits.
      1.   Alarm Business: Alarm agent answering alarms and making service
calls shall carry approved identification. Alarm business shall supply a
current written list of alarm agents as needed.
      2.   Alarm Systems; Direct Alarm Systems: The permit shall be denied by
the City Clerk if the alarm system does not comply with the standards and
regulations adopted pursuant to this Chapter. The permit shall be issued to the
person owning, using or possessing the alarm system. If the permit is denied,
the reasons for denial shall be set forth in writing and provided to the
applicant. If the basis for denial can be corrected, the writing shall so state
and shall explain how these corrections may be made and set a reasonable time
limit for making such corrections. The notice of denial shall inform the
applicant that he may appeal the denial and set forth the procedure for appeal.
   (B)   Notice Of Information Change: Whenever any change occurs relating to
the written information requested by this Chapter, the applicant or permittee
shall give written notice thereof to the services division of the Police
Department within fifteen (15) days after such change or at any hearing
conducted under this Chapter if such hearing is conducted before the notice has
been given. (Ord. 88-45, 9-19-1988)
6-10-15: FEES:
   (A)   Permit fees under this Section shall be paid to the East Moline Clerk.
Said fees are as follows:
      1.   For an alarm system permit, a fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00).
      2.   For a direct alarm permit, a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00).
   (B)   The City reserves the right to own all indicator panels and accessory
equipment for direct alarm systems located within the station. In such case,
each permittee, in addition to the annual permit fee, shall pay an initial
installation fee and an annual user fee, as the same may be established by
ordinance, and uniformly applied to cover the cost of the maintenance of such
facilities. In the event the City decides not to own the equipment within the
station, but to provide for its installation and maintenance by a third party,
it shall establish and regulate reasonable fees and charges which may be
charged permittees. All such fees provided for in this paragraph to be charged
by the City shall be payable annually in advance on July 1 of each year.
   (C)   Regardless of the status of an alarm permit, the members of the Police
Department will always respond as promptly and effectively as possible to any
and all alarm actuations. However, there will be a service charge for each
false alarm that the Police Department responds to while the alarm permit is
under suspension or revocation. Said service charge shall be assessed in the
amount of fifty dollars ($50.00) for each false alarm while the alarm permit is
under suspension or revocation.
This service charge will be deposited into the City's general citizens fund.
This service charge will not exempt the permit holder from the violation
penalty adopted pursuant to this Chapter 1 . (Ord. 88-45, 9-19-1988)
 
Notes
1 1. See Section
  6-10-2 of this Chapter.
6-10-16: FAILURE TO PAY AD VALOREM TAXES:
No permit shall be issued or renewed pursuant to this Chapter if any ad valorem
taxes upon any real property used directly or indirectly in connection with the
proposed business or service are delinquent. A receipt of payment of ad valorem
taxes shall be provided for inspection to the City Clerk at the time of issue
or renewal of a permit. Where a permit has been issued and ad valorem taxes on
such property thereafter become delinquent, the permit shall be subject to
cancellation immediately without notice and without right of appeal. (Ord. 88-
45, 9-19-1988)
6-10-17: ISSUANCE, RENEWAL OF PERMIT:
Upon approval by the City Clerk of applications for a permit or for renewal
thereof, the City Clerk shall endorse his approval and cause permit to be
issued or renewed. (Ord. 88-45, 9-19-1988)
6-10-18: SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION, VIOLATION OF CHAPTER:
   (A)   Suspension By Clerk: Any permit issued under this Chapter may be
suspended by the City Clerk for violation of any of the provisions of this
Chapter.
   (B)   Additional Grounds: The following shall constitute grounds for
suspension and/or revocation of a permit issued under this Chapter:
      1.   Where an alarm system is knowingly activated by a subscriber, his
employee or agent in a situation where no burglary or robbery is actually in
progress;
      2.   Where the permittee, his employee or agent has knowingly made any
false, misleading or fraudulent statement of material fact in the application
for a permit or in any report or record required to be filed with any City
agency;
      3.   Where any alarm business or alarm agent is charged with a crime
involving moral turpitude or where the character, reputation or moral integrity
of the business or his employee is determined inimical to public safety or the
general welfare of the community;
      4.   Where the business or permittee has had a similar type permit
previously revoked for good cause within the last year, unless the applicant
can show a material change in circumstances since the date of revocation; or
      5.   Where an alarm system, while under a valid permit, actuates
excessive false alarms, it shall constitute a public nuisance. The penalty for
the first three (3) false alarms shall be ten dollars ($10.00) each ($5.00 if
paid within 24 hours) and fifty dollars ($50.00) each thereafter ($25.00 if
paid within 24 hours) for each calendar year. (Ord. 88-45, 9-19-1988)
6-10-19: SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION PROCEDURE:
   (A)   The Police Chief, in the case of suspension, shall serve the permittee
with a written order of suspension which shall state the reasons for such
suspension. The order shall be effective upon the expiration of a period five
(5) days after receipt of said order by the permittee.
   (B)   The suspension shall become a revocation fifteen (15) days after the
order of suspension becomes effective unless the permittee files an appeal of
the order of suspension in the manner set forth in this Chapter. Where an
appeal is filed, the order of suspension shall be stayed, pending a final
determination of the appeal. The suspension shall become a revocation if the
decision of the Public Services Committee upholds the suspension, unless said
decision is overruled by the City Council. The suspension shall be dissolved
immediately if the decision of the Public Services Committee reverses the
suspension. (Ord. 88-45, 9-19-1988)
6-10-20: APPEAL PROCEDURE:
   (A)   The permittee shall have a period of ten (10) days after the issuance
of a ticket in order to present evidence to the Chief or his designee, as to
the circumstances surrounding the incident which the permittee considers to be
beyond the control of the permittee or its alarm servicing agent. The Chief
shall have the authority to dismiss the ticket upon good cause shown.
   (B)   Any person aggrieved by the decision of the City Clerk or the Police
Chief under this Chapter with reference to the approval or denial of an
application for a permit, or renewal or suspension of a permit, shall have the
right of appeal. An appeal must be perfected within fifteen (15) days after
notice of the decision or order of suspension by filing with the Public
Services Committee a letter of appeal briefly stating therein the basis for the
appeal.
   (C)   Failure to file a letter of appeal within the said fifteen (15) days
shall constitute a waiver of appellant's right to review, but the Public
Services Committee, in its discretion, may nevertheless grant such review.
   (D)   If the Public Services Committee affirms the decision of the Chief of
Police, the appellant may have a hearing before the City Council on said
matter. If the Public Services Committee does not approve the decision of the
Chief, he shall transmit this decision to the Chief, who will comply with same.
(Ord. 88-45, 9-19-1988)
6-10-21: SURRENDER OF PERMIT:
   (A)   Surrender To Police Department: If any permit is revoked pursuant to
this Chapter, the permittee shall surrender the permit to the services division
of the Police Department.
   (B)   Renewal:
      1.   Direct alarm permits issued pursuant to this Chapter shall expire
annually on May 1. All applications for renewal of such permits shall be filed
with the City Clerk on forms provided for that purpose. The fee for renewal of
each permit required hereunder shall be the same as the initial permit fee and
shall be paid to the City Clerk prior to the time the permit is issued.
      2.   Alarm system permits need not be renewed. Any modifications or
additions to an alarm system will require a new permit and may require an
inspection as determined by the Chief. (Ord. 88-45, 9-19-1988)
CHAPTER 11
ABATEMENT OF CHRONIC NUISANCE PROPERTIES
SECTION:
6-11-1: Applicability
6-11-2: Definitions
6-11-3: Remedy
6-11-4: Abatement Of Nuisance
6-11-5: Procedure
6-11-6: Commencement Of Action, Burden Of Proof
6-11-7: Emergency Closing Procedures
6-11-8: Severability
6-11-1: APPLICABILITY:
   (A)   Any certain property within the City of East Moline which becomes a
chronic nuisance property is in violation of this Chapter and is subject to its
remedies.
   (B)   Any person in charge who permits property under his or her ownership
or control to be a public nuisance property shall be in violation of this
Chapter and subject to its remedies. (Ord. 97-37, 7-21-1997)
6-11-2: DEFINITIONS:
CHRONIC NUISANCE PROPERTY: Property upon which three (3) or more of the
behaviors listed below have occurred during any sixty (60) day period, as a
result of any three (3) separate factual events that have been independently
investigated by any law enforcement agency.
   (A)   Disorderly conduct as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/26-
1.
   (B)   Unlawful use of weapons as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/24-1 et seq.
   (C)   Mob action as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/25-1.
   (D)   Discharge of a firearm as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/
24-1.2 and 1.5.
   (E)   Gambling as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/28-1.
   (F)   Possession, manufacture or delivery of controlled substances as
defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 570/401 et seq.
   (G)   Public indecency as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-9.
   (H)   Prostitution as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-14 et
seq.
   (I)   Criminal damage to property as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/21-1 et seq.
   (J)   Possession, cultivation, manufacture or delivery of cannabis as
defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 550/1 et seq.
   (K)   Illegal consumption or possession of alcohol as defined in 235
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1 et seq.
CONTROL: The ability to regulate, restrain, dominate, counteract or govern
conduct that occurs on that property.
OWNER: Any person, agent, firm or corporation having any legal or equitable
interest in the property. "Owner" includes, but is not limited to: a) a
mortgagee in possession in whom is vested 1) all or part of the legal title to
the property; or 2) all or part of the beneficial ownership and the right to
the present use and enjoyment of the premises; or b) an occupant who can
control what occurs on the property.
PERMIT: To suffer, allow, consent to, acquiesce by failure to prevent, or
expressly ascent or agree to the doing of an act.
PERSON: Any natural person, association, partnership or corporation capable of
owning or using property in the City of East Moline.
PERSON IN CHARGE: Any person in actual or constructive possession of a
property, including, but not limited to, an owner, occupant of property under
his or her domain, ownership or control.
PROPERTY: Any real property, including land in that which is affixed,
incidental or pertinent to land, including, but not limited to, any premises,
room, house, building, or structure or any separate part or portion thereof,
whether permitted or not. (Ord. 97-37, 7-21-1997; amd. Ord. 17-11, 5-15-2017)
6-11-3: REMEDY:
   (A)   In the event a court determines property to be a chronic nuisance
property, the court may order that the property be closed and secured against
all use and occupancy for a period of not less than thirty (30) days, but not
more than one hundred eighty (180) days, or the court may employ any other
remedy deemed by it to be appropriate to abate the nuisance.
   (B)   In addition to the remedy provided in subsection (A) of this Section,
the court may impose upon the owner of the property a civil penalty in the
amount of up to one hundred dollars ($100.00) per day, payable to the City of
East Moline for each day the owner had actual knowledge that the property was a
public nuisance property and permitted the property to remain public nuisance
property.
   (C)   In determining what remedy or remedies shall employ, the court may
consider evidence of other conduct which has occurred on the property,
including, but not limited to:
      1.   The disturbance of neighbors.
      2.   The recurrence of loud and obnoxious noises.
      3.   Repeated consumption of alcohol by minors. (Ord. 97-37, 7-21-1997)
6-11-4: ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE:
The City Attorney of the City of East Moline or the State's Attorney of Rock
Island County may commence an action to abate the public nuisance as described
above. Upon being satisfied by affidavits or other sworn evidence that an
alleged public nuisance exists, the court may without notice or bond enter a
temporary restraining order or a preliminary injunction to enjoin any defendant
from maintaining such nuisance and may enter an order restraining any defendant
from removing or interfering with all property used in connection with the
public nuisance. (Ord. 97-37, 7-21-1997)
6-11-5: PROCEDURE:
When the Chief of Police of the City of East Moline receives two (2) or more
police reports documenting the occurrence of nuisance activity on or within a
property, the Chief of Police shall independently review such reports to
determine whether they describe criminal acts. Upon such findings, the Chief
may:
   (A)   Notify the person in charge in writing that the property is in danger
of becoming a chronic nuisance property. The notice shall contain the following
information:
      1.   The street address or a legal description sufficient for
identification of the property.
      2.   A statement that the Chief of Police has information that the
property may be chronic nuisance property, with a concise description of the
nuisance activities that may exist, or that have occurred. The Chief of Police
shall offer the person in charge an opportunity to propose a course of action
that the Chief of Police agrees will abate the nuisance activities giving rise
to the violation.
      3.   Demand that the person in charge respond to the Chief of Police
within ten (10) days to discuss the nuisance activities.
   (B)   After complying with the notification procedures described herein when
the Chief of Police receives a police report documenting the occurrence of a
third nuisance activity at or within a property and determines that the
property has become a chronic nuisance property, the Chief of Police shall:
      1.   Notify the person in charge in writing that the property has been
determined to be a chronic nuisance property. The notice shall contain the
following information:
         (a)   The street address or legal description sufficient for
identification of the property.
         (b)   A statement that the Chief of Police has determined the property
to be chronic nuisance property with a concise description of the nuisance
activities leading to his/her findings.
         (c)   Demand that the person in charge respond within ten (10) days to
the Chief of Police and propose a course of action that the Chief of Police
agrees will abate the nuisance activities giving rise to the violation.
         (d)   Service shall be made either personally or by first class mail,
postage prepaid, return receipt requested, addressed to the person in charge at
the address of the property believed to be a chronic nuisance property, or such
other place which is likely to give the person in charge notice of the
determination by the Chief of Police.
         (e)   A copy of the notice shall be served on the owner at such
address as shown on the tax rolls of the county in which the property is
located, and/or the occupant, at the address of the property, if these persons
are different than the person in charge, and shall be made either personally or
by first class mail, postage prepaid.
         (f)   A copy of the notice shall also be posted at the property after
ten (10) days have elapsed from the service or mailing of the notice to the
person in charge and the person in charge has not contacted the Chief of
Police.
         (g)   The failure of any person to receive notice that the property
may be a chronic nuisance property shall not invalidate or otherwise affect the
proceedings under this Chapter.
      2.   After the notification, but prior to the commencement of legal
proceedings by the City pursuant to this Chapter, a person in charge stipulates
with the Chief of Police that the person in charge will pursue a course of
action the parties agree will abate the nuisance activities giving rise to the
violation. If the agreed course of action does not result in the abatement of
the nuisance activity or if no agreement concerning abatement is reached within
thirty (30) days, the Chief of Police shall request authorization for the
Corporation Counsel to commence a legal proceeding to abate the nuisance.
      3.   Concurrent with the notification procedures set forth herein, the
Chief of Police shall send copies of the notice, as well as any other
documentation which supports legal proceedings, to the Corporation Counsel.
   (C)   When a person in charge makes a response to the Chief of Police as
required above, any conduct or statements made in connection with the
furnishing of that response shall not constitute an admission that any nuisance
activities have or are occurring. This subsection does not require the
exclusion of any evidence which is otherwise admissible or ordered for any
other purpose. (Ord. 97-37, 7-21-1997)
6-11-6: COMMENCEMENT OF ACTION, BURDEN OF PROOF:
   (A)   In an action seeking closure of a chronic nuisance property, the City
shall have the initial burden of showing by preponderance of the evidence that
the property is a chronic nuisance property.
   (B)   It is a defense to an action seeking the closure of chronic nuisance
property that the owner of the property at the time in question could not, in
the exercise of reasonable care or diligence, determine that the property had
become a public nuisance property, or could not, in spite of the exercise of
reasonable care and diligence, control the conduct leading to the findings that
the property is a chronic nuisance property.
   (C)   In establishing the amount of any civil penalty requested, the court
may consider any of the following factors if they need be found appropriate,
and shall cite those found applicable.
      1.   The actions or lack of action taken by the person in charge to
mitigate or correct the problem at the property.
      2.   Whether the problem at the property was repeated or continuous.
      3.   The magnitude or gravity of the problem.
      4.   The cooperation of the person in charge with the City.
      5.   The cost of the City investigating and correcting or attempting to
correct the condition. (Ord. 97-37, 7-21-1997)
6-11-7: EMERGENCY CLOSING PROCEDURES:
   (A)   In the event that it is determined that the property is an immediate
threat to the public safety and welfare, the City may apply to the court for
such interim relief as is deemed by the Chief of Police to be appropriate. In
such an event, the notification provision set forth in Section
6-11-5 of this Chapter need not be complied with, however, the City shall make
a diligent effort to notify the person in charge prior to a court hearing.
   (B)   In the event that the court finds the property constitutes a "chronic
nuisance property" as defined in this Chapter, the court may order the remedy
set out above. In addition, in the event that it also finds the person in
charge had knowledge of activities or conditions of the property constituting
or violating this Chapter and permitted the activities to occur, the court may
assess a civil fine as provided above.
   (C)   The court may authorize the City of East Moline to physically secure
the property against use or occupancy in the event the owner fails to do so
within the time specified by the court. In the event that the City is
authorized to secure the property, all costs reasonably incurred by the City to
effect a closure shall be made and assessed as a lien against the property. If
used herein "costs" mean these costs actually incurred by the City for the
physical securing of the property, as well as tenant relocation costs.
   (D)   The City of East Moline Department of Public Works effecting the
closure shall prepare a statement of cost and the City of East Moline shall
thereafter submit said statement to the court for its review. If no objection
of the statement is made within the period described by the court, a lien in
said amount may be recorded against said property.
   (E)   Any person who is assessed the cost of closure and/or civil penalty by
the court shall be personally liable for the payment thereof by the City.
   (F)   A tenant is entitled to their reasonable relocation costs, as those
are determined by the court if, without actual notice, the tenant moved into
the property, after either:
      1.   The owner or tenant received notice as described herein of the
Police Chief's determination as described above.
      2.   Unknown owner or other agent received notice of an action brought
pursuant to this Section.
      3.   Any person who is assessed with costs of closure and/or civil
penalty by the court shall be personally liable for the payment thereof to the
City. (Ord. 97-37, 7-21-1997)
6-11-8: SEVERABILITY:
If any provision of this Ordinance or its application, or any person or
circumstances held to be invalid for any reason, the remainder of said
application or its provisions to the other persons or circumstance shall not be
in any way affected. (Ord. 97-37, 7-21-1997)
CHAPTER 12
CLANDESTINE DRUG LAB SITES AND CHEMICAL DUMPSITES
SECTION:
6-12-1: General Provisions
6-12-2: Administration
6-12-3: Violations And Penalties
6-12-1: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
   (A)   Purpose And Intent: The purpose of this chapter is to reduce public
exposure to health risks where law enforcement officers have determined that
hazardous chemicals from a suspected clandestine drug lab site or associated
dumpsite may exist. The city council finds that such sites may contain
suspected chemicals and residues that place people, particularly children or
adults of childbearing age, at risk when exposed through inhabiting or visiting
the site, now and in the future.
   (B)   Interpretation And Application: In their interpretation and
application, the provisions of this chapter shall be construed to protect the
public health, safety and welfare.
Where the conditions imposed by any provision of this chapter are either more
or less restrictive than comparable provisions imposed by any other law,
ordinance, statute, or regulation of any kind, the regulations which are more
restrictive or which impose higher standards or requirements shall prevail.
Should any court of competent jurisdiction declare any section or subpart of
this chapter to be invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the
chapter as a whole or any part thereof, other than the provision declared
invalid.
   (C)   Fees: Fees for the administration of this chapter may be established
and amended periodically by resolution of the city council.
   (D)   Definitions: For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms or
words shall be interpreted as follows:
    CHEMICAL DUMPSITE: Any place or area where chemicals or other waste
materials used in a clandestine drug lab have been located.
   CHILD: Any person less than eighteen (18) years of age.
   CLANDESTINE DRUG LAB: The unlawful manufacture or attempt to manufacture
controlled substances.
   CLANDESTINE DRUG LAB SITE: Any place or area where law enforcement has
determined that conditions associated with the operation of an unlawful
clandestine drug lab exist. A clandestine drug lab site may include dwellings,
accessory buildings, accessory structures, a chemical dumpsite or any land.
   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE: A drug, substance or immediate precursor in the
schedules of article II of the Illinois controlled substances act, 720 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 570/201-217. The term shall not include distilled spirits,
wine, malt beverages, intoxicating liquors or tobacco.
   HOUSEHOLD HAZARDOUS WASTES: Waste generated from a clandestine drug lab.
Such wastes shall be treated, stored, transported or disposed of in a manner
consistent with Illinois department of health, Illinois pollution control
board, and Rock Island County health department rules and regulations.
   MANUFACTURE: In places other than a pharmacy, shall mean and include the
production, cultivation, quality control, and standardization, by mechanical,
physical, chemical or pharmaceutical means, packing, repacking, tableting,
encapsulating, labeling, relabeling, filling, or by other process, of drugs.
   MOVABLE PROPERTY: Is subject to, but not limited to, the following:
vehicles, boats, trailers, motor home appliances, and portable storage units.
   OWNER: Any person, firm or corporation who owns, in whole or in part, the
land, buildings or structures associated with a clandestine drug lab site or
chemical dumpsite.
   PUBLIC HEALTH NUISANCE: All dwellings, accessory structures and buildings or
adjacent property associated with a clandestine drug lab site are potentially
unsafe due to health hazards and are considered a public health nuisance. (Ord.
05-09, 3-7-2005)
6-12-2: ADMINISTRATION:
   (A)   Law Enforcement Notice To Other Authorities: Law enforcement
authorities that identify conditions associated with a clandestine drug site or
chemical dumpsite that places neighbors, visiting public, or present and future
occupants of the dwelling at risk for exposure to harmful contaminants and
other associated conditions, must promptly notify in writing the appropriate
municipal, child protection, and public health authorities, of the following:
      1.   Property location by street address and other identifiable
information.
      2.   Property owner's identity and location if known.
      3.   Identities of the occupants, especially the identities of any
children and women of childbearing age found or known to be associated with the
site.
      4.   Chemicals found and indications of chemical residues.
      5.   Presumed duration of the operation of the drug lab.
      6.   Conditions found at the drug lab.
   (B)   Declaration Of Property As A Public Health Nuisance: If law
enforcement determines the existence of a clandestine drug lab site or chemical
dumpsite, the property shall be declared a public health nuisance. A warning
sign shall be affixed to the dwelling entrances or property prior to the law
enforcement agency leaving the site.
   (C)   Notice Of Public Health Nuisance To Concerned Parties: Upon
notification by law enforcement authorities, the city health inspector shall
also notify the owner of the property by mail and notify the following parties:
      1.   Occupants of the property;
      2.   Neighbors at probable risk;
      3.   The city of East Moline police department;
      4.   The health inspector may notify any financial institution with an
interest of record of the declaration of public health nuisance;
      5.   The health inspector may notify the insurance company with a policy
known to be applicable to the subject property; and
      6.   Other state and local authorities, such as Illinois pollution
control board and Illinois department of health, which are known to have public
and environmental protection responsibilities that are applicable to the
situation.
   (D)   Property Owner's Responsibility To Act: The health inspector shall
also issue an order to abate the public health nuisance, including the
following:
      1.   Property owner and occupant(s) shall be provided with a notice. The
notice shall direct the owner and occupants to immediately vacate those
portions of the property, including building or structure interiors, which may
place the occupants or visitors at risk. This notice may include the posted
declaration of public health nuisance.
      2.   No person shall reside in or occupy any premises or property subject
to an order for abatement until such time as the health inspector has received
written documentation that the contamination has been reduced to an acceptable
level and that the cleaning of the premises was conducted in accordance with
the approved practices and standards for remediation of residual contamination
adopted by the city health department.
      3.   The property owner shall within ten (10) days of written notice,
contract with an appropriate environmental testing and cleaning firm to conduct
an on site assessment, complete cleanup, and remediation testing and follow up
testing, and determine that the property risks are sufficiently reduced in
accordance with the approved practices and standards for remediation of
residual contamination adopted by the city health department. The property
owner shall notify the city of actions taken and shall reach an agreement with
the city on the cleanup schedule. The city shall consider practical limitations
and the availability of contractors in approving the schedule for cleanup.
      4.   The property owner shall provide written documentation of the
cleanup process, including a signed, written statement that the contamination
has been reduced to an acceptable level and that the cleanup was conducted in
accordance with the approved practices and standards for remediation of
residual contamination adopted by the city health department.
   (E)   Property Owner's Responsibility For Costs: The property owner shall be
responsible for all costs of abatement or cleanup of the site, including
contractor's fees and public costs for services that were performed in
association with a clandestine drug lab site or chemical dumpsite cleanup.
Public costs may include, but are not limited to:
      1.   Posting of the site;
      2.   Notification of affected parties;
      3.   Expenses related to the recovery of costs, including the assessment
process;
      4.   Laboratory fees;
      5.   Cleanup services;
      6.   Administrative fees; and
      7.   Other associated costs.
   (F)   Recovery Of Public Costs:
      1.   If, after service of notice of the declaration of public health
nuisance, the property owner fails to arrange appropriate assessment and
cleanup, the city health inspector is authorized to proceed in a prompt manner
to initiate the on site assessment and cleanup and/or the securing of the
property until such work can be done.
      2.   If the city is unable to locate and contact the property owner
within ten (10) days of the declaration of public health nuisance, the city is
authorized to proceed in a prompt manner to initiate the on site assessment and
cleanup and/or the securing of the property until such work can be done.
      3.   The city may abate the nuisance by removing the hazardous structure
or building, or otherwise, such as, but not limited to: vehicles, boats,
trailers, motor homes, and portable storage units, according to 720 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/47-5 through 25.
      4.   If the city abates the public health nuisance, in addition to any
other legal remedy, the city shall be entitled to recover all costs plus an
additional twenty five percent (25%) of the costs for administration. The city
may recover costs by civil action against the person or persons who own the
property or by assessing such costs as a special tax against the property in
the manner as taxes and special assessments are certified and collected
pursuant to section
7-1-6 of this code.
      5.   When the estimated cost of testing, cleanup, and remediation exceeds
seventy five percent (75%) of the county assessor's market value of the
structure and land or seventy five percent (75%) of the estimated market value
of movable property, the city is authorized to notify the property owner of the
city's intent to demolish and dispose of the structures instead of proceeding
with cleaning and remediation, or to dispose of the movable property.
      6.   When a contaminated vehicle is impounded, the vehicle shall not be
released to the owner or a lien holder until remediation is completed and paid
by the owner or lien holder and impoundment fees are paid by the owner or lien
holder.
   (G)   Authority To Modify Or Remove Declaration Of Public Health Nuisance:
      1.   The health inspector is authorized to modify the declaration
conditions or remove the declaration of public health nuisance.
      2.   Such modifications or removal of the declaration shall only occur
after documentation from a qualified environmental or cleaning firm stating
that the health and safety risks, including those to neighbors and potential
dwelling occupants, are sufficiently reduced through remediation to warrant
modification or removal of the declaration. (Ord. 05-09, 3-7-2005)
6-12-3: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor
and upon conviction shall be subject to the penalties set forth in the general
penalty provisions of title 1, chapter 4 of this code. (Ord. 05-09, 3-7-2005)
CHAPTER 13
CAR OWNER RESPONSIBILITY ASSIGNMENT
SECTION:
6-13-1: Purpose
6-13-2: Public Nuisance
6-13-3: Length Of Impoundment And Fines
6-13-4: Subsequent Violations
6-13-5: Sound Amplification Systems Violations; Impoundment
6-13-6: Seizure, Impoundment And Hearings Request
6-13-7: Bonding Procedure
6-13-8: Hearing And Notification
6-13-9: Unclaimed Vehicles
6-13-10: Fees For Towing And Storage
6-13-1: PURPOSE:
This chapter is declared necessary for the preservation of the public peace,
health, safety and welfare of the people of the city, and is intended to
address a public nuisance created by individuals operating motor vehicles upon
the streets and highways of this city. (Ord. 09-01, 2-17-2009)
6-13-2: PUBLIC NUISANCE:
   (A)   A motor vehicle that is used in the violation of any of the offenses
contained in this section, as set forth below, shall be declared a public
nuisance and the owner of record shall be subject to having said vehicle
impounded for lengths of impoundment described in section
6-13-3 of this chapter and shall also be liable to the City of the penalties
indicated in section
6-13-3 of this chapter to include the fees for the towing and storage of the
vehicle and fines. The owner of record of such vehicle shall also be liable to
the City for an administrative fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00). In the
event the vehicle is left to remain in impoundment and not removed by the
registered vehicle owner upon the forty-five (45) day appeal time limit, the
one hundred dollar ($100.00) administrative fee may be forwarded to
collections.
      1.   The driver or any other person in possession of a motor vehicle who
is in violation of section
6-3-54 of this title.
      2.   The driver or any other person in possession of a motor vehicle
where the windows of the motor vehicle are obstructed in violation of the
Illinois vehicle code, 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/12-503(a) and (b).
      3.   The driver of a motor vehicle who is in violation of the Illinois
vehicle code, 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-101 entitled “drivers must
have licenses or permits” and the violator has an invalid driver’s license or
the violator’s driver’s license has been expired for more than six (6) months.
      4.   The driver or any other person in possession of a motor vehicle is
in violation of section
6-3-34, “Drug Paraphernalia”, or
6-3-38, “Possession Of Cannabis”, of this title, or the Illinois cannabis
control act, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 550/4(a), (b), or (c).
      5.   The driver or any other person in possession of a motor vehicle is
wanted as evidenced by the arrest on a valid arrest warrant issued by a court.
      6.   The driver or any other person in possession of a motor vehicle
while being twenty (20) years of age or younger is in possession of alcohol in
violation of section
3-7-26 of this code.
      7.   The driver of a motor vehicle who is in violation of the Illinois
vehicle code, 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-303, entitled “driving while
driver’s license, permit or privilege to operate a motor vehicle is suspended
or revoked”.
      8.   The motor vehicle unlawfully flees or attempts to flee and elude a
peace officer in violation of Illinois vehicle code, 625 ILCS 11-204, fleeing
or attempting to elude officers or 11-204.1, aggravated fleeing or attempting
to elude officer.
      9.   The driver or any other person in possession of a motor vehicle who
is in violation of the Illinois Cannabis Control Act, 720 ILCS 550/4 (d) or
(e), entitled “Possession of Cannabis; Violations; Punishment” and/or Illinois
Cannabis Control Act. 720 ILCS 550/5 (a), (b), (c), (d) and (e), entitled
“Manufacture or Delivery of Cannabis; Violations; Punishment”. Possession of
cannabis up to ten grams (10g) shall not be subject to this section.
      10.   The driver or any other person in possession of a motor vehicle who
is in violation of the Illinois vehicle code, 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/
11-501, entitled “driving while under the influence of alcohol, other drug or
drugs, intoxicating compound or compounds or any combination thereof”.
      11.   The driver or any other person in possession of a motor vehicle is
in violation of the Illinois criminal code, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/
24-1(a)(4), entitled “unlawful use of weapons”.
      12.   The motor vehicle is used in the commission of, or attempt to
commit a violation of Illinois criminal code, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/
24-1.2, entitled “aggravated discharge of a firearm” and/or Illinois criminal
code, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/24-1.5, entitled “reckless discharge of
a firearm”.
      13.   The driver or any other person in possession of a motor vehicle is
in violation of the Illinois controlled substances act, 720 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 570/402, entitled “possession unauthorized by this act; penalty”.
   (B)   The driver or other person in possession of the motor vehicle shall be
arrested or cited for the violations of the state statute(s) or city ordinance
(s) as indicated in subsections (A)1 through (A)13 of this section. (Ord. 09-
01, 2-17-2009; amd. Ord. 18-18, 11-19-2018; Ord. 21-07, 7-19-2021)
6-13-3: LENGTH OF IMPOUNDMENT AND FINES:
   (A)   Whenever a vehicle is used in violation of subsections
6-13-2(A)1 through (A)13 of this chapter, the registered owner's vehicle shall
be impounded for the following lengths of time and a penalty imposed against
the registered vehicle owner as indicated herein:
      1.   Violation of subsections
6-13-2(A)1 through (A)3 of this chapter, motor vehicle impounded for three (3)
days and a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00). Vehicles in violation of
these subsections shall only be eligible for impoundment upon the second
violation within five (5) years.
      2.   Violation of subsections
6-13-2(A)4 through (A)7 of this chapter, motor vehicle impounded for seven (7)
days and a fine of three hundred dollars ($300.00).
      3.   Violation of subsection
6-13-2(A)8, (A)9 or (A)10 of this chapter, motor vehicle impounded for ten (10)
days and a fine of four hundred dollars ($400.00).
      4.   Violation of subsection
6-13-2(A)11, (A)12 or (A)13 of this chapter, motor vehicle impounded for thirty
(30) days and a fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00). (Ord. 10-21, 7-19-2010)
6-13-4: SUBSEQUENT VIOLATIONS:
All lengths of impoundment, bonds, and fines imposed shall double upon any
subsequent violation of this chapter within five (5) years of the first
offense. (Ord. 09-01, 2-17-2009)
6-13-5: SOUND AMPLIFICATION SYSTEMS VIOLATIONS; IMPOUNDMENT:
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this or other ordinances, there shall
be no impoundment of an owner's vehicle for the vehicle's operation as a public
nuisance in violation of subsection
6-13-2(A)1 of this chapter when that vehicle has not been so operated as a
public nuisance in violation of subsection
6-13-2(A)1 of this chapter for a period of two (2) or more years. However, the
owner of a vehicle that is not impounded because of the preceding sentence
shall pay a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00) if the vehicle is found to
have been operated as a public nuisance in violation of subsection
6-13-2(A)1 of this chapter. For second and subsequent operations of a given
owner's vehicle as a public nuisance in violation of subsection
6-13-2(A)1 of this chapter that occur within two (2) years of the most recent
violation of that section, all other provisions of sections
6-13-1 through
6-13-10 of this chapter shall be fully operable. (Ord. 09-01, 2-17-2009)
6-13-6: SEIZURE, IMPOUNDMENT AND HEARINGS REQUEST:
Whenever a police officer has reasonable suspicion to believe that a vehicle is
subject to seizure and impoundment pursuant to this chapter, the police officer
shall provide for the towing of the vehicle to a facility controlled by the
city or its agents. When the vehicle is towed, the police officer shall notify
the person who is found to be in control of the vehicle at the time of the
alleged violation, if there is such a person, and the owner of said vehicle of
the fact of the seizure and the vehicle owner's right to post a cash bond as
indicated in section
6-13-7 of this chapter to retrieve possession of their vehicle pending a
hearing to be held by the city's code hearing officer. This notice shall be
given at the time of impoundment or as soon as reasonably possible. When the
vehicle is not impounded for a first offense pursuant to section
6-13-5 of this chapter, the police officer shall notify the vehicle's owner
that second and subsequent uses of the vehicle as a public nuisance in
violation of subsection
6-13-2(A)1 of this chapter that occur within two (2) years of the most recent
use as a public nuisance shall result in the impoundment of the vehicle
pursuant to this section. The notification shall also explain the vehicle
owner's right to a hearing with respect to the alleged violation. When a
vehicle is impounded, the officer shall also notify the owner and person in
control of the vehicle of the owner's right to a probable cause hearing as set
forth in subsection
6-13-8(I) of this chapter. (Ord. 09-01, 2-17-2009)
6-13-7: BONDING PROCEDURE:
   (A)   Whenever the owner, or an authorized agent of the owner, of a vehicle
seized pursuant to this chapter wishes to retrieve their vehicle prior to the
evidentiary hearing they may do so by posting a cash bond at police
headquarters in the amount indicated herein. Once the bond has been posted, the
vehicle shall be released without charge until an evidentiary hearing is held
by the city code hearing officer.
      1.   Violation of subsections
6-13-2(A)1 through (A)3 of this chapter, bond of four hundred seventy dollars
($470.00).
      2.   Violation of subsections
6-13-2(A)4 through (A)7 of this chapter, bond of seven hundred seventy dollars
($770.00).
      3.   Violation of subsection
6-13-2(A)8, (A)9 or (A)10 of this chapter, bond of eight hundred seventy
dollars ($870.00).
      4.   Violation of subsection
6-13-2(A)11, (A)12 or (A)13 of this chapter, bond of one thousand two hundred
seventy dollars ($1,270.00).
(Ord. 10-21, 7-19-2010; amd. Ord. 25-04, 2-3-2025)
6-13-8: HEARING AND NOTIFICATION:
   (A)   Within ten (10) days after a vehicle is seized and impounded pursuant
to this chapter, or not impounded by operation of section
6-13-5 of this chapter, the city shall notify by certified mail, return receipt
requested, the owner of record of the date, time and location of a hearing that
will be conducted pursuant to this section.
   (B)   A hearing shall be scheduled and held, unless continued by order of
the city code hearing officer, not more than thirty (30) days, or not less than
seven (7) days after the vehicle was seized. All interested persons shall be
given a reasonable opportunity to be heard at the hearing. The formal rules of
evidence shall not apply at the hearing and hearsay evidence shall be
admissible. The hearing shall be open to the public and shall be recorded. If
the city of East Moline shall enter into an intergovernmental agreement
providing for the shared use of the code enforcement hearing officer, the
notice and hearing date rules established pursuant to the intergovernmental
agreement shall apply to this subsection.
   (C)   If, after the hearing, the city code hearing officer determines by a
preponderance of the evidence that the vehicle had been stolen prior to the
alleged violation, he shall enter an order dismissing the procedure. If,
however, he determines by a preponderance of the evidence that the vehicle was
not stolen prior to the violation, he shall enter an order requiring the
vehicle to continue to be impounded for the applicable length of time provided
for in this section and until the owner pays the fees imposed under sections
6-13-3 and
6-13-4 of this chapter if the vehicle is still in the custody of the city. If
the vehicle is not in the city's custody, then subsection (D) of this section
shall apply.
   (D)   If a bond had been posted and the owner has possession of the vehicle,
the city code hearing officer shall enter an order deducting the fees imposed
under sections
6-13-3 and
6-13-4 of this chapter as if the vehicle was actually held for the time period
specified from the cash bond that was posted.
   (E)   In the event the defendant wishes to appeal the decision of the city
code hearing officer under the provisions of the administrative review act,
said defendant shall pay the cost of the preparation and transcription of the
record of the hearing and shall appeal to the circuit court.
   (F)   If the city code hearing officer determines that there is no such
probable cause, the vehicle will be returned without penalty or other fees.
   (G)   The penalty and fees shall be a debt due and owed to the city.
However, if a cash bond has been posted, the bond shall be applied to the fine.
If the city code hearing officer determines that the vehicle was not used with
the permission, express or implied, of the owner, he or she shall order the
return of the vehicle or cash bond. In the event it shall become necessary for
the city to collect the debt by filing an action in the circuit court, they
shall be entitled to recover, in addition to the amount due, court costs and
reasonable attorney fees.
   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section, whenever a person with
a lien of record against a vehicle impounded under this chapter has commenced
foreclosure proceedings, possession of the vehicle shall be given to that
person if he or she agrees in writing to refund to the city the net proceeds of
any foreclosure sale, less any amounts necessary to pay all lien holders of
record, up to the total amount of penalties and fees imposed under sections
6-13-3 and
6-13-4 of this chapter.
   (H)   In addition to the hearing procedures set forth in the preceding
subsections of this section, every owner who has his or her car impounded
pursuant to this chapter shall be entitled to a probable cause hearing before
the city's code hearing officer, or if he or she is not available, before an
impartial Illinois licensed attorney at law, on the question of whether or not
the vehicle has been operated as a public nuisance in violation of subsections
6-13-2(A)1 through (A)13 of this chapter. This hearing, if requested, shall
occur no later than two (2) business days from the time of the owner's request
for such a hearing. The owner's request for a probable cause hearing must be
made in writing to the city of East Moline police department within three (3)
days of receiving notice of the right to such a probable cause hearing.
(Ord. 09-01, 2-17-2009; amd. Ord. 25-04, 2-3-2025)
6-13-9: UNCLAIMED VEHICLES:
Any motor vehicle that is not reclaimed with thirty (30) days after the
expiration of the time during which the owner of record may seek judicial
review of the City’s action under this chapter, or the time at which a final
judgement is rendered in favor of the City, or the time a final administrative
decision is rendered against an owner of record who is in default, may be
disposed of as an unclaimed vehicle as provided by law. In the event the
vehicle is left to remain in impoundment and not removed by the registered
vehicle owner upon the forty-five (45) day appeal time limit, the one hundred
dollar ($ 100.00) administrative fee may be forwarded to collection. As used in
this chapter, the “owner of record” of a vehicle means the record titleholder.
(Ord. 09-01, 2-17-2009; amd. Ord. 21-07, 7-19-2021)
6-13-10: FEES FOR TOWING AND STORAGE:
Fees for towing and storage of a vehicle under this chapter shall be the same
as those charged per the contract for towing service with the city in effect at
the time of the violation. (Ord. 09-01, 2-17-2009)
CHAPTER 14
IMPOUNDMENT OF FLEEING VEHICLES
SECTION:
6-14-1: Authority To Impound Fleeing Vehicles
6-14-1: AUTHORITY TO IMPOUND FLEEING VEHICLES:
   (A)   A motor vehicle involved in an unlawful attempt to flee or elude
police officers shall be subject to impoundment under the procedures of this
section.
      1.   Whenever a police officer has observed a vehicle engaged in an
unlawful attempt to flee and elude and believes that there exist probable cause
to tow said vehicle, and locates said vehicle on a public thoroughfare or
within a parking lot under City ordinance control or a parking lot open to the
general public within the City of East Moline, Illinois within Eight (8) hours
of the initial incident, then said vehicle may be seized and impounded by the
City of East Moline Police Department
      2.   Notice shall be given to the person in control of the vehicle as
described in
6-13-6.
      3.   If the said vehicle is not located within the Eight (8) hours, the
police department may file a notice of intent to impound with the
administrative clerk of MUNICES as outlined in section C.
   (B)   A police officer shall, if possible, record the vehicle make and color
and the issuing state and number of the license plate of a vehicle that the
officer has attempted to stop through use of the emergency signal equipment on
the officer’s vehicle. If the operator of the other vehicle fails or refuses to
stop, and if the police officer forgoes or abandons pursuit of the other
vehicle for reasons of public safety, the officer shall report the recorded
information as directed by the chief of police for delivery to appropriate
sections of the police department.
   (C)   The police department shall send a notice of intent to impound the
vehicle described in the police officer’s report to the owner of record of the
vehicle. The notice shall be sent either by first class mail or by messenger to
the address of the owner of record as indicated in state registration records.
The notice shall include the following: a statement that the operator of the
vehicle failed or refused to stop when ordered to do so by the East Moline
police officer; the date, approximate time and approximate location of the
event; the description of the vehicle as contained in the officer’s report; and
notice of an opportunity to contest eligibility for impoundment. A copy of the
notice shall be forwarded to the city code hearing officer. A notice is
presumed delivered upon being deposited with the United States postal service
with proper postage affixed.
   (D)   An owner of record who receives a notice pursuant to subsection (C) of
this section may contest eligibility for impoundment by written request
delivered to the city code hearing officer, postmarked within fourteen (14)
days after the delivery of the notice. The city code hearing officer shall set
a date for a hearing on the eligibility of the vehicle for impoundment, and
shall notify the owner of the date, time and place of hearing. The hearing date
must be no more than thirty (30) days after the request for a hearing has been
filed. At the hearing, the police officer’s report shall be considered prima
facie correct. In order to disprove the vehicle’s eligibility for impoundment,
the owner of record must prove that: 1) at the time and date of the attempted
stop as described in the police officer’s report, the described vehicle was not
operated within the city of East Moline; or 2) at the time and date of the
attempted stop, the vehicle had been reported stolen; or 3) the license
information described in the report does not match the listed make of the
described vehicle. If the owner of record prevails, the notice of intent to
impound the owner’s vehicle shall be withdrawn and the vehicle shall not be
eligible for impoundment under this section.
   (E)   If the vehicle owner receives a notice pursuant to subsection (C) of
this section and: 1) fails to contest eligibility under subsection (D) of this
section, or 2) does not prevail in the contest of eligibility, the vehicle
described in the notice shall be eligible for impoundment if found on the
public way or within a parking lot under city ordinance control or parking lot
open to the general public or in a parking lot or on the public way of another
city with whom the city has an intergovernmental agreement to provide
assistance in conjunction with an incident involving multijurisdictional
problems within twelve (12) months following the conclusion of the contest, if
a contest was requested, or following the last date to request a contest if
none was requested.
   (F)   The owner of a vehicle impounded under this section shall be subject
to an administrative penalty of five hundred dollars ($500.00) plus the cost of
towing and storage of the vehicle.
   (G)   A vehicle impounded under this section shall be held until the
investigation into the offense has been completed. Once the investigation is
completed, the owner of the vehicle shall be notified of the eligibility of the
vehicle for release. If the vehicle is not claimed, the vehicle will be
disposed of as an unclaimed vehicle pursuant to law. (Ord. 09-03, 2-17-2009;
amd. Ord. 18-18, 11-19-2018)
TITLE 7
HEALTH AND SANITATION
CHAPTER 1
HEALTH REGULATIONS
SECTION:
7-1-1: Health Nuisances
7-1-2: Definitions
7-1-3: Enumerations
7-1-4: Investigation
7-1-5: Inspections
7-1-6: Abatement
7-1-7: Penalties
7-1-8: Conflict Of Ordinance
7-1-9: Separability Of Provisions
7-1-1: HEALTH NUISANCES:
An ordinance regulating nuisances and their abatement with the City of East
Moline, Illinois.
Whereas, the Mayor and the City Council of the City of East Moline are aware
that health nuisances do result in scenic blight, cause serious hazards to the
public health and safety, create harborage for vermin, depress the value of
nearby property, offend the senses, and otherwise interfere with community life
and development has deemed it necessary and desirable to regulate nuisances.
Therefore, the East Moline City Council hereby adopts health nuisance
regulations, and shall be controlling within the limits of the City of East
Moline, Illinois, from the date on which this Ordinance shall take effect.
(Ord. 92-42, 10-5-1992)
7-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of
this Ordinance:
HEALTH AUTHORITY: The Health Inspector for the East Moline Health Department or
duly authorized representative(s).
PERSON: Any individual, group of individuals, association, trust, partnership,
corporation, or any other entity.
PROPERTY OWNER: Any individual, group of individuals, association, trust,
partnership, corporation, or any other entity whose name legal title to the
real estate is recorded. (Ord. 92-42, 10-5-1992)
7-1-3: ENUMERATIONS:
Health nuisance includes any act, omission to act, or condition on any real
property which injures or threatens the health or safety of one or more persons
and shall not be limited to, but shall include the following:
   (A)   The storage, collection, accumulation, discharge, or deposition of any
offal, fecal matter filth, refuse, weeds, vegetation, animal carcass, dead
organic material, garbage, stagnant or polluted waters, combustible materials
and similar materials in any place or on any property so as to threaten the
health or safety of the individual or the public or to be conductive to the
breeding of flies, rats, or other vermin, or to the prejudice of others.
   (B)   The presence of rats, flies, or other vermin.
   (C)   To discharge or deposit any offal, liquid waste, sewage effluent, dead
animal(s), or other polluting material into or upon any watercourse, stream,
river, lake, pond, spring, well, abandoned well, ground-surface, drainage
ditch, storm sewer, field drain tile, street or public highway.
   (D)   To corrupt or render impure the water of any spring, river, stream,
pond or lake, to the injury or prejudice of others.
   (E)   To erect or continue to use any building or other place for the
exercise of any trade, employment, or manufacture, which, by occasioning
noxious exhalations, is dangerous to the health of individuals or to the
public.
   (F)   To collect, store, deposit, or discharge flammable refuse, liquid, or
other material in any building or on any place in such manner as to constitute
a hazard of fire injury to individuals or the public.
   (G)   To dump, abandon, deposit, dismantle, or burn upon any public or
private property, right-of-way, highway, park, street, or parkway anywhere in
Rock Island County, any trash, garbage, ashes, junk, junked or wrecked motor
vehicles or nonmotorized equipment, or parts thereof, or miscellaneous solid
waste.
   (H)   The unlawful disposal of the carcasses of dead animals, fish, or fowl.
   (I)   The exposure of any person to any communicable disease by any unlawful
act or practice.
   (J)   To own, maintain, or keep a dwelling unit unfit for human habitation
or dangerous or detrimental to life, safety, or health because of lack of
repair, defects in the sewage system, plumbing facilities, lighting, or
ventilation, the existence of contagious diseases or unsanitary conditions
likely to cause sickness among persons residing in said premises or residing in
proximity thereof.
   (K)   Failure to secure areas, buildings, equipment, or places against
unauthorized access where such access threatens the safety of individuals.
   (L)   Whatever renders food or drink detrimental to human beings, as
determined by the Health Authority.
   (M)   Any attractive nuisance which may prove detrimental to life, health,
or safety whether in a building, on the premises of a building, or upon an
unoccupied lot. This includes any abandoned well shaft, basement or excavation,
motor vehicle, discarded, abandoned, unattended, or used refrigerators,
iceboxes and similar containers equipped with airtight door or lid, snap lock,
or other locking device which may not be released from the inside. The duties
of this item are imposed alike on the owner of the nuisance and the owner or
occupant of the premises where the nuisance is permitted to remain.
   (N)   To allow growth of weeds and grass to exceed ten inches (10") in
height upon any public or private property.
   (O)   For the owner or keeper of any lot or premises to suffer, to remain
thereon, to the annoyance and detriment of other persons outside the buildings
located on said premises, any furniture not designed for outdoor use. (Ord. 92-
42, 10-5-1992)
7-1-4: INVESTIGATION:
The Health Authority shall investigate, upon written complaint of any person,
or on its own initiative any alleged health nuisance in the City of East
Moline, Illinois. (Ord. 92-42, 10-5-1992)
7-1-5: INSPECTIONS:
The Health Authority shall have the authority to enter any property at any
reasonable time to inspect for health, sanitation, or safety purposes to
determine compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance. In the event the
Health Authority, in attempting to enter any premises for the purpose of making
an inspection to carry out the provisions of this Article, shall be refused
entry, an affidavit may be made under oath to any judge of the circuit court
for a warrant authorizing the Health Authority named in the affidavit to enter
upon or into such premises for the purpose of determining the existence of the
conditions set forth in the affidavit. (Ord. 92-42, 10-5-1992)
7-1-6: ABATEMENT:
   (A)   Nonsummary Abatement:
      1.   By Owner:
         (a)   The Health Authority may serve or cause to be served a notice,
in writing, upon the owner, agent, occupant, or person in possession, charge,
or control of any lot, building, or premises or item of personalty in or upon
which any nuisance exists, requiring said person to abate the same within a
specified, reasonable time, in such manner as the notice shall direct.
         (b)   An appeal to the East Moline City Council from any notice shall
be provided if a written request for a hearing is filed with the Health
Department within the time established for the abatement of the nuisance.
      2.   By Health Department: If the person so served and notified does not
abate the nuisance within the specified reasonable time, the Health Authority
may proceed to abate the nuisance in any or all manner allowable by law,
including, without limiting the generality thereof, the following:
         (a)   Seeking to impose a monetary penalty as defined by Section
7-1-7 of this Chapter by instituting Ordinance enforcement action.
         (b)   Seeking to enjoin the continuation of the nuisance by filing of
a lawsuit in a court of competent jurisdiction.
         (c)   All expenses incurred thereby shall be paid by the owner, agent,
occupant, or person in possession of said property; said expenses shall be a
lien upon said property if payment is not made to the Health Department after
presentation of a bill and a reasonable period of time.
   (B)   Summary Abatement: Whenever, in the opinion of the Health Authority, a
nuisance creates an imminent threat of serious injury to person(s) or real
property, or if the nuisance can be abated summarily without or with only minor
damage to the items or premises which are creating the nuisance, and the
continuation of the nuisance poses a substantial threat of injury to persons or
property or a substantial interference with the quiet enjoyment of life
normally present in the community, the Health Authority shall proceed to abate
such nuisance; provided, further that whenever the owner, occupant agent, or
person in possession, charge, or control of the real or personal property which
has become a nuisance is unknown or cannot readily be found, the Health
Authority may proceed to abate such nuisance without notice. Where the
abatement of the nuisance requires continuing acts by the Health Authority
beyond the initial summary abatement and any other additional emergency
abatements, it shall seek abatement of such nuisance on a permanent basis
through judicial process as soon as readily possible. All expenses incurred
hereby shall be paid by the owner, agent, occupant, or person in possession of
said property. Said expenses shall be a lien upon said property if payment is
not made to the Health Department after presentation of a bill and a reasonable
period of time. (Ord. 92-42, 10-5-1992)
7-1-7: PENALTIES:
Any person who violates any provision of this Ordinance shall be guilty of a
petty offense and shall be fined a sum not to exceed five hundred dollars
($500.00). Each day's violation constitutes a separate offense. (Ord. 92-42,
10-5-1992)
7-1-8: CONFLICT OF ORDINANCE:
In any case where a provision of this Ordinance is found to be in conflict with
a provision of any zoning, building, fire, safety, or health ordinance, or Code
of City of East Moline existing on the effective date of this Ordinance, the
provision which, in the judgment of the Health Authority, established the
higher standards for the promotion and protection of the health and safety of
the people shall be deemed to prevail, and such other ordinance or codes are
hereby declared to be repealed to the extent that they may be found in conflict
with this Ordinance. (Ord. 92-42, 10-5-1992)
7-1-9: SEPARABILITY OF PROVISIONS:
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this
Ordinance should be declared invalid for any reason whatsoever, such decision
shall remain in full force and effect and, to this end, the provisions of the
ordinance are hereby declared to be severable. (Ord. 92-42, 10-5-1992)
CHAPTER 2
FOOD SERVICE SANITATION
SECTION:
7-2-1: Adoption By Reference Rules And Regulations, Food Service Sanitation,
State Of Illinois Department Of Public Health, 1983
7-2-2: Adoption By Reference Rules And Regulations, Retail Food Store
Sanitation, Illinois Department Of Public Health, Office Of Health Regulation;
Division Of Food, Drugs And Dairies, 1983 Compliance Procedures
7-2-3: Definitions
7-2-4: Establishment Minimums
7-2-5: Permits
7-2-5.1: Required
7-2-5.2: Types Of Permits
7-2-5.3: Applications
7-2-5.4: Process For Issuing Of Permits
7-2-5.5: Fees For Permit
7-2-6: Inspections
7-2-6.1: Inspection Frequency
7-2-6.2: Access
7-2-6.3: Consent To Inspection
7-2-6.4: Report Of Inspections
7-2-6.5: Correction Of Violations
7-2-7: Administration And Enforcement
7-2-7.1: Compliance Conferences
7-2-7.2: Suspension And Reinstatement Of Permit
7-2-7.3: Revocation Of Permit
7-2-7.4: Notices
7-2-7.5: Hearings
7-2-7.6: Enforcement And Penalties
7-2-8: Food Handlers Training And Food Sanitation Certificates
7-2-9: Examination And Condemnation Of Food And Equipment
7-2-10: Foods From Outside Jurisdiction
7-2-11: Procedure When Infection Is Suspected
7-2-12: Exemptions
7-2-1: ADOPTION BY REFERENCE, FOOD SERVICE SANITATION RULES AND REGULATIONS:
Whereas, the mayor and the city council of the City of East Moline are aware
that a potential for foodborne illness exists in the city; that studies of
foodborne illness outbreaks have indicated the need for health agencies to
direct more attention to the protection of foods which cause foodborne illness;
and that it is desirable that state and local health agencies adopt and apply
uniform food service sanitation guidelines.
Therefore, the city council of the City of East Moline, Illinois, for the
purpose of prescribing regulations protecting the public from foodborne
disease, hereby adopts certain regulations known as food service sanitation
regulations, as adopted by the State of Illinois Department of Public Health,
being particularly the 2017 FDA Food Code edition thereof, and any future
revisions or addenda thereto, of which not less than three (3) copies of said
regulations have been and are now filed in the Office of the Clerk of the City
of East Moline, and the same are hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if
set out at length herein, and from the effective date hereof, the provisions
thereof shall be controlling within the limits of the City of East Moline,
Illinois. (Ord. 84-19, 5-7-1984; amd. Ord. 22-01, 3-7-2022)
7-2-2: ADOPTION BY REFERENCE, RETAIL FOOD STORE SANITATION RULES AND
REGULATIONS:
Whereas, the mayor and the city council of the City of East Moline are aware
that a potential for foodborne illness exists in the city; that studies of
foodborne illness outbreaks have indicated the need for health agencies to
direct more attention to the protection of foods which cause foodborne illness;
and that it is desirable that state and local health agencies adopt and apply
uniform retail food store handling requirements.
Therefore, the city council of the City of East Moline, Illinois, for the
purpose of prescribing regulations protecting the public from foodborne
disease, hereby adopts certain regulations known as retail food store
sanitation regulations, as adopted by the State of Illinois, Department of
Public Health, being particularly the 2017 FDA Food Code edition thereof and
any future revisions or addenda thereto, of which not less than three (3)
copies have been and are now filed in the Office of the Clerk of the City of
East Moline, and the same are hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if
set out at length herein, and from the effective date hereof, the provisions
thereof shall be controlling within the limits of the City of East Moline,
Illinois. (Ord. 84-19, 5-7-1984; amd. Ord. 22-01, 3-7-2022)
COMPLIANCE PROCEDURES
7-2-3: DEFINITIONS:
For any definitions or terms not found in this section the city will look to
one of the following resources for guidance in the interpretation and
enforcement of this ordinance: Illinois Department of Public Health (IDPH),
food and drug administration (FDA), National Environmental Health Association
(NEHA) or any reputable food service or public health books or documents.
The following definitions shall have the following meanings ascribed to them
for the interpretation and enforcement of this chapter:
 
                           Fee applied to an additional area within the same
                           base of operation type be it food service or retail
                           food for each of the following areas: customer self-
ADDITIONAL AREA ADD ON:    service areas, delicatessen department, bakery
                           department, liquor by the drink, produce department,
                           meat department, seafood department, or banquet
                           area. More than one may apply.
                           Someone approved by the health officer or city
AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE: administrator to work directly under the supervision
                           of the health officer in the enforcement of this
                           chapter.
                           A licensed food facility regulated by a governmental
                           entity where food is stored, prepared, portioned,
COMMISSARY:                packaged or any combination thereof, and where such
                           food is intended for consumption at another location
                           or place from a mobile food unit or food cart.
                           Applied to areas of operation where the operation
CONVENIENCE AREA:          type differs from the primary base of operation and
                           that area is smaller than fifteen percent (15%) of
                           the base.
                           An operation conducted by a person who produces or
                           packages food or drink, other than foods and drinks
                           listed as prohibited in Section 5, paragraph 1.5 of
                           subsection (b), of the Illinois Food Handling
COTTAGE FOOD OPERATION:    Regulation Enforcement Act, in a kitchen located in
                           that person's primary domestic residence or another
                           appropriately designed and equipped kitchen on a
                           farm for direct sale by the owner, a family member,
                           or employee.
                           A common facility or area where farmers gather to
FARMERS MARKET:            sell a variety of fresh fruits and vegetables and
                           other locally produced farm and food products
                           directly to consumers.
 
 
                An operation that stores, prepares, packages, serves, vends food directly to the
               consumer, or otherwise provides food for human consumption such as a restaurant;
               satellite or catered feeding location; catering operation if the operation
               provides food directly to a consumer or to a conveyance used to transport people;
               market; vending location; conveyance used to transport people; institution; or
               food bank; and relinquishes possession of food to a consumer directly, or
               indirectly through a delivery service such as home delivery of grocery orders or
               restaurant takeout orders, or delivery service that is provided by common
               carriers.
               (A)   Food establishment includes:
               1.   An element of the operation such as a transportation vehicle or a central
               preparation facility that supplies a vending location or satellite feeding
               location unless the vending or feeding location is permitted by the regulatory
               authority; and
               2.   An operation that is conducted in a mobile, stationary, temporary, or
               permanent facility or location; where consumption is on or off the premises; and
               regardless of whether there is a charge for the food.
               (B)   Food establishment does not include:
               1.   An establishment that offers only prepackaged foods that are not time/
FOOD           temperature control for safety foods;
ESTABLISHMENT: 2.   A produce stand that only offers whole, uncut fresh fruits and vegetables;
               3.   A food processing plant; including those that are located on the premises of
               a food establishment;
               4.   A kitchen in a private home if only food that is not time/temperature
               control for safety food, is prepared for sale or service at a function such as a
               religious or charitable organization's bake sale if allowed by law and if the
               consumer is informed by a clearly visible placard at the sales or service
               location that the food is prepared in a kitchen that is not subject to regulation
               and inspection by the regulatory authority;
               5.   An area where food that is prepared as specified in subparagraph (2)(D) of
               this definition is sold or offered for human consumption;
               6.   A kitchen in a private home, such as a small family day-care provider; or a
               bed-and- breakfast operation that prepares and offers food to guests if the home
               is owner occupied, the number of available guest bedrooms does not exceed six
               (6), breakfast is the only meal offered, the number of guests served does not
               exceed eighteen (18), and the consumer is informed by statements contained in
               published advertisements, mailed brochures, and placards posted at the
               registration area that the food is prepared in a kitchen that is not regulated
               and inspected by the regulatory authority; or
               7.   A private home that receives catered or home-delivered food.
 
 
                        The licensed environmental health practitioner, or
                        person holding an equivalent license allowed by the
HEALTH OFFICER:         State of Illinois, who has been designated by the city
                        to act with authority to enforce this chapter. The
                        terms health authority and health inspector shall have
                        equivalent meaning for use in this chapter.
                        A motorized, self-propelled food establishment, or a
                        trailer/vehicle towed by a motorized vehicle, that is
                        readily movable, and which typically operates at a
MOBILE FOOD UNIT:       remote location and returns to base of operation or
                        commissary at the end of its daily business. MFUs are
                        required to be property registered, licensed, and
                        insured. Operators of the MFU must possess proof of a
                        valid driver's license.
                        Shall apply to any food facility newly constructed when
NEW FOOD ESTABLISHMENT: an existing structure is converted to use as a food
                        service establishment or retail food store or changing
                        ownership.
                        Applies when application is made for a facility being
PLAN REVIEW:            newly constructed, changing use of operation, or being
                        extensively remodeled.
                        Any event that is not open to the general public, such
                        as a wedding, shower, or employee work party in which
                        some type of invitation is issued. Events where
PRIVATE EVENT:          invitation is made using methods, including, but not
                        limited to, in a newspaper, online, on a flier, or by
                        selling tickets to the public are not considered
                        private events.
 
 
                             A nonself-propelled vehicle strictly limited to
PUSHCART:                    serving only foods with limited food preparation
                             and assembly or commercial or commissary prepared
                             foods.
                             Any establishment or section of an establishment
                             where food and food products are offered to the
                             consumer and intended for, though not limited to,
RETAIL FOOD STORE:           off premises consumption. The term includes
                             delicatessens that offer prepared food in bulk
                             quantities only. The term does not include
                             establishments which handle only prepackaged
                             spirits.
                             Any establishment operating at a fixed location
                             for less than six (6) months of the year. This
                             term is intended, but not limited, to mean such
                             locations as baseball parks, swimming pools, and
                             recreational facilities serving a limited menu for
                             a limited time based on seasonal needs. Seasonal
                             concession stands electing to serve potentially
                             hazardous foods shall meet all applicable
SEASONAL FOOD ESTABLISHMENT: requirements for a food service establishment.
                             Those stands unable to meet basic food safety
                             requirements, including, without limitation, a
                             potable permanent water source under pressure,
                             approved hot water heating devices, proper sewage
                             disposal facilities, required hand washing
                             facilities, and required utensil washing
                             facilities, shall limit their menu to prepackaged
                             retail foods only. (Ord. 11-12, 4-4-2011; amd.
                             Ord. 22-01, 3-7-2022; Ord. 24-03, 4-15-2024)
 
7-2-4: ESTABLISHMENT MINIMUMS:
   (A)   Equipment Required: All applicable food service equipment for use in
establishments with a fixed location or in mobile food units shall be of a
quality as approved by the National Sanitation Foundation (NSF) or equivalent.
New equipment, which is approved for a certain use by NSF, shall be
automatically approved by the health officer for said use. Other applicable
equipment or used equipment shall be evaluated for approval by the health
officer. In addition to the equipment required by the Illinois Department of
Public Health to handle the desired operation of the facility the following
provisions shall also be met if deemed necessary by the health officer; hand
washing facilities shall be provided for each food service area, must be within
the same room and must be convenient for employees.
   (B)   Operations: Food facilities shall operate within the permissions of
their risk class as stated on their permits. For facilities hosting private
events, such as weddings or work parties or showers, where use of the kitchen,
storage or ware washing facilities is not provided then these events are not
subject to the provisions of this chapter.
   (C)   Operational Logs Required: Facilities shall maintain any operational
logs relating to the: safety of the foods being prepared, served, or cooled;
monitoring food refrigeration equipment; sanitation devices such as dish
machines; or any other logs as deemed necessary by the health officer. These
logs shall be kept on file and may be reviewed by the health officer if
requested. Facilities with high temperature dish machines must use single use,
irreversible registering temperature indicators as often as deemed necessary to
ensure surface temperatures of one hundred sixty degrees FFahrenheit (160°F)
are being met.
   (D)   Restrictions And Modifications And Variances: The health officer may
impose additional requirements on the establishment as deemed necessary to
protect against health hazards related to the conduct of the establishment and
may prohibit the sale of all or some potentially hazardous foods. The health
officer may also waive or modify the requirements set forth in this ordinance
through a variance when it is believed that no health hazard will result. Such
restrictions, waivers or modifications shall be documented in writing and kept
on file with the health authority.
   (E)   Ware Washing Machines: Ware washing machines installed after adoption
of this ordinance shall be equipped to automatically dispense detergents and
sanitizers; and incorporate a visual means to verify that detergents and
sanitizers are delivered or a visual or audible alarm to signal if the
detergents and sanitizers are not delivered to the respective washing and
sanitizing cycles. Ware washing machines shall also be equipped with a pressure
gauge or similar device that measures and displays the water pressure in the
supply line immediately before entering the ware washing machine.
(Ord. 11-12, 4-4-2011; amd. Ord. 22-01, 3-7-2022)
7-2-5: PERMITS:
7-2-5.1: REQUIRED:
No person shall operate a food establishment, temporary food establishment,
mobile unit, pushcart, concession stand, or retail food establishment who does
not have a valid permit or permits issued to them by the health officer of the
city of East Moline. Only a person who complies with the requirements of this
ordinance shall be entitled to receive or retain such a permit. Permits shall
not be transferable from one person to another nor shall said permit be
applicable to any locations, buildings, or places other than that for which it
is issued. A valid permit shall be posted in every food establishment so as to
be clearly visible to all customers. A valid permit is one that has not been
suspended, revoked, or expired. Annual permits shall expire December 31st of
each year, unless sooner suspended or revoked, and shall be renewed on or
before January 1st of each year.
The health authority shall issue a permit to the applicant if inspection
records reveal that the proposed or existing food operation complies with the
provisions of this ordinance. The facility must meet all applicable zoning,
building, plumbing and fire requirements as set forth by the city of East
Moline or the permit may be denied, suspended, or revoked.
All permits issued by the health authority shall be signed by the health
authority prior to presentation to the establishment. (Ord. 11-12, 4-4-2011;
amd. Ord. 22-01, 3-7-2022; Ord. 24-03, 4-15-2024)
7-2-5.2: TYPES OF PERMITS:
   (A)   Food service: Shall be required for any establishment or part of the
establishment where operations conducted fall within the definition of "food
establishment" as defined by this chapter.
   (B)   Retail Food: Shall be required for any establishment or part of an
establishment where operations conducted fall within the definition of "retail
food store" as defined by this chapter.
   (C)   Annual: Shall be required for any food establishment operating at a
fixed location for six (6) months or more per calendar year and requiring a
food service or retail food permit. Also required for mobile food units and
pushcarts.
   (D)   Seasonal: Shall be required for any seasonal concession stand, and
summer meal sites so long as the establishment is operating at a fixed location
for less than six (6) months of the year and requires a food service or retail
food permit.
   (E)   Temporary: Shall be required for any food establishment operating at a
fixed location, in conjunction with a single event or celebration, requiring a
food service or retail food permit. Permit may not exceed five (5) consecutive
days unless otherwise allowed by the provisions of this chapter.
   (F)   Conditional: May be granted to establishments when additional time is
needed to correct outstanding minor violations or procure the proper number of
certified food protection managers as required by the provisions of the 2017
FDA Food Code. May also be granted in lieu of suspending or revoking a permit
or prior to the initial opening of a facility. (Ord. 11-12, 4-4-2011; amd. Ord.
22-01, 3-7-2022; Ord. 24-03, 4-15-2024)
7-2-5.3: APPLICATIONS:
Any person desiring to operate a food establishment, retail food store, mobile
unit, temporary or seasonal facility shall make written application for a
permit on forms provided by the health authority. Such application shall
include at minimum the applicant's full name, mailing address, phone number, e-
mail address, and whether such applicant is an individual, firm, corporation,
or partnership; as well as the location of the proposed facility, and the
signature of the applicant More information may be required by the health
authority as deemed necessary and the information provided on the application
shall be kept current at all times. Applications for temporary or seasonal
permits shall also include the inclusive dates of the proposed operation and a
menu. Application for plan review shall be made for any operation requiring new
construction, remodeling, or a change of use prior to being approved. (Ord. 11-
12, 4-4-2011; amd. Ord. 22-01, 3-7-2022; Ord. 24-03, 4-15-2024)
7-2-5.4: PROCESS FOR ISSUING OF PERMITS:
   (A)   New Food Establishments:
      1.   New Operation Provisions: Any person desiring to operate a new
annual food service or retail food establishment, mobile unit, seasonal
concession stand, or summer meal site shall comply with the provisions of this
section to obtain any and all necessary permits. The establishment must meet
the provisions of the current ordinance being used.
      2.   Consultation Fees: Consultation fees may apply for any site the
department is requested to look at for use as a potential food operation site.
This consultation does not forgo the need of the owner or applicant to submit
the application of plan review and/or plans.
      3.   Application For Plan Review: To ensure a proper review and time
allowed to change any items not meeting the provisions of this ordinance, the
application for plan review, payment for the review, and any required plans
should be submitted to the health officer at least thirty (30) days prior to
the start of any construction, remodeling, or when the change in ownership is
intended to occur. Inspections conducted prior to opening are included as part
of this service.
      4.   Submission Of Plans: Whenever a food establishment or retail food
store is constructed or remodeled, and whenever an existing structure is
converted to use as a food establishment or retail food store, properly
prepared plans and specifications for such construction, remodeling, or
conversions shall be submitted to the health officer for review and approval
before construction, remodeling or conversion has begun. The plans and
specifications shall include the proposed layout, arrangement, mechanical plans
and construction materials of work areas and the type and model of proposed
fixed equipment and facilities. The health officer may waive the submission of
plans and specifications, or require less than is stated in this section,
provided it is found that the nature of the work is such that the complete
requirements of this section are not necessary to obtain compliance with this
chapter.
   5.   Review And Approval Of Plans And Application: Once the application,
plans and specifications have been completely submitted to the health officer
they shall be promptly reviewed. Any discrepancies with the provisions of this
chapter shall be reported to the owner or person in charge. Submission of new
plans or written agreement to comply may be required at the discretion of the
health officer. Any variance requests must be submitted to the health officer
in writing and if approved maintained on file with the department. The health
officer shall approve the plans and specifications if they meet the
requirements of this chapter in written form. No food establishment or retail
food store shall be constructed, or remodeled or converted except in accordance
with plans and specifications approved by the health officer.
   6.   Preoperational Inspections: The health officer shall inspect any new
food establishment or retail food operation one or more times prior to
commencing business, to determine compliance with the approved plans and
specifications and with the requirements of this ordinance. If there are
violations remaining prior to opening and the health officer deems these items
can be done in a timely and safe manner after opening a conditional permit may
be issued with the expiration date clearly stated. Application for the annual
or seasonal food permit and payment for such permit must be received by the end
of the last preoperational inspection. Not complying with the provisions of
this section will result in the establishment's permit not being issued.
   (B)   Renewals:
      1.   Any person renewing an annual or seasonal permit for the operation
of a food or retail food establishment shall make written application for a
permit on forms provided by the health authority. Such application shall meet
the provisions of this chapter.
   2.   Annual and seasonal establishments previously permitted, where
ownership has not changed, may automatically renew a permit that has not been
suspended, revoked or when the application or most current inspection report
states the permit cannot be renewed at this time, provided that the
establishment has been inspected, and found to be in substantial compliance
with the provisions of this chapter, by the health officer within the preceding
twelve (12) month period.
   3.   Prior to providing renewal applications to permitted annual or seasonal
establishments, the health officer or authorized representative shall review
the food establishment record to determine compliance with the provisions of
this chapter. If it is determined the establishment is not in compliance the
application will clearly state that the facility's permit cannot be renewed as
well as state the reasons for not renewing.
   4.   Time extensions may be granted to applicants providing adequate
documentation and a reasonable time schedule for compliance of all nonserious
outstanding violations or a lack of certified food operators. Time extension if
granted will be in the form of a conditional permit with a set expiration date
not to exceed thirty (30) days for establishment or employee violations and
ninety (90) days if a certified food class must be taken. Failure to comply by
the date given may result in the immediate suspension of the permit to operate
as provided herein.
   5.   Permit applications and payment must be received, or postmarked, by
January 5 or a late fee of twenty.five dollars ($25.00) will be assessed.
Applications and payments received after January 5. but prior to January 12,
will be assessed a fifty dollar ($50.00) late fee. Applications and payments
not received by January 31 will result in the immediate cessation of
operations. To reopen, the facility will need to meet and provisions of this
ordinance and pay all fees, fines, and penalties prior to reinstating the
permit.
   (C)   Temporaries:
      1.   Any person desiring to operate a temporary food service shall comply
with the provisions of this section to obtain any and all necessary permits.
      2.   Applications for all temporary food service or temporary retail
sales shall be submitted at least ten (10) business days prior to event being
attended. Applications received within ten (10) to two (2) days prior to the
event will be assessed a twenty-five-dollar ($25.00) fee and may be denied if
an inspection is required and an inspector is not available. The permit fee
will be doubled if the application is within two (2) days prior to the event,
and approval is subject to inspector availability. Any variance requests must
be submitted to the health officer in writing when submitting the application.
If the variance is approved, it shall be maintained on file with the
department; failure to obtain a variance prior to permit approval will result
in that variance request being denied.
      3.   Temporary applications will be approved based on compliance with the
2017 FDA Food Code and Part 750 of the Illinois Food Code, section 750.300, and
the provisions of this chapter.
      4.   Temporary permits will be granted to an applicant for a fixed
location, in conjunction with a single event or celebration, and not to exceed
five (5) days (county fair may not exceed ten (10) days), providing they meet
the provisions of this ordinance.
      5.   A minimum of one ANSI approved certified food protection manager, or
equivalent, is required. Temporary vendors new to East Moline will have one (1)
year to comply with this requirement or future applications shall be denied.
      6.   All vendors shall have mechanical, commercial refrigeration on site
to store foods prior to cooking and maintaining proper temperatures, unless
approved by the health officer. Facilities without commercial refrigeration
will be required to use time as a temperature control.
      7.   All foods prepared must be prepared on site or in a licensed and
inspected facility with a valid food permit as required by their jurisdiction.
Nonpotentially hazardous baked goods may be offered as long as there is a sign
declaring the source.
      8.   Vendors setting up without approved permits, prior approval from the
health officer, or without proper application and payment turned in, shall be
required to cease operation immediately. If the health officer determines the
vendor has knowledge that food permits are required and was trying to
circumvent the provisions of this chapter the health officer may choose to
issue a citation for violating the provisions of this chapter, issue an
official notice of violation, bring them in for a compliance hearing, deny
future permit applications or any combination thereof.
Establishments with a valid East Moline food permit wishing to participate in a
special event, which is beyond the scope of their normal operations or requires
outside food service facilities, shall obtain a temporary food service permit.
If the establishment participating in the special event will be located on
their property, they are not required to obtain a temporary food service
permit. Establishments with a valid East Moline food service permit wishing to
participate in a special event with outside food facilities where foods are
prepackaged for service will receive a fifty percent (50%) reduction in the
applicable temporary fee, provided the event takes place on their grounds.
      9.   Unlicensed applicants or permitted establishments without approved
food service facilities shall meet the requirements for temporary food service
and will not be exempt or receive reduced fees applicable to their operation.
   (D)   County Fair Vendors:
      1.   Any person desiring to operate a temporary or mobile food service or
retail food establishment at the county fair shall comply with the provisions
of this section to obtain any and all necessary permits.
      2.   Applications for all temporary or mobile permits shall be submitted
at least ten (10) business days prior to event being attended. Applications
received within ten (10) days prior to the event will be assessed a twenty-five
dollar ($25.00) fee. The permit fee will be doubled if the application is
handled in the field after twelve o'clock (12:00) noon on the Monday the fair
starts.
      3.   Applications will be approved based on compliance with the 2017 FDA
Food Code and Part 750 of the Illinois Food Code.
      4.   Permits will be granted to the applicant, not to exceed ten (10)
days, providing they meet the provisions of this chapter ordinance.
      5.   A minimum of one ANSI approved certified food protection manager, or
equivalent, is required. Vendors new to East Moline will have one year to
comply with this requirement or future applications shall be denied.
      6.   Permit application and payment must be received by five o'clock (5:
00) P.M. on Monday or the establishment shall be required to cease operation
until in compliance.
   (E)   Mobile food unit (MFU):
      1.   MFUs shall have all necessary state and city licenses and such
licenses shall be posted on or within the MFU so as to be readily visible to
all persons conducting business with the MFU.
      2.   MFUs shall operate in compliance with all referenced regulations,
applicable food, health, and sanitation laws and shall comply with all health
regulations regarding food service, storage, preparation. handling, and
cooking.
      3.   MFUs shall operate in compliance with all applicable National Fire
Protection Association (NFPA) Codes & Standards including but not limited to
NFPA 96: Standard for the Ventilation Control and Fire Protection of Commercial
Cooking Operations (2017 ed.): Annex B Mobile and Temporary Cooking Operations.
      4.   No MFU shall operate between the hours of one o’clock (1:00) a.m.
and six o’clock (6:00) a.m. An MFU may only operate for a maximum of eight (8)
consecutive hours in a given location within a twenty-four (24) hour period.
      5.   An MFU shall not operate a generator in a residential neighborhood
between the hours of ten o’clock (10:00) p.m. and seven o’clock (7:00) a.m.
      6.   MFUs shall be removed from their operating location, be it public or
private property, at the end of business day and returned to its base business
operation location or commissary.
      7.   Operators of MFUs shall not call, shout, provide any amplified
music, or make any other loud noise toward potential customers or in any other
way generate noise that would be considered a disturbance of the peace.
      8.   No MFU shall be used for any other purpose other than offering food
and/or beverage to customers.
      9.   Operators of MFUs shall be responsible for keeping and maintaining
the area around and within fifty feet (50') of the MFU neat, clean, and free
from trash, debris, garbage, and other hazardous conditions at all times
regardless of whether the trash, debris, or garbage originated from the
operation of the unit or was left in the area by a pedestrian passersby or
natural conditions. An MVU shall always provide adequate trash receptacles for
garbage in the area around their unit when the unit is in operation. At the
close of daily business, the MFU must remove all garbage from the area and
properly dispose of it away from the site of its operation; the garbage shall
not simply be placed in nearby receptacles provided for use to the public at
large.
      10.   Sewage and other liquid wastes shall be removed from a MFU at an
approved waste servicing area or by a sewage transport vehicle in such a way
that a public health hazard, city ordinance violation, or nuisance is not
created. Waste and/or rinse water must never be dumped on the ground, gutter,
or other inlet.
      11.   MFUs shall only offer single service food utensils that are wrapped
or dispensed by the MFU.
      12.   All signage and aesthetics promoting the MFU must be attached to
the vehicle.
      13.   No dining areas including tables, chairs, booths, benches, bar
stools, tents, stand-up counters, or similar furniture, any storage or self-
serve areas provided by an MFU shall obstruct the reasonable passage of
pedestrians. The MFU shall provide a minimum of five feet (5') of unobstructed
sidewalk to allow for pedestrian traffic.
      14.   Location Requirements:
         a.   Sales shall be conducted on the sidewalk side of the MFU whenever
possible.
         b.   No MFU shall park or stand within forty feet (40') of a
pedestrian crosswalk, stop sign, traffic signal light, or the intersection of
right-of-way lines. MFUs must not be parked over or within twenty feet (20') of
a storm water inlet.
         c.   No MFU shall park or stand within two hundred feet (200') of any
permanent food service establishment during the hours the establishment's
kitchen is operating as measured from the property line. This requirement may
be waived if the application is submitted with the written consent of the owner
of the food establishment.
         d.    MFUs that are not directly involved with the sponsor
organization shall not park or stand within two hundred feet (200') of a
special event approved by the city or taking place within a city park as
measured from the property line.
         e.   Parking shall be on an approved, hard surface such as concrete or
asphalt unless MFU obtains prior approval from the City.
         f.   MFUs that wish to park on private property shall obtain written
permission from property owner.
         g.   MFUs that wish to park on city property shall complete the mobile
food unit application for parking on city property.
         h.   The City reserves the right to move an MFU from any location if
determined to be necessary for the provision of emergency or public services or
in the interest of public safety, peace, and welfare.
      15.   Alcohol:
         a.   MFUs shall only allow alcohol sales when approved by the Liquor
Commissioner in accordance with city ordinance
Title 3, Chapter 7.
         b.   MFUs shall meet all applicable state and local regulations prior
to approval.
(Ord. 11-12, 4-4-2011; amd. Ord. 20-13, 7-20-2020; Ord. 22-01, 3-7-2022; Ord.
24-03, 4-15-2024)
7-2-5.5: FEES FOR PERMIT:
   (A)   The following fee schedule shall apply:
Annual permits:
   Operations of 2,000 square feet or less in size   $225.00
   Operations of 2,001-3,000 square feet in size     $300.00
   Operations of 3,001 square feet and greater in siz$400.00
   Additional area add-ons                           $50.00
Churches:
   Risk category 1 and 2                             $100.00
   Risk category 3                                   $50.00
Convenience area:
   Selling nonpotentially hazardous foods            $100.00
   Selling potentially hazardous foods               $125.00
Mobile:                                                  
   Selling nonpotentially hazardous foods            $100.00
   Selling potentially hazardous foods               $150.00
   Pushcarts                                         $100.00
Schools:                                                 
   1 menu option                                     $100.00
   2 or more menu options                            $150.00
Stand-alone not for profit food pantries                $100.00
Stand-alone not for profit meal sites                   $150.00
Warehouse/commodity storage                             $150.00
Temporary permits:                                      -
   Temporary food service                            $50.00
   Temporary retail                                  $25.00
Seasonal permits:                                        
      Food service                                $80.00
      Retail                                      $50.00
   Summer meal sites                                 $80.00
Miscellaneous fees:                                      
   Continued noncompliance follow-ups/consultation fe$40.00
Noncompliance reopening                                 $100.00
Noncompliance reopening after hours                     $300.00
Plan review:                                             
   For facilities less than 3,000 square feet        $200.00
   For facilities larger than 3,000 square feet      $400.00
 
   (B)   All such fees shall be made payable to the city clerk for the city of
East Moline, Illinois, and are nonrefundable.
   (C)   Any person failing to obtain a permit prior to operating any type of
food service or retail food operation shall be assessed two (2) times the
applicable fee in addition to any other fine, penalty or cost assessed for
violating this ordinance.
   (D)   Permit fees are prorated for newly opened food service or retail food
establishments and/or establishments with a change of ownership. To obtain a
valid permit, the new owner must reapply and complete the application process.
Establishments opening. After January 31st will be prorated based on the months
left for the current year as follows:
      Annual fee/12 = monthly fee
      Monthly fee * months open = prorated fee
   (E)   The fees shall be reviewed by the city on a regular basis, said time
period shall not exceed three (3) years. (Ord. 11-12, 4-4-2011; amd. Ord. 22-
01, 3-7-2022; Ord. 24-03, 4-15-2024)
7-2-6: INSPECTIONS:
7-2-6.1: INSPECTION FREQUENCY:
The health authority shall inspect each food service establishment or retail
food store within East Moline in accordance with requirements set forth by the
Illinois Department of Public Health. The health officer shall make as many
additional inspections and reinspections of the food service establishment or
retail food store as often as necessary for the enforcement of this ordinance.
The following activities may be used in place of one annual inspection of a
category I facility:
   (A)   Facility meets the certified food manager requirements set forth by
the Illinois Department of Public Health.
   (B)   A hazard analysis critical control point (HACCP) inspection/menu
review is conducted.
   (C)   Facility employees attend third-party in-service training or
educational conference on food sanitation where at least three (3) contact
hours of food safety are earned.
   (D)   All employees working as part of the food service operation are
certified in food safety through a workers' sanitation course approved and
recognized by the Illinois Department of Public Health.
(Ord. 11-12, 4-4-2011; amd. Ord. 22-01, 3-7-2022)
7-2-6.2: ACCESS:
The health officer or authorized representative, after proper identification
shall be permitted to enter at any reasonable time, but no less than all hours
said establishment is open for business, any food establishment or temporary
food operation within East Moline for the purpose of making inspections to
determine compliance with this chapter. The officer or authorized
representative shall be permitted to examine the records of the establishment
to obtain information pertaining to food and supplies purchased, received, or
used, and persons employed. Failure to permit access after proper
identification shall be grounds for immediate suspension of or revocation of
permit. After such suspension or revocation, the permit holder may submit, in
writing, a request for reinstatement of the permit. Permit holder is
responsible to pay any fees that may apply prior to reopening. (Ord. 11-12, 4-
4-2011; amd. Ord. 22-01, 3-7-2022)
7-2-6.3: CONSENT TO INSPECTION:
The receipt of any permit or license issued by the health department, pursuant
to this chapter, to any person, firm, or corporation shall constitute the
agreement of such person, firm, or corporation to such investigations or
inspections. (Ord. 11-12, 4-4-2011)
7-2-6.4: REPORT OF INSPECTIONS:
Whenever an inspection of a food establishment or temporary food operation is
made, the findings shall be recorded on an inspection report form. A copy of
the completed inspection report form shall be furnished to the person in charge
of the establishment at the conclusion of the inspection. The completed
inspection report form is a public document that shall be made available for
public disclosure to any person who requests it according to law.
(Ord. 11-12, 4-4-2011; amd. Ord. 22-01, 3-7-2022)
7-2-6.5: CORRECTION OF VIOLATIONS:
   (A)   The completed inspection report form shall specify a reasonable period
of time for the correction of the violations found; correction of the
violations shall be accomplished within the period specified, in accordance
with the following provisions:
      1.   If an imminent health hazard exists, including, but not limited to,
a severe pest infestation (rodent or insect), a complete lack of refrigeration,
sewage backup into the establishment, or a lack of water or hot water, the
permit will be suspended, and the establishment shall immediately cease food
service or retail food store operations. Operations shall not be resumed until
the health officer or authorized representative has ensured the imminent health
hazards responsible for ceasing operations no longer exist and any applicable
fees, fines or penalties are paid.
      2.   Violations will be categorized as core, priority, or priority
foundation.
         a.   Core item means a provision in the 2017 FDA Code that is not
designated as a priority item or priority foundation item. A core item includes
an item that usually relates to general sanitation, operational controls,
sanitation standard operating procedures (SSOPs), facilities or structures,
equipment design or general maintenance.
         b.   Priority item means a provision in the 2017 FDA Food Code whose
application contributes directly to the elimination, prevention, or reduction
to an acceptable level, hazards associated with foodborne illness or injury and
there is no other provision that more directly controls the hazard. Priority
items include items with a quantifiable measure to show control of hazards such
as cooking, reheating, cooling, handwashing, etc.
         c.   Priority Foundation item means a provision in the 2017 FDA Food
Code whose application supports, facilitates, or enables one or more priority
items. This includes an item that requires the purposeful incorporation of
specific action, equipment, or procedure by industry management to attain
control of risk factors that contribute to foodborne illness or injury such as
personnel training, infrastructure or necessary equipment, HACCP plans,
documentation or record keeping and labeling.
      3.   All outstanding violations, when designated by the health officer,
must be corrected prior to the annual renewal of a permit as required in
section 7-2-5.4 of this chapter.
      4.   In the case of temporary food service establishments or temporary
retail food stores, all violations shall be corrected immediately. If
violations are not corrected, the establishment shall immediately cease food
service operations until authorized to resume by the health authority.
   (B)   Failure of the permit holder or person in charge to comply with any
time limits for corrections may result in cessation of food service or retail
food operations. An opportunity for hearing on the inspection findings or the
time limitations or both will be provided if a written request is filed with
the health officer within ten (10) days following cessation of operations. If a
request for hearing is received, a hearing shall be afforded.
   (C)   Whenever a food service establishment or retail food store is required
under the provisions of this ordinance to cease operations, it shall not resume
operations until it is shown on the reinspection that conditions responsible
for the order to cease operations no longer exist. Opportunity for reinspection
shall be offered within a reasonable time, subject to availability of the
health officer or authorized representative.
(Ord. 11-12, 4-4-2011; amd. Ord. 22-01, 3-7-2022)
7-2-7: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT:
7-2-7.1: COMPLIANCE CONFERENCES:
Whenever a permit holder fails to comply with a notice to correct on a repeat
basis, or the health officer determines a conference is necessary, that permit
holder may be required to attend a compliance conference. Said conference shall
be conducted before the city administrator, or person designated by the city
administrator, and other parties deemed necessary by the health officer and
permit holder. The intent of this conference shall be to achieve compliance
with this ordinance prior to a planned suspension or revocation of a permit.
Failure to attend the conference or not comply with the findings shall be
grounds for revocation. (Ord. 11-12, 4-4-2011)
7-2-7.2: SUSPENSION AND REINSTATEMENT OF PERMIT:
   (A)   The health officer may, without warning, notice or hearing,
temporarily suspend any permit to operate a food service retail food
establishment if the holder of the permit does not comply with the requirements
of this chapter, or if the operation of the establishment does not comply with
the requirements of this chapter, or if the operation of the establishment
otherwise constitutes a substantial hazard to public health. Whenever a permit
holder or operator has failed to comply with any notice issued pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter, the permit holder or operator shall be notified in
writing that the license is, upon service of the notice, immediately suspended
or that the suspension shall be effective on a specific future date, and that
an opportunity for a hearing will be provided if a written request for a
hearing is filed with the health officer within ten (10) days of the notice
date.
   (B)   Whenever a permit is suspended, the holder of the permit or the person
in charge shall be notified citing the conditions, specifying the corrective
action to be taken, and specifying the time period within such action shall be
taken. If deemed necessary, such order shall state that the permit is
immediately suspended temporarily, and all food operations are to cease at
once. Any person to whom such an order is issued shall comply immediately. An
opportunity for hearing will be provided if a written request is filed with the
health officer within ten (10) days following cessation of operations. If a
request for hearing is received, a hearing shall be afforded.
   (C)   Any person whose permit has been suspended may, at any time make
application for a noncompliance reopening inspection on a form provided by the
health officer. This form at minimum shall include a statement signed by the
applicant that, in said applicant’s opinion the conditions causing suspension
of the license have been corrected. The application shall also contain
necessary documentation required by the health officer to assure compliance
with the notice to correct. The applicant must also remit payment for the
noncompliance reopening fee established pursuant to this ordinance prior to the
date of reinspection. The reinspection shall be conducted by the health officer
as soon as possible, but subject to availability. If the applicant is found to
be in compliance with the requirements of this chapter, the permit shall
immediately be reinstated. (Ord. 11-12, 4-4-2011)
7-2-7.3: REVOCATION OF PERMIT:
   (A)   The health officer may, after providing opportunity for hearing,
revoke a permit for serious or repeated violations of any of the requirements
of this chapter, or for interference with the health officer in the performance
of duty, or for not complying with the requirement to attend or the
requirements administered in a previous compliance conference.
   (B)   Prior to revocation, the health officer shall notify, in writing, the
holder of the permit, or the person in charge, the specific reason(s) for which
the permit is subject to being revoked and advise that the permit shall be
permanently revoked at the end of the five (5) calendar days following service
of such notice unless a written request for hearing is filed with the health
authority by the holder of the permit within such five (5) calendar day period.
If no request for hearing is filed within the five (5) calendar day period, the
revocation of the permit becomes final. A permit may be suspended for cause
pending its revocation or a hearing relative thereto.
   (C)   In lieu of revocation, a facility may be granted a conditional permit.
An agreement shall be submitted by the permit holder or officer stating the
actions of said permit holder deemed necessary to provide a continuing
sanitation program. Based on approval of agreement from the health authority,
the permit shall be removed and replaced with a new license marked “Conditional
Prior to Revocation”. The conditional permit shall then be in effect until the
December 31 licensing date. A follow up hearing prior to renewal to determine
if a normal permit will be issued may be required. Failure to comply with the
terms of the written agreement for continued compliance at any time shall cause
the permit to be permanently revoked pursuant to this section.
(Ord. 11-12, 4-4-2011; amd. Ord. 22-01, 3-7-2022)
7-2-7.4: NOTICES:
A notice provided for in this ordinance is properly served when it is delivered
to the holder of the permit, or the person in charge, or when it is sent by
registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known
address of the permit holder on file.
A copy of the notice shall be filed in the records of the health authority. A
completed inspection report form or a letter is considered proper forms of
notice. (Ord. 11-12, 4-4-2011)
7-2-7.5: HEARINGS:
Hearings provided for use in this ordinance shall be conducted through the
municipal code enforcement system ("MUNICIES") at a place and time designated
by the health officer. Based upon the record of the hearing, the MUNICIES
hearing officer shall make written findings and shall sustain, modify, or
rescind any official notice or order considered in the hearing. Any court costs
associated with holding a hearing shall be payable by the permit holder. (Ord.
11-12, 4-4-2011)
7-2-7.6: ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES:
This ordinance shall be enforced by the health officer or authorized
representative, for the city of East Moline, Illinois, in accordance with the
rules and regulations, Illinois Food Code Part 750, 2017 FDA Food Code and any
subsequent revisions, copies of which will be on file in the city clerk's
office.
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this ordinance shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine
of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and not to exceed five hundred
dollars ($500.00). Each day such a violation is committed or permitted to
continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such.
(Ord. 11-12, 4-4-2011; amd. Ord. 22-01, 3-7-2022)
7-2-8: FOOD HANDLERS TRAINING AND FOOD SANITATION CERTIFICATES:
   (A)   Training:
      1.   The health authority may order any food handler, manager, or
establishment owner to attend an immediate food handler training course when in
the judgment of the health authority, the work habits of said food handler
constitute a hazard to the public or when repetitive violations of this chapter
are noted. Fees may be charged to offset any costs incurred by the health
authority.
   (B)   Certifications:
      1.   Category I facilities, as defined in section 750.100 of the Illinois
Part 750 Food Code, including, but not limited to, healthcare facilities, shall
have one ANSI certified food protection manager on the premises at all times
that potentially hazardous food is being handled, prepared, or served.
      2.   Category II facilities as defined in section 750.100 of the Illinois
Part 750 Food Code shall employ a minimum of one ANSI certified food protection
manager on the premises at all times that potentially hazardous food is being
handled, prepared, or served.
      3.   Category III facilities as defined in section 750.100 of the
Illinois Part 750 Food Code shall have one ANSI certified food protection
manager on staff that has managerial oversight.
   (C)   Food Service Workers Duty:
      1.   Food service employees shall report any of the following symptoms
present, either while at work or outside work, including the day of onset to
the food service manager, owner and/or person in charge the onset of: diarrhea,
vomiting, jaundice, sore throat with fever, infected cuts or wounds, or lesions
containing pus on the hand, wrist, an exposed body part, or other body part and
the cuts, wounds, or lesions are not properly covered (such as boils and
infected wounds, however small).
      2.   Whenever diagnosed as being ill with Norovirus, typhoid fever
(Salmonella typhi), shigellosis (Shigella spp. infection), Escherichia coli
O157:H7 or other EHEC/STEC infection, or hepatitis A (hepatitis A virus
infection) employees shall report such diagnosis to the food service manager,
owner and/or person in charge immediately.
      3.   Food service employees shall report to food service manager, owner
and/or person in charge the exposure to or suspicion of causing any confirmed
disease outbreak of Norovirus, typhoid fever, shigellosis, E. coli O157:H7 or
other EHEC/STEC infection, or hepatitis A.
      4.   Food service employees shall report to the food service manager,
owner and/or person in charge whenever a household member is diagnosed with
Norovirus, typhoid fever, shigellosis, E. coli O157:H7 or other EHEC/STEC
infection, or hepatitis A.
      5.   Food service employees shall report to the food service manager,
owner and/or person in charge whenever a household member is working or
attending in a setting experiencing a confirmed disease outbreak of Norovirus,
typhoid fever, shigellosis, E. coli O157:H7 or other EHEC/STEC infection, or
hepatitis A.
   (D)   Food Service Manager, Owner And/Or Person In Charge Duty:
      1.   To ensure that employees are properly trained in food safety as it
relates to their assigned duties.
      2.   To ensure food service employees are informed of their
responsibility to report in accordance with this chapter, to the food service
manager, information about their health and activities as they relate to
diseases that are transmissible through food and as part of the food service
operation and take any necessary actions and precautions to prevent the spread
of any such disease.
      3.   The food service manager, owner or person in charge shall report any
workers diagnosed with Norovirus, typhoid fever (Salmonella typhi), shigellosis
(Shigella spp. infection), Escherichia coli O157:H7 or other EHEC/STEC
infection, or hepatitis A (hepatitis A virus infection) to the health authority
immediately.
      4.   To ensure that consumers are informed, by posting a notice, that
clean tableware is to be used when they return to self-service areas such as
salad bars or buffets.
(Ord. 11-12, 4-4-2011; amd. Ord. 22-01, 3-7-2022)
7-2-9: EXAMINATION AND CONDEMNATION OF FOOD AND EQUIPMENT:
   (A)   Food may be examined or sampled by the health authority as may be
necessary to determine freedom from adulteration or misbranding. The health
authority may, upon written notice to the permit holder or person in charge,
place a hold order on any food which the health authority determines, or has
probable cause to believe, to be adulterated or misbranded. The health
inspector shall tag, label, or otherwise identify any food subject to the hold
order. No food subject to a hold order shall be used, served, or moved from the
establishment. The health inspector shall permit storage of the food under
conditions specified in the hold order, unless storage is not possible without
risk to the public health, in which case immediate destruction shall be ordered
and accomplished. It shall be unlawful for any person to move or alter a hold
order notice or tag placed on food by the health authority. Neither such food
nor the containers thereof shall be relabeled, repackaged, or reprocessed,
altered, disposed of, or destroyed without permission of the health authority,
except on an order by a court of competent jurisdiction. A request for a
hearing may be filed within ten (10) days and if a hearing request is not
received within said time period the food shall be destroyed. If a request for
hearing is received, a hearing shall be afforded as promptly as possible. On
the basis of evidence produced at that hearing, the hold order may be vacated,
or the owner or person in charge of the food may be directed by written order
to denature or destroy such food or to bring it into compliance with the
provisions of this chapter. Such order shall be stayed if the order is appealed
to a court of competent jurisdiction within ten (10) business days.
   (B)   Where equipment used in the preparation or storage of food products or
for sanitation purposes is found to be in a state of disrepair, unsafe,
unsuitable for use, or unsanitary, such equipment shall be taken out of use and
a hold order placed on said items by the health authority. Such equipment may
not be put back into service until written permission is obtained from the
health authority. It shall be unlawful for any person to move or alter a hold
order notice or tag placed on equipment by the health authority. Such equipment
shall not be altered, disposed of, or destroyed without permission of the
health authority except on an order in a court of competent jurisdiction. A
request for a hearing may be filed within ten (10) days and if a hearing
request is not received within said time period the health authority may vacate
the hold order or may, by written notice, direct the license holder or person
in charge to remove such equipment or bring it into compliance with the
provisions of this chapter. If a request for hearing is received within the
time period allowed, then the opportunity for a hearing shall be afforded. Such
order shall be stayed if the order is appealed to a court of competent
jurisdiction within ten (10) business days. (Ord. 11-12, 4-4-2011; amd. Ord.
22-01, 3-7-2022)
7-2-10: FOODS FROM OUTSIDE JURISDICTION:
Food from establishments outside the jurisdiction of East Moline may be sold in
the city if such food establishments conform to the provisions of this chapter 
or to substantially equivalent provisions. To determine the extent of
compliance with such provisions, the health officer may accept reports from
responsible authorities and other jurisdictions where such food establishments
are located. Facilities must have valid permits in their base jurisdiction and
operating within the confines of normal operations. If previous reports cite
and/or notate violations or concerns of a repetitive nature, they must be in
compliance prior to approval or they may be denied the privilege of operating
in East Moline. (Ord. 11-12, 4-4-2011; amd. Ord. 22-01, 3-7-2022)
7-2-11: PROCEDURE WHEN INFECTION IS SUSPECTED:
When the health officer or authorized representative has reasonable cause to
suspect the possibility of disease transmission by any food establishment or
temporary food service, the officer shall make such investigation as may be
indicated, including the morbidity history of suspected employees and take
appropriate action. The health officer or authorized representative may require
any or all of the following measures:
   (A)   The immediate exclusion of the employee from all food service or
temporary food services;
   (B)   The immediate closing of the food service establishment, temporary
food service, or retail food store concerned until, in the opinion of the
health officer; no further danger of transmitting disease exists;
   (C)   Restriction of the employee's services to some area of the
establishment where there would be no danger of transmitting disease;
   (D)   Adequate medical and laboratory examination of the employee and, if
deemed necessary, other employees and of his and/or their body discharges.
   (E)   No employee shall be allowed to return to work in a food establishment
or temporary food service until the health officer or authorized representative
certifies that the employee no longer presents a health hazard. (Ord. 11-12, 4-
4-2011)
7-2-12: EXEMPTIONS:
   (A)   Persons operating establishments which have only prepackaged
nonperishable and/or nonpotentially hazardous food, such as candy or canned
soda, and whose primary business is not a food service or retail food store
shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter, unless deemed necessary by
the health authority.
   (B)   Roadside stands operated for the sale of unprocessed agricultural
products produced and offered for sale shall be exempt from the provisions of
this chapter.
   (C)   Establishments which have only nonperishable, nonpotentially hazardous
food dispensed by vending machines shall be exempt from the provisions of this
chapter unless deemed necessary by the health authority. (Ord. 11-12, 4-4-2011)
CHAPTER 3
DUTCH ELM DISEASE
(Rep. by Ord. 93-9, 2-15-1993)
CHAPTER 4
PLANTS AND WEEDS
SECTION:
7-4-1: Definitions
7-4-2: Program Administration
7-4-3: Responsibility And Maintenance Of Boulevard And Private Property
7-4-4: Failure To Comply And Costs Assessed
7-4-5: Notice To Owners
7-4-6: Billing And Liens
7-4-7: Appeals
7-4-8: Emergency
7-4-9: Violations; Penalty
7-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used throughout this chapter, the following words have been defined:
BOULEVARD: The property between a property owner's lot or property line and the
curb, or the traveled portion of the public street, or the center line of the
public right of way depending on the absence of a curb or traveled portion.
DEVELOPED AREAS: An area under one of the city's zoning districts upon which
there exists one or more houses, businesses, or industrial plants, with the
exclusion of an area designated as an agricultural district.
FARMLAND: An area of land suitable for the production of farm products, those
being plants or animals or the byproducts thereof which supply people with
food, feed, fiber, or fur, which is entirely, actively, and currently being
used to produce such products.
FOREST COVER: Land which is predominantly wooded.
NATURAL AREAS: An area of forest cover, open prairies, wetlands, waterways, and
areas certified as a wildlife habitat.
OPEN PRAIRIES: Hillsides and/or natural gully areas of one or more acres which
have permanent grass cover.
PROPERTY OWNER: The contract purchaser if there is one of record, otherwise the
record holder of legal title as shown by the tax records of the county
collector.
STREET: The area from curb to curb, or in the absence of curbing the traveled
portion of the street, of a public highway, street, road, lane, alley, or
similar public way within the jurisdiction of the city which is generally used
for vehicular traffic.
VACANT LOT: A parcel in which no inhabitable structure exists, but lies within
an area regulated within in this chapter and must be maintained.
WATERCOURSE: Any natural or artificial stream, river, creek, ditch, channel,
canal, conduit, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows in
a definite direction or course, either continuously or intermittently, and has
a definite channel, bed, and banks and includes any area adjacent thereto
subject to inundation by reason of overflow or flood water.
WETLANDS: An area of one acre or more that is mostly underwater or waterlogged
during the spring growing season and which area is characterized by vegetation
of hydric soils. (Ord. 02-11, 3-4-2002)
7-4-2: PROGRAM ADMINISTRATION:
The city administrator shall designate the person or persons responsible for
coordinating the removal of weeds and/or grass over eight inches (8") in height
on private property within the city when the owner of such property, after
notification, refuses or neglects to cut said weeds or grass. (Ord. 02-11, 3-4-
2002)
7-4-3: RESPONSIBILITY AND MAINTENANCE OF BOULEVARD AND PRIVATE PROPERTY:
Each property and abutting boulevard shall be maintained in a fashion that all
weeds, vines, brush, and similarly troublesome or unwanted growth shall be cut
or destroyed to a height comparable to or lower than the ground cover in the
surrounding area as those areas are hereinafter regulated.
Each property owner shall be responsible to maintain the subject property and
abutting boulevard according to the following standards:
   (A)   Developed Areas And Within One Hundred Feet Of The Said Area: All
grass and uncultivated plants and trees shall not be allowed to exceed eight
inches (8") in height.
   (B)   Natural Areas: Natural areas may exceed the standards of this chapter
to a height of two feet (2'). Except when weeds, vines, brush, and other
similarly troublesome or unwanted growth constitute a health, safety, or fire
hazard, said weeds or growth shall be cut or destroyed to a height to eliminate
the hazard.
   (C)   Public Right Of Way: Public right of way of an urban street including
a drainage ditch shall be cut or destroyed so that all brush and trees are kept
from infringing on normal use of rights of way (sidewalks, streets and alleys),
grass and uncultivated plants and shall not be allowed to exceed eight inches
(8") in height. (Ord. 02-11, 3-4-2002)
7-4-4: FAILURE TO COMPLY AND COSTS ASSESSED:
If the property owner fails to maintain the property as required by this
chapter and after notice is given as provided in this chapter, the person
designated in section
7-4-2 of this chapter shall order the work to be done and shall collect from
the property owner the total cost and expense of the work done, including
administrative fees. Failure to comply with this order shall also result in
ordinance violation charges being filed with the circuit court. In addition,
failure to pay said costs shall result in the cost being assessed against the
land as provided by law.
 
Costs:                  
   Mowing charge:   $85.00 per man hour, minimum of $85.00
   Brush pickup:    50.00 per truckload, $50.00 minimum
   Administrative fe70.00 per parcel
   Lien fee:        51.00 per parcel
 
(Ord. 02-11, 3-4-2002)
7-4-5: NOTICE TO OWNERS:
Notice to the property owner or person in control of lands within the city
shall be provided as follows:
   (A)   A notice stating that maintaining property as required under this
chapter shall be done and a statement that property owners have five (5)
calendar days, not including Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays within which such
work to be done shall be published prior to the beginning of the current season
in a newspaper of general circulation within the city.
   (B)   Such notice shall also state that the work of cutting or destroying
weeds, vines, brush or other growth is required to be done inclusively during
the months of April 15th through October 31st.
   (C)   Further, the notice shall state that failure to comply after
publication of the notice will result in the work being done by the city, and
the costs incurred by the city shall be assessed against the property in the
manner provided by law. No further notice shall be required.
In addition, when the property owner has been cited for a violation of this
ordinance during the previous season, they shall be notified by first class
mail, at the beginning of the current season of their obligation to provide for
the cutting or destroying of the weeds and grass on their property. This shall
constitute reasonable notice for the entire growing season.
(Ord. 02-11, 3-4-2002; amd. Ord. 22-03, 4-4-2022)
7-4-6: BILLING AND LIENS:
   (A)   Billing: Each owner shall be sent by first class mail to the address
noted on the tax rolls of the county a bill for the work performed informing
the owner of the cost of such work and the council intent to assess the cost if
not paid in twenty eight (28) calendar days from the invoice date to the
director of finance. Any bill remaining unpaid after the twenty eight (28) day
period may be assessed against the property in the manner provided by law.
Costs shall be billed to the property owner along with an additional thirty
dollar ($30.00) lien charge per parcel. If mowing charges are fully paid within
said time frame the thirty dollar ($30.00) lien charge shall be removed at the
time of payment.
   (B)   Liens: If mowing charges are not fully paid within twenty eight (28)
calendar days from the invoice date the director of finance may cause a lien to
be placed on the parcel which lien shall be superior to all subsequent liens
and encumbrances except tax liens if a notice of lien is filed in the office of
the county recorder within twelve (12) months of the date of completion of
cutting weeds or grass by the city. The notice of lien shall consist of a sworn
statement setting out:
      1.   A description of the real estate sufficient for identification
thereof.
      2.   The amount of money representing the cost and expense incurred or
payable for the service.
      3.   The date or dates when such cost and expense was incurred by the
city.
The lien shall not be valid as to any purchaser whose rights in and to such
real estate have arisen subsequent to the weed or grass cutting prior to filing
of such notice, and the lien of the city shall not be valid as to any
mortgagee, judgment creditor or other lien or whose rights in and to such real
estate arise prior to filing such notice. Upon payment of the costs, the
administrative charges and filing fees by the owner, or persons interested in
such property, after such lien has been filed, the lien shall be released and
the release may be filed on record as in the case of filing notice of lien.
(Ord. 02-11, 3-4-2002)
7-4-7: APPEALS:
If the property owner objects to the liability as outlined in this chapter, the
objection shall be filed by the property owner with the designee in writing
within thirty (30) calendar days of the billing date as provided in this
chapter and shall state the basis for appeal. The appeal will be heard before
the city administrator or his designee without unnecessary delay. At the appeal
hearing, the hearing officer shall consider the property owner's objection and
make a decision as to the validity of the billing. The hearing officer shall
immediately notify the property owner of his or her decision in writing.
Failure to appeal within the time specified constitutes a waiver of rights to a
hearing. (Ord. 02-11, 3-4-2002)
7-4-8: EMERGENCY:
If the designee determines that a clear and compelling emergency exists, the
designee may cause the necessary maintenance required under this ordinance to
be done immediately without prior notification to the property owner. Before
the cost of the work can be assessed to the affected property, the property
owner shall be notified as provided in this ordinance and offered the
opportunity to appeal as provided in this ordinance. (Ord. 02-11, 3-4-2002)
7-4-9: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
   (A)   In the event of a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter,
the person designated by the city administrator shall serve on the owner of the
parcel a notice to appear at the city finance office within seven (7) days and
pay as a penalty in full for such violation, in addition to the cost of
abatement and administrative fees, the sum of twenty five dollars ($25.00).
Failure to make such payment as aforesaid shall subject said person, upon
filing of a complaint and conviction of said violation of this chapter, to a
fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the first offense.
Consecutive violations within two (2) years at the same property are as
follows:
      1.   One hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for the second offense.
      2.   Two hundred dollars ($200.00) for the third offense.
      3.   Three hundred dollars ($300.00) for the fourth offense and
thereafter.
   (B)   In any event the city administrator's designee will proceed to cause
the weeds to be cut and bill the violator the city's expense therefor in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 02-11, 3-4-2002)
CHAPTER 5
RESTAURANTS
(Rep. by Ord. 75-7, 3-3-1975)
CHAPTER 6
SLAUGHTERHOUSES
(Rep. by Ord. 93-8, 2-15-1993)
CHAPTER 7
RENTAL HOUSING STANDARDS
(Rep. by Ord. 98-22, 5-4-1998)
CHAPTER 8
AIR POLLUTION CONTROL
(Rep. by Ord. 93-7, 2-15-1993)
CHAPTER 9
SOLID WASTE REGULATIONS
SECTION:
7-9-1: Solid Waste
7-9-1.1: Waste Hauler Registration
7-9-2: Definitions
7-9-3: Unlawful Dumping
7-9-4: Accumulation And Storage Of Refuse
7-9-4.1: Burning Of Refuse
7-9-4.2: Flammable, Explosive Or Hazardous Materials
7-9-4.3: Vacated Premises
7-9-5: Refuse Containers Required
7-9-5.1: Refuse Containers For One- And Two-Family Residential Use
7-9-5.2: Refuse Containers For Three-Family Residential And Commercial Refuse
Generators
7-9-5.3: Use Of Plastic Bags (Rep. by Ord. 02-47, 11-4-2002)
7-9-5.4: Cleaning Of Refuse Containers
7-9-6: Yard Waste Separation
7-9-7: Special Collection Services
7-9-7.1: Theft Of Recyclables
7-9-8: Investigation
7-9-9: Abatement
7-9-10: Penalties
7-9-11: Conflict Of Ordinance
7-9-12: Separability Of Provisions
7-9-1: SOLID WASTE:
An ordinance regulating the storage and disposal of solid waste within the city
of East Moline, Illinois.
Whereas, the mayor and the city council of the city of East Moline are aware
that excessive quantities of solid waste and inefficient and improper methods
of solid waste disposal result in scenic blight, cause serious hazards to
public health and safety, create public nuisances, divert land from more
productive uses, depress the value of nearby property, offend the senses, and
otherwise interfere with community life and development and have deemed it
necessary and desirable to regulate solid waste.
Therefore, the East Moline city council hereby adopts solid waste regulations,
and shall be controlling within the limits of the city of East Moline,
Illinois, from the date on which this ordinance shall take effect. (Ord. 92-41,
10-5-1992)
7-9-1.1: WASTE HAULER REGISTRATION:
Each waste hauler doing business within the city shall be required to register
with the health department prior to commencing business within the city limits.
Each dumpster shall be labeled with the current owner's name. (Ord. 04-41, 11-
15-2004)
7-9-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of
this ordinance:
GARBAGE: Organic waste products resulting from the handling, storage,
preparation, cooking or consumption of any food, or any matter that may
decompose and become offensive or dangerous to health.
HEALTH AUTHORITY: The health inspector for the East Moline health department or
duly authorized representative(s).
PERSON: Any individual, group of individuals, association, trust, partnership,
corporation, or any other entity.
PROPERTY OWNER: Any individual, group of individuals, association, trust,
partnership, corporation, or any other entity whose name legal title to the
real estate is recorded.
REFUSE: Any discarded, used or unconsumed substance or waste material. Refuse
may include, but is not limited to, any garbage, trash, debris, rubbish,
sticks, brush, branches, tree limbs, grass clippings or other lawn or garden
waste, newspaper, magazines, glass, metal, plastic or paper containers or other
packaging construction material, inoperative, dismantled, partially dismantled,
wrecked, or abandoned motor vehicles or vehicle parts, discarded, dismantled,
unusable, or dilapidated appliances, furniture, equipment, machinery, or parts
thereof, discarded, unusable, broken, or dilapidated household articles,
construction or demolition wastes or materials including, but not limited to,
wood, plaster, metals, plastics, tile, brick, concrete, and mineral, oil,
carcass of a dead animal, any nauseous or offensive matter of any kind, any
object likely to injure any person or create a traffic hazard, or anything else
of an unsightly or unsanitary nature, which has been discarded, abandoned or
otherwise disposed of improperly.
SOLID WASTE: Refuse.
WHITE GOODS: Refrigerator, freezer, range, water heater, clothes dryer, air
conditioner, humidifier, dehumidifier, stoves, oven, dishwasher, water cooler,
heat pump, chillers, furnace and boiler. (Ord. 92-41, 10-5-1992; amd. Ord. 02-
47, 11-4-2002)
7-9-3: UNLAWFUL DUMPING:
No person shall dump, deposit, drop, throw, discard, leave, cause, or permit
the dumping, depositing, dropping, throwing, discarding, or leaving of refuse
upon any public or private property within the city of East Moline, or upon or
into any body of water within the city of East Moline unless:
   (A)   The property has been designated as an authorized waste disposal site
by the state of Illinois environmental protection agency.
   (B)   The refuse is placed into a receptacle or other container, as
prescribed in section
7-9-5 of this chapter, intended by the owner or tenant in lawful possession of
that property for the depositing of refuse.
   (C)   The person is acting under the direction of proper public officials
during special cleanup days; or
   (D)   The person is lawfully acting in or reacting to an emergency situation
where health and safety is threatened, and removes and properly disposes of
such refuse when the emergency situation no longer exists.
No person shall transport refuse from any dwelling, residence, place of
business, farm, or other site to deposit such material in, around, or on top of
refuse containers on any other property, public or private. (Ord. 92-41, 10-5-
1992)
7-9-4: ACCUMULATION AND STORAGE OF REFUSE:
No person shall cause, or permit to accumulate on any property refuse so as to
be offensive or attract vermin except such properties or facilities which are
zoned authorized salvage yards by the East Moline zoning department, and except
if refuse is placed in approved containers as described in section
7-9-5 of this chapter. (Ord. 92-41, 10-5-1992)
7-9-4.1: BURNING OF REFUSE:
No person shall be permitted to burn refuse in the city of East Moline unless
special exemption has been allowed by the East Moline fire department, or its
authorized representative. (Ord. 92-41, 10-5-1992)
7-9-4.2: FLAMMABLE, EXPLOSIVE OR HAZARDOUS MATERIALS:
No person shall place or cause to be placed in any refuse containers highly
flammable, explosive or hazardous materials, unless such disposal has been
approved by appropriate authority. (Ord. 92-41, 10-5-1992)
7-9-4.3: VACATED PREMISES:
Any person occupying or controlling any property or building shall cause to be
removed therefrom all refuse, and other hazardous, noxious or unhealthy
substances or materials and enclose same property or building before vacating.
Owners of rental property shall remove all refuse of tenants who vacate the
rental property as to refuse placed outside of the rental building, within
forty eight (48) hours of the time when the tenant vacates the property. (Ord.
92-41, 10-5-1992; amd. Ord. 04-41, 11-15-2004)
7-9-5: REFUSE CONTAINERS REQUIRED:
Containers as prescribed in section
7-9-5.1 of this chapter shall be provided at each building or property where
refuse is generated or stored. (Ord. 02-47, 11-4-2002)
   (A)   The health inspector may issue an order for a different location of
trash container. The owner may appeal such determination to the city
administrator, who shall conduct a hearing to review such determination, with
the property owner being permitted to present evidence and witnesses on his
behalf. Any decision of the city administrator may be appealed to the board of
standards and appeals. (Ord. 04-41, 11-15-2004)
7-9-5.1: REFUSE CONTAINERS FOR ONE- AND TWO-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL USE:
The occupant, tenant, owner or his agent of any one- or two-family house,
building, apartment, mobile home or condominium shall provide and maintain in
good repair approved containers for refuse storage and collection. A sufficient
number of containers shall be provided to accommodate all refuse generated.
There shall be a total limit of eight (8) containers (cans and bags) per
residence with a maximum number of four (4) can containers for each residence.
Can containers shall not exceed thirty five (35) gallons or weigh more than
fifty (50) pounds. Bags shall not exceed fifty five (55) gallons or weigh more
than fifty (50) pounds. All can containers shall be: a) of rigid design, b)
corrosion resistant, c) constructed of metal or plastic and d) leakproof and
flyproof with tightfitting lids not attached to the can when lid is removed,
and shall have handles at the sides. Cans shall be free of any lid ties, ropes,
cords, or connectors. Cans shall not be placed into or stacked inside one
another for collection. Only relatively strong plastic bags shall be permitted.
Bags shall be tightly tied without holes or rips. All refuse shall be set out
to curb and out of any storage racks or shelters by the start of collection
service day.
The city refuse collection service shall be required to pick up only refuse,
and shall exclude the following: a) yard waste, b) inoperative, dismantled,
partially dismantled, wrecked or abandoned motor vehicles or motor vehicle
parts, c) whole or partial building demolition wastes, d) hazardous, infectious
or explosive wastes, e) dead animal carcasses, f) improperly disposed animal
feces, g) tires, and h) white goods.
The director of maintenance services or his/her designee shall have the
authority to deviate from any restrictions provided in this section and section
7-9-7 of this chapter due to special circumstances such as, but not limited to,
collecting extra refuse containers and more weight due to holidays, special
events, health hazards and/or dangerous conditions.
In the event garbage storage facilities are determined by the health authority
to provide harborage for insect or rodent, or any other health hazard, or are
determined not to be easily accessible for collection, the health authority may
require a central collection area be provided, and equipped with appropriate
container(s). (Ord. 02-47, 11-4-2002)
7-9-5.2: REFUSE CONTAINERS FOR THREE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL AND COMMERCIAL REFUSE
GENERATORS:
The occupant, tenant, owner or his agent of any three-family residence or
larger, and any commercial business refuse generators shall provide container
(s) of one cubic yard capacity or larger. A sufficient amount of total refuse
storage capacity shall be provided to accommodate all refuse generated between
regular collection dates. Such cubic yard containers shall be: a) stable while
empty or loaded, b) equipped with tightfitting lid or door, c) equipped for
mechanical dumping, d) durable, e) leakproof and vermin proof, and f)
maintained in good repair.
Any person subject to the provisions of this section may file a written request
for exemption with the health authority. Such request shall be based upon
factual circumstances which would make the applications of the requirements an
undue hardship or burden upon the applicant, or otherwise demonstrate the
requirements to be inappropriate. (Ord. 04-41, 11-15-2004)
7-9-5.3: USE OF PLASTIC BAGS:
(Rep. by Ord. 02-47, 11-4-2002)
7-9-5.4: CLEANING OF REFUSE CONTAINERS:
All residential and commercial containers shall be maintained so as to be clean
and sanitary. All refuse containers shall be cleaned as often as is necessary
to minimize the attraction of vermin or other animals, or creation of
unsanitary conditions or offensive odors. (Ord. 92-41, 10-5-1992)
7-9-6: YARD WASTE SEPARATION:
The disposal within the grass or shrubbery cuttings, leaves, tree limbs and
other materials accumulated as the result of the care of lawns, shrubbery,
vines and trees, shall be subject to the following provisions:
   (A)   No person may knowingly put landscape waste into a container intended
for curbside collection by the city, except as set forth below. Landscape waste
shall be placed in a biodegradable paper bag designated and approved by the
city, and sold by the city or its designated agents. Brush and limbs must be
bundled and tied with an East Moline brush tie. Curbside collection of
landscape waste by the city shall be made from April through November of each
year.
   (B)   No person may knowingly mix landscape waste that is intended for
collection or for disposal at a landfill with any other municipal waste.
   (C)   The gross weight of a bag or brush bundle must not exceed fifty (50)
pounds. Individual cuttings of brush or limbs must not exceed four feet (4')
long or three inches (3") in diameter.
   (D)   Each resident desiring yard waste and brush collection service must
register with the maintenance services department of the city of East Moline
annually. To register for curbside collection, each resident must pay an annual
subscription fee of ten dollars ($10.00). Six (6) free yard waste stickers will
be given to each subscriber.
   (E)   An East Moline yard waste sticker must be attached to each bag. Yard
waste stickers shall cost one dollar fifty cents ($1.50) each. All brush and
limbs must be bundled in an East Moline brush tie. Brush ties shall cost one
dollar seventy five cents ($1.75) each. Yard waste stickers and brush ties
shall be sold at various retail stores throughout the city. (Ord. 05-13, 4-18-
2005)
7-9-7: SPECIAL COLLECTION SERVICES:
After a telephone request has been made to the municipal services department,
special collection services shall be provided to all residential property
owners or representatives up to four (4) times per calendar year. Effective May
1, 2011, there shall be a prepaid fifteen dollar ($15.00) charge to the
property owner or resident for each truckload of material collected. Citywide
promotional cleanup campaigns shall not be counted against this limitation.
Additional special collection service over the four (4) times per calendar year
limit shall be provided at the rate of twenty five dollars ($25.00) for each
additional collection, but shall not exceed three (3) additional collections
within the same calendar year without prior city council approval. Items for
collection shall be placed out to curb away from any obstructions such as, but
not limited to, low wires, tree limbs, vehicles, and structures. All loose
material shall be containerized for collection. (Ord. 02-47, 11-4-2002; amd.
Ord. 11-16, 4-4-2011)
Special collection service shall pick up only refuse, excluding: a) yard waste,
b) inoperative, dismantled, partially dismantled, wrecked or abandoned motor
vehicles or motor vehicle parts, c) whole or partial building demolition
wastes; hazardous, infectious or explosive wastes, d) dead animal carcasses, e)
improperly disposed animal feces, f) tires and g) white goods. (Ord. 02-47, 11-
4-2002)
7-9-7.1: THEFT OF RECYCLABLES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to collect, obtain, possess or pick up any
recyclable item placed out for collection, at a residence, business or at the
recycling drop off center, which is part of the city of East Moline's voluntary
recycling program, unless the person is the exclusive recycling contractor.
(Ord. 08-11, 10-6-2008)
7-9-8: INVESTIGATION:
The health inspector, or other designated representative, shall be authorized
to investigate the refuse requirements of any property owner upon written
complaint of any person or where there is evidence that there is an inadequate
amount of total refuse storage capacity or less frequent pick up than is
necessary to maintain proper sanitation in the city of East Moline, Illinois.
The health inspector may, after proper investigation, give written notice to
the property owner of the required capacity of the refuse container to be
provided for the property, or a more frequent pick up schedule as is necessary
to maintain proper sanitation. (Ord. 92-41, 10-5-1992; amd. Ord. 04-41, 11-15-
2004)
7-9-9: ABATEMENT:
   (A)   Nonsummary Abatement:
      1.   By Owner:
         (a)   The health authority may serve or cause to be served a notice,
in writing, upon the owner, agent, occupant, or person in possession, charge,
or control of any lot, building, or premises or item of personalty in or upon
which any refuse complaint exists, requiring said person to abate the same
within seven (7) calendar days after receiving written notice, in such manner
as the notice shall direct. (Ord. 02-47, 11-4-2002)
         (b)   An appeal to the East Moline city council from any notice shall
be provided if a written request for a hearing is filed with the health
department within the time established for the abatement of the nuisance.
      2.   By Health Department: If the person so served and notified does not
abate the refuse complaint within the specified reasonable time, the health
authority may proceed to abate the refuse complaint in any or all manner
allowable by law, including, without limiting the generality thereof, the
following:
         (a)   Institute Action: Seeking to impose a monetary penalty as
defined by section
7-9-10 of this chapter by instituting ordinance enforcement action.
         (b)   Filing Lawsuit: Seeking to enjoin the continuation of the refuse
complaint by filing of a lawsuit in a court of competent jurisdiction.
         (c)   Payment Of Expenses: All expenses incurred thereby shall be paid
by the owner, agent, occupant, or person in possession of said property; said
expenses shall be a lien upon said property if payment is not made to the
health department after presentation of a bill and a reasonable period of time.
   (B)   Summary Abatement: Whenever, in the opinion of the health authority, a
refuse complaint creates an imminent threat of serious injury to person(s) or
real property, or if refuse complaint can be abated summarily without or with
only minor damage to the items or premises which are creating the refuse
complaint, and the continuation of the refuse complaint poses a substantial
threat of injury to persons or property or a substantial interference with the
quiet enjoyment of life normally present in the community, the health authority
shall proceed to abate such refuse complaint; provided, further that whenever
the owner, occupant, agent, or person in possession, charge, or control of the
real or personal property which has become a refuse complaint is unknown or
cannot readily be found, the health authority may proceed abatement of the
refuse complaint which requires continuing acts by the health authority beyond
the initial summary abatement and any other additional emergency abatements, it
shall seek abatement of such refuse complaint on a permanent basis through
judicial process as soon as readily possible. All expenses incurred hereby
shall be paid by the owner, agent, occupant, or person in possession of said
property. Said expenses shall be a lien upon said property if payment is not
made to the health department after presentation of a bill and a reasonable
period of time. (Ord. 92-41, 10-5-1992)
7-9-10: PENALTIES:
Any person who violates any provision of this ordinance shall be guilty of a
petty offense and shall be fined a sum not to exceed five hundred dollars
($500.00). Each day's violation constitutes a separate offense. (Ord. 92-41,
10-5-1992)
7-9-11: CONFLICT OF ORDINANCE:
In any case where a provision of this ordinance is found to be in conflict with
a provision of any zoning, building, fire, safety, or health ordinance, or code
of the city of East Moline which, in the judgment of the health authority,
established the higher standards for the promotion and protection of the health
and safety of the people shall be deemed to prevail, and such other ordinance
or codes are hereby declared to be repealed to the extent that they may be
found in conflict with this ordinance. (Ord. 92-41, 10-5-1992)
7-9-12: SEPARABILITY OF PROVISIONS:
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this
ordinance should be declared invalid for any reason whatsoever, such decision
shall remain in full force and effect and, to this end, the provisions of this
ordinance are hereby declared to be severable. (Ord. 92-41, 10-5-1992)
CHAPTER 10
LANDFILL OPERATION
(Rep. by Ord. 93-6, 2-15-1993)
CHAPTER 11
PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS 1
(Rep. by Ord. 09-08, 4-20-2009)
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  8-9-15 of this code.
CHAPTER 12
INFECTIOUS WASTE MANAGEMENT
SECTION:
7-12-1: Definitions
7-12-2: Authority; Administration, Inspection And Enforcement
7-12-3: Infectious Waste Inventory Plan
7-12-4: Storage And Containment Of Infectious Waste
7-12-5: Infectious Waste Treatment
7-12-6: Infectious Waste Disposal
7-12-7: Infectious Waste Transporter
7-12-8: Violation; Penalty
7-12-1: DEFINITIONS:
CITY: The City of East Moline.
HEALTH OFFICER: The Director of the East Moline Department of Public Health or
his/her designated representative.
INFECTIOUS WASTE: Solid waste, including the following:
   (A)   Laboratory Waste: All cultures and stocks of infectious agents,
including specimen cultures from medical and pathological laboratories,
cultures and stocks from research and industrial laboratories, wastes from the
production of biological, discarded live and attenuated vaccines, and culture
dishes and devices used to transfer, inoculate and mix cultures.
   (B)   Infectious Waste Sharps: Medical and laboratory equipment generated by
an infectious waste generator or contributor that may cause punctures or cuts.
Such waste includes, but is not limited to, needles, syringes, lancets, scalpel
blades, contaminated broken or sharp laboratory glassware including slides,
coverslips, and pasteur pipettes.
      Non-Infectious Waste Sharps: Waste sharps not originating from the
diagnosis, care or treatment of humans or animals.
   (C)   Fluid Blood, Blood Products And Body Fluids: Human blood and blood
products include serum, plasma and other blood components. The term body fluid
should include semen, vaginal secretions, cerebrospinal fluid, synovial fluid,
pleural fluid, peritoneal fluid, pericardial fluid, amniotic fluid and any
other body fluid visibly contaminated with blood.
   (D)   Animal Waste: Animal waste derived from animals afflicted with
zoonotic disease or purposely infected with agents communicable to humans.
Infectious animal waste should include blood and body fluids, carcasses, body
parts, excrement, and bedding of these animals.
   (E)   Other Wastes: Other wastes as reasonably determined by the infectious
waste generator, that have come into contact with human body substances or
other sources which may contain pathogenic microbial agents or other
biologically active materials in sufficient concentrations that exposure to the
waste directly or indirectly creates a significant risk of disease.
INFECTIOUS WASTE GENERATOR: Any producer of infectious waste, to include
without limitation the following categories: skilled nursing facility or
convalescent hospitals, intermediate care facilities, inpatient care facilities
for the developmentally disabled, chronic dialysis clinics, community clinics,
health maintenance organizations, surgical clinics, urgent care clinics, acute
psychiatric hospitals, laboratories, medical buildings, physician's offices and
clinics, veterinary offices, dental offices and clinics, funeral homes, or
other similar facilities.
INFECTIOUS WASTE GENERATOR - PRIVATE: Any producer of infectious waste and
dependent upon self-injection; to include without limitation, persons with
insulin dependent diabetes, persons with hemophilia using clotting factor, and
persons receiving other injections or intravenous treatments.
INFECTIOUS WASTE TRANSPORTER: A person who transports infectious waste.
INFECTIOUS WASTE TREATMENT: Infectious waste treatment is defined as any
method, technique or process designed to change the biological character or
composition of waste, and as described herein. (Ord. 90-31, 8-20-1990)
7-12-2: AUTHORITY; ADMINISTRATION, INSPECTION AND ENFORCEMENT:
The Health Officer of the East Moline Public Health Department is authorized to
administer and enforce all the provisions of this Chapter relating to the
generation, storage, treatment, transportation, and disposal of infectious
wastes in the City. (Ord. 90-31, 8-20-1990)
7-12-3: INFECTIOUS WASTE INVENTORY PLAN:
The Health Officer shall prepare an infectious waste inventory plan of all
infectious waste generators. Such infectious waste inventory plan shall be
limited to general identification of types of infectious waste generated (e.g.,
laboratory waste, infectious waste sharps, non-infectious waste sharps, fluid
blood/blood products and body fluids, animal waste, other) and, name, address,
and phone number of infectious waste generator. (Ord. 90-31, 8-20-1990)
7-12-4: STORAGE AND CONTAINMENT OF INFECTIOUS WASTE:
   (A)   Outdoor storage of infectious waste shall be in a manner and location
which affords protection from animals, rain and wind; does not provide a
breeding place or a food source for insects or rodents; and is accessible only
to authorized personnel.
   (B)   Infectious waste, except for sharps, shall be contained in disposable
leakproof plastic bags or containers that have a strength to preclude ripping,
tearing or bursting under normal conditions of use. The bags shall be labeled
as containing infectious waste (i.e., BIOHAZARD symbol). The bags shall be
secured to prevent leakage or expulsion of solid or liquid waste during
storage, handling or transport. These gags shall be placed in containers which
will lend rigidity to the plastic bags such as disposable or reusable pails,
cartons, boxes, drums or portable bins. These containers shall be labeled with
the standard BIOHAZARD symbol or as infectious waste.
   (C)   Infectious sharps waste shall be contained in leakproof, rigid,
puncture resistant, containers, and shall be tightly lidded before being placed
in approved plastic bags for storage, handling and transport. These containers
shall be labeled with the standard BIOHAZARD symbol or as infectious waste.
      1.   Non-infectious sharps waste shall be contained in leakproof, rigid,
puncture resistant containers, and shall be tightly lidded before being placed
in approved plastic bags for handling and storage.
   (D)   Reusable containers for infectious waste storage shall be rigid,
durable, corrosion resistant, non-absorbent, and water tight, insect and rodent
proof, and equipped with tight fitting lids or covers. Reusable containers
shall be cleaned and sanitized as needed to preclude the possibility of
nuisance conditions.
   (E)   Non-reusable containers, such as cardboard, styrofoam or other
materials intended for single-use only shall not be re-used for any purpose.
(Ord. 90-31, 8-20-1990)
7-12-5: INFECTIOUS WASTE TREATMENT:
   (A)   Infectious waste generator shall not cause or allow any infectious
waste to be deposited in any landfill unless same has been rendered innocuous
by incineration, steam sterilization, or other treatment method approved in
writing by the Health Officer. Proper monitoring of treatment processes should
be followed to insure sterilization of the waste is achieved. Blood, blood
products and body fluids may be poured via a utility sink drain or toilet into
an approved sewage disposal system. Following proper grinding and screening,
animal excrement and bedding material should be disposed of in an approved
sewage disposal system provided the waste strength is acceptable. Once
infectious waste is properly treated, it is non-infectious and can enter the
general waste stream.
   (B)   Infectious waste generator-private shall be exempted from those
requirements concerning infectious waste treatment as described in subsection
(A) of this Section. However, all other requirements herein stated shall be
considered applicable. (Ord. 90-31, 8-20-1990)
7-12-6: INFECTIOUS WASTE DISPOSAL:
   (A)   Infectious waste generators which do not utilize facilities to render
waste innocuous shall:
      1.   Contract with a special waste hauler permitted by the Illinois
Environmental Protection Agency to dispose of all infectious waste materials
or;
      2.   Personally transport infectious waste to an approved infectious
waste treatment or storage facility, provided that all infectious waste is
properly contained, and identified while in transport; and provided that such
infectious waste treatment or storage facility notifies the Health Officer in
writing of such agreement with individual infectious waste generator. (Ord. 90-
31, 8-20-1990)
7-12-7: INFECTIOUS WASTE TRANSPORTER:
   (A)   Any person desiring to operate as a commercial infectious waste
transporter shall submit written application to the Health Officer.
Such application form shall be prepared by the Health Department and shall
include the applicant's full name, post office address, and the signature of an
authorized representative of the applicant; shall disclose whether such
applicant is an individual, firm, corporation, and description of the site(s)
that the applicant is planning to use to treat or dispose of infectious waste.
   (B)   Infectious waste collection/transportation vehicles used by permitted
infectious waste transporters shall have a leakproof, fully enclosed non-
compacting container compartment of a durable and easily cleanable
construction, and shall be identified on each side of the vehicle with the name
or trademark of the infectious waste transporter and with the standard
BIOHAZARD symbol or otherwise to indicate containment of infectious waste.
   (C)   All persons collecting or transporting infectious waste shall avoid
littering, the creation of other nuisances or hazards at the loading point,
during transport and upon unloading of the waste.
   (D)   The Health Officer may require disinfection of any vehicle. Vehicles
shall be cleaned frequently to prevent rodent/vector nuisances. All waste-water
from vehicle cleaning shall be disposed of in a sanitary sewer system unless
otherwise authorized by the Health Officer.
   (E)   Infectious waste transporter shall have available at all times a
containment kit/equipment so as to control accidental leakage, or spill, of
infectious waste from transport container. All spills shall be reported to the
Health Department. (Ord. 90-31, 8-20-1990)
7-12-8: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter shall constitute a violation
subject to the provisions of Section
1-4-1 of this Code and any person convicted thereof may be punished for each
separate offense. Each day's violation shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 90-31, 8-20-1990)
CHAPTER 13
TATTOOING ESTABLISHMENTS
SECTION:
7-13-1: Definitions
7-13-2: Tattooing Establishments And Tattoo Artists To Be Licensed; Fees
7-13-3: Display Of License
7-13-4: Exceptions To Provisions Of Chapter
7-13-5: Application And Fee
7-13-6: Contents Of Application
7-13-7: Hours Of Operation
7-13-8: Personnel
7-13-9: Equipment
7-13-10: Cleaning And Storage Of Equipment
7-13-11: Tattooing Procedures
7-13-12: Sanitary Facilities
7-13-13: Physical Facilities
7-13-14: Inspections
7-13-15: Tattooing
7-13-16: No Guarantee Or Warranty
7-13-17: Hearing Prerequisite To Revocation Of License; Notice
7-13-18: Grounds For Revocation
7-13-19: Tattooing Establishments Practicing When Provisions Of Chapter Became
Effective
7-13-20: Federal, State And Local Regulation
7-13-21: Penalty
7-13-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this Chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this Section:
CERTIFICATE OF INSPECTION: Written approval from the health authority that said
tattooing has been inspected and meets all of the terms of this Ordinance
relating to physical facilities, equipment and layout for operation of such
business. Said writing shall be on a form designated by the health authority
for such purposes.
CITY: The City of East Moline, Illinois.
HEALTH AUTHORITY: The Health Inspector or authorized representative.
OPERATOR: Any individual, firm, partnership, company, corporation or
association that owns or operates an establishment where tattooing is
performed.
TATTOO ARTIST: Any individual who performs or practices the art of tattooing,
on the person of another.
TATTOO, TATTOOED, TATTOOING: To insert pigment under the surface of the skin of
a human being, by pricking with a needle or otherwise, so as to produce an
indelible mark or figure visible through the skin. (Ord. 95-1, 2-6-1995)
7-13-2: TATTOOING ESTABLISHMENTS AND TATTOO ARTISTS TO BE LICENSED; FEES:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of
operating a tattooing establishment within the City without first paying an
annual license fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) and payable to City Clerk's
office upon written approval from the health authority and to engage in such
business in accordance with the provisions hereof.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or conduct any tattoo
establishment within the City without a tattoo license, respectively, which
shall be issued pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter, or to employ any
person as a tattooer, who has not paid for such tattoo artists annual license
fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) for each artist, and payable to City Clerk's
office, upon written approval from the health authority. (Ord. 95-1, 2-6-1995)
7-13-3: DISPLAY OF LICENSE:
Every person to whom a license shall have been granted shall display said
license in a conspicuous place. Failure to display said license shall be
grounds for revocation. (Ord. 95-1, 2-6-1995)
7-13-4: EXCEPTIONS TO PROVISIONS OF CHAPTER:
The requirements of this Chapter shall have no application and no effect upon
and shall not be construed as applying to any person, firm or corporation
licensed by the State to practice medicine or licensed by the State to practice
any of the healing arts. (Ord. 95-1, 2-6-1995)
7-13-5: APPLICATION AND FEE:
Any person desiring to obtain a license to operate a tattooing establishment
shall make application to the City Clerk who shall refer all such applications
to the Chief of Police and Health Inspector for an appropriate investigation.
(Ord. 95-1, 2-6-1995)
7-13-6: CONTENTS OF APPLICATION:
   (A)   The application for a tattooing license required by this Chapter shall
contain the following information:
      1.   Full name and current address;
      2.   The two (2) previous addresses of the applicant immediately prior to
the current address;
      3.   Written proof that the applicant is over the age of eighteen (18)
years;
      4.   Applicant's height, weight and color of eyes and hair;
      5.   Two (2) current photographs at least two inches by two inches (2" x
2") in size;
      6.   The business, occupation or employment of the applicant for the
three (3) years immediately preceding the date of the application;
      7.   The tattooing license history of the applicant, including whether
such person in previous operation in this or another area has had his license
revoked or suspended, the reason therefore, and any business activity or
occupation subsequent to the action of suspension or revocation;
      8.   All convictions (excluding traffic convictions), and the grounds
therefore;
      9.   The names of all employees of the establishment (and there shall be
a continuous obligation to notify the City Clerk within 10 days after any
employee is terminated or hired);
      10.   A certificate from a medical doctor designating that the applicant
has recently been examined and is free of any contagious or communicable
disease. (Ord. 95-1, 2-6-1995)
7-13-7: HOURS OF OPERATION:
The hour of operation of a tattoo, electrolysis and/or body piercing
establishment within the City shall be between the hours of seven o'clock (7:
00) A.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) P.M., Monday through Saturday and shall not be
open for business on Sunday. (Ord. 95-1, 2-6-1995)
7-13-8: PERSONNEL:
   (A)   No employee, while infected with a disease in a communicable form, or
who is a carrier of a disease; and no employee while affected with a boil,
infected wound or acute respiratory infection shall provide tattooing to a
client.
   (B)   No employee shall provide tattooing to any skin surface that shows
evidence of any rash, boils, infections or other unhealthy conditions or
disease.
   (C)   Employees shall thoroughly wash their hands and the exposed portions
of their arms with soap and warm water before starting work, during work as
often as is necessary to keep them clean, and after smoking, eating, drinking
or using the toilet. Employees shall keep their fingernails clean and trimmed.
   (D)   Employees providing tattooing shall, in addition to thoroughly
washing, shall use single-use latex or vinyl examination gloves, as a barrier
to potentially infective blood.
   (E)   Employees shall not use tobacco in any form, or eat or drink while
tattooing a client.
   (F)   No employee shall provide tattooing without first obtaining a
tattooing artist permit. (Ord. 95-1, 2-6-1995)
7-13-9: EQUIPMENT:
   (A)   All service table surfaces shall be constructed of easily cleanable
material.
   (B)   Sterile single service or sterile individual containers of dye or ink
shall be used for each patron.
   (C)   Ink cups shall be for single patron use.
   (D)   All tubes, needle bars and instruments used in the tattoo procedure
that are not sterile single patron use and disposable shall be thoroughly
cleaned and steam sterilized or dry-heat sterilized between patrons.
   (E)   Tattoo machines shall be stored in a manner that will maintain
sterility.
   (F)   Needles shall be disposable, sterile, single patron use or shall be
reusable needles and shall be thoroughly cleaned and steam sterilized or dry-
heat sterilized between patrons.
   (G)   Razors shall be single patron use and disposable, or shall be
sterilized razors with a new blade used for each patron. Alum or other material
used to stop the flow of blood shall be used only in liquid or powder form.
   (H)   Topical ointments or medications shall be packaged for single patron
use.
   (I)   All bandages and dressings shall be sterile and single use.
   (J)   All instruments, equipment and facilities shall be maintained in a
clean and sanitary condition. (Ord. 95-1, 2-6-1995)
7-13-10: CLEANING AND STORAGE OF EQUIPMENT:
   (A)   All clean and ready-to-use needles and instruments shall be kept in a
locked storage cabinet maintained in a clean and sanitary condition.
   (B)   A steam sterilizer (autoclave) shall be provided for sterilizing all
needles and similar instruments before use on any customer, person or patron.
Sterilization of equipment will be accomplished by exposure to live steam for
at least thirty (30) minutes at a minimum pressure of fifteen (15) pounds per
square inch, and temperature of two hundred forty degrees Fahrenheit (240°F),
or one hundred sixteen degrees Celsius (116°C).
   (C)   Dry-heat sterilization shall be at three hundred fifty degrees
Fahrenheit (350°F) (170° C) for one hour. The needles and instruments required
to be sterilized shall be so used, handled and temporarily placed during
tattooing and/or body piercing so that they will not be contaminated. (Ord. 95-
1, 2-6-1995)
7-13-11: TATTOOING PROCEDURES:
   (A)   The area of skin to be worked on shall first be thoroughly washed and
scrubbed for a period of two (2) minutes with warm water to which has been
added an antiseptic liquid soap. A sterile single-use sponge shall be used to
scrub the area. After shaving and before the tattooing, electrolysis and/or
piercing is begun, a solution of seventy percent (70%) alcohol shall be applied
to the area with a single-use sponge used and applied with a sterile
instrument;
   (B)   For tattooing, single-service or individual containers of dye or ink
shall be used for each patron, and the container therefore shall be discarded
immediately after completing work on a patron; any dye in which the needles
were dipped shall not be used on another person;
   (C)   Whenever a new sterile tube is used that contains a different color of
dye or ink, a separate or new sterile needle shall also be used. Excess dye or
ink shall be removed from the skin with an individual, single-use sterile
sponge or a disposable paper tissue which shall be used only on one person and
then immediately discarded. After completing work on any person, the tattooed
area shall be washed with sterile gauze saturated with an antiseptic soap
solution approved by the health officer, or a seventy percent (70%) alcohol
solution. The tattooed area shall be allowed to dry and petroleum jelly from a
collapsible or plastic tube shall be applied, using sterile gauze. A sterile
gauze dressing shall then be fastened to the tattooed area with adhesive; and
   (D)   Persons tattooed shall be provided with printed instructions regarding
tattoo care during the healing process and shall be instructed to consult a
physician if signs and symptoms of an infection develop.
   (E)   Single-use needles, razors or other sharps materials must be disposed
of immediately upon completion of tattooing within approved sharps disposal
containers. (Ord. 95-1, 2-6-1995)
7-13-12: SANITARY FACILITIES:
   (A)   Enough potable water under pressure, and at the right temperature
shall be provided to all fixtures and equipment that use water.
   (B)   The potable water system shall be installed so as to preclude the
possibility of backflow.
   (C)   All water-carried sewage shall be disposed of by means of a Municipal
sewage system, or a private sewage system or a private sewage disposal system.
   (D)   All plumbing shall be sized, installed and maintained in accordance
with applicable provisions of the plumbing code.
   (E)   At least one toilet and no fewer than the number of toilets required
by the plumbing code shall be provided, and shall be accessible to the public
clientele.
   (F)   Toilet rooms shall be completely enclosed and shall have tight
fitting, self-closing doors.
   (G)   Toilet rooms shall be mechanically and effectively ventilated to the
outside atmosphere.
   (H)   Toilet rooms shall be kept clean, in good repair and free of
objectionable odors. A supply of toilet tissue shall be provided at each toilet
at all times. Easily cleanable, covered receptacles shall be provided for waste
materials.
   (I)   Lavatories shall be located in, or immediately adjacent to toilet
rooms.
   (J)   Lavatories shall be located in the immediate vicinity, and easily
accessible to the tattooing artist while providing tattooing to a client.
   (K)   Each lavatory shall be provided with hot and cold water tempered by
means of a mixing valve or combination-faucet.
   (L)   A supply of hand-cleansing soap or detergent shall be available at
each lavatory. A supply of sanitary towels or a hand-drying device providing
heated air shall be conveniently located near each lavatory. Common towels
shall be prohibited. If disposable towels are used, easily cleanable waste
receptacles shall be conveniently located.
   (M)   Lavatories, soap dispensers, hand drying devices and all related
fixtures shall be kept clean and in good repair.
   (N)   All garbage and refuse generated indoors shall be disposed of in
durable, easily cleanable containers. Plastic bags shall line all containers.
   (O)   All garbage and refuse stored outdoors shall be stored in an approved
garbage dumpster. Approved garbage dumpsters shall be placed on a concrete or
asphalt surface, and shall be easily accessible to garbage collection crews.
(Ord. 95-1, 2-6-1995)
7-13-13: PHYSICAL FACILITIES:
   (A)   Tattooing shall be performed in a room of not less than one hundred
(100) square feet, and shall be physically separate from toilet rooms and
waiting areas.
   (B)   Floors and floor coverings in all toilet rooms, janitors closets and
tattooing rooms shall be constructed of smooth, durable material such as sealed
concrete, terrazzo, ceramic tile or durable grades of linoleum or plastic, and
shall be maintained in good repair.
   (C)   The walls, wall coverings and ceilings of toilet rooms, and tattooing
rooms shall be light-colored, smooth, nonabsorbent and easily cleanable. All
junctures between walls and floors shall be covered and sealed.
   (D)   Permanently fixed artificial light sources shall be installed to
provide at least twenty (20) foot-candles of light intensity in all toilet
rooms and tattooing rooms.
   (E)   All tattooing establishments shall provide at least one utility sink
or curbed cleaning facility with a floor drain for the cleaning of mops or
similar wet floor cleaning tools and for the disposal of mop water or similar
liquid waste.
   (F)   All rooms shall have sufficient ventilation to keep them free of
excessive heat, steam, condensation, vapors, obnoxious odors, smoke and fumes.
   (G)   An adequate number of lockers or other suitable facilities shall be
provided and used for the orderly storage of employees' clothing and other
belongings.
   (H)   Tattooing establishments shall be maintained free of pest insect and/
or rodent infestations.
   (I)   Tattooing establishments shall not allow the keeping of other live
animals within the tattooing room except for canine accompanying the visually
handicapped. This exclusion does not include the presence of birds in cages or
fish in aquariums in the waiting room. (Ord. 95-1, 2-6-1995)
7-13-14: INSPECTIONS:
During the business hours of the tattooing establishment, the health authority
may conduct periodic inspections for the purpose of determining whether or not
said establishment and the persons performing the art of tattooing therein are
in compliance with all applicable health provisions contained within this
Ordinance and other pertinent ordinances. It shall be unlawful for any person
or operator of a tattooing establishment willfully to prevent or restrain the
health officer from entering any licensed establishment where tattooing is
being performed for the purpose of inspecting said premises, after proper
identification is presented to the operator. (Ord. 95-1, 2-6-1995)
7-13-15: TATTOOING:
No person, other than a person licensed to practice medicine in all its
branches, shall do any tattooing to any person under the age of twenty one (21)
years without the consent of a parent or legal guardian, provided, however,
that such parent or legal guardian are themselves over twenty one (21) years of
age. A sign shall be prominently displayed at the tattoo facility stating that
tattooing of a person under the age of twenty one (21) is contrary to State
law. (Ord. 95-1, 2-6-1995)
7-13-16: NO GUARANTEE OR WARRANTY:
The purpose of this Chapter is to protect the public interest by reducing the
dangers involved in unregulated practice of tattooing. Neither the issuance of
a license, the making of an inspection without finding violations, or any other
act by the health officer or by any other City official shall constitute a
guarantee or warranty that any equipment or any treatment is safe or effective,
or that any tattooing establishment will perform without making errors. (Ord.
95-1, 2-6-1995)
7-13-17: HEARING PREREQUISITE TO REVOCATION OF LICENSE; NOTICE:
No license shall be revoked until after due notice and a hearing shall have
been held before the City Administrator to determine just cause for such
revocation. Notice of such hearing shall be given in writing and served at
least ten (10) days but not more than twenty (20) days prior to the date of the
hearing thereon. The notice shall state the grounds of the complaint against
the holder of such license and shall designate the time and place where such
hearing will be had. Said notice shall be served upon the license holder by
delivering the same personally or by leaving such notice at the place of
business or residence of the license holder in the custody of a person of
suitable age and discretion. In the event the license holder cannot be found,
and the service of such notice cannot be otherwise made in the manner herein
provided, a copy of such notice shall be mailed, registered and postage fully
prepaid, addressed to the license holder at his place of business or residence
at least ten (10) days prior to the date of such hearing. (Ord. 95-1, 2-6-1995)
7-13-18: GROUNDS FOR REVOCATION:
The license of a tattooing establishment may be revoked for any legitimate
reason, including without limitation any one or more of the following grounds:
   (A)   That the holder has been convicted in a court of competent
jurisdiction of a felony. The conviction of a felony shall be the conviction of
any offense which, if committed within this State, would constitute a felony
under the laws thereof.
   (B)   That the holder is addicted to the habitual use of intoxicating
liquors, narcotics or stimulants to such an extent as to incapacitate such
person for the performance of his professional duties for any period of time.
   (C)   That the holder is guilty of fraudulent, false, misleading or
deceptive advertising.
   (D)   That the holder is guilty of wilful negligence in the practice of
tattooing or has been guilty of employing, allowing or permitting any
unlicensed person to perform tattooing in his establishment.
   (E)   That liquor is being sold or consumed within the establishment.
   (F)   That the licensee has been convicted of prostitution, pandering,
pimping or other offense opposed to decency and morality.
   (G)   That the licensee has committed any act involving moral turpitude.
   (H)   That the establishment has abandoned the practice of tattooing or that
the individual licensee has abandoned the same practices. For purposes of this
subsection, "abandonment" shall mean that the activities regulated hereunder,
or any of them, have ceased or otherwise not conducted for a period of sixty
(60) days at the establishment in question, or where an individual licensee has
abandoned the activities regulated hereunder, or any of them, for a like
period.
   (I)   That the licensee, whether an establishment or individual, has
violated any provision of this Ordinance, whether or not an action has been
commenced in Circuit Court.
   (J)   Any licensee, whether an establishment or individual, who has had its
license revoked three (3) times shall be ineligible for any license hereunder
for a period of five (5) years beginning with the effective date of the third
revocation. (Ord. 95-1, 2-6-1995)
7-13-19: TATTOOING ESTABLISHMENTS PRACTICING WHEN PROVISIONS OF CHAPTER BECAME
EFFECTIVE:
Any person, firm or corporation who is actually engaged in the practice of
tattooing at the time of final passage of this Chapter and meets all the
requirements except as to adequacy of facilities, and, upon payment of the
prescribed fee, shall be granted a license. Such person shall have thirty (30)
days from the effective date of this Ordinance from which this Chapter is
derived to bring his facilities into compliance with this Chapter. (Ord. 95-1,
2-6-1995)
7-13-20: FEDERAL, STATE AND LOCAL REGULATION:
Wherever Federal, State or local laws, ordinances, rules or regulations
conflict with the provisions of this Ordinance, then the law, ordinance, rule
or regulation which is most strict shall apply, and it shall not be a defense
to an action under this Chapter, or to a request for suspension or revocation
of the license(s) provided herein, that this Ordinance does not specifically
enumerate the proscribed, prohibited or regulated conduct. (Ord. 95-1, 2-6-
1995)
7-13-21: PENALTY:
In addition to the revocation and suspension of any license, any person
violating any provision of this Ordinance shall be fined not less than twenty
five dollars ($25.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each
offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or
on which a violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 95-1, 2-6-1995)
CHAPTER 14
RADON RESISTANT CONSTRUCTION
SECTION:
7-14-1: Adoption By Reference, Model Standards And Techniques For Control Of
Radon In New Residential Buildings
7-14-2: Zone One Credit (Rep. by Ord. 03-05, 3-3-2003)
7-14-3: Inspection
7-14-4: Enforcement
7-14-5: Testing And Evaluation
7-14-6: Penalties
7-14-7: Conflict Of Ordinance
7-14-1: ADOPTION BY REFERENCE, MODEL STANDARDS AND TECHNIQUES FOR CONTROL OF
RADON IN NEW RESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS:
The mayor and the city council for the city of East Moline are aware that radon
gas remains a deadly threat to our well being, and that radon is second only to
cigarette smoking as the leading cause of lung cancer in our nation, and that
the city of East Moline has been identified to be located in a zone 1-high
radon potential area, and furthermore are aware that the model standards and
techniques are applicable to controlling radon levels in new construction of
one- and two- family dwellings and other new residential buildings three (3)
stories or less in height.
Therefore, the city council of the city of East Moline, Illinois, for the
purpose of prescribing regulations that will help control radon in new
residential buildings and contribute to a healthier indoor air environment,
hereby adopts by passage of this ordinance, certain regulations known as the
"Model Standards And Techniques For Control Of Radon In New Residential
Buildings", as recommended by the United States environmental protection
agency, air and radiation (6604-J), being particularly the March 1994 (EPA 402-
R-94-009) document, specifically sections 9.0, 9.1, 9.1.1.a-b-c, 9.1.2, 9.1.5,
9.1.6*, 9.1.7**, 9.1.8, 9.1.9, 9.1.10, 9.1.11, 9.1.12, 9.1.13, 9.1.14, 9.1.15,
9.1.16, 9.1.17, 9.1.18, 9.1.19, 9.1.20, 9.1.20.1, 9.1.20.2, 9.1.20.3, 9.1.21,
9.1.21.1, 9.1.21.2, 9.1.21.3 and 9.1.21.5 thereof, and any future revisions or
addenda thereto, of which not less than three (3) copies of said regulations
have been and are now filed in the office of the clerk of the city of East
Moline, and the same are hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out
at length herein, and from the date on which this ordinance shall take effect,
the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the limits of the city of
East Moline, Illinois.
* Unfinished basements or cellar occupancies are exempt from the requirements
of both sections 9.1.6 and 9.1.7.
** Delete the sentence "A continuous formed gap (for example, a "tooled edge")
which allows the application of a sealant that will provide a continuous, air-
tight seal shall be created along all joints." from section 9.1.7.
(Ord. 97-44, 11-17-1997)
7-14-2: ZONE ONE CREDIT:
(Rep. by Ord. 03-05, 3-3-2003)
7-14-3: INSPECTION:
The city will require a minimum of three (3) inspections during the
installation of the "standards and techniques", which will be made concurrently
with typical ground work/precover/final building or plumbing inspection
request; and to include: a) "prepour": prior to basement or crawl space pour,
an inspection of the installation of the plastic T- fitting, and the
installation of the polyethylene sheeting over the gas permeable (clean
aggregate or sand) layer, b) "precover": prior to wall covering, an inspection
of the vent pipe installation as it passes vertically through the walls and
into the attic space including the roof penetration and, c) "final inspection":
to verify all applicable work has been completed. The city will identify the
vent piping installation with labels which clearly read "RADON REDUCTION
SYSTEM" and "NO PLUMBING-DO NOT USE" so as to be easily identified for future
reference, and not to be confused with household plumbing system components.
(Ord. 97-44, 11-17-1997)
7-14-4: ENFORCEMENT:
This ordinance shall be enforced by the health inspector or authorized
representative for the city of East Moline (Illinois) health department in
accordance with the "Model Standards And Techniques For Control Of Radon In New
Residential Buildings"; United States environmental protection agency, air and
radiation, March 1994, and any subsequent revisions, copies of which will be on
file in the city clerk's office. (Ord. 97-44, 11-17-1997)
7-14-5: TESTING AND EVALUATION:
The health inspector or authorized representative for the East Moline health
department, within six (6) months after new home occupancy, shall provide
appropriate tests to determine the effectiveness of the radon resistant new
construction methods; and at no expense to the homeowner. The health inspector
shall provide explanation of test results to homeowner, and may make
recommendations to enhance or improve the indoor radon levels. (Ord. 97-44, 11-
17-1997)
7-14-6: PENALTIES:
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this ordinance shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine of not less that fifty
dollars ($50.00) and not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). Each day
which such a violation occurs shall constitute a separate violation. (Ord. 97-
44, 11-17-1997)
7-14-7: CONFLICT OF ORDINANCE:
In any case where a provision of this ordinance is found to be in conflict with
a provision of the East Moline building code(s) current practice, the East
Moline building code(s) will prevail and remain in full force. (Ord. 97-44, 11-
17-1997)
CHAPTER 15
INTERMENTS
Section:
7-15-1: Interment Of Remains
7-15-1: INTERMENT OF REMAINS:
It shall be unlawful to make any interment or bury the dead body of any person
within the city limits, except in a properly established cemetery. (Ord. 17-07,
2-21-2017)
TITLE 8
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
CHAPTER 1
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
SECTION:
8-1-1: Supervision
8-1-2: Construction
8-1-3: Specifications
8-1-4: Injury To New Pavements
8-1-5: Repairs And Maintenance
8-1-6: Defects
8-1-7: Obstruction
8-1-8: Barricades
8-1-9: Disturbing Barricades
8-1-10: Private Use
8-1-11: Encroachments
8-1-12: Injury
8-1-13: Deposits On Streets
8-1-14: Deposits On Sidewalks
8-1-15: Drains
8-1-16: Poles And Wires
8-1-17: Gas Pumps
8-1-18: Games
8-1-19: Openings
8-1-20: View At Corners
8-1-21: Barbed Wire Fences
8-1-22: Burning Leaves, Rubbish (Rep. by Ord. 91-30, 10-7-1991)
8-1-23: Bicycle Path And Walkway
8-1-24: Discharge Of Water
8-1-1: SUPERVISION:
All public streets, alleys, sidewalks and other public ways in the City shall
be under the supervision of the Director of Maintenance Services. He shall be
charged with the enforcement of all provisions of this Code relating to such
public places (except traffic regulations) and is hereby authorized to enforce
such Code provisions. (M.C. 1962, sec. 13.101; amd. Ord. 88-1, 1-4-1988)
8-1-2: CONSTRUCTION:
It shall be unlawful to construct or lay any pavement on any public street,
sidewalk, alley or other public way or to repair the same without having first
obtained a permit therefor. Applications for such permits shall be made to the
Clerk and shall state the location of the intended pavement or repair, the
extent thereof and the person or firm who is to do the actual construction
work. No such permits shall be issued except in or on the order of the City
Council. (M.C. 1962, sec. 13.102)
8-1-3: SPECIFICATIONS:
All street and sidewalk pavements shall be made in conformity with
specifications laid down or approved from time to time by the Council. (M.C.
1962, sec. 13.104)
8-1-4: INJURY TO NEW PAVEMENTS:
It shall be unlawful to walk upon or drive any vehicle or animal upon or injure
any newly laid street or sidewalk pavement while the same is guarded by a
warning sign or barricade or to knowingly injure any soft newly laid pavement.
(M.C. 1962, sec. 13.105)
8-1-5: REPAIRS AND MAINTENANCE:
   (A)   Kept In Good Repair: All public streets, alleys and sidewalk pavement
shall be kept in good repair, said repair work to be done under the supervision
of the Director of Maintenance Services.
      It shall be the duty of all owners of lots, blocks, tracts or parcels of
land touching the line of a sidewalk in the City to maintain and repair said
sidewalk.
      It shall be the duty of the Director of Maintenance Services to serve or
cause to be served, a notice addressed to the party who last paid the general
taxes on the respective real estate, notifying said person that the sidewalk
abutting the subject real estate is in need of repair and that the necessary
repairs must be made within thirty (30) days of the receipt of the notice. The
cost of said repairs made under voluntary compliance shall be shared between
the property owner and the City under the then existing sidewalk replacement
program as determined by the City Council.
      If the person so served does not make the necessary repairs within the
prescribed time period, the Director of Maintenance Services may proceed to
make the necessary repairs, keeping an account of the expense of the repairs,
and one hundred percent (100%) of such expense shall be collected from the
property owner pursuant to 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-84-3, or may be
filed as a lien against said property with the Recorder of Deeds of Rock Island
County, Illinois. Any property owner's failure to properly maintain the
sidewalk abutting the owner's real estate shall create a cause of action
against such owner in favor of any party injured as a result of the failure to
maintain the sidewalk.
   (B)   Duties Of Abutting Property Owners:
      1.   The occupant of property abutting a public right of way or the owner
thereof if said property is vacant, or any person acting as the agent of
either, shall have the following duties in relation to said public right of
way:
         (a)   To remove within a reasonable time from the portion of any
public sidewalk abutting said property all snow and ice.
         (b)   To refrain from putting, pushing, blowing or otherwise
depositing any snow removed from a public sidewalk or private property upon any
improved public roadway.
         (c)   To refrain from allowing, causing, permitting or making any
accumulation of sand, gravel, soil, ashes, debris, or other matter to be
washed, blown, carried or deposited by the elements or otherwise from private
property to the public right of way, including, but not limited to, streets,
alleys, sidewalks, catch basins and storm drains, and to remove any such matter
so washed, blown, carried or deposited onto said public right of way within a
reasonable time.
         (d)   To maintain the boulevard in accordance with the ordinances of
the City.
      2.   For purposes of this Section, "reasonable time" shall mean as
follows:
         (a)   Snow Removal: Within twenty four (24) hours after cessation of a
snowfall or, if a snowfall ceases in the nighttime hours, within twenty four
(24) hours after sunrise.
         (b)   Other Material: Within twenty four (24) hours after such matter
has been washed, blown, carried or deposited onto the public right of way or;
if the cause of said washing, blowing, carrying or depositing of such matters
onto public right of way is an ongoing activity such as excavation,
construction or transportation; within two (2) hours after the close of each
workday.
   (C)   Violation: Any person found guilty of violating any of the provisions
of this Section shall be subject to a fine of five dollars ($5.00) for the
first offense, ten dollars ($10.00) for the second offense and twenty five
dollars ($25.00) for the third offense, with said offense being charged by
citation as issued by the Police Department, only after written warning has
been delivered to the property owner or occupant. (Ord. 96-4, 2-5-1996)
8-1-6: DEFECTS:
It shall be the duty of every City officer or employee becoming cognizant of
any defect in any street or alley or sidewalk or any obstruction thereof, to,
report the same to the Director of Maintenance Services as soon as possible.
(Ord. 99-10, 3-15-1999)
8-1-7: OBSTRUCTION:
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, create or maintain any
obstruction of any street, alley, sidewalk or other public way, except as may
be specifically authorized by ordinance or by the Director of Maintenance
Services when necessary in an emergency or in connection with any lawful
construction, repair or removal work.
When an abandoned, unattended, wrecked, burned or partially dismantled vehicle
is creating a hazard to vehicular or pedestrian traffic, its immediate removal
from the street, alley, sidewalk or other public way by a towing service may be
authorized by the Police Department. (Ord. 99-10, 3-15-1999)
8-1-8: BARRICADES:
Any person laying or repairing any pavement on a street, sidewalk or other
public place or making an excavation in any such place, shall maintain suitable
barricades to prevent injury to any person or vehicle by reason of the work;
such barricades shall be protected by lights at nighttime.
Any defect in any such pavement shall be barricaded to prevent injury; any
person properly maintaining any opening or excavation in any such place shall
guard such opening or excavation while the same remains open by proper
barricades and lights. (M.C. 1962, sec. 13.109)
8-1-9: DISTURBING BARRICADES:
It shall be unlawful to disturb or interfere with any barricade or lights
lawfully placed to protect or mark any new pavement or excavation or opening in
any public street, alley or sidewalk. (M.C. 1962, sec. 13.110)
8-1-10: PRIVATE USE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to use any street, sidewalk or other public
place as space for the display of goods or merchandise for sale or to write or
mark any signs or advertisements on any such pavements. (M.C. 1962, sec.
13.111)
8-1-11: ENCROACHMENTS:
It shall be unlawful to erect or maintain any building or structure which
encroaches upon any public street or property. (M.C. 1962, sec. 13.112)
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect or cause to
be erected, to retain or cause to be retained, an "encroachment" (herein
defined), within the limits of the roadway right of way.
ENCROACHMENT: Any building, fence, sign, or any other structure or object of
any kind (with the exception of utilities and public road signs), which is
placed, located or maintained in, on or over any portion of the roadway right
of way.
ROADWAY RIGHT OF WAY: Those areas existing or acquired by dedication or by fee
simple for highway purposes; also, the areas acquired by temporary easement
during the time the easement is in effect. (Ord. 99-17, 5-17-1999)
8-1-12: INJURY:
It shall be unlawful to injure any sidewalk, street or alley pavement. (M.C.
1962, sec. 13.113)
8-1-13: DEPOSITS ON STREETS:
It shall be unlawful to deposit on any street any material which may be harmful
to the pavement thereof, or any waste material or any glass or other articles
which may do injury to persons, animals or property.
Coal or other materials may be deposited in streets preparatory to delivery or
use, provided that such deposit does not reduce the usable width of the roadway
at the point to less than eighteen feet (18'), provided that such material or
coal, other than material to be used in actual building construction, shall not
be permitted to remain on such street for more than three (3) hours.
Any such material or coal shall be guarded by lights if the same remains upon
any street after nighttime. (M.C. 1962, sec. 13.114)
8-1-14: DEPOSITS ON SIDEWALKS:
It shall be unlawful to deposit on any public sidewalk any material which may
be harmful to the pavement thereof, or any waste material, or any glass or
other articles which might cause injury to persons, animals or property.
Merchandise or other articles may be deposited on sidewalks preparatory to
delivery, provided that the usable width thereof is not thereby reduced to less
than four feet (4'); and provided that no such article shall remain on such
walk for more than one- half (1/2) hour. (M.C. 1962, sec. 13.115)
8-1-15: DRAINS:
It shall be unlawful to obstruct any drain in any public street or alley. (M.C.
1962, sec. 13.116)
8-1-16: POLES AND WIRES:
It shall be unlawful to erect any poles or wires or to maintain any poles or
wires over any public street, alley or other public way without having first
secured permission from the Director of Maintenance Services. (Ord. 99-10, 3-
15-1999)
8-1-17: GAS PUMPS:
It shall be unlawful to maintain or erect any gasoline pump or tank in any
public street, alley or sidewalk. (M.C. 1962, sec. 13.118)
8-1-18: GAMES:
It shall be unlawful to play any games upon any street, alley, sidewalk or
other public place where such games cause unnecessary noise or interfere with
traffic or pedestrians. (M.C. 1962, sec. 13.119)
8-1-19: OPENINGS:
It shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any opening or stairway in any
public street or sidewalk or alley without a permit from the City Council. All
such lawfully maintained openings shall be guarded by a suitably strong cover
or a railing to the approval of the Director of Maintenance Services. (M.C.
1962, sec. 13.120; amd. Ord. 88-1, 1-4-1988)
8-1-20: VIEW AT CORNERS:
It shall be unlawful to construct or maintain or permit to remain any fence or
other structure or any bushes or other plants on a corner lot within fifty feet
(50') of the street line which obstructs the view, at a height of more than
five feet (5') above the level of the adjacent street pavement.
Any person violating any provision of this Chapter shall be subject to penalty
as provided by Section
1-4-1 of this Code; and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each
day during or on which a violation occurs or continues or on which any such
obstruction to the view is permitted to remain after notice from the Police
Department, or any other official of the City, to remove the same. (M.C. 1962,
sec. 13.121)
8-1-21: BARBED WIRE FENCES:
It shall be unlawful to maintain or construct any fence composed in whole or in
part of barbed wire, or with any similar material designed to cause injury to
person, or any wire which is charged with electric current, anywhere within
three feet (3') of any public street, sidewalk, alley, park or other public way
or place. (M.C. 1962, sec. 13.122)
8-1-22: BURNING LEAVES, RUBBISH:
(Rep. by Ord. 91-30, 10-7-1991)
8-1-23: BICYCLE PATH AND WALKWAY:
The bicycle path and walkway within the City of East Moline shall be restricted
to pedestrians, including joggers, and those on bicycles, in-line skates, and
those in wheelchairs. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate upon the
bicycle path and walkway any other vehicle, any motorized vehicle, or
skateboard, except for any vehicle approved in writing by the Chief of Police,
or any vehicle authorized by the City for maintenance, security, safety or
emergency purposes, or motorized wheelchairs. (Ord. 92-37, 9-21-1992)
The bicycle path and walkway shall be closed to all persons before the hour of
six o'clock (6:00) A.M., and after the hour of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. Any
person convicted of a violation of said ordinance provision shall be subject to
a fine of not less than ten dollars ($10.00) and not more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00). (Ord. 91-37, 12-2-1991)
8-1-24: DISCHARGE OF WATER:
   (A)   Prohibited: The owner or occupant of property abutting a public right
of way, or any other person acting as agent for either, shall not discharge
water originating from sumps, sump pits, sump pumps or other pumps or any
reservoir serving as a drain or receptacle for water, onto a street, alley, or
other public right of way so as to cause a hazardous accumulation of water or
ice upon said right of way.
   (B)   Notification: The Director of Maintenance Services shall give written
notice of violation to the owner or occupant of the property from which the
water is discharged. Said notice shall direct said owner or occupant to abate
the discharge within thirty (30) days. If the discharge of water continues
after thirty (30) days, the violation shall be subject to prosecution by the
City Attorney and to the penalties of this provision.
   (C)   Penalties: Any person who shall violate this provision shall be
punished by a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) and not to exceed
five hundred dollars ($500.00). Each day which such violation occurs shall
constitute a separate violation. (Ord. 98-27, 7-20-1998)
CHAPTER 2
DRIVEWAY APPROACHES AND CITY SIDEWALKS
SECTION:
I. DRIVEWAY APPROACHES
8-2-1: Permit Required
8-2-2: Application To City Engineering (Building Inspection) Department
8-2-3: Contractor's Bond
8-2-4: Fees Required
8-2-5: Traffic Control And Public Safety
8-2-6: Sidewalks
8-2-7: Graded Surfaces
8-2-8: Specifications
8-2-9: Repairs
8-2-10: Supervision
8-2-11: Exemptions
8-2-12: Authority
8-2-13: Penalty
II. SIDEWALKS
8-2-14: Permit Required
8-2-15: Application To City Engineering Department
8-2-16: Contractor's Bond
8-2-17: Fees Required
8-2-18: Traffic Control And Public Safety
8-2-19: Sidewalks
8-2-20: Graded Surfaces
8-2-21: Specifications
8-2-22: Repairs
8-2-23: Supervision
8-2-24: Exemptions
8-2-25: Authority
8-2-26: Penalty
I. DRIVEWAY APPROACHES
8-2-1: PERMIT REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful to construct or build, any driveway for vehicles over,
across, or upon any public right of way, curb, or sidewalk or that enters or
connects with any public street without first having obtained a separate
driveway permit from the Engineering Department (Building Inspections
Department for new building construction). Failure to obtain a permit prior to
commencement of the work shall result in a stop work order until the proper
permit is obtained. (Ord. 95-11, 4-3-1995)
8-2-2: APPLICATION TO CITY ENGINEERING (BUILDING INSPECTION) DEPARTMENT:
Prior to any work commencing, applications for such permit shall be made to the
Engineering Department and shall set forth:
   (A)   The nature or purpose, and exact location of the work to be done.
   (B)   The date of application, time when the work will commence and the
expected duration of the use or occupancy of any public way or public place
described in the application.
   (C)   The names and addresses of the contractor and owner, and the signature
of the applicant.
   (D)   The fee required.
The permit shall constitute an agreement that the applicant will comply with
all the provisions of this Code relating to the work to be done. (Ord. 95-11,
4-3-1995)
8-2-3: CONTRACTOR'S BOND:
No person shall be issued a permit unless a general contractor's license and
Code compliance bond has been executed and delivered to the City, with a
certificate that said bond is presently in full force and effect in the penal
sum of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) with good and sufficient sureties to
be approved by the Director of Engineering Services and the City. (Ord. 95-11,
4-3-1995)
8-2-4: FEES REQUIRED:
   (A)   The fee required for all such construction permits shall be twenty
five dollars ($25.00) for residential driveways and approaches. The residential
driveway shall be a maximum width of twenty five feet (25') wide at the curb
line. The fee shall be applicable to original construction and any widening or
replacement.
   (B)   The fee required for all such construction permits shall be thirty
five dollars ($35.00) for commercial, business, or residential special use
driveways. Commercial, business, or residential special use driveways shall be
a maximum of thirty five feet (35') wide at the curb line. The fee shall be
applicable to original construction and any widening or replacement.
   (C)   The fee for a permit issued under a stop work order will be twice the
required fee for each permit. All fees and previous permits must be paid in
full before any permits will be issued. (Ord. 95-11, 4-3-1995)
8-2-5: TRAFFIC CONTROL AND PUBLIC SAFETY:
   (A)   Traffic control shall be in accordance with the applicable sections of
the Illinois Department of Transportation Standard for Road and Bridge
Construction, latest edition, and the applicable guidelines contained in the
Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways,
latest edition.
   (B)   The permit holder shall insure that the work is performed with minimal
inconvenience and safety hazard to the public. The permit holder shall provide,
erect, and maintain all barricades and signs necessary to protect the work and
the public.
   (C)   No street or alley may be closed or partially closed without the
permission of the City Engineer. Once permission is granted, the contractor
must notify the Police, Fire, and Engineering Departments twenty four (24)
hours in advance of commencing the work. The contractor must also notify those
Departments when the work is completed and the street or alley is reopened.
   (D)   Fire hydrants, gutters, and storm inlets adjacent to the work may not
be obstructed without the permission of the Director of Engineering Services.
(Ord. 95-11, 4-3-1995)
8-2-6: SIDEWALKS:
If any sidewalk is blocked by any such work, an alternate route or a temporary
sidewalk shall be constructed or provided which shall be safe for travel and
convenient for users. (Ord. 95-11, 4-3-1995)
8-2-7: GRADED SURFACES:
No driveway shall be so constructed or graded as to leave a step, sharp
depression, or other obstruction in the sidewalk. The grade shall be the same
as that of the adjoining sidewalk, and in any case the work shall meet the
applicable requirements under the American with Disabilities Act, and the
Illinois Department of Transportation Standards. It shall be unlawful to have
the surface finish of any driveway where it crosses the sidewalk constructed of
such materials as to render it slippery and hazardous to pedestrians, or to
have the grade of such portion vary from the grade of the sidewalk. (Ord. 95-
11, 4-3-1995)
8-2-8: SPECIFICATIONS:
   (A)   Driveways over, across, or upon public right of way shall be
constructed in accordance with specifications adopted by the City Council.
Standard specifications for the improvement shall be maintained on file by the
Director of Engineering Services and available to the public.
   (B)   Work or material not conforming to the applicable specifications may
be rejected at any time within four (4) years after completion of the work,
even though inspected and accepted through oversight or otherwise. (Ord. 95-11,
4-3-1995)
8-2-9: REPAIRS:
It shall be the duty of the property owner maintaining a driveway to keep the
same in good repair where it crosses over, across, or upon public right of way,
and also free from obstructions and openings. (Ord. 95-11, 4-3-1995)
8-2-10: SUPERVISION:
The Director of Engineering Services or his designated representative shall
from time to time inspect all driveway approaches being made over, across, or
upon any public right of way, or other public place in the City to see to the
enforcement of the provisions of this Chapter. Notice shall be given to him at
least twenty four (24) hours in advance of any work to be done in order that
inspection may be provided. (Ord. 95-11, 4-3-1995)
8-2-11: EXEMPTIONS:
The provisions of this Code relative to securing permits shall not apply to
officers or employees of the City engaged in doing work for the City, nor to
persons or corporations which are operating under a franchise or grant from the
City if such franchise provides for the making of excavations and tunnels
without securing a permit therefor. This exemption pertains to the
applications, permits, and fees, but not to the supervision, inspection and
standards prescribed by this Article or specifications. (Ord. 95-11, 4-3-1995)
8-2-12: AUTHORITY:
The Director of Engineering Services shall have authority and it shall be his
duty to exercise his judgement in the public interest, in the issuance of
driveway approach permits, with respect to the size, location, specifications
and timing of construction or other qualifications affecting same. (Ord. 95-11,
4-3-1995)
8-2-13: PENALTY:
Any person convicted of a violation of any section of the Ordinance shall be
subject to the provisions of Section
1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 95-11, 4-3-1995)
II. SIDEWALKS
8-2-14: PERMIT REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful to construct or build, any driveway for vehicles over,
across, or upon any public right of way curb, or sidewalk or that enters or
connects with any public street without first having obtained a separate
sidewalk permit from the Engineering Department (Building Inspection Department
for a new building construction). Failure to obtain a permit prior to
commencement of the work shall result in as stop work order until the proper
permit is obtained. (Ord. 95-11, 4-3-1995)
8-2-15: APPLICATION TO CITY ENGINEERING DEPARTMENT:
Prior to any work commencing, applications for such permits shall be made to
the Engineering Department and shall set forth:
   (A)   The nature or purpose, and exact location of the work to be done.
   (B)   The date of application, time when the work will commence and the
expected duration of the use or occupancy of any public way or public place
described in the application.
   (C)   The names and addresses of the contractor and owner, and the signature
of the applicant.
   (D)   The fee required.
The permit shall constitute an agreement that the applicant will comply with
all the provisions of this Code relating to the work to be done. (Ord. 95-11,
4-3-1995)
8-2-16: CONTRACTOR'S BOND:
No person shall be issued a permit unless a general contractor's license and
Code compliance bond has been executed to the City with a certificate that said
bond is presently in full force and effect in the penal sum of five thousand
dollars ($5,000.00) with good and sufficient sureties to be approved by the
Director of Engineering Services and the City. (Ord. 95-11, 4-3-1995)
8-2-17: FEES REQUIRED:
   (A)   The fee required for all such construction permits shall be fifteen
dollars ($15.00) for residential sidewalks. The fee shall be applicable to
original construction and any widening or replacement.
   (B)   The fee required for all such construction permits shall be fifteen
dollars ($15.00) for commercial or business use sidewalks. The fee shall be
applicable to original construction and any widening or replacement.
   (C)   The fee for a permit issued under a stop work order will be twice the
required fee for each permit. All fees and previous permits must be paid in
full before any permits will be issued. (Ord. 95-11, 4-3-1995)
8-2-18: TRAFFIC CONTROL AND PUBLIC SAFETY:
   (A)   Traffic control shall be in accordance with the applicable sections of
the Illinois Department of Transportation Standard for Road and Bridge
Construction, latest edition, and the applicable guidelines contained in the
Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways,
latest edition.
   (B)   The permit holder shall insure that the work is performed with minimal
inconvenience and safety hazard to the public. The permit holder shall provide,
erect, and maintain all barricades and signs necessary to protect the work and
the public.
   (C)   No street or alley may be closed or partially closed without the
permission of the Director of Engineering Services. Once permission is granted,
the contractor must notify the Police, Fire, and Engineering Department twenty
four (24) hours in advance of commencing the work. The contractor must also
notify those Departments when the work is completed and the street or alley is
reopened.
   (D)   Fire hydrants, gutters, and storm inlets adjacent to the work may not
be obstructed without the permission of the Director of Engineering Services.
(Ord. 95-11, 4-3-1995)
8-2-19: SIDEWALKS:
If any sidewalk is blocked by any such work, an alternate route or a temporary
sidewalk shall be constructed or provided which shall be safe for travel and
convenient for users. (Ord. 95-11, 4-3-1995)
8-2-20: GRADED SURFACES:
No sidewalk shall be so constructed or graded as to leave a step, sharp
depression, or other obstruction in the sidewalk. The grade shall be the same
as that of the adjoining sidewalk, and in any case the work shall meet the
applicable requirements under the American with Disabilities Act, and the
Illinois Department of Transportation Standards. It shall be unlawful to have
the surface finish of any driveway where it crosses the sidewalk constructed of
such materials as to render it slippery and hazardous to pedestrians, or to
have the grade of such portion vary from the grade of the sidewalk. (Ord. 95-
11, 4-3-1995)
8-2-21: SPECIFICATIONS:
   (A)   Sidewalks, over, across, or upon public right of way shall be
constructed in accordance with specifications adopted by the City Council.
Standard specifications for the improvement shall be maintained on file by the
Director of Engineering Services and available to the public.
   (B)   Work or material not conforming to the applicable specifications may
be rejected at any time within four (4) years after completion of the work,
even though inspected and accepted through oversight or otherwise. (Ord. 95-11,
4-3-1995)
8-2-22: REPAIRS:
It shall be the duty of the property owner maintaining a driveway to keep the
same in good repair where it crosses over, across, or upon public right of way,
and also free form obstructions and openings. (Ord. 95-11, 4-3-1995)
8-2-23: SUPERVISION:
The Director of Engineering Services or his designated representative shall
from time to time inspect all sidewalks being made over, across, or upon any
public right of way, or public place in the City to see the enforcement of the
provisions of this Chapter. Notice shall be given to him at least twenty four
(24) hours in advance of any work to be done in order that inspections may be
provided. (Ord. 95-11, 4-3-1995)
8-2-24: EXEMPTIONS:
The provisions of this Code relative to securing permits shall not apply to
officers or employees of the City engaged in doing work for the City, nor to
persons or corporations which are operating under a franchise or grant from the
City if such franchise provides for the making of excavations and tunnels
without securing a permit therefor. This exemption pertains only to the
applications, permits, and fees, but not to the supervision, inspection and
standards prescribed by this Article or specifications. (Ord. 95-11, 4-3-1995)
8-2-25: AUTHORITY:
The Director of Engineering Services shall have authority and it shall be his
duty to exercise his judgement in the public interest, in the issuance of
driveway approach permits, with respect to the size, location, specification
and timing of construction or other qualifications affecting same. (Ord. 95-11,
4-3-1995)
8-2-26: PENALTY:
Any person convicted of a violation of any section of this Ordinance shall be
subject to the provisions of Section
1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 95-11, 4-3-1995)
CHAPTER 3
EXCAVATIONS
SECTION:
8-3-1: Permit Required
8-3-2: Application To The Plumbing Inspector
8-3-3: Excavator's Bond
8-3-4: Fees Required
8-3-5: Traffic Control And Public Safety
8-3-6: Manner Of Excavating
8-3-7: Sidewalks
8-3-8: Backfilling And Restoring Surfaces
8-3-9: Backfilling By Private Utilities
8-3-10: Specifications
8-3-11: Supervision
8-3-12: Exemptions
8-3-13: Emergency Work
8-3-14: Authority
8-3-15: Penalty
8-3-1: PERMIT REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful to dig, excavate, remove, cut or in any manner tunnel
under or break the surface of any part of any street, alley, curb, sidewalk, or
public right of way, unless a separate excavation permit to do so has been
issued by the Plumbing Inspector or his designated representative, according to
the conditions of this Chapter. Failure to obtain prior to commencement of the
work will result in a stop work order until the proper permit is obtained.
(Ord. 95-13, 4-3-1995)
8-3-2: APPLICATION TO THE PLUMBING INSPECTOR:
   (A)   Prior to any work commencing, an application for such permit shall be
made to the Plumbing Inspector and shall set forth:
      1.   The nature or purpose, size, and exact location of the work to be
done.
      2.   The date of application, time when the work will commence and the
expected duration of the use or occupancy of any public way or public place
described in the application.
      3.   The names and addresses of the contractor and owner, and the
signature of the applicant.
      4.   The fee required.
   (B)   The permit shall constitute an agreement that the applicant will
comply with all the provisions of this Code relating to the work done.
   (C)   The excavation permit shall be void one hundred eighty (180) days
after the date of issue. From the time the public right of way is excavated,
the permit holder shall work with all possible speed and shall have five (5)
working days to complete his responsibilities. The permit shall be available on
site for inspection at any time upon request by the authorized City officials.
   (D)   A separate excavation permit shall be required for each uninterrupted
alteration of the surface or undersurface of any street, avenue, highway,
alley, curb, or sidewalk, provided that when multiple cuts are made at
approximately the same time one permit fee shall apply for each six hundred
foot (600') section of utility main over which such multiple cuts are made.
(Ord. 95-13, 4-3-1995)
8-3-3: EXCAVATOR'S BOND:
No person shall be issued an excavation permit unless an excavator's license
and Code compliance bond has been executed to the City with a certificate that
said bond is presently in full force and effect in the penal sum of five
thousand dollars ($5,000.00) with good and sufficient sureties to be approved
by the Director of Engineering Services and the City. (Ord. 95-13, 4-3-1995)
8-3-4: FEES REQUIRED:
   (A)   The fee required for each permit issued shall be twenty five dollars
($25.00), payable to the City of East Moline, at the time the permit is issued.
No refunds shall be made on excavation permits.
   (B)   The fee for a permit issued under a stop work order will be twice the
fee required for each permit. All fees and previous permits must be paid in
full before any permits will be issued. (Ord. 95-13, 4-3-1995)
8-3-5: TRAFFIC CONTROL AND PUBLIC SAFETY:
   (A)   Traffic control shall be in accordance with the applicable sections of
the Illinois Department of Transportation Standard for Road and Bridge
Construction, latest edition, and the applicable guidelines contained in the
Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways,
latest edition.
   (B)   The excavation permit holder shall insure that the work is performed
with minimal inconvenience and safety hazard to the public. The permit holder
shall provide, erect, and maintain all barricades and signs necessary to
protect the work and the public.
   (C)   No street or alley may be closed or partially closed without the
permission of the Director of Engineering Services. Once permission is granted,
the contractor must notify the Police, Fire, and Engineering Departments twenty
four (24) hours in advance of commencing the work. The contractor must also
notify those Departments when the work is completed an the street or alley
reopened. Fire hydrants, gutters, and storm inlets adjacent to the work may not
be obstructed without the permission of the Director of Engineering Services.
(Ord. 95-13, 4-3-1995)
8-3-6: MANNER OF EXCAVATING:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to make any such excavation or tunnel in any way
contrary to or at variance with the terms of the permit therefor. Proper
bracing shall be maintained to prevent the collapse of adjoining ground. In
order to insure proper backfill, the excavation shall not have any portion of
it which is below the surface and which extends beyond the opening at the
surface.
   (B)   No injury shall be done to any pipes, cables, or conduits in the
making of such excavations or tunnels. Notice shall be given to the City
department or officer charged with the care thereof, or inspection of any
utility exposed to damage or visual condition of the existing conduits,
endangered or affected by the making of any such excavation or tunnel. (Ord.
95-13, 4-3-1995)
8-3-7: SIDEWALKS:
If any sidewalk is blocked by any such work, an alternate route or a temporary
sidewalk shall be constructed or provided which shall be safe for travel and
convenient for users. (Ord. 95-13, 4-3-1995)
8-3-8: BACKFILLING AND RESTORING SURFACES:
   (A)   Any person making any excavation or tunnel in or under any public
street, alley, curb, sidewalk, or public place in the City shall restore the
surface thereof, to its original condition if there was no pavement located
there. Backfill shall be properly tamped down, and any bracing in such tunnel
or excavation shall not be left in the ground.
   (B)   Any opening in a paved or improved portion of a street shall be
repaired and the surface relayed by the applicant in compliance with the
provisions of this Code and subject to the supervision of the Director of
Engineering Services. The permit holder shall be responsible for the proper
backfilling of the excavation for a period of two (2) years after the date the
backfill is completed. This responsibility shall include all costs for
reopening the excavation, correcting the problem causing the settlement, and
replacing the pavement patch.
   (C)   Backfill material within two feet (2') of streets, alleys, curbs,
sidewalks, driveways, and other paved surfaces, with the exception of the top
one foot (1') of the excavation, shall be sand meeting the Illinois Department
of Transportation Specification for Road and Bridge Construction, latest
edition, and the Supplemental Specifications and Recurring Special Provisions,
latest edition, gradation FA-6, or equivalent as approved by the Director of
Engineering Services. The backfill material shall be thoroughly compacted in
accordance with the Illinois Department of Transportation Specification for
Road and Bridge Construction, latest edition, and the Supplemental
Specifications and Recurring Special Provisions, latest edition, or by methods
approved by the Director of Engineering Services.
   (D)   Backfill for areas beyond more than two feet (2') from the paved
surfaces shall be earthen material free from broken concrete, asphalt, large
rocks, or other debris. The backfill material shall be thoroughly compacted in
accordance with the Illinois Department of Transportation Specification for
Road and Bridge Construction, latest edition, and the Supplemental
Specifications and Recurring Special Provisions, latest edition, or by methods
approved by the Director of Engineering Services.
   (E)   Surface restoration at paved surfaces shall be the responsibility of
the permit holder. Temporary pavement patching on all pavement excavations
shall be done within two (2) working days after completion of the work in the
excavation. The temporary patches shall conform to the following minimum
standards:
      1.   Streets and alley patches:
Two inches (2") of well compacted, cold-mix asphalt placed on six inches (6")
of well compacted CA-6.
      2.   Driveways and sidewalks:
Two inches (2") of well compacted, cold-mix asphalt.
   (F)   The permit holder is responsible for maintaining the temporary patches
for a period of not more than six (6) months. During this maintenance period,
the permit holder shall make any repairs within two (2) working days after
notification by the City. If the permit holder fails to make the necessary
repairs within the two (2) working day period, the City will make the repairs
and charge the permit holder for all the costs incurred for such repairs.
   (G)   Surface restoration for areas disturbed outside of paved areas by the
construction shall be restored in like condition prior to the excavation. (Ord.
95-13, 4-3-1995)
8-3-9: BACKFILLING BY PRIVATE UTILITIES:
Private utility companies shall be responsible for backfilling, restoration and
safeguarding excavations made by the companies in street rights of way, and
also backfilling and safeguarding excavations made on boulevards or other City
property. Said companies shall be liable for the maintenance of backfilling and
restoration for a period of forty eight (48) months after the date of
acceptance by the City for said excavations, and shall hold the City harmless
for all claims for damages that may result because of the excavations during
said period. Backfilling and restoration shall be done in accordance with
specifications provided by the Director of Engineering Services. The sinking or
deterioration within the aforesaid period of months shall be held to be the
responsibility of the utility company, who shall upon direction of the Director
of Engineering Services re-excavate and properly refill and resurface said
street cut. (Ord. 95-13, 4-3-1995)
8-3-10: SPECIFICATIONS:
Excavations across or upon public right of ways shall be constructed in
accordance with specifications adopted by the City Council. Standard
specifications for the improvement shall be maintained on file by the Director
of Engineering Services and available to the public. (Ord. 95-13, 4-3-1995)
8-3-11: SUPERVISION:
The Director of Engineering Services or his designated representative shall
from time to time inspect all excavations and tunnels being made in or under
any public street, alley, curb, sidewalk, or other public place in the City to
see to the enforcement of the provisions of this Chapter. Notice shall be given
to the Director of Engineering Services or his agent at least twenty four (24)
hours before work of refilling any such excavation or tunnel commences. (Ord.
95-13, 4-3-1995)
8-3-12: EXEMPTIONS:
The provisions of this Code relative to securing permits shall not apply to
officers or employees of City engaged in doing work for the City, nor to
persons or corporations which are operating under a franchise or grant from the
City, if such franchise provides for the making of excavations and tunnels
without securing a permit therefor. This exemption pertains only to the
applications, permits, and fees, but not to the supervision, inspection and
standards prescribed by this Article or specifications. (Ord. 95-13, 4-3-1995)
8-3-13: EMERGENCY WORK:
Excavations shall be allowed at any time for emergency repairs to the public
utilities by the City, its contractor, or private utilities having a valid
franchise with the City by the respective utility company or its contractor
under the following conditions:
   (A)   The repairs shall be of an emergency nature only and shall not
constitute normal maintenance to the utility or extension thereof.
   (B)   Immediate notification must be given to the Police and Fire
Departments for any street or alley closure.
   (C)   Notice shall be given to the Director of Engineering Services at the
first available opportunity during normal City working hours stating the
location of the work, the nature of the emergency, and when said work will be
completed and back to normal conditions.
   (D)   Removal and replacement of pavement and traffic control for the
duration of the closing shall be in accordance with the applicable sections of
the Code of Ordinances. (Ord. 95-13, 4-3-1995)
8-3-14: AUTHORITY:
The Director of Engineering Services shall have authority and it shall be his
duty to exercise his judgement in the public interest, in the issuance of
excavation permits, with respect to the size, location, specifications, and
timing on excavations or other qualifications affecting same. (Ord. 95-13, 4-3-
1995)
8-3-15: PENALTY:
Any person convicted of a violation of any section of this Ordinance shall be
subject to the provisions of Section
1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 95-13, 4-3-1995)
CHAPTER 4
RAILROAD REGULATIONS
SECTION:
8-4-1: Train Crossings
8-4-1: TRAIN CROSSINGS:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for a railroad corporation to permit any train,
railroad car or engine to obstruct public travel at a railroad or highway grade
crossing for a period in excess of ten (10) minutes, except where such train,
railroad car or engine cannot be moved by reason of circumstances over which
the railroad corporation has no control.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any railroad employee to wilfully or
intentionally permit any train, railroad car or engine to obstruct public
travel at a railroad or highway grade crossing for a period in excess of ten
(10) minutes, except where such train, railroad car or engine cannot be moved
by reason of circumstances over which the railroad employee has no control.
However, no employee acting under the rules or orders of the railroad
corporation or its supervisory personnel may be prosecuted for such violations.
   (C)   Any railroad corporation violating, or any railroad employee violating
this Section shall be fined not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than
five hundred dollars ($500.00). (Ord. 73-41, 10-15-1973)
CHAPTER 5
TREES AND SHRUBS
SECTION:
8-5-1: License
8-5-2: Clean-Up
8-5-3: City Property
8-5-4: Unsafe Conditions
8-5-5: Injury
8-5-6: Advertisements And Notices
8-5-7: Excavations
8-5-8: Wires
8-5-9: Penalties
8-5-1: LICENSE:
   (A)   No person engaged in the business of trimming trees shall trim,
remove, feed or treat in any manner any trees standing in any street, alley,
parkway, boulevard or other public or private place in the City without first
obtaining a tree trimmer's license from the City Clerk. The license fee for
such a business or occupation shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) per year. The
license shall commence on the first day of May in each year. Any person being
issued a tree trimmer's license shall first provide a copy of his/her
insurance, good for the term of one year, but not necessarily to coincide with
the term of the license. Said insurance shall be from a reputable insurance
agent authorized to do business in the State of Illinois and cover public
liability of twenty five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) per person, fifty
thousand dollars ($50,000.00) per accident and twenty thousand dollars
($20,000.00) liability coverage for property damage. In addition thereto, said
applicant shall provide proof of workman's compensation coverage for each
employee. (Ord. 93-37, 6-7-1993)
   (B)   The provisions of this Section shall not apply to:
      1.   The United States of America, the State, County or the City, any
department, bureau or agency of any of the foregoing or any official
representative of any of the foregoing in the pursuit of his official duties.
      2.   Any person who engages in tree trimming as defined above on his own
premises.
      3.   Any public utility, including its authorized employees and agents,
when engaged in tree trimming for the purpose of line clearance and in order to
ensure the continuity of utility service to the public. (Ord. 90-5, 3-5-1990)
8-5-2: CLEAN-UP:
Any person licensed pursuant to this Chapter shall immediately, and at his own
expense, remove all tree trunks, limbs, branches, twigs or brush and properly
dispose of same in accordance with State and local laws. In addition thereto,
the licensee shall remove any stumps, fill in depressions, or remove any other
hazards caused by his/her actions. (Ord. 90-5, 3-5-1990)
8-5-3: CITY PROPERTY:
Any person, including each licensee, shall obtain permission from the Director
of Maintenance Services for each tree to be removed, cut, trimmed, or planted
when such tree is or will be located on City property or such tree is owned by
the City or its departments. (Ord. 90-5, 3-5-1990)
8-5-4: UNSAFE CONDITIONS:
   (A)   Any person who is found operating, or creating a condition which is
dangerous, unsafe, unsanitary or a menace to life, health, or property, or has
engaged in the business of trimming trees without a proper license or permit,
shall be ordered by the Director of Maintenance Services to immediately stop
work and correct the said situation.
   (B)   Whenever it has appeared to the Director of Maintenance Services that
the licensee has created or maintained any condition which is dangerous,
unsafe, unsanitary, or a menace to life, health, or property, or has done
business without proper license or permit, the Director of Maintenance Services
shall direct and mail an order in writing by certified mail to the licensee
directing him/her to correct the defect or omission within twenty (20) days
from the receipt of the notice.
   (C)   No applicant for the license required by Section
8-5-1 of this Chapter who is subject to an order issued under subsection (A) of
this Section shall be entitled to such license until compliance is demonstrated
to the satisfaction of the Director of Maintenance Services. (Ord. 90-5, 3-5-
1990)
8-5-5: INJURY:
It shall be unlawful to injure any tree or shrub planted in any public place.
(Ord. 90-5, 3-5-1990)
8-5-6: ADVERTISEMENTS AND NOTICES:
It shall be unlawful to attach any sign, advertisement, or notice to any tree
or shrub in any street, parkway, or other public place. (Ord. 90-5, 3-5-1990)
8-5-7: EXCAVATIONS:
In making excavations in streets or other public places proper care shall be
taken to avoid injury to the roots of any tree or shrub, whenever possible.
(Ord. 90-5, 3-5-1990)
8-5-8: WIRES:
Any person or company given the right to maintain poles and wires in the
streets, alleys, or other public places in the City shall, in the absence of
provision in the franchise concerning the subject, keep such wires and poles
free from and away from any trees or shrubs far away as may be possible. Said
party shall also keep all such trees and shrubs properly trimmed so that no
injury shall be done to the poles or wires or shrubs and trees by their contact
with each other. (Ord. 90-5, 3-5-1990)
8-5-9: PENALTIES:
Any person(s) violating any part of this Ordinance shall be subject to a fine
of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00) for each occurrence. (Ord. 90-5, 3-5-1990)
CHAPTER 6
PUBLIC BENCHES
SECTION:
8-6-1: Definitions
8-6-2: Location Restrictions
8-6-3: Permit Required
8-6-4: License Period; Permit Fee
8-6-5: Revocation
8-6-6: Construction
8-6-7: Maintenance
8-6-8: Advertising
8-6-9: Supervision
8-6-10: Location Of Benches
8-6-11: Indemnity Agreement
8-6-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of
this Chapter:
BENCH: A seat located upon public property along any public highway for the
accommodation of passersby awaiting transportation.
STREET: Any public thoroughfare, or way including the sidewalk, the parkway and
any public property bordering upon a public way. (M.C. 1962, sec. 27.501)
8-6-2: LOCATION RESTRICTIONS:
It shall be unlawful to install, erect or maintain any bench in any of the
following locations:
   (A)   In any alley.
   (B)   At any place where the distance from the face of the curb to the
property line is less than eight feet (8').
   (C)   At any location more than fifty feet (50') from the nearest
intersecting street; provided, that whenever, in the opinion of the Mayor and
City Council, observance of this requirement would result in inconvenience or
hardship, this requirement may be waived by the Mayor and City Council.
   (D)   On any street or highway except at an established bus stop.
   (E)   At any place or places which the Mayor and City Council may from time
to time specify. (M.C. 1962, sec. 7.502)
8-6-3: PERMIT REQUIRED:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to install, erect or maintain any
bench in the City without first securing a license therefor. A separate permit
must be obtained for each bench, which shall be valid only for a particular
location specified thereon. Each permit shall bear a separate number and not
more than two (2) permits shall be issued for any one location.
   (B)   No bench permit shall be issued except upon written application
showing proposed location of each bench, the advertising, if any, to appear
thereon and such other information as the Mayor and City Council may require.
   (C)   Detailed plans and specifications of each bench must be supplied by
the applicant. No installation will be permitted which will cause damage to the
property of the City.
   (D)   No permit shall be issued if the City Council shall find that the
maintenance of the bench should tend to obstruct the passage along any public
way, or create a hazard or would otherwise be detrimental to the public safety,
welfare or convenience. (M.C. 1962, sec. 27.503)
8-6-4: LICENSE PERIOD; PERMIT FEE:
Each permit shall expire on April 30 next following the date of issuance.
Annual permit fee shall be five dollars ($5.00) for each bench. Application for
renewal must be made prior to expiration date and must be accompanied by the
renewal fee. (M.C. 1962, sec. 27.504)
8-6-5: REVOCATION:
Any permit may be revoked or renewal thereof denied for any violation of any of
the provisions of this Chapter, for any fraud or misrepresentation in the
application, or any other reason, the issuance or revocation of the permit
being in full discretion of the City Council as to the number of permits and
renewal thereof. If any permit is revoked or renewal thereof denied in
accordance with the provisions of this Chapter, the permittee shall remove the
bench from public property within ten (10) days from the date he is so ordered,
the City may remove and store the bench at the permittee's expense.
Any permit issued under this Chapter shall be cancelled and revoked if the
permittee fails to install a bench within sixty (60) days after date of
issuance of the permit. (M.C. 1962, sec. 27.505)
In addition to any penalty imposed hereunder for the violation of any
provisions of this Chapter, the Mayor and City Council may revoke any such
permit. (M.C. 1962, sec. 27.513)
8-6-6: CONSTRUCTION:
No permittee shall locate or maintain any bench at a point less than eighteen
inches (18"), or more than thirty inches (30") from the face of the curb, and
each bench shall be kept parallel with the curb.
No bench shall be more than forty two inches (42") high, nor more than two feet
six inches (2'6") wide, nor more than seven feet (7') long over-all.
Each bench must have displayed thereon in a conspicuous place the name of the
permittee and the permit number. (M.C. 1962, sec. 27.506)
8-6-7: MAINTENANCE:
It shall be the duty of the permittee to maintain each bench at all times in
safe condition at its proper location, and to inspect each bench periodically.
(M.C. 1962, sec. 27.507)
8-6-8: ADVERTISING:
No advertising matter or sign whatever shall be displayed on any bench, except
on the front and rear surfaces of the back rest, and not have more than seventy
five percent (75%) of each such surface used.
No advertisement or sign on any bench shall display the words "Stop", "Look",
"Drive-In", or any other word, phrase, symbol or character calculated to
interfere, mislead or distract traffic. (M.C. 1962, sec. 27.508)
8-6-9: SUPERVISION:
The Building Inspector shall supervise the maintenance and erection of all
benches licensed hereunder. (M.C. 1962, sec. 27.509)
8-6-10: LOCATION OF BENCHES:
The Mayor and City Council shall designate locations where such benches shall
be erected and reserve the right to change, alter or amend designation of said
location as public convenience and necessity may from time to time require.
(M.C. 1962, sec. 27.510)
8-6-11: INDEMNITY AGREEMENT:
No bench permit or permits shall be issued hereunder unless applicant shall
post with the City Clerk a public liability bond as may be approved by the
Mayor and City Council.
Such public liability bond shall provide that the permittee will indemnify and
save harmless the City, its officers, agents and employees from any loss, cost,
damages, expenses or like, which may result or arise out of the granting the
permit or permits on the existence, installation or maintenance of the bench
for which the permit is issued, and that permittee will pay all loss or damage
that may arise out of such existence, installation or maintenance. The said
insurance policy shall be maintained in its original amount by the permittee at
his own expense, at all times during the period for which the permit is in
effect. In the event that two (2) or more permits are issued to one permittee,
one such policy of insurance shall be of such a type, coverage shall be
automatically restored immediately from and after the report of any accident
from which liability shall thereafter occur.
The limit of liability of any such bond shall be in no case less than fifteen
thousand dollars ($15,000.00) for bodily injury or death of one person, and
five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) for property damage. The permissible limits
of the liability for bodily injury or death of more than one person and the
limits of liability for property damage shall depend on the number of bench
permits covered thereby, and shall not be less than the amounts specified in
the following schedule:
 
Number Of Bench Permits Limits Of Public Liability Limits Of Property Damage
   1 to 10           $ 30,000.00                $5,000.00
   11 to 50          40,000.00                  5,000.00
   51 to 100         60,000.00                  5,000.00
   101 or more       100,000.00                 5,000.00
 
(M.C. 1962, sec. 27.511)
CHAPTER 7
CITY PARKS
SECTION:
8-7-1: Administration
8-7-2: Rules And Regulations
8-7-3: Tobacco Free Parks
8-7-1: ADMINISTRATION:
All City parks, lots or lands, heretofore or hereafter devised or bequeathed to
the City or purchased by the City shall be administered by and shall be under
the control of the Park Board which is provided for in Title 2, Chapter 14 of
this Code. (M.C. 1962, sec. 11.701)
8-7-2: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The Park Board shall make and enforce whatever rules and regulations it deems
necessary for the proper use of each of the City's parks. However, the
following regulations shall be in effect for all City parks and any violation
thereof shall be punishable by a fine of not less than ten dollars ($10.00) and
not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00):
No person or persons shall:
   1.   Permit dogs, cats or other animals on the premises, nor allow animals
to enter fenced-in areas, except for special functions, as authorized by the
Director Of Maintenance Services.
   2.   Carry or discharge firearms, fireworks, bows and arrows or slingshots,
unless duly authorized by City officials.
   3.   Cut, mark, break, climb upon, or in any way injure or deface trees,
shrubs, plants, buildings, fences, bridges or other structures or property on
the premises.
   4.   Remove from the premises sod, trees or plants, or other movable
property, or to pick flowers of any kind on any such premises.
   5.   Race with horses, bicycles, automobiles, minibikes, motorcycles, or
other vehicles, boats or animals; or drive or ride on drives on any such
premises at more than fifteen (15) miles per hour, except in Northeast Park
where said speed limit shall be ten (10) miles per hour, or unless otherwise
posted.
   6.   Sell, be in possession, or be under the influence of any intoxicating
beverages, hallucinogenic drugs or cannabis. The Park Board and City Council
may authorize the sale of alcoholic beverages in a park or parks. Consumption
of alcohol in a park must be limited to alcohol purchased from a vendor
licensed to sell alcohol in the park by the City with a valid liquor license
authorizing such sale.
   7.   Lie or sleep on tables or benches on the premises.
   8.   Distribute circulars or advertisements, or post notices, bills or other
paper upon any structures or trees on any such premises, or to advertise by any
other means.
   9.   Take any bird eggs or bird nests, fish in the lagoons, unless permitted
at such times as designated by the Director of Maintenance Services or other
authorities; or kill, or disturb any waterfowl, birds or wildlife.
   10.   Light any fires on the property, other than established fireplaces.
   11.   Drive or park any motorized vehicles other than on a roadway or
parking area.
   12.   Ride a bicycle in any playground area.
   13.   Be on the premises, unless otherwise designated or authorized, and
under proper supervision, between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and
seven o'clock (7:00) A.M., unless as otherwise posted. The enclosed playground
areas shall be opened and closed at the discretion of the Director of
Maintenance Services and any person being found within such closed areas shall
be in violation of this Chapter.
      The bicycle path and walkway shall be closed to all persons before the
hour of six o'clock (6:00) A.M. and after the hour of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M.
   14.   Be permitted to bring into or upon park and recreational properties
refuse of any kind, including undesirable plant life or discarded appliances.
   15.   Enter any area or portion of any area designated as restricted by
signs or notices without the consent of the director of maintenance services.
   16.   Be allowed to display language or conduct deemed disorderly, nor
engage in acts of vandalism.
   17.   Sell or offer to sell to any person, food, refreshments, or be a
vendor of any salable products without the approval by written permit, and by
contractual agreement with the park recreation board or its authorized agents.
   18.   Play or participate in a baseball or softball game, except in those
areas designated as ball diamonds.
   19.   Play radio or recording devices in a loud manner so as to disturb or
annoy other patrons of a city park. (Ord. 78-15, 4-17-1978; Ord. 93-52, 10-18-
1993; Ord. 99-10, 3-15-1999; Ord. 05-31, 10-17-2005; Ord. 23-06, 3-20-2023)
8-7-3: TOBACCO FREE PARKS:
   (A)   Tobacco Products Prohibited. No Person shall be permitted to use
tobacco products, including electronic nicotine delivery systems, in any City
park at all times under the jurisdiction of the park board.
   (B)   Locations. Locations of prohibition include but are not limited to:
      1.   Butterworth Park
      2.   Cottage Grove Baseball Diamond
      3.   Cottage Grove Tot Lot
      4.   Empire Park
      5.   Fire Station Tot Lot
      6.   Garfield Tot Lot
      7.   Hereford Park
      8.   Lincoln Tot Lot
      9.   Millennium Park
      10.   Mitchell Park
      11.   Jacobs Northeast Park Sports Complex
      12.   James C. Officer Park
      13.   Radden Park
      14.   Watertown Memorial Park
      15.   WimanPark
   (C)   Posting of Signs. A sign indicating “NO SMOKING” must be placed at
every City park entrance and noticeably placed throughout the City parks. The
park board will deem appropriate areas for all signs in all parks.
   (D)   Exemption. Tobacco products are permitted in parking lots adjacent to
City parks. Tobacco products may be used in City parks as part of a Native
American spiritual or cultural ceremony. Approval from the City of East Moline
administration must be requested and received prior to the ceremony.
   (E)   Enforcement.
      1.   Signage will be posted at strategic locations.
      2.   The community, faculty users and staff will be notified of this
Ordinance.
      3.   Enforcement of
8-7-3 is a shared responsibility of City staff and City park patrons.
      4.   The City will make periodic observations to monitor for compliance.
      5.   Any individual in violation of
8-7-3 will be informed of policy and asked to comply. If the violator refuses
to comply they will be subjected to ejection from the City park.
   (F)   Penalty. Any person violating
8-7-3 shall be subject to a mandatory fine as follows: not less than fifty
dollars ($50.00) plus court costs nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00) plus court costs for a first offense; not less than one hundred
dollars ($100.00) plus court costs nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00) plus court costs for a second offense; not less than two hundred
dollars ($200.00) plus court costs nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00) plus court costs for a third or subsequent offense.
   (G)   Definitions as used in this section:
 
AT ALL TIMES:                        At all hours every day.
                                     All facilities controlled by East Moline
                                     for recreation purposes including but not
CITY PARKS:                          limited to: playgrounds, trails, open
                                     space, plazas, athletic fields, restrooms,
                                     concession areas or bleachers.
                                     Includes all products containing or
                                     delivering nicotine or lobelia, or any
                                     other substance intended for human
ELECTRONIC NICOTINE DELIVERY SYSTEM: consumption to stimulate smoking through
                                     inhalation of aerosol or vapor from the
                                     product This term includes but is not
                                     limited to: e-cigarettes, e-cigars, e-
                                     pipes, vape pens or e-hookah.
                                     All commodities containing, made or
                                     derived from tobacco that is intended for
                                     human consumption. These commodities
                                     include products to be chewed, smoked,
                                     absorbed, dissolved, inhaled, snorted,
                                     sniffed or ingested. Tobacco products
TOBACCO PRODUCT:                     include but are not limited to:
                                     cigarettes, cigars, cigarillos, chewing
                                     tobacco, snuff, electronic nicotine
                                     delivery systems and any other forms of
                                     tobacco. Tobacco products exclude nicotine
                                     gum and patches being used only for
                                     cessation. (Ord. 18-09, 9-17-2018)
 
CHAPTER 8
WATER AND SEWER 1
SECTION:
8-8-1: Creation Of Department
8-8-2: Management
8-8-3: Bonds Of Employees
8-8-4: Rules And Regulations Of The Water And Sewer Departments
8-8-5: Permit For Water Service Connections
8-8-6: Service Connections
8-8-7: Service Taps
8-8-8: No Alterations Or Additions Of Service Pipes Without Permit
8-8-9: No Sprinkler Or Fire Protection Service Until Connection Is Tested
8-8-10: Separate Connections
8-8-11: Temporary Mains
8-8-12: Yard Hydrants, Sprinkling Plugs And Sill Cocks
8-8-13: Service Curb Box And Stop
8-8-14: No Connection Between Services
8-8-15: Depth Of Service Pipe
8-8-16: Maintenance Of Service Pipes
8-8-17: Emergency Water Leaks
8-8-18: Failure Of Supply
8-8-19: Abandoned Or Unused Service Pipes
8-8-20: Right To Shut Off Water
8-8-21: Application For Water And/Or Sewer Service Meter
8-8-22: No Service At New Location Until Payment Of Delinquent Rentals
8-8-23: Rates And Charges
8-8-24: Revenue
8-8-25: Discontinued Use Of Water
8-8-26: Collecting Zones, Payment Dates And Penalties
8-8-27: Notice Of Delinquency
8-8-28: Adjustment Of Water Charges
8-8-29: Leakage
8-8-30: Water Meters
8-8-31: Owners To Protect Meters
8-8-32: Discontinued Use Of Meter
8-8-33: Repairing Meters
8-8-34: Unlawful To Obstruct
8-8-35: Water For Construction And Special Purposes
8-8-36: Damage To City Utilities Or Appurtenances
8-8-37: Fire Hydrants
8-8-38: Plumbing Inspector To Report
8-8-39: Inspection And Inspectors
8-8-40: Water Distribution Department May Inspect Premises
8-8-41: Other Departments Required To Aid
8-8-42: No Connection Between City And Other Supply
8-8-43: Regulation Of Cross Connections
8-8-44: Repeal Invalidity Of Part
8-8-45: Effective Date
8-8-46: Water Review Committee
 
Notes
1 1. See also chapter 9 of this title.
8-8-1: CREATION OF DEPARTMENT:
There is hereby created a water and sewer department of the city, which shall
consist of officers and employees as may be assigned to the water and sewer
department, with the approval of the mayor and city council. (Ord. 99-10, 3-15-
1999)
8-8-2: MANAGEMENT:
   (A)   City Administrator: The city administrator oversees and coordinates
activities in the water and sewer departments. The city administrator shall be
held strictly responsible for the efficient and economical operation of the
water and sewer departments, and shall have full control of all employees
within said departments, and with their employment and discharge, with the
consent and approval of the mayor and city council.
   (B)   Director Of Maintenance Services: The director of maintenance services
oversees and coordinates the activities of the water distribution department,
including the reading of meters, and the sewerage collection and drainage
departments.
   (C)   City Finance Director: The city finance director oversees the
management and supervision of the water and sewer billing responsibilities. The
city finance director shall, pursuant to his/her authority under 65 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/3.1-10-45, appoint various clerks and subordinates to
perform water and sewer billing responsibilities, as the city council may from
time to time authorize, and shall be held responsible, severally, for the
fidelity of all persons so appointed by the City Finance Director.
   (D)   Director Of Engineering Services: The Director of Engineering Services
oversees and coordinates the installation of water, sewer and drainage systems.
He shall keep a correct map of all the water, sewer and drainage systems now or
hereafter laid in said City with a record of their dimensions, location and
connection, hydrants, valves and manholes. It shall be his duty to see to the
enforcement of the laws and ordinances relating to the water, sewer and
drainage systems of the City.
   (E)   Director Of Water Filtration: The Director of Water Filtration
oversees and coordinates the processing of drinking water from the Mississippi
River to the time it is distributed for consumption.
   (F)   Superintendent Of Wastewater Treatment: The Superintendent of
Wastewater Treatment oversees and coordinates the processing of sewage from the
time it reaches the sewer plant until it is processed for return to the river.
   (G)   Certification: The Director of Water Filtration and the Superintendent
of the wastewater treatment plant or their representative shall obtain
certification, as required by the State of Illinois Department of Public
Health, or the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency. (Ord. 99-10, 3-15-
1999)
8-8-3: BONDS OF EMPLOYEES:
The City Council shall require of all employees, as they may deem proper, good
and sufficient bond for their faithful performance of duties, the amount
thereof to be fixed and approved by the City Council. The premiums shall be
paid out of the funds of the Water and Sewer Departments, respectively, and
such bonds shall run in the name of the City and shall be filed with the City
Finance Director. (Ord. 99-10, 3-15-1999)
8-8-4: RULES AND REGULATIONS OF THE WATER AND SEWER DEPARTMENTS:
The following rules and regulations shall be considered a part of the contract
with every customer of City water, sanitary sewer and drainage; said customer
or user shall be governed by and subject to the rules and regulations set out
in this Chapter. (Ord. 99-10, 3-15-1999)
8-8-5: PERMIT FOR WATER SERVICE CONNECTIONS:
   (A)   Required: Permit for water service connections must be obtained at the
office of the Plumbing Inspector by the owner or agent of the property to be
served. Such permit shall state the official street address of the premises,
the size of the pipe required and the approximate location where such services
shall enter the premises. No work is to commence until the permit is issued.
   (B)   Water Services: Only the following types of material shall be used in
all water services, from the distribution main to the metering device: type "K"
copper, brass, or ductile iron. (Ord. 99-10, 3-15-1999)
8-8-6: SERVICE CONNECTIONS:
The making of all service connections and the laying of pipes, setting of water
service fixtures in streets, public grounds and in premises to be served by
City water, shall be made by duly licensed plumbers under the supervision of
the Plumbing Inspector of the City. Each plumber must have a current bond on
file with the City and must have a current State of Illinois plumbing license.
This Section does not prohibit City employees from performing necessary
plumbing repairs and connections as referenced above. (Ord. 99-10, 3-15-1999)
8-8-7: SERVICE TAPS:
No service taps shall be made on new mains until the main has been tested for
pressure and bacteria and approved by the City and/or the Illinois
Environmental Protection Agency, Division of Public Water Supply. No service
taps shall be made unless first authorized by the City's Plumbing Inspector and
when so authorized, shall be made as required by the plumbing ordinance in
effect in the City. (Ord. 99-10, 3-15-1999)
8-8-8: NO ALTERATIONS OR ADDITIONS OF SERVICE PIPES WITHOUT PERMIT:
After a service connection has been laid, no plumber or other person shall make
any attachment or connection to it to serve other premises so as to connect the
same with the City water system unless he shall procure a written permit from
the Plumbing Inspector, specifying the particular additions, repairs, or
alterations to be made, and shall perform such work in conformity with such
permit, ordinances of the City and rules and regulations of the City Water and
Sewer Department. (Ord. 99-10, 3-15-1999)
8-8-9: NO SPRINKLER OR FIRE PROTECTION SERVICE UNTIL CONNECTION IS TESTED:
City water will not be turned on to any sprinkler or fire protection service
unless all pipes in connection with such system are left exposed until pressure
tested. The Water and Sewer Department must be notified in order that its
representative shall be present to perform the required bacteria tests. The
proper approved backflow device must be in place, tested and certified. The
device must be no farther than three feet (3') from the outside wall. (Ord. 99-
10, 3-15-1999)
8-8-10: SEPARATE CONNECTIONS:
There shall be separate service pipes laid from the main to each building
wherever there is a water main laid in front, at the rear or at the side of
such building. Such service pipes shall be laid on a straight line at right
angles to the water main and connections made within two (2) lines drawn
parallel to the sides of the building to be served or within three feet (3')
thereof. Where services are laid to premises where there are no water mains
available for direct connection, a small temporary main will be permitted to be
laid as hereinafter provided under Section
8-8-11 of this Chapter. In all cases such building served must have an
independent service shutoff. (Ord. 99-10, 3-15-1999)
8-8-11: TEMPORARY MAINS:
   (A)   Pipe laid temporarily in the streets where there are no water mains,
must be laid in the line where water mains may be laid in the future, and if
under four inches (4") in size the service pipe must be of approved material
from the main to the shutoff, and shall be copper pipe from shutoff to the
premises to be served. Four inch (4") pipe or larger, shall be ductile cast
iron, or approved AWWA plastic (for temporary mains only). The location of the
meter shall be designated by the City's Plumbing Inspector.
   (B)   Temporary mains shall be laid at the expense of the party to be
served.
   (C)   The permit for any temporary main shall provide that the size of such
main shall be designated by the Director Of Engineering Services subject to the
approval of the Council and shall be of a size as to allow other party
connections to be made to such main if requested by intervening property
owners, or to allow any further extension which may be deemed necessary by the
Director Of Engineering Services.
   (D)   If a request is made to the City Finance Director for permission to
connect onto such main, the City Finance Director shall, before granting such
permission, require such person to pay a just and equitable amount to the
person who laid such main under the original permit.
   (E)   If at any future time the City deems it necessary to extend its
regular water service on any street or alley and paralleling such temporary
main, then all consumers being served by such temporary main shall abandon
their service connection with such temporary main. Such connection shall be
made within thirty (30) days after completion of such water service. (Ord. 99-
10, 3-15-1999)
8-8-12: YARD HYDRANTS, SPRINKLING PLUGS AND SILL COCKS:
Yard hydrants, sprinkling plugs, and sill cocks will not be allowed on water
service connections now installed or to be hereafter installed unless such yard
hydrant, sprinkling plug or sill cock is connected in such a manner that the
water consumed through such yard hydrant, sprinkling plug or sill cock shall
first pass through the water meter on such service, and must meet any and all
cross-connection control backflow connection codes. (Ord. 99-10, 3-15-1999)
8-8-13: SERVICE CURB BOX AND STOP:
   (A)   Stop Box And Shutoff: A curb stop box and shutoff for controlling the
supply of water to consumers shall be placed on every service. When connections
are made in streets or avenues, the stop box shall be placed twelve inches
(12") outside the property line and when made in alleys, on the lot line. The
cover of said stop box shall be maintained by the property owner at the same
height as the sidewalk or the surrounding ground. Any variation in the location
for setting of such stop boxes, as herein provided for, shall be made only when
authorized by the Plumbing Inspector. The stop box used shall be of a design
approved by the Plumbing Inspector or Director Of Maintenance Services and must
have an unobstructed opening at least one inch (1") in diameter and fitted with
a substantial cover on which shall be marked the word "Water" in raised
letters. Any curb box which is to be surrounded by anything other than earth,
shall have an approved curb box receptacle installed.
   (B)   Stop Valve: Every service pipe must also have a stop valve placed in
the building within twelve inches (12") of the point where the pipe enters the
building. Said stop must have a full flow ball and/or gate valve, and be kept
in working order at all times, by the property owner, so that the water may be
shut off by the occupant of the premises. There shall also be a full flow ball
and/or gate valve placed on the outlet side of the water meter, not more than
twelve inches (12") from the meter, so that the meter can be taken out or
replaced without draining the pipe system in the building.
   (C)   Curb Box Stop Requirements: All curb box stops on the line of service
must have round ways of the same diameter as the pipe with which they are
placed, and with proper tee head and rods for turning on and off, and of a make
and pattern approved by the City's Plumbing Inspector. Services larger than one
inch (1") shall have a value in compliance with the Plumbing Ordinance. Any and
all curb box stops should be of the "ori-seal" design.
   (D)   Outside Meter Vault And Shutoff: Whenever a meter cannot be set on the
premises without danger of freezing, difficulty of reading, or for any other
cause as determined by the Water and Sewer Department, the Director of
Maintenance Services may demand the installation of an outside meter vault and
shutoff, type to be designated by the City's Plumbing Inspector.
   (E)   Conformance: Owners of premises having water services which do not
have separate curb boxes and stops for each building and or address, or which
otherwise do not conform to the requirements in this Ordinance at the time of
its passage shall be required to put in such curb box stops or make such other
changes as are necessary to conform to these requirements when so instructed by
the Plumbing Inspector.
   (F)   Control: The outside shutoff shall be under the sole control of the
City Water and Sewer Department and no person except an employee or person
specially authorized by the City Water and Sewer Department shall open the
cover of such box, or turn on or off water. Provided, however, that licensed
and bonded plumbers may turn on or off water for testing plumbing or making
repairs, but whenever so used the shutoff must be left closed if found closed,
and open if found open by the plumber who uses it.
   (G)   Locations; Maintenance: The stop box on every service must be kept
flush with the surrounding ground or sidewalk surface, and must be visible from
the sidewalk. The valves, curb box and shutoff must be kept in good condition
and ready for use at all times by the property owner. Should the property owner
neglect to maintain such valves, curb box stop and shutoff in proper condition,
and if the curb box stop is found to be out of repair at any time, the City
Water Department shall have the right to clean or repair the same when needed
upon giving notice, and charge the cost thereof to the owner, and if payment is
refused may turn off the water in the service until the same is paid. The City
will not be responsible for any damage due to the breaking of a service or curb
box stop, done while setting, or repairing a water meter.
   (H)   Responsibility In Turning On Water: In turning on water, the City of
East Moline or the City Water And Sewer Department shall not be responsible for
any damage that may occur by reason of open or improper connections, or for any
other causes. (Ord. 99-10, 3-15-1999)
8-8-14: NO CONNECTION BETWEEN SERVICES:
When there are two (2) or more services on the premises, the piping from each
service must be kept separate, and no connection shall be made from one to the
other. (Ord. 99-10, 3-15-1999)
8-8-15: DEPTH OF SERVICE PIPE:
Service pipes must be laid at least four and one-half feet (41/2') below the
surface of the ground. When pipes are laid in streets or grounds subject to
fixed grades, where the surface of the ground is higher than the established
grades, they shall be so laid that they will be at least four and one-half feet
(41/2') below the established grade, except in sandy soil formation in which
case the Plumbing Inspector may require pipes to be laid to a depth of at least
five feet (5') below the established grade. (Ord. 99-10, 3-15-1999)
8-8-16: MAINTENANCE OF SERVICE PIPES:
All service pipes and appurtenances from the water main to the premises,
including the corporation cocks at the mains shall be installed and maintained
at the expense of the property owners, and any leaks or other defects in the
same shall be promptly repaired by the property owners, or if not promptly
repaired the water shall be turned off until such repairs have been made, and
the expense thereof shall be charged against such owner, and must be paid
before water shall be turned on again. (Ord. 99-10, 3-15-1999)
8-8-17: EMERGENCY WATER LEAKS:
In the event of any leak or other defect occurring which endangers the public
health or safety, the City Plumbing Inspector shall give the property owner
twenty four (24) hour notice to repair said defect, and in the event repair is
not made within said twenty four (24) hours, then the City may hire a licensed
plumber to make said repair, which cost shall be assessed against the owner.
(Ord. 99-10, 3-15-1999)
8-8-18: FAILURE OF SUPPLY:
The City shall not be held responsible for any damages resulting from the
failure of the water supply. The City reserves the right to prohibit and
control water usage when in the judgment of the City it shall be necessary to
do so. (Ord. 99-10, 3-15-1999)
8-8-19: ABANDONED OR UNUSED SERVICE PIPES:
All water and sewer laterals that may become useless because of installation of
larger or other new services, or because water or sewer will be no longer used
through them, must be permanently disconnected at the respective mains at the
expense of the owner of the premises, and so reported to the City's Plumbing
Inspector and Maintenance Services Department.
If a service pipe or connection, which is not being used, is found to be
leaking, the City's Maintenance Services Department may with proper notice,
repair or turn off the same, and charge the expense thereof to the owner of
property for which the repair was made. (Ord. 99-10, 3-15-1999)
8-8-20: RIGHT TO SHUT OFF WATER:
The City may, when necessary, without notice, shut the water off in its mains
for the purpose of making repairs, extensions, or for other purposes. No claims
shall be made against the City by reason of the breakage of any service pipe or
service connection or from any other damage that may result from shutting off
water. The City Water and Sewer Department shall also have the right to shut
off water services for the nonpayment of bills by the giving of due notice of
at least ten (10) days.
If at any future time the City deems it necessary to extend its regular water
service on any street or alley and paralleling a temporary main, then all
consumers being served by such temporary main shall abandon their service
connection with the temporary main. The connection shall be made within thirty
(30) days after completion of such water service. (Ord. 99-10, 3-15-1999)
8-8-21: APPLICATION FOR WATER AND/OR SEWER SERVICE METER:
   (A)   Location Within City Limits: All properties connected to City
utilities must be within the City limits. If not, prior to application the
property must be annexed to the City, or if not contiguous, a preannexation
agreement must be signed. Properties within the corporate boundaries of another
municipality are exempted from the requirements of this subsection.
   (B)   Form; Record: Application for water and/or sewer, and for the
installation of the water meter shall be made at the Finance Department office
upon blanks furnished by said office. The Finance Department office shall at
once make a record of such application in a file kept for that purpose. Every
application for water and/or sewer shall state that the same is taken subject
to all rules and regulations then in force or that may thereafter be adopted
for the government of the Water and Sewer Department.
   (C)   Owner To Sign All Applications; Deposit: All applications for water
and sewer service shall be signed by the owner and/or tenant of the premises,
and shall contain an agreement to pay all bills. Such application when accepted
by the Water Department shall constitute a contract between the applicants and
the City. All applications for use of water by a tenant, shall in addition to
the signature of the owner, be accompanied by a cash deposit in an amount equal
to two (2) minimum bills, rounded up to the next five dollar ($5.00) increment,
for a single dwelling and one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a business
establishment. Such deposit shall be returned to the applicant, less final
amount owed for water and sewer. The final bill is to be computed with the next
regularly scheduled billing. (Ord. 99-10, 3-15-1999)
8-8-22: NO SERVICE AT NEW LOCATION UNTIL PAYMENT OF DELINQUENT RENTALS:
No persons, either owners or tenants, who in changing their residence from one
location to another served by the Water and Sewer Department, shall be given
water and sewer service until any and all delinquent accounts, which are
charged against them at their former place of residence, shall have been paid
in full. No water at a new location shall be turned on and if water has been
turned on, it shall be turned off until settlement of such delinquent water and
sewer rental at the former location is made. Also, no water at the new location
shall be turned on and if water has been turned on, it shall be turned off, if
there is a delinquency at the new location, until settlement of such delinquent
account has been made. (Ord. 99-10, 3-15-1999)
8-8-23: RATES AND CHARGES:
The rates and charges for the use and services of the waterworks, sewerage and
drainage system of the city of East Moline are hereby established. Such rates
and charges shall be made and collected against each lot, parcel of land, or
premises which may have any active water and/or sewer connections with the
waterworks and sewage systems of the city of East Moline or which may actively
use water and discharge sewage or industrial waste either directly or
indirectly into said system or any part thereof.
The rates for all water used, subject to minimum service charges, hereinafter
stated shall be as follows: (Ord. 03-12, 4-21-2003)
   (A)   In City Water Rates Per One Thousand Gallons: (Rep. by Ord. 14-16, 11-
3-2014)
   (B)   In City Water Rates Per One Hundred Cubic Feet: In city water rates
per one hundred (100) cubic feet shall be computed and charged upon a monthly
basis as follows:
 Present Rate Rate Effective
              Jan. 1, 2022 Jan. 1, 2023 Jan. 1, 2024 Jan. 1, 2025 Jan. 1, 2026
              Present Rate Effective
              Rate    Jan. 1, Jan. 1, Jan. 1, 2024 Jan. 1, 2025 Jan. 1, 2026
                      2022    2023
Billing
Charge ($/    $2.82   $3.82   $4.82   $5.82        $6.82        $7.82
Month)
Consumption Charge ($/CCF)
   0-80    $7.32   $7.87   $8.45   $9.08        $9.72        $10.43
   80-200  4.87    5.24    5.63    6.03         7.08         7.93
   200-700 4.73    5.08    5.45    5.88         6.35         7.07
   700-1,133.40    3.66    3.93    4.22         4.98         5.57
   1,137-  1.13    1.24    1.37    1.52         1.72         1.96
8,022
   8,022-  0.76    0.87    1.00    1.15         1.30         1.52
33.423
   33,423- 0.67    0.78    0.91    1.06         1.21         1.32
66,845
   66,845+ 0.45    0.56    0.69    0.84         0.99         1.09
 
A penalty of ten percent (10%) of the utility bill will be charged if full
payment is not made within sixteen (16) days of the postal date. If the
sixteenth day falls on a Saturday or Sunday or a legal holiday, the penalty
shall be extended to the next regular business day.
A discount of one percent (1%) of the utility bill will be allowed if full
payment is made by the in city residential customer and received by the city on
or before the due date.
A discount of one dollar ($1.00) per water/sewer utility bill will be allowed
if the in city residential customer pays the bill by use of the city’s online
website payment portal, and the city receives payment through the customer’s
automated checking account. (Ord. 15-24, 12-7-2015)
   (C)   Municipal Customer Water Rates Per One Thousand Gallons: Municipal
customer water rates per one thousand (1,000) gallons shall be computed and
charged upon a monthly basis as follows:
Bracket Rate Effective
Gallons Sept. 21, Sept. 21, 2011 Sept. 21, 2012 Sept. 21, 2013 Sept. 21, 2014
        2010
Bracket      Rate Effective
Gallons      Sept. 21, Sept. 21, Sept. 21, 2012 Sept. 21, 2013 Sept. 21, 2014
             2010      2011
First 59,840 $6.36     $6.75     $7.15          $7.51          $7.74
Next 89,760  4.25      4.51      4.77           5.01           5.16
Next 374,000 4.05      4.29      4.55           4.77           4.92
Next 476,000 2.91      3.09      3.28           3.44           3.54
Next         1.51      1.51      1.51           1.51           1.51
5,000,000
Next         1.02      1.02      1.02           1.02           1.02
19,000,000
Next         0.90      0.90      0.90           0.90           0.90
25,000,000
Over         0.60      0.60      0.60           0.60           0.60
50,000,000
Customer     2.82      2.82      2.82           2.82           2.82
charge
 
(Ord. 10-23, 8-16-2010)
   (D)   Municipal Customer Water Rates Per One Hundred Cubic Feet: Municipal
water rates per one hundred (100) cubic feet shall be computed and charged upon
a monthly basis as follows:
Bracket Cubic Feet Rate Effective
                   Jan. 1, 2015 Jan. 1, 2016 Jan. 1, 2017 Jan. 1, 2018
Bracket Cubic Feet Rate Effective
                   Jan. 1, 2015 Jan. 1, 2016 Jan. 1, 2017 Jan. 1, 2018
First 8,000        $6.05        $7.08        $7.04        $7.34
Next 12,000        4.05         4.76         4.77         4.86
Next 50,000        3.86         4.54         4.52         4.75
Next 63,700        2.81         3.28         3.27         3.44
Next 668,500       1.13         1.13         1.13         1.13
Next 2,540,100     0.76         0.76         0.76         0.76
Next 3,342,200     0.67         0.67         0.67         0.67
Over 6,684,500     0.45         0.45         0.45         0.45
Customer charge    2.82         2.82         2.82         2.82
 
A penalty of ten percent (10%) of the utility bill will be charged if full
payment is not made within sixteen (16) days of the postal date. If the
sixteenth day falls on a Saturday or Sunday or a legal holiday, the penalty
shall be extended to the next regular business day. (Ord. 15-23, 12-7-2015)
   (E)   Minimum Water Service Charge: (Rep. by Ord. 07-38, 12-17-2007)
   (F)   Sewerage Rates Based On Quantity: Sewerage rates shall be based upon
the quantity of water (or metered sewage usage, if applicable) used in each
lot, parcel of land, or premises as such quantity may be measured by the water
meter or meters of the city of East Moline serving such lot, parcel of land, or
premises. (Ord. 03-12, 4-21-2003)
   (G)   In City Sewerage Rates: In city sewerage rates shall be computed and
charged upon a monthly basis as follows:
 Present Rates Rate Effective
               Jan. 1, 2022 Jan. 1, 2023 Jan. 1, 2024 Jan. 1, 2025 Jan. 1, 2026
                                Present Rate Effective
                                Rates   Jan. 1, Jan. 1, Jan. 1, Jan. 1, Jan. 1,
                                        2022    2023    2024    2025    2026
Residential
   Billing Fee ($/Month)     $2.73   $3.43   $3.62   $3.82   $4.03   $4.25
   Sewer Plant and Usage ($/ 5.20    5.42    5.72    6.04    6.37    6.72
CCF)
Commercial
   Billing Fee ($/Month)     $2.73   $3.43   $3.62   $3.82   $4.03   $4.25
   Sewer Plant and Usage ($/ 5.20    5.42    5.72    6.04    6.37    6.72
CCF)
Industrial
   Billing Fee ($/Month)     $2.73   $3.43   $3.62   $3.82   $4.03   $4.25
   Sewer Plant and Usage ($/ 5.20    5.42    5.72    6.04    6.37    6.72
CCF)
Municipal
   Billing Fee ($/Month)     $2.73   $3.43   $3.62   $3.82   $4.03   $4.25
   Sewer Plant (S/CCF)       3.05    3.22    3.40    3.59    3.79    4.00
 
A penalty of ten percent (10%) of the utility bill will be charged if full
payment is not made within sixteen (16) days of the postal date. If the
sixteenth day falls on a Saturday or Sunday or a legal holiday, the penalty
shall be extended to the next regular business day.
A discount of one percent (1%) of the utility bill will be allowed if full
payment is made by the in city residential customer and received by the city on
or before the due date.
A discount of one dollar ($1.00) per water/sewer utility bill will be allowed
if the in city residential customer pays the bill by use of the city’s online
website payment portal, and the city receives payment through the customer’s
automated checking account. (Ord. 15-24, 12-7-2015)
   (H)   Municipal Customer Sewerage Rates: Municipal customer sewerage rates
shall be computed and charged upon a monthly basis as follows:
 
Bracket Cubic Feet Rate Effective
                   Jan. 1, 2015 Jan. 1, 2016 Jan. 1, 2017 Jan. 1, 2018
Per 100 cubic feet $2.71        $3.05        $3.05        $3.05
Customer charge    2.73         2.73         2.73         2.73
 
A penalty of ten percent (10%) of the utility bill will be charged if full
payment is not made within sixteen (16) days of the postal date. If the
sixteenth day falls on a Saturday or Sunday or a legal holiday, the penalty
shall be extended to the next regular business day. (Ord. 15-23, 12-7-2015)
   (I)   Minimum Sewage Charge: The minimum sewage charge shall be as follows
for residential:
For meters less than two inches (2") in size, eight hundred (800) cubic feet
times the current rate if billed for a two (2) month period, not to exceed
eight hundred (800) cubic feet. (Ord. 04-27, 7-19-2004, eff. 7-31-2004)
   (J)   Storm Sewer Rates And Surcharges: Storm sewer rates and surcharges
shall be computed and charged as follows:
 
                                 Rate Effective
                                 May 1, 2003 May 1, 2004 May 1, 2005
Per 100 cubic feet               $0.163      $0.163      $0.163
Per 1,000 gallons                0.218       0.218       0.218
Additional surcharge per bill  2.000       2.000       2.000
 
   (K)   Drainage Fund: All funds collected from the storm sewer rates and
surcharges shall be deposited into the drainage fund of this system. The
drainage fund shall be considered a separate operation fund with sewerage
revenue being transferred to the drainage fund on an as needed basis. (Ord. 03-
12, 4-21-2003)
   (L)   Billing:
      1.   Billing for water usage, sewerage and drainage shall be prepared and
sent out by the city of East Moline, and said bills shall be payable fifteen
(15) days from postal date. Bills for residential water, sewerage and drainage
shall be prepared for a two (2) month period. The bills shall be payable at the
finance department.
      2.   A billing charge will be added to each water bill in the amount of
three dollars fifteen cents ($3.15). A billing charge will be added to each
sewer bill in the amount of three dollars fifteen cents ($3.15). (Ord. 04-27,
7-19-2004, eff. 7-31-2004)
   (M)   Liability: The owner of any lot, parcel of land, or premises having
active water and/or sewer connections with the waterworks and sewerage system
of the city, the occupant of such premises, and the user of such services shall
be jointly and severally liable to pay for such services to such lot, parcel of
land, or premises, and all services are furnished to the premises by the city
of East Moline only upon the condition that owner, occupant, and user shall be
jointly and severally liable therefor to the city of East Moline. (Ord. 03-12,
4-21-2003)
   (N)   Commencement Of Rates: (Rep. by Ord. 07-09, 9-4-2007)
   (O)   Connection Fees: Whenever any person, firm or corporation desire to
connect their premises with a water main and/or sanitary sewer owned by the
city of East Moline, and said premises have not been charged, nor has the owner
of said premises paid for the construction of the water main and/or sewer main,
said owner shall, in addition to the other applicable fees required by the
ordinances of said city, pay to the city a connection fee in the amount
assessed for each connection. Said fee or fees are to be paid before
application is made for a plumbing permit or permits to make the connection. If
the owner of the premises has at their own expense installed the water main
and/or sanitary sewer in the vicinity of the property to be served by said
connection, no connection fee shall be charged; however, the plumbing permit(s)
shall be required.
   (P)   Special Charges: The city council reserves the right to make special
charges for services supplied to properties which may not be covered by the
above rates or which, in the judgment of the council, should be charged special
rates due to the extent of the use of water or sewage service so supplied.
(Ord. 03-12, 4-21-2003)
   (Q)   Outside The City Rates: Outside the city rates shall be computed and
charged upon a monthly basis as follows:
      1.   Sewerage Rates: Sewerage rates shall be computed and charged upon a
monthly basis as follows:
 
Bracket Cubic Feet Rate Effective
                   Jan. 1, 2015 Jan. 1, 2016 Jan. 1, 2017 Jan. 1, 2018
Per 100 cubic feet $ 8.92       $10.26       $10.32       $10.78
Customer charge    5.46         5.46         5.46         5.46
Minimum bill       23.30        25.98        26.10        27.02
 
   2.   Water Rates: Water rates shall be computed and charged upon a monthly
basis as follows:
 
Bracket Cubic Feet Rate Effective
                   Jan. 1, 2015 Jan. 1, 2016 Jan. 1, 2017 Jan. 1, 2018
Bracket Cubic Feet Rate Effective
                   Jan. 1, 2015 Jan. 1, 2016 Jan. 1, 2017 Jan. 1, 2018
First 8,000        $12.10       $14.16       $14.08       $14.68
Next 12,000        8.10         9.52         9.54         9.72
Next 50,000        7.72         9.08         9.04         9.50
Next 63,700        $5.62        $6.56        $6.54        $6.88
Next 668,500       2.26         2.26         2.26         2.26
Next 2,540,100     1.52         1.52         1.52         1.52
Next 3,342,200     1.34         1.34         1.34         1.34
Over 6,684,500     0.90         0.90         0.90         0.90
Customer charge    5.64         5.64         5.64         5.64
Minimum bill       29.84        33.96        33.80        35.00
 
(Ord. 15-23, 12-7-2015; amd. Ord. 21-13, 11-15-2021)
8-8-24: REVENUE:
All revenues derived from the operation of the waterworks and sewerage system
of the city shall promptly be deposited and held in the waterworks and sewerage
system fund established by an ordinance entitled:
   AN ORDINANCE COMBINING THE EXISTING WATERWORKS SYSTEM AND THE EXISTING
SEWERAGE SYSTEM OF THE CITY OF EAST MOLINE, ROCK ISLAND COUNTY, ILLINOIS;
PROVIDING FOR THE ISSUANCE OF WATERWORKS AND SEWERAGE SYSTEM REFUNDING AND
IMPROVEMENT REVENUE BONDS OF SAID CITY IN THE AGGREGATE PRINCIPAL AMOUNT OF
FIVE MILLION, THREE HUNDRED FIFTEEN THOUSAND DOLLARS ($5,315,000); PRESCRIBING
THE FORM AND INCIDENTS OF SAID BONDS; PROVIDING FOR THE REFUNDING OF CERTAIN
OUTSTANDING BOND ISSUES OF SAID CITY; PROVIDING FOR THE COLLECTION OF REVENUES
FROM SAID COMBINED WATERWORKS AND SEWERAGE SYSTEM SUFFICIENT FOR THE PURPOSE OF
PAYING THE COST OF THE OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE COST OF THE OPERATION AND
MAINTENANCE THEREOF; PROVIDING AN ADEQUATE DEPRECIATION FUND THEREFOR, AND
PROVIDING FOR THE PAYMENT OF SAID BONDS, BOTH AS TO PRINCIPAL AND INTEREST; AND
FURTHER PROVIDING FOR THE SEGREGATION AND DISTRIBUTION OF SAID REVENUES
passed on September 7, 1965, and shall be credited, held, and disbursed in
accordance with the provisions of said ordinance.
   (A)   Records And Accounting: The city finance director shall install and
maintain a proper system of accounts and records, separate and apart from all
other accounts and records showing the amount of revenues received from the
waterworks and sewerage system and the application of all such revenues and all
financial transactions in connection therewith.
      Such accounts shall be kept and an annual audit thereof shall be made in
accordance with the provisions of the aforesaid ordinance passed on September
7, 1965, which authorized the above mentioned waterworks and sewerage system
refunding and improvement bonds.
      All revenues derived from the operation of the waterworks and sewerage
system shall be kept in a bank account separate and distinct from all other
funds or bank accounts of the city, as provided by the aforesaid ordinance.
   (B)   Auditing: The waterworks and sewerage system fund shall be audited
after the close of each fiscal year by an independent firm of certified public
accountants. (Ord. 99-10, 3-15-1999)
8-8-25: DISCONTINUED USE OF WATER:
Owners or consumers desiring to discontinue the use of water shall give a
minimum twenty four (24) hour notice thereof to the water and sewer department
at the city hall office who shall cause the water to be turned off and the
meter removed. Water and sewer rents or charges for services shall be made
until such notice is given. When water and sewer service is discontinued all
water and sewer rentals for such service that is currently outstanding shall
become due and payable. The final billing is due and payable after issuance of
the bill. "Minimum bill" charges, or actual usage, will be due if the meter is
not removed.
Owners or consumers desiring to have periodic water disconnection and
reconnection shall be subject to a single thirty five dollar ($35.00) fee for
the disconnection and reconnection of the water service. This charge will be
incurred at time of disconnect. (Ord. 13-19, 9-3-2013)
8-8-26: COLLECTING ZONES, PAYMENT DATES AND PENALTIES:
Failure to receive a bill will not protect the owner or consumer from the
assessment of a penalty.
Notice must be given by the owner or authorized agent if it is desired that
bills be forwarded to any other address than the premises supplied.
The city of East Moline water and sewer department shall have full power and
authority to require the payment in advance for the use of water furnished to
any building, place or premises. In case prompt payment for the water and/or
sewer shall not be made the city finance director may authorize the water to
such premises be turned off and shall not be compelled again to supply said
premises with water until said arrears, together with the costs and expense of
turning said water off and on, shall be fully paid. (Ord. 99-10, 3-15-1999)
8-8-27: NOTICE OF DELINQUENCY:
   (A)   If the charges for the use and services of the waterworks, and
sewerage and drainage system are not paid within seventeen (17) days after the
rendition of the bill, such charges shall be deemed and are hereby declared to
be delinquent. Delinquent charges shall thereafter constitute liens upon the
real estate to which the water and sewerage services shall have been furnished.
The city finance director or city attorney may file after the expiration of
such seventeen (17) days, a notice of such lien in the office of the recorder
of deeds of Rock Island County, Illinois. This notice shall consist of a sworn
statement of the city finance director setting out:
      1.   A description of such real estate sufficient for the identification
thereof;
      2.   The amount of money due for the use and services of the waterworks
and sewerage system; and costs of filing and releasing of liens;
      3.   The date when such amount became delinquent. (Ord. 99-10, 3-15-1999)
   (B)   The director of maintenance services shall turn off the water, after
notification of the City Finance Director, of any premises if the charges for
the use and services of the waterworks and sewage and drainage system are not
paid within forty (40) days after rendition of the bill therefor.
A charge of ten dollars ($ 10.00) will be made upon the issuance or delivery of
a warning notice (red tag) for the disconnection of water service.
A charge of thirty-five dollars ($35.00) will be made for turning off the water
whenever water is shut off for nonpayment of water and/or sewer service. If a
water and/or sewer customer requests to have water turned on same day or after
normal business hours the charge will ninety dollars ($90.00).
Water will not be turned on again until the above mentioned charges have been
paid.
   (C)   An individual, 18 years or older, must be present during the time that
the City is turning on the water/sewer service to the premises. (Ord. 13-18, 9-
3-2013; amd. Ord. 18-34, 12-17-2018; Ord. 21-09, 8-2-2021; Ord. 21-16, 12-6-
2021)
8-8-28: ADJUSTMENT OF WATER CHARGES:
In case of a dispute over the amount of a bill or over the accuracy of a meter,
the water distribution department shall, at the request of the consumer, test
the meter after the required deposit has been made by the customer. The
following rates shall apply: under two inches (2"), twenty five dollars
($25.00); two inches (2") and over, fifty dollars ($50.00), plus any additional
costs. The customer is encouraged to witness the meter testing, but if the
individual chooses not to attend, the validity of the test results are final.
If it is found upon such test that the meter registers a greater amount of
water than has actually passed through said meter (allowing 2 percent for
accuracy) the bill will be adjusted to conform with the correct amount passing
through said meter, and the deposit shall be returned. If, however, the meter
registers correctly the amount of water passing through it or is slow by two
percent (2%) or more the owner shall be required to forfeit the deposit for the
test. (Ord. 99-10, 3-15-1999)
8-8-29: LEAKAGE:
No billing adjustment shall be made due to leakage after the water has passed
through and has been registered by the meter. (Ord. 99-10, 3-15-1999)
8-8-30: WATER METERS:
   (A)   All water furnished consumers shall be metered. One meter per customer
under two inches (2") shall be furnished and installed by the city water
distribution department, but owners must provide a suitable location and proper
opening in piping system per the plumbing code. All proper valves and fittings
necessary to comply with the requirements and to provide connection to meter,
except a coupling or flange at each end of the meter, shall be provided by the
owner of premises to be served. Meters shall be placed on service pipe not to
exceed two feet (2') from the wall where such pipe enters the premises. There
shall be a suitable place provided for the meter so as to keep it dry and
clean, and readily accessible at all times to the meter reader and inspectors
of the water distribution department.
   (B)   In case two (2) or more meters are desired for measuring water to
different tenants in the same building from one service connection, they shall
be so placed that neither one of them shall measure water which has passed
through the other one. Each metered service connection shall be separately
valved.
   (C)   All water meters two inches (2") and larger shall be furnished by the
city. The customer will be responsible for the installation of the meter, as
well as any cost incurred for said installation.
   (D)   All such systems, two inches (2") or larger, shall be installed by the
customer with a bypass with a valve connection at each end of the bypass to
permit the repair, testing or replacement of a meter. All bypass valves shall
be sealed.
   (E)   Size of meters for any buildings, industry or apartments shall be
approved by the plumbing inspector at the time of application for water
service. The size of meters so specified shall be subject to change as the
demand or other conditions may develop. The city’s plumbing inspector reserves
the right to require an increase in the size of meter.
   (F)   No meters shall be installed in pits.
   (G)   The owner and/or contractor of a new building shall be responsible for
the installation of the remote wire from the water meter location to the remote
reading device location when a meter is relocated or a second meter is
installed. There shall be a suitable place provided so the remote is readily
accessible at all times to the meter reader and inspectors of the city. The
wire used in such installations shall be 22/3 AWG solid conductor outdoor
communication cable with three (3) wires being black, green, and red in color.
Installation of the wire and location of the remote reading device shall be
completed prior to precover inspection of the plumbing inspection. (Ord. 99-10,
3-15-1999; amd. Ord. 00-27, 8-21-2000; Ord. 20-15, 8-3-2020)
8-8-31: OWNERS TO PROTECT METERS:
   (A)   The owner or occupant of premises where a meter is installed shall be
held responsible for its care and protection from freezing or hot water and
from other damage or interference from any person or persons. In case of any
damage to the meter, or in case of its stoppage or malfunction he shall give
immediate notice to the water and sewer office. In all cases where meters are
broken or damaged by negligence of owners, occupants, or their agents, except
for ordinary wear and tear, the necessary repairs shall be paid for by such
owner or occupant, and in case payment thereof is neglected or refused, the
water service shall be turned off and shall not be turned on until full payment
has been made, together with a turn off and a turn on fee of thirty five
dollars ($35.00). Damaged meters may be repaired by the water distribution
department without first giving notice to the owner or occupant of premises
served by such meter.
   (B)   No one shall in any way interfere with the proper registration of a
water meter, and no one except an authorized employee of the water distribution
department shall break a seal of a meter; provided, however, that the city's
plumbing inspector may grant written permits to licensed plumbers in case of
emergency to break such seal for drainage pipes or stopping water leaks. (Ord.
99-10, 3-15-1999)
8-8-32: DISCONTINUED USE OF METER:
Whenever an owner or occupant of premises wishes to or is required to
discontinue a water service either temporarily or permanently, notice shall be
given at least twenty four (24) hours in advance of the next business day to
the water and sewer office for removal of the meter. The owner of the premises
shall provide free access and shall be held responsible for that meter until
such meter has been removed, and if the meter is inaccessible, covered or lost,
the owner shall be required to pay for the same at the actual value of the
replacement meter. (Ord. 99-10, 3-15-1999)
8-8-33: REPAIRING METERS:
The Water Distribution Department shall not be denied the right to enter any
premises supplied by City water to exchange any meter, for repairs or other
cause, as may be deemed necessary by the Department. (Ord. 99-10, 3-15-1999)
8-8-34: UNLAWFUL TO OBSTRUCT:
No person shall in any manner obstruct the access of any curb box stop, water
meter, remote reading device, dial or valve connected with any water service,
by means of any lumber, brick building material, fuel, or any other article,
thing or hindrance, particularly the obstruction of meters that will interfere
with the ready access to meters at any and all times. Neglecting to comply with
this provision, the consumer at once becomes liable and the water will be
turned off, after notice has been given, until said obstruction shall be
removed. (Ord. 99-10, 3-15-1999)
8-8-35: WATER FOR CONSTRUCTION AND SPECIAL PURPOSES:
The consumer is to notify the City's Plumbing Inspector of location of usage.
To determine water usage, the City's Plumbing Inspector will determine whether
to install a meter or charge a flat rate. Unmetered water usage will not be
allowed for any reason, without approval of the City's Plumbing Inspector.
Persons violating this Section may be subject to possible criminal prosecution
and/or fines. (Ord. 99-10, 3-15-1999)
8-8-36: DAMAGE TO CITY UTILITIES OR APPURTENANCES:
Any person, persons, company, contractor or corporation who may be working in
any street of the City of East Moline who in any way damages the City utilities
or appurtenances thereto, shall be responsible to the City of East Moline for
any and all such damages and they shall bear all expenses of such replacement
or repair made necessary thereby, and they shall also be responsible for damage
to surrounding properties, on account of said damages to City utilities or
appurtenances. (Ord. 99-10, 3-15-1999)
8-8-37: FIRE HYDRANTS:
All fire hydrants installed in the City of East Moline, for the purpose of
extinguishing fires in said City are hereby declared to be public hydrants and
no person or persons other than members of the Fire Department of said City of
East Moline, for the uses and purposes of said Department, and those
specifically authorized by the Water Distribution Department, shall open any of
the hydrants or attempt to draw water from the same or in any manner interfere
with or damage any of said fire hydrants. No person shall in any manner
obstruct the access to or the view of fire hydrants. No fire hydrant may be
painted, unless authorization is granted in writing by the Director of
Maintenance Services. (Ord. 99-10, 3-15-1999)
8-8-38: PLUMBING INSPECTOR TO REPORT:
It shall be the duty of the Plumbing Inspector to report, in writing, to the
Finance Department and Water Distribution Department, all premises inspected by
him where City water is used or about to be used, within forty eight (48) hours
after such inspection. Such report shall contain the name of the owner, address
of the property, and the name of the plumber or plumbers performing the work,
and any necessary data required as to the location of the tap-on main, stop
box, or curb box. (Ord. 99-10, 3-15-1999)
8-8-39: INSPECTION AND INSPECTORS:
Inspectors, meter readers, or any other employee of the Water Distribution
Department, whose duty it may be to enter upon private premises to make
inspections and examination of water meters, pipes, fixtures, or appurtenances,
thereto, for any reason whatsoever, in connection with the City water supply,
will be provided with a badge or other credentials to identify him, her or
them, as authorized agents and representatives of the Water Distribution
Department.
Any officer, inspector, meter reader or authorized agent, or employee of the
Water Distribution Department shall upon presentation of his or her badge or
other credentials provided for in the preceding paragraph, have free access at
any and all reasonable hours to any premises, supplied by City utilities, for
the purpose of making any inspection thereof. (Ord. 99-10, 3-15-1999)
8-8-40: WATER DISTRIBUTION DEPARTMENT MAY INSPECT PREMISES:
In case any authorized agent or employee of said Water Distribution Department
shall be refused admittance to any premises, or after being admitted is
hindered or prevented in making such examination, the Water Distribution
Department may cause the water to be turned off from said premises, after
giving twenty four (24) hours' notice to the owner or occupant of said
premises.
No unauthorized person shall have, wear or exhibit any badge or credential of
the Department. It shall be the duty of each and every officer, agent or
employee of said Department, upon resignation or dismissal to surrender and
deliver to the Director of Maintenance Services all badges, credentials and
keys of the Water Distribution Department. (Ord. 99-10, 3-15-1999)
8-8-41: OTHER DEPARTMENTS REQUIRED TO AID:
It shall be the duty of all City employees and officials to give aid to the
Water Distribution Department in the enforcement of this Ordinance and to this
end they shall report all violations thereof which come to their knowledge, to
the office of the City Finance Director. (Ord. 99-10, 3-15-1999)
8-8-42: NO CONNECTION BETWEEN CITY AND OTHER SUPPLY:
No person, company or corporation shall be permitted to cause a connection to
be made or allow one to exist with City water supply for commercial, domestic,
sanitary, fire protection, or boiler feed purposes, or for any other purpose
whatsoever, where water foreign to the City water supply is used for a second
source of supply. (Ord. 99-10, 3-15-1999)
8-8-43: REGULATION OF CROSS-CONNECTIONS:
   (A)   Definitions: For the purpose of this Chapter the following definitions
shall apply:
    BACKFLOW: Water of questionable quality, wastes or other contaminants
entering a public water supply system due to a reversal of flow. "Back
siphonage" is one type of "backflow".
   CROSS-CONNECTION: A connection or arrangement of piping or appurtenance in
which a backflow could occur.
   SAFE AIR GAP: The minimum distance of a water inlet or opening above the
maximum high-water level or overflow rim in a fixture, device or container to
which public water is furnished which shall be at least two (2) times the
inside diameter of the water inlet pipe; but shall not be less than one inch
(1") and need not be more than twelve inches (12").
   SECONDARY WATER SUPPLY: A water supply system maintained in addition to a
public water supply, including, but not limited to, water systems from ground
or surface sources or water from a public water supply which in any way has
been treated, processed or exposed to any possible contaminant or stored in
other than an approved storage facility.
   SUBMERGED INLET: A water pipe or extension thereto from a public water
supply terminating in a tank, vessel, fixture or appliance which may contain
water of questionable quality, waste or other contaminant and which is
unprotected against backflow.
   WATER UTILITY: The City Water Department.
   (B)   Compliance With Existing Laws: A connection with a public water supply
system shall comply with the existing laws and rules, the Illinois State
Plumbing Code, and the provisions of this Code.
   (C)   Cross-Connections Prohibited: Cross-connections of the public water
supply system and any other water supply system or source including, but not
limited to, the following are prohibited:
      1.   Between a public water supply system and a secondary water supply.
      2.   By submerged inlet.
      3.   Between a lawn sprinkling system and the public water supply system.
      4.   Between a public water supply and piping which may contain sanitary
waste or a chemical contaminant.
      5.   Between a public water supply system and piping immersed in a tank
or vessel which may contain a contaminant.
   (D)   Local Cross-Connection Control Program: The City shall develop a
comprehensive control program for the elimination and prevention of all cross-
connections, and removal of all existing cross-connections and prevention of
all future cross- connections.
   (E)   Corrections And Protective Devices: Any user of the water supply
system shall obtain written approval from the plumbing inspector of any
proposed corrective action or protective device before using or installing it.
The total time allowed for completion of the necessary corrections shall be
contingent upon the degree of hazard involved and include the time required to
obtain and install equipment. If the cross connection has not been removed
within the time as hereinafter specified, the city shall physically separate
the water supply system from the on site piping system in such manner that the
two (2) systems cannot be connected by any unauthorized person.
   (F)   Piping Identification: When a secondary water source is used in
addition to the public water supply, the public water supply and secondary
water piping shall be identified by distinguishing colors or tags and so
maintained that each pipe may be traced readily in its entirety, it will be
necessary to protect the water supply system at the service connection in a
manner acceptable to the plumbing inspector.
   (G)   Private Water Storage Tanks: A private water storage tank supplied
from the water supply system shall be deemed a secondary water supply unless it
is designed and approved for potable water usage.
   (H)   Elimination Of Existing Cross Connections: By August 1, 1994, all
existing cross connections to the water supply systems shall be eliminated. The
expenses of such elimination shall be that of the owner of the property on
which such cross connection exists.
   (I)   Inspection: The water department or plumbing inspector shall have the
authority to inspect any premises to determine the presence of an existing
cross connection and to order the elimination of such cross connection.
   (J)   Discontinuance Of Water Service: The water department is hereby
authorized to discontinue water service after a reasonable notice to any person
owning any property where a cross connection in violation of this code exists.
The water department may take such other precautionary measures as necessary to
eliminate any danger of the contamination of the water supply system. Water
service to such property shall not be restored until such cross connection has
been eliminated.
   (K)   Penalty: The city may issue a monetary penalty for noncompliance in
accordance with the provisions of this code of the city of East Moline. Any
person convicted of a violation of this ordinance section shall be fined in a
sum not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than five hundred dollars
($500.00), in addition to being subject to a petition to the circuit court of
Rock Island County for an order of compliance. (Ord. 99-10, 3-15-1999)
8-8-44: REPEAL INVALIDITY OF PART:
Any ordinance or parts of ordinances in conflict with the provisions of this
ordinance are hereby repealed insofar as such conflict exists. If any section
or provision of this ordinance shall be held invalid, the remaining sections or
provisions of this ordinance shall be construed as though the invalid provision
or section had not been contained herein and shall remain in full force and
effect. (Ord. 99-10, 3-15-1999)
8-8-45: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This ordinance shall be in effect immediately upon its passage and publication
as provided by law. (Ord. 99-10, 3-15-1999)
8-8-46: WATER REVIEW COMMITTEE:
There is hereby created the water review committee, of the city of East Moline.
This committee shall be made up of three (3) members, who shall be the city
administrator, the director of maintenance services, and the director of water
and wastewater facilities.
The water review committee shall act as the appeal board for those water and
sewer customers of the city, who have been unable to resolve a challenge to
their water bill, with the director of finance. The committee shall be convened
by the director of finance for a hearing with the water customer, upon at least
ten (10) days' written notice. All hearings of the committee shall be open to
the public. The director of finance shall prepare a report on the business of
the committee, and present the report to the city council on a quarterly basis.
The water review committee shall have authority to adjust a water bill up to an
amount of two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) of an unpaid or
disputed water bill. Any adjustment shall be made by a majority vote of the
members of the committee. Any portion of the water bill that remains unpaid
after conclusion of the hearing before the water review committee, shall be
treated in the normal course of enforcement, by shutoff notice, lien, or
collection in court, as determined by the director of finance. (Ord. 10-27, 8-
16-2010)
CHAPTER 9
WASTEWATER REGULATIONS 1
SECTION:
8-9-1: General Provisions
8-9-2: General Sewer Use Requirements
8-9-3: Pretreatment Of Wastewater
8-9-4: Wastewater Discharge Permit Application
8-9-5: Wastewater Discharge Permit Issuance Process
8-9-6: Reporting Requirements
8-9-7: Compliance Monitoring
8-9-8: Publication Of Users In Significant Noncompliance
8-9-9: Administrative Enforcement Remedies
8-9-10: Judicial Enforcement Remedies
8-9-11: Supplemental Enforcement Action
8-9-12: Affirmative Defenses To Discharge Violations
8-9-13: Miscellaneous Provisions
8-9-14: Use Of Public Sewers Required
8-9-15: Private Sewage Disposal
 
Notes
1 1. See also chapter 8 of this title.
8-9-1: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
   (A)   Purpose And Policy: This ordinance sets forth uniform requirements for
users of the publicly owned treatment works for the city of East Moline and
enables the city of East Moline to comply with all applicable state and federal
laws, including the clean water act (33 United States Code section 1251 et
seq.) and the general pretreatment regulations (40 code of federal regulations
part 403). The objectives of this ordinance are:
      1.   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the publicly owned
treatment works that will interfere with its operation;
      2.   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the publicly owned
treatment works that will pass through the publicly owned treatment works,
inadequately treated, into receiving waters, or otherwise be incompatible with
the publicly owned treatment works;
      3.   To protect both publicly owned treatment works personnel who may be
affected by wastewater and sludge in the course of their employment and the
general public;
      4.   To promote reuse and recycling of industrial wastewater and sludge
from the publicly owned treatment works;
      5.   To provide for fees for the equitable distribution of the cost of
operation, maintenance, and improvement of the publicly owned treatment works;
and
      6.   To enable the city of East Moline to comply with its national
pollutant discharge elimination system permit conditions, sludge use and
disposal requirements, and any other federal or state laws to which the
publicly owned treatment works is subject.
This ordinance shall apply to all users of the publicly owned treatment works.
This ordinance authorizes the issuance of wastewater discharge permits;
provides for monitoring, compliance, and enforcement activities; establishes
administrative review procedures; requires user reporting; and provides for the
setting of fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the
program established herein.
   (B)   Administration: Except as otherwise provided herein, the
superintendent shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this
ordinance. Any powers granted to or duties imposed upon the superintendent may
be delegated by the superintendent to other city of East Moline personnel.
   (C)   Abbreviations: The following abbreviations, when used in this
ordinance, shall have the designated meanings:
BMP:   Best management practice
BMR:   Baseline monitoring report
BOD:   Biochemical oxygen demand
CFR:   Code of federal regulations
CIU:   Categorical industrial user
COD:   Chemical oxygen demand
EPA:   U.S. environmental protection agency
FOG:   Fats, oils, and grease
gpd:   Gallons per day
IU:    Industrial user
mg/l:  Milligrams per liter
NPDES: National pollutant discharge elimination system
NSCIU: Nonsignificant categorical industrial user
POTW:  Publicly owned treatment works
RCRA:  Resource conservation and recovery act
SIC:   Standard industrial classification
SIU:   Significant industrial user
SNC:   Significant noncompliance
TSS:   Total suspended solids
TTO:   Total toxic organics
USC:   United States Code
 
   (D)   Definitions: Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the
following terms and phrases, as used in this ordinance, shall have the meanings
hereinafter designated:
   ACT OR THE ACT: The federal water pollution control act, also known as the
clean water act, as amended, 33 USC section 1251 et seq.
   APPROVAL AUTHORITY: USEPA, regional administrator, region 5, 230 S. Dearborn
Street, Chicago, IL 60604.
   AUTHORIZED OR DULY AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF THE USER:
      1.   If the user is a corporation:
         (a)   The president, secretary, treasurer, or a vice president of the
corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who
performs similar policy or decision making functions for the corporation; or
         (b)   The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or
operation facilities employing more than two hundred fifty (250) persons or
having gross annual sales or expenditures exceeding twenty five million dollars
($25,000,000.00) (in second quarter 1980 dollars), if authority to sign
documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with
corporate procedures.
      2.   If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship: a general
partner or proprietor, respectively.
      3.   If the user is a federal, state, or local governmental facility: a
director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation
and performance of the activities of the government facility, or their
designee.
      4.   The individuals described in subsections 1 through 3 of this
definition, may designate a duly authorized representative if the authorization
is in writing, the authorization specifies the individual or position
responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the discharge
originates or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the
company, and the written authorization is submitted to the city of East Moline.
   BATCH PROCESS: A treatment or manufacturing process in which a tank or
reactor is filled, the wastewater (or solution) is held or a chemical solution
is prepared, and the tank is emptied, resulting in a discrete discharge to the
sanitary sewer. The tank may then be refilled and the process repeated.
   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES OR BMPs: Schedules of activities, prohibitions of
practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to implement
the prohibitions listed in subsections
8-9-2(A)1 and (A)2 of this chapter (40 CFR 403.5 (a)(1) and (b)). BMPs include
treatment requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control plant
site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw
materials storage.
   BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND OR BOD: The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures
for five (5) days at twenty degrees centigrade (20°C), usually expressed as a
concentration (e.g., milligrams per liter).
   CATEGORICAL INDUSTRIAL USER (CIU): An industrial user which is subject to a
categorical standard promulgated by the USEPA.
   CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD OR CATEGORICAL STANDARD: Any regulation
containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by EPA in accordance with
sections 307(b) and (c) of the act (33 USC section 1317) which apply to a
specific category of users and which appear in 40 CFR chapter I, subchapter N,
parts 405-471.
   CHAIN OF CUSTODY: A legal record (which may be a series of records) of each
person who had possession of an environmental sample, from the person who
collected the sample to the person who analyzed the sample in the laboratory
and to the person who witnessed the disposal of the sample.
   CITY: The city of East Moline or the city council of East Moline.
   CONFINED SPACE: A space which, by design, has limited openings for entry and
exit, unfavorable natural ventilation which could contain or produce dangerous
air contaminants (or create an atmosphere of oxygen deprivation), and which is
not intended for continuous employee occupation. A permit may be required under
OSHA to enter a confined space.
   CONTROL AUTHORITY: The city of East Moline.
   CONVENTIONAL POLLUTANT: A pollutant which has been designated as
conventional under section 304(a)(4) of the act. These pollutants include: BOD,
TSS, pH, fecal coliform, and oil and grease.
   DAILY MAXIMUM: The arithmetic average of all effluent samples for a
pollutant collected during a calendar day.
   DAILY MAXIMUM LIMIT: The maximum allowable discharge limit of a pollutant
during a calendar day. Where daily maximum limits are expressed in units of
mass, the daily discharge is the total mass discharged over the course of the
day. Where daily maximum limits are expressed in terms of a concentration, the
daily discharge is the arithmetic average measurement of the pollutant
concentration derived from all measurements taken that day.
   ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY OR EPA: The U.S. environmental protection
agency or, where appropriate, the regional water management division director,
or other duly authorized official of said agency.
   EXISTING SOURCE: Any source of discharge that is not a "new source".
   GRAB SAMPLE: A sample which is taken from a waste stream without regard to
the flow in the waste stream and over a period of time not to exceed fifteen
(15) minutes.
   HAZARDOUS WASTE (40 CFR 261): Unless excluded by the domestic sewage
exemption and not a solid waste, a solid waste is a hazardous waste if it meets
one of two (2) criteria: 1) it has one of the following four (4)
characteristics: ignitability, corrosivity, reactivity, or toxicity (according
to the toxicity characteristic leaching procedure), or 2) it must be a listed
hazardous waste in 40 CFR 261.31-261.33.
   INDIRECT DISCHARGE OR DISCHARGE: The introduction of pollutants into the
POTW from any nondomestic source.
   INDUSTRIAL USER: An industrial user is any nondomestic source which
introduces pollutants into a publicly owned treatment works (POTW).
   INSTANTANEOUS MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE DISCHARGE LIMIT: The maximum concentration
of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at any time, determined from the
analysis of any discrete or composited sample collected, independent of the
industrial flow rate and the duration of the sampling event.
   INTERFERENCE: A discharge, which alone or in conjunction with a discharge or
discharges from other sources, inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment
processes or operations or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and
therefore, is a cause of a violation of the city of East Moline's NPDES permit
or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with any of
the following statutory/regulatory provisions or permits issued thereunder, or
any more stringent state or local regulations: section 405 of the act; the
solid waste disposal act, including title II commonly referred to as the
resource conservation and recovery act (RCRA); any state regulations contained
in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to subtitle D of the
solid waste disposal act; the clean air act; the toxic substances control act;
and the marine protection, research, and sanctuaries act.
   LOCAL LIMITS (40 CFR 403.3(c)): Effluent discharge limits applicable to
industrial users of the city of East Moline, developed by the city of East
Moline in accordance with 40 CFR 403.5(c).
   MAY: Is permissive.
   MEDICAL WASTE: Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood
products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated bedding,
surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes, and dialysis
wastes.
   MONTHLY AVERAGE: The sum of all "daily discharges" measured during a
calendar month divided by the number of "daily discharges" measured during the
month.
   MONTHLY AVERAGE LIMIT: The highest allowable average of "daily discharges"
over a calendar month, calculated as the sum of all "daily discharges" measured
during a calendar month divided by the number of "daily discharges" measured
during that month.
   NEW SOURCE:
      1.   Any building, structure, facility, or installation from which there
is (or may be) a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced
after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under section 307(c)
of the act which will be applicable to such source if such standards are
thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that:
         (a)   The building, structure, facility, or installation is
constructed at a site at which no other source is located; or
         (b)   The building, structure, facility, or installation totally
replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of
pollutants at an existing source; or
         (c)   The production or wastewater generating processes of the
building, structure, facility, or installation are substantially independent of
an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are
substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility
is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility
is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source, should
be considered.
      2.   Construction on a site at which an existing source is located
results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not
create a new building, structure, facility, or installation meeting the
criteria of subsection 1(b) or 1(c) of this definition but otherwise alters,
replaces, or adds to existing process or production equipment.
      3.   Construction of a "new source" as defined herein has commenced if
the owner or operator has:
         (a)   Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous on site
construction program:
            (1)   Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or
equipment; or
            (2)   Significant site preparation work including clearing,
excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities which
is necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of new source
facilities or equipment; or
         (b)   Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase
of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its operation
within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be
terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility,
engineering, and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation
under this subsection.
   NONCONTACT COOLING WATER: Water used for cooling which does not come into
direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste product, or
finished product.
   PASS-THROUGH: A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the United
States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a
discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any
requirement of the city of East Moline's NPDES permit, including an increase in
the magnitude or duration of a violation.
   PERSON: Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company,
corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental
entity, or any other legal entity; or their legal representatives, agents, or
assigns. This definition includes all federal, state, and local governmental
entities.
   pH: A measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a solution, expressed in
standard units (SU).
   POLLUTANT: Dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash,
sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical wastes,
biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded
equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, municipal, agricultural and industrial
wastes, and certain characteristics of wastewater (e.g., pH, temperature, TSS,
turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity, or odor).
   PRETREATMENT: The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of
pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in
wastewater prior to, or in lieu of, introducing such pollutants into the POTW.
This reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical, or
biological processes; by process changes; or by other means, except by diluting
the concentration of the pollutants unless allowed by an applicable
pretreatment standard.
   PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS: Any substantive or procedural requirement related
to pretreatment imposed on a user, other than a pretreatment standard.
   PRETREATMENT STANDARDS OR STANDARDS: "Pretreatment standards" shall mean
prohibited discharge standards, categorical pretreatment standards, and local
limits.
   PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS OR PROHIBITED DISCHARGES: Absolute
prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances; these prohibitions
appear in subsection
8-9-2(A) of this chapter.
   PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS OR POTW: A "treatment works", as defined by
section 212 of the act (33 USC section 1292) which is owned by the city of East
Moline. This definition includes any devices or systems used in the collection,
storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of sewage or industrial wastes
of a liquid nature and any conveyances which convey wastewater to a treatment
plant.
   SEPTIC TANK WASTE: Any sewage from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical
toilets, campers, trailers, and septic tanks.
   SEWAGE: Human excrement and gray water (household showers, dishwashing
operations, etc.).
   SHALL: Is mandatory.
   SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER: Except as provided in subsections 3 and 4 of
this definition, a significant industrial user is:
      1.   A user subject to categorical pretreatment standards; or
      2.   A user that:
         (a)   Discharges an average of twenty five thousand (25,000) gpd or
more of process wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling,
and boiler blowdown wastewater);
         (b)   Contributes a process waste stream which makes up five percent
(5%) or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the
POTW treatment plant; or
         (c)   Is designated as such by the city of East Moline on the basis
that it has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation
or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement.
      3.   The city of East Moline may determine that an industrial user is
subject to categorical pretreatment standards is a nonsignificant categorical
industrial user rather than a significant industrial user on a finding that the
industrial user never discharges more than one hundred (100) gallons per day
(gpd) of total categorical wastewater (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling
and boiler blowdown wastewater, unless specifically included in the
pretreatment standard) and the following conditions are met:
         (a)   The industrial user, prior to the city of East Moline's finding,
has consistently complied with all applicable categorical pretreatment
standards and requirements;
         (b)   The industrial user annually submits the certification statement
required in subsection
8-9-6(N)2 of this chapter (see 40 CFR 403.12(q)), together with any additional
information necessary to support the certification statement; and
(c) The industrial user never discharges any untreated concentrated wastewater.
      4.   Upon a finding that a user meeting the criteria in subsection 2 of
this definition has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's
operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, the city
of East Moline may at any time, on its own initiative or in response to a
petition received from an industrial user, and in accordance with procedures in
40 CFR 403.8(f)(6), determine that such user should not be considered a
significant industrial user.
   SLUDGE: The settleable solids intentionally separated from liquid waste
streams during treatment typically under quiescent conditions, and the
unintentional accumulation of solids in tanks and reservoirs associated with
production and manufacturing processes.
   SLUG LOAD OR SLUG DISCHARGE: Any discharge at a flow rate or concentration,
which could cause a violation of the prohibited discharge standards in
subsection
8-9-2(A) of this chapter. A slug discharge is any discharge of a nonroutine,
episodic nature, including, but not limited to, an accidental spill or a
noncustomary batch discharge, which has a reasonable potential to cause
interference or pass-through, or in any other way violate the POTW's
regulations, local limits or permit conditions.
   STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC) CODE: A classification pursuant to
the "Standard Industrial Classification Manual" issued by the United States
office of management and budget.
   STORMWATER: Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural
precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation, including snowmelt.
   SUPERINTENDENT: The person designated by the city of East Moline to
supervise the operation of the POTW, and who is charged with certain duties and
responsibilities by this ordinance, or a duly authorized representative.
   TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLIDS OR SUSPENDED SOLIDS: The total suspended matter that
floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater, or other
liquid, and which is removable by laboratory filtering.
   USER OR INDUSTRIAL USER: A source of indirect discharge.
   WASTEWATER: Liquid and water carried industrial wastes and sewage from
residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing
facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated, which are
contributed to the POTW.
   WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT OR TREATMENT PLANT: That portion of the POTW
which is designed to provide treatment of municipal sewage and industrial
waste. (Ord. 09-08, 4-20-2009)
8-9-2: GENERAL SEWER USE REQUIREMENTS:
   (A)   Prohibited Discharge Standards:
      1.   General Prohibitions: No user shall introduce or cause to be
introduced into the POTW any pollutant or wastewater which causes pass-through
or interference. These general prohibitions apply to all users of the POTW
whether or not they are subject to categorical pretreatment standards or any
other national, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements.
      2.   Specific Prohibitions: No user shall introduce or cause to be
introduced into the POTW the following pollutants, substances, or wastewater:
         (a)   Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the POTW,
including, but not limited to, waste streams with a closed cup flashpoint of
less than one hundred forty degrees Fahrenheit (140°F) (60°C) using the test
methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21;
         (b)   Wastewater having a pH less than 5.0 or more than 11.5, or
otherwise causing corrosive structural damage to the POTW or equipment;
         (c)   Solid or viscous substances in amounts which will cause
obstruction of the flow in the POTW resulting in interference but in no case
solids greater than one-half inch (1/2") or one point two seven centimeters
(1.27 cm) in any dimension;
         (d)   Pollutants, including oxygen demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.),
released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which,
either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, will cause interference
with the POTW;
         (e)   Wastewater having a temperature greater than one hundred fifty
seven degrees Fahrenheit (157°F) (65°C); or which will inhibit biological
activity in the treatment plant resulting in interference, but in no case
wastewater which causes the temperature at the introduction into the treatment
plant to exceed one hundred four degrees Fahrenheit (104°F) (40°C);
         (f)   Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of
mineral oil origin, in amounts that will cause interference or pass-through;
         (g)   Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors,
or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and
safety problems;
         (h)   Trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points
designated by the superintendent in accordance with subsection
8-9-3(D) of this chapter;
         (i)   Noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids, or other
wastewater which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are
sufficient to create a public nuisance or a hazard to life, or to prevent entry
into the sewers for maintenance or repair;
         (j)   Wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed by the
treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable
tanning solutions, which consequently impart color to the treatment plant's
effluent, thereby violating the city of East Moline's NPDES permit;
         (k)   Wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes except
in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations;
         (l)   Stormwater, surface water, ground water, artesian well water,
roof runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage, condensate, deionized
water, noncontact cooling water, and unpolluted wastewater, unless specifically
authorized by the superintendent;
         (m)   Sludges, screenings, or other residues from the pretreatment of
industrial wastes;
         (n)   Medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by the
superintendent in a wastewater discharge permit;
         (o)   Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other sources,
the treatment plant's effluent to fail a toxicity test;
         (p)   Detergents, surface active agents, or other substances which may
cause excessive foaming in the POTW;
         (q)   Fats, oils, or greases of animal or vegetable origin in
concentrations greater than one hundred milligrams per liter (100 mg/l) (see
subsection
8-9-6(K) of this chapter); or
         (r)   Wastewater causing two (2) readings on an explosion hazard meter
at the point of discharge into the POTW, or at any point in the POTW, of more
than five percent (5%) or any single reading over ten percent (10%) of the
lower explosive limit of the meter.
Pollutants, substances, or wastewater prohibited by this subsection shall not
be processed or stored in such a manner that they could be discharged to the
POTW.
   (B)   National Categorical Pretreatment Standards: The categorical
pretreatment standards found at 40 CFR chapter I, subchapter N, parts 405-471
are hereby incorporated.
      1.   Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in terms
of either the mass or the concentration of a pollutant in wastewater, the
superintendent may impose equivalent concentration or mass limits in accordance
with this section.
      2.   When the limits in a categorical pretreatment standard are expressed
only in terms of mass of pollutant per unit of production, the superintendent
may convert the limits to equivalent limitations expressed either as mass of
pollutant discharge per day or effluent concentration for purposes of
calculating effluent limitations applicable to individual industrial users.
      3.   When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard is
mixed with wastewater not regulated by the same standard, the superintendent
shall impose an alternate limit in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(e).
   (C)   State Pretreatment Standards: State pretreatment standards found in
title 35, environmental protection, subtitle C, water pollution, subpart B;
general and specific pretreatment requirements; section 307.1101; 307.1102;
307.1103, are hereby incorporated.
   (D)   Local Limits: The following pollutant limits are established to
protect against pass-through and interference. No person shall discharge
wastewater containing in excess of the following daily maximum allowable
discharge limits unless authorized by the superintendent:
0.1    mg/l arsenic
200.   mg/l BOD5
1.0    mg/l cadmium
6.8    mg/l chromium
1.4    mg/l copper
1.1    mg/l cyanide
2.0    mg/l lead
0.0003 mg/l mercury
0.9    mg/l nickel
100.   mg/l oil and grease1
0.8    mg/l silver
7.6    mg/l total phenols
250.   mg/l total suspended solids
10.0   mg/l zinc
 
Note:
1.   See subsection
8-9-6(K) of this chapter.
The above limits apply at the point where the wastewater is discharged to the
POTW. All concentrations for metallic substances are for "total" metal unless
indicated otherwise. The superintendent may impose mass limitations in addition
to, or in place of, the concentration based limitations above.
Wastewater containing five (5) day BOD greater than two hundred milligrams per
liter (200 mg/l), or total suspended solids in excess of two hundred fifty
milligrams per liter (250 mg/l), may be permitted by specific, written
agreement with the city, upon determination by the city that these alternative
limits will not cause adverse effect on the city's facilities or operations,
which agreement to discharge such BOD or TSS may provide for special charges,
payments or provisions for treating and testing equipment.
Best management practices (BMPs) may be incorporated into individual discharge
permits.
   (E)   City Of East Moline's Right Of Revision: The city of East Moline
reserves the right to establish, by ordinance or in wastewater discharge
permits, more stringent standards or requirements on discharges to the POTW.
   (F)   Dilution: No user shall ever increase the use of process water, or in
any way attempt to dilute a discharge, as a partial or complete substitute for
adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a discharge limitation unless
expressly authorized by an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement. The
superintendent may impose mass limitations on users who are using dilution to
meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or in other cases when
the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate. (Ord. 09-08, 4-20-2009)
8-9-3: PRETREATMENT OF WASTEWATER:
   (A)   Pretreatment Facilities: Users shall provide wastewater treatment as
necessary to comply with this ordinance and shall achieve compliance with all
categorical pretreatment standards, local limits, and the prohibitions set out
in subsection
8-9-2(A) of this chapter within the time limitations specified by the EPA, the
state, or the superintendent, whichever is more stringent. Any facilities
necessary for compliance shall be provided, operated, and maintained at the
user's expense. Detailed plans describing such facilities and operating
procedures shall be submitted to the superintendent for review, and shall be
acceptable to the superintendent before such facilities are constructed. The
review of such plans and operating procedures shall in no way relieve the user
from the responsibility of modifying such facilities as necessary to produce a
discharge acceptable to the city of East Moline under the provisions of this
ordinance.
   (B)   Additional Pretreatment Measures:
      1.   Whenever deemed necessary, the superintendent may require users to
restrict their discharge during peak flow periods, designate that certain
wastewater be discharged only into specific sewers, relocate and/or consolidate
points of discharge, separate sewage waste streams from industrial waste
streams, and such other conditions as may be necessary to protect the POTW and
determine the user's compliance with the requirements of this ordinance.
      2.   The superintendent may require any person discharging into the POTW
to install and maintain, on their property and at their expense, a suitable
storage and flow control facility to ensure equalization of flow. A wastewater
discharge permit may be issued solely for flow equalization.
      3.   Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the
opinion of the superintendent, they are necessary for the proper handling of
wastewater containing excessive amounts of grease and oil, or sand; except that
such interceptors shall not be required for residential users. All interception
units shall be of type and capacity approved by the superintendent and shall be
so located to be easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Such
interceptors shall be inspected, cleaned, and repaired regularly, as needed, by
the user at their expense.
      4.   Users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may be
required to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection meter.
   (C)   Accidental Discharge/Slug Control Plans: At least once every two (2)
years, the superintendent shall evaluate whether each significant industrial
user needs an accidental discharge/slug control plan. The superintendent may
require any user to develop, submit for approval, and implement such a plan.
Alternatively, the superintendent may develop such a plan for any user. An
accidental discharge/slug control plan shall address, at a minimum, the
following:
      1.   Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch
discharges;
      2.   Description of stored chemicals;
      3.   Procedures for immediately notifying the superintendent of any
accidental or slug discharge, as required by subsection
8-9-6(F) of this chapter; and
      4.   Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug
discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection and
maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and
unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building
of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic
pollutants, including solvents, and/or measures and equipment for emergency
response.
   (D)   Hauled Wastewater:
      1.   Septic tank waste may be introduced into the POTW only at locations
designated by the superintendent, and at such times as are established by the
superintendent. Such waste shall not violate section
8-9-2 of this chapter or any other requirements established by the city of East
Moline. The superintendent may require septic tank waste haulers to obtain
wastewater discharge permits.
      2.   All procedures for discharging, for cleanliness and for general
sanitary operation of city property as prescribed by the city of East Moline
shall be strictly adhered to by all wastewater haulers delivering wastewater to
the city dumping station.
      3.   The source or sources of all liquid wastes being hauled to the POTW
treatment plant shall be properly documented using a manifest system.
      4.   Wastewater from a domestic level user shall not be mixed with
wastewater from an industrial user (nondomestic). Vehicles hauling wastewater
from an industrial user (nondomestic) shall not be used to haul wastewater from
a domestic level user for disposal at the POTW unless thoroughly cleaned
between hauls.
      5.   In addition to remedies available to the city set forth elsewhere in
this ordinance, failure of a wastewater hauler to comply with the provisions of
this section shall be grounds for revocation of the hauler's discharge
privilege.
      6.   Wastewater hauled from an industrial user shall provide the city
with a statement documenting significant constituents of the wastewater and
their concentrations, which may include analysis such as TCLP.
      7.   The superintendent may require industrial waste haulers and/or
generators to obtain wastewater discharge permits. The superintendent also may
prohibit the disposal of hauled industrial waste. The discharge of hauled
industrial waste is subject to all other requirements of this ordinance.
      8.   Industrial waste haulers may discharge loads only at locations
designated by the superintendent. No load may be discharged without prior
consent of the superintendent. The superintendent may collect samples of each
hauled load to ensure compliance with applicable standards.
      9.   Industrial waste haulers must provide a waste tracking form for
every load. This form shall include, at a minimum, the name and address of the
industrial waste hauler, permit number (if applicable), truck identification,
names and addresses of sources of waste, and volume and characteristics of
waste. The form shall identify the type of industry, known or suspected waste
constituents, and whether any wastes are RCRA hazardous wastes. (Ord. 09-08, 4-
20-2009)
8-9-4: WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT APPLICATION:
   (A)   Wastewater Analysis: When requested by the superintendent, a user must
submit information on the nature and characteristics of its wastewater within
ninety (90) days of the request. The superintendent is authorized to prepare a
form for this purpose and may periodically require users to update this
information.
   (B)   Individual Wastewater Discharge Permit Requirement:
      1.   No significant industrial user shall discharge wastewater into the
POTW without first obtaining a wastewater discharge permit from the
superintendent, except that a significant industrial user that has filed a
timely application pursuant to subsection (C) of this section may continue to
discharge for the time period specified therein.
      2.   The superintendent may require other users to obtain wastewater
discharge permits as necessary to carry out the purposes of this ordinance.
      3.   Any violation of the terms and conditions of an individual
wastewater discharge permit shall be deemed a violation of this ordinance and
subjects the wastewater discharge permittee to the sanctions set out in
sections
8-9-9 through
8-9-11 of this chapter. Obtaining a wastewater discharge permit does not
relieve a permittee of its obligation to comply with all federal and state
pretreatment standards or requirements or with any other requirements of
federal, state, and local law.
   (C)   Individual Wastewater Discharge Permitting; Existing Connections: Any
user required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit who was discharging
wastewater into the POTW prior to the effective date hereof and who wishes to
continue such discharges in the future, shall, within ninety (90) days after
said date, apply to the superintendent for a wastewater discharge permit in
accordance with subsection (E) of this section, and shall not cause or allow
discharges to the POTW to continue after ninety (90) days of the effective date
hereof except in accordance with a wastewater discharge permit issued by the
superintendent.
   (D)   Individual Wastewater Discharge Permitting; New Connections: Any user
required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit who proposes to begin or
recommence discharging into the POTW must obtain such permit prior to the
beginning or recommencing of such discharge. An application for this wastewater
discharge permit, in accordance with subsection (E) of this section, must be
filed at least ninety (90) days prior to the date upon which any discharge will
begin or recommence.
   (E)   Individual Wastewater Discharge Permit Application Contents:
      1.   All users required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit must
submit a permit application. The superintendent may require all users to submit
as part of an application the following information:
         (a)   Identifying Information: Identifying information:
            (1)   The name and address of the facility, including the name of
the operator and owner;
            (2)   Contact information, description of activities, facilities,
and plant production process on the premises;
         (b)   Environmental Permits: A list of any environmental control
permits held by or for the facility;
         (c)   Description Of Operations:
            (1)   A brief description of the nature, average rate of production
(including each product produced by type, amount, processes, and rate of
production), and standard industrial classifications of the operation(s)
carried out by such user. This description should include a schematic process
diagram, which indicates points of discharge to the POTW from the regulated
processes;
            (2)   Types of wastes generated, and a list of all raw materials
and chemicals used or stored at the facility which are, or could accidentally
or intentionally be, discharged to the POTW;
            (3)   Number and type of employees, hours of operation, and
proposed or actual hours of operation;
            (4)   Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and
maximum per day);
            (5)   Site plans, floor drains, and appurtenances by size,
location, and elevation, and all points of discharge;
         (d)   Time And Duration Of Discharges: Time and duration of
discharges;
         (e)   Location For Monitoring Wastes: The location for monitoring all
wastes covered by the permit;
         (f)   Flow Measurement: Information showing the measured average daily
and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from regulated process
streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of the combined waste
stream formula set out in subsection
8-9-2(B)3 of this chapter (40 CFR 403.6(e));
         (g)   Measurement Of Pollutant:
            (1)   The categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each
regulated process and any new categorically regulated processes for existing
sources.
            (2)   The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature
and concentration, and/or mass, where required by the standard or by the
superintendent, of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated
process.
            (3)   Instantaneous, daily maximum, and long term average
concentrations, or mass, where required, shall be reported.
            (4)   The sample shall be representative of daily operations and
shall be analyzed in accordance with procedures set out in subsection
8-9-6(J) of this chapter. Where the standard requires compliance with a BMP or
pollution prevention alternative, the user shall submit documentation as
required by the superintendent or the applicable standards to determine
compliance with the standard.
            (5)   Sampling must be performed in accordance with procedures set
out in subsection
8-9-6(K) of this chapter;
         (h)   Other Information Deemed Necessary: Any other information as may
be deemed necessary by the superintendent to evaluate the permit application.
      2.   Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed and
returned to the user for revision.
   (F)   Application Signatories And Certification:
      1.   All wastewater discharge permit applications and user reports must
be signed by an authorized representative of the user and contain the
certification statement in subsection
8-9-6(N)1 of this chapter.
      2.   If the designation of an authorized representative is no longer
accurate because a different individual or position has responsibility for the
overall operation of the facility or overall responsibility for environmental
matters for the company, a new written authorization satisfying the
requirements of this section must be submitted to the superintendent prior to
or together with any reports to be signed by an authorized representative.
      3.   A facility determined to be a nonsignificant categorical industrial
user by the superintendent pursuant to subsection
8-9-1(D) of this chapter must annually submit the signed certification
statement in subsection
8-9-6(N)2 of this chapter.
   (G)   Permit Decisions: The superintendent will evaluate the data furnished
by the user and may require additional information. Within ninety (90) days of
receipt of a complete wastewater discharge permit application, the
superintendent will determine whether or not to issue a wastewater discharge
permit. The superintendent may deny any application for a wastewater discharge
permit. (Ord. 09-08, 4-20-2009)
8-9-5: WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT ISSUANCE PROCESS:
   (A)   Permit Duration: An individual wastewater discharge permit shall be
issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five (5) years from the
effective date of the permit. An individual wastewater discharge permit may be
issued for a period less than five (5) years, at the discretion of the
superintendent. Each individual wastewater discharge permit will indicate a
specific date upon which it will expire.
   (B)   Permit Contents: An individual wastewater discharge permit shall
include such conditions as are deemed reasonably necessary by the
superintendent to prevent pass-through or interference, protect the quality of
the water body receiving the treatment plant's effluent, protect worker health
and safety, facilitate sludge management and disposal, and protect against
damage to the POTW.
      1.   Individual wastewater discharge permits must contain:
         (a)   A statement that indicates wastewater discharge permit issuance
date, expiration date and effective date;
         (b)   A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is
nontransferable without prior notification to the city of East Moline in
accordance with subsection (E) of this section, and provisions for furnishing
the new owner or operator with a copy of the existing wastewater discharge
permit;
         (c)   Effluent limits, including best management practices, based on
applicable pretreatment standards;
         (d)   Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and
recordkeeping requirements. These requirements shall include an identification
of pollutants (or best management practice) to be monitored, sampling location,
sampling frequency, and sample type based on federal, state, and local law;
         (e)   The process for seeking a waiver from monitoring for a pollutant
neither present nor expected to be present in the discharge in accordance with
subsection
8-9-6(D)2 of this chapter;
         (f)   A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for
violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any applicable
compliance schedule. Such schedule may not exceed the time for compliance
beyond that required by applicable federal, state, or local law;
         (g)   Requirements to control slug discharge, if determined by the
superintendent to be necessary;
         (h)   Any grant of the monitoring waiver by the superintendent
(subsection
8-9-6(D)2 of this chapter) must be included as a condition in the user's
permit.
      2.   Individual wastewater discharge permits may contain, but need not be
limited to, the following conditions:
         (a)   Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time of
discharge, and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization;
         (b)   Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology,
pollution control, or construction of appropriate containment devices, designed
to reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the
treatment works;
         (c)   Requirements for the development and implementation of spill
control plans or other special conditions including management practices
necessary to adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated, or nonroutine
discharges;
         (d)   Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to
reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW;
         (e)   The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the
management of the wastewater discharged to the POTW;
         (f)   Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and
sampling facilities and equipment, including flow measurement devices;
         (g)   A statement that compliance with the individual wastewater
discharge permit does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for
compliance with all applicable federal and state pretreatment standards,
including those which become effective during the term of the wastewater
discharge permit; and
         (h)   Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the superintendent to
ensure compliance with this ordinance, and state and federal laws, rules, and
regulations.
   (C)   Permit Appeals: The superintendent shall provide public notice of the
issuance of a wastewater discharge permit. Any person, including the user, may
petition the superintendent to reconsider the terms of a wastewater discharge
permit within thirty (30) days of notice of its issuance.
      1.   Failure to submit a timely petition for review shall be deemed to be
a waiver of the administrative appeal.
      2.   In its petition, the appealing party must indicate the wastewater
discharge permit provisions objected to, the reasons for this objection, and
the alternative condition, if any, it seeks to place in the wastewater
discharge permit.
      3.   The effectiveness of the wastewater discharge permit shall not be
stayed pending the appeal.
      4.   If the superintendent fails to act within thirty (30) days, a
request for reconsideration shall be deemed to be denied. Decisions not to
reconsider a wastewater discharge permit, not to issue a wastewater discharge
permit, or not to modify a wastewater discharge permit shall be considered
final administrative actions for purposes of judicial review.
      5.   Aggrieved parties seeking judicial review of the final
administrative wastewater discharge permit decision must do so by filing a
complaint with the Rock Island circuit court for the county of Rock Island,
Rock Island, Illinois, within thirty (30) days after entry of administrative
order.
   (D)   Permit Modification: The superintendent may modify a wastewater
discharge permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following
reasons:
      1.   To incorporate any new or revised federal, state, or local
pretreatment standards or requirements;
      2.   To address significant alterations or additions to the user's
operation, processes, or wastewater volume or character since the time of
wastewater discharge permit issuance;
      3.   A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent
reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge;
      4.   Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat
to the city of East Moline's POTW, city of East Moline personnel, or the
receiving waters;
      5.   Violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater discharge
permit;
      6.   Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts
in the wastewater discharge permit application or in any required reporting;
      7.   Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical pretreatment
standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13;
      8.   To correct typographical or other errors in the wastewater discharge
permit; or
      9.   To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership or operation to a
new owner or operator.
   (E)   Permit Transfer: Wastewater discharge permits may be transferred to a
new owner or operator only if the permittee gives at least thirty (30) days'
advance notice to the superintendent and the superintendent approves the
wastewater discharge permit transfer. The notice to the superintendent must
include a written certification by the new owner or operator which:
      1.   States that the new owner and/or operator has no immediate intent to
change the facility's operations and processes;
      2.   Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur;
      3.   Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the existing
wastewater discharge permit; and
      4.   Fulfills the signatory requirements of subsection
8-9-4(F) of this chapter, within the thirty (30) days the permittee has to file
transfer application with the city of East Moline. Failure to provide advance
notice of a transfer renders the wastewater discharge permit void as of the
date of facility transfer.
   (F)   Permit Revocation: The superintendent may revoke a wastewater
discharge permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following
reasons:
      1.   Failure to notify the superintendent of significant changes to the
wastewater prior to the changed discharge;
      2.   Failure to provide prior notification to the superintendent of
changed conditions pursuant to subsection
8-9-6(E) of this chapter;
      3.   Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in
the wastewater discharge permit application;
      4.   Falsifying self-monitoring reports;
      5.   Tampering with monitoring equipment;
      6.   Refusing to allow the superintendent timely access to the facility
premises and records;
      7.   Failure to meet effluent limitations;
      8.   Failure to pay fines;
      9.   Failure to pay sewer charges;
      10.   Failure to meet compliance schedules;
      11.   Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the wastewater discharge
permit application;
      12.   Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of business
ownership of a permitted facility; or
      13.   Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any terms
of the wastewater discharge permit or this ordinance.
Wastewater discharge permits shall be voidable upon cessation of operations or
transfer of business ownership. All wastewater discharge permits issued to a
particular user are void upon the issuance of a new wastewater discharge permit
to that user.
   (G)   Permit Reissuance: A user with an expiring wastewater discharge permit
shall apply for wastewater discharge permit reissuance by submitting a complete
permit application, in accordance with subsection
8-9-4(E) of this chapter, a minimum of ninety (90) days prior to the expiration
of the user's existing wastewater discharge permit.
   (H)   Regulation Of Waste Received From Other Jurisdictions:
      1.   If another municipality, or user located within another
municipality, contributes wastewater to the POTW, the superintendent shall
enter into an intermunicipal agreement with the contributing municipality.
      2.   Prior to entering into an agreement required by subsection (H)1 of
this section, the superintendent shall request the following information from
the contributing municipality:
         (a)   A description of the quality and volume of wastewater discharged
to the POTW by the contributing municipality;
         (b)   An inventory of all users located within the contributing
municipality that are discharging to the POTW; and
         (c)   Such other information as the superintendent may deem necessary.
      3.   An intermunicipal agreement, as required by subsection (H)1 of this
section, shall contain the following conditions:
         (a)   A requirement for the contributing municipality to adopt a sewer
use ordinance which is at least as stringent as this ordinance and local limits
which are at least as stringent as those set out in subsection
8-9-2(D) of this chapter and which will permit the city of East Moline to
enforce all provisions of said ordinance in the same manner and with the same
remedies as set forth in this ordinance. The requirement shall specify that
such ordinance and limits must be revised as necessary to reflect changes made
to the city of East Moline's ordinance or local limits;
         (b)   A requirement for the contributing municipality to submit a
revised user inventory on at least an annual basis;
         (c)   A provision specifying which pretreatment implementation
activities, including wastewater discharge permit issuance, inspection and
sampling, and enforcement, will be conducted by the contributing municipality;
which of these activities will be conducted by the superintendent; and which of
these activities will be conducted jointly by the contributing municipality and
the superintendent;
         (d)   A requirement for the contributing municipality to provide the
superintendent with access to all information that the contributing
municipality obtains as part of its pretreatment activities;
         (e)   Limits on the nature, quality, and volume of the contributing
municipality's wastewater at the point where it discharges to the POTW;
         (f)   Requirements for monitoring the contributing municipality's
discharge;
         (g)   A provision ensuring the superintendent access to the facilities
of users located within the contributing municipality's jurisdictional
boundaries for the purpose of inspection, sampling, and any other duties deemed
necessary by the superintendent; and
         (h)   A provision specifying remedies available for breach of the
terms of the intermunicipal agreement. (Ord. 09-08, 4-20-2009)
8-9-6: REPORTING REQUIREMENTS:
   (A)   Baseline Monitoring Reports:
      1.   Within either one hundred eighty (180) days after the effective date
of a categorical pretreatment standard, or the final administrative decision on
a category determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing
categorical users currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the
POTW shall submit to the superintendent a report which contains the information
listed in subsection (A)2 of this section. At least ninety (90) days prior to
commencement of their discharge, new sources, and sources that become
categorical users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical
standard, shall submit to the superintendent a report which contains the
information listed in subsection (A)2 of this section. A new source shall
report the method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable
categorical standards. A new source also shall give estimates of its
anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants to be discharged.
      2.   Users described above shall submit the information set forth below:
         (a)   Information Required: All information required in subsections
8-9-4(E)1(a)(1), (E)1(b), (E)1(c)(1) and (E)1(f) of this chapter.
         (b)   Measurement Of Pollutants:
            (1)   The user shall provide the information required in
subsections
8-9-4(E)1(g)(1) through (E)1(g)(4) of this chapter.
            (2)   The user shall take a minimum of one representative sample to
compile that data necessary to comply with the requirements of this subsection.
            (3)   Samples should be taken immediately downstream from
pretreatment facilities if such exist or immediately downstream from the
regulated process if no pretreatment exists. If other wastewaters are mixed
with the regulated wastewater prior to pretreatment the user should measure the
flows and concentrations necessary to allow use of the combined waste stream
formula in 40 CFR 403.6(e) to evaluate compliance with the pretreatment
standards. Where an alternate concentration or mass limit has been calculated
in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(e) this adjusted limit along with supporting
data shall be submitted to the control authority;
            (4)   Sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with
subsection (J) of this section;
            (5)   The superintendent may allow the submission of a baseline
report which utilizes only historical data so long as the data provides
information sufficient to determine the need for industrial pretreatment
measures;
            (6)   The baseline report shall indicate the time, date and place
of sampling and methods of analysis, and shall certify that such sampling and
analysis is representative of normal work cycles and expected pollutant
discharges to the POTW.
         (c)   Compliance Certification: A statement, reviewed by the user's
authorized representative as defined in subsection
8-9-1(D) of this chapter and certified by a qualified professional, indicating
whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if
not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional
pretreatment is required to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements.
         (d)   Compliance Schedule: If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will
be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which
the user will provide such additional pretreatment and/or O&M. The completion
date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established
for the applicable pretreatment standard. A compliance schedule pursuant to
this subsection must meet the requirements set out in subsection (B) of this
section.
         (e)   Signature And Report Certification: All baseline monitoring
reports must be certified in accordance with subsection (N)1 of this section
and signed by an authorized representative as defined in subsection
8-9-1(D) of this chapter.
   (B)   Compliance Schedule Progress Reports: The following conditions shall
apply to the compliance schedule required by subsection (A)2(d) of this
section:
      1.   The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates
for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction
and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the
applicable pretreatment standards (such events include, but are not limited to,
hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final plans, executing contracts
for major components, commencing and completing construction, and beginning and
conducting routine operation);
      2.   No increment referred to above shall exceed nine (9) months;
      3.   The user shall submit a progress report to the superintendent no
later than fourteen (14) days following each date in the schedule and the final
date of compliance including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the
increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and, if appropriate, the steps
being taken by the user to return to the established schedule; and
      4.   In no event shall more than nine (9) months elapse between such
progress reports to the superintendent.
   (C)   Reports On Compliance With Categorical Pretreatment Standard Deadline:
Within ninety (90) days following the date for final compliance with applicable
categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source following
commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any user subject
to such pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the
superintendent a report containing the information described in subsections
8-9-4(E)1(f) and (E)1(g) of this chapter and subsection (A)2(b) of this
section. For users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits
established in accordance with the procedures in subsection
8-9-2(B) of this chapter or 40 CFR 403.6(c), this report shall contain a
reasonable measure of the user's long term production rate. For all other users
subject to categorical pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable
pollutant discharge per unit of production (or other measure of operation),
this report shall include the user's actual production during the appropriate
sampling period. All compliance reports must be signed and certified in
accordance with subsection (N)1 of this section. All sampling will be done in
conformance with subsection (K) of this section.
   (D)   Periodic Compliance Reports:
      1.   Except as specified in subsection (D)3 of this section, all
significant industrial users must, at a frequency determined by the
superintendent but in no case less than twice per year (see permit for
submission month), submit a report indicating the nature and concentration of
pollutants in the discharge which are limited by pretreatment standards and the
measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period.
In cases where the pretreatment standard requires compliance with a best
management practice (BMP) or pollution preventative alternative, the user must
submit documentation required by the superintendent or the pretreatment
standard necessary to determine the compliance status of the user.
      2.   The city may authorize an industrial user subject to a categorical
pretreatment standard to forego sampling of a pollutant regulated by a
categorical pretreatment standard if the industrial user has demonstrated
through sampling and other technical factors that the pollutant is neither
present nor expected to be present in the discharge, or is present only at
background levels from intake water and without any increase in the pollutant
due to activities of the industrial user (see 40 CFR 403.12(e)(2)). This
authorization is subject to the following conditions:
         (a)   The waiver may be authorized where a pollutant is determined to
be present solely due to sanitary wastewater discharged from the facility
provided that the sanitary wastewater is not regulated by an applicable
categorical standard and otherwise includes no process wastewater.
         (b)   The monitoring waiver is valid only for the duration of the
effective period of the individual wastewater discharge permit, but in no case
longer than five (5) years. The user must submit a new request for the waiver
before the waiver can be granted for each subsequent individual wastewater
discharge permit. See subsection
8-9-4(E)1(h) of this chapter.
         (c)   In making a demonstration that a pollutant is not present, the
industrial user must provide data from at least one sampling of the facility's
process wastewater prior to any treatment present at the facility that is
representative of all wastewater from all processes.
         (d)   The request for a monitoring waiver must be signed in accordance
with subsection
8-9-1(D) of this chapter, and include the certification statement in subsection
(N)1 of this section (40 CFR 403.6(a)(2)(ii)).
         (e)   Nondetectable sample results may be used only as a demonstration
that a pollutant is not present if the EPA approved method from 40 CFR 403 part
136 with the lowest minimum detection level for that pollutant was used in the
analysis.
         (f)   Any grant of the monitoring waiver by the superintendent must be
included as a condition in the user's permit. The reasons supporting the waiver
and any information submitted by the user in its request for waiver must be
maintained by the superintendent for three (3) years after expiration of the
waiver.
         (g)   Upon approval of the monitoring waiver and revision of the
user's permit by the superintendent, the industrial user must certify on each
report with the statement in subsection (N)3 of this section, that there has
been no increase in the pollutant in its waste stream due to activities of the
industrial user.
         (h)   In the event that a waived pollutant is found to be present or
is expected to be present because of changes that occur in the user's
operations, the user must immediately: comply with the monitoring requirements
of subsection (D)1 of this section, or other more frequent monitoring
requirements imposed by the superintendent, and notify the superintendent.
         (i)   This certification does not supersede certification processed
and requirements established in categorical pretreatment standards, except as
otherwise specified in the categorical pretreatment standard.
      3.   The city of East Moline may reduce the requirement for periodic
compliance reports (see subsection (D)1 of this section [40 CFR 403.12(e)(1)])
to a requirement to report no less frequently than once a year, unless required
more frequently in the pretreatment standard or by the EPA/state IEPA, where
the industrial user's total categorical wastewater flow does not exceed any of
the following:
         (a)   Five thousand (5,000) gallons per day.
         (b)   Two thousand five hundred milligrams per liter (2,500 mg/l) per
day BOD and SS combined.
         (c)   One hundred (100) of one percent (1%) of any pollutant regulated
by the applicable categorical pretreatment standard or for any pollutant
regulated for an approved local limit developed in accordance with subsection
8-9-2(D) of this chapter.
Reduced reporting is not available to industrial users that have in the last
two (2) years been in significant noncompliance, as defined in section
8-9-8 of this chapter. In addition, reduced reporting is not available to an
industrial user with daily flow rates, production levels, or pollutant levels
that vary so significantly that, in the opinion of the superintendent,
decreasing the reporting requirement for this industrial user would result in
data that are not representative of conditions occurring during the reporting
period.
      4.   All periodic compliance reports must be signed and certified in
accordance with subsection (N)1 of this section.
      5.   All wastewater samples must be representative of the user's
discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be
properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at all
times, at user's expense. The failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility
in good working order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample
results are unrepresentative of its discharge.
      6.   If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this section
monitors any regulated pollutant at the appropriate sampling location more
frequently than required by the superintendent, using the procedures prescribed
in subsection (K) of this section, the results of this monitoring shall be
included in the report.
   (E)   Reports Of Changed Conditions: Each user must notify the
superintendent of any significant changes to the user's operations or system
which might alter the nature, quality, or volume of its wastewater at least
thirty (30) days before the change.
      1.   The superintendent may require the user to submit such information
as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition, including the
submission of a wastewater discharge permit application under subsection
8-9-4(E) of this chapter.
      2.   The superintendent may issue an individual wastewater discharge
permit under subsection
8-9-4(G) of this chapter or modify an existing wastewater discharge permit
under subsection
8-9-5(D) of this chapter in response to changed conditions or anticipated
changed conditions.
   (F)   Reports Of Potential Problems:
      1.   In the case of any discharge, including, but not limited to,
accidental discharges, discharges of a nonroutine, episodic nature, a
noncustomary batch discharge, a slug discharge or a slug load, that might cause
potential problems for the POTW, the user shall immediately telephone and
notify the superintendent of the incident. This notification shall include the
location of the discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, if known,
and corrective actions taken by the user.
      2.   Within five (5) days following such discharge, the user shall,
unless waived by the superintendent, submit a detailed written report
describing the cause(s) of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the
user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve
the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which might be
incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, natural resources, or any other
damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of
any fines, penalties, or other liability which may be imposed pursuant to this
ordinance.
      3.   A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or
other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event of a
discharge described in subsection (F)1 of this section. Employers shall ensure
that all employees, who may cause such a discharge to occur, are advised of the
emergency notification procedure.
   (G)   Reports From Unpermitted Users: All users not required to obtain a
wastewater discharge permit shall provide appropriate reports to the
superintendent as the superintendent may require.
   (H)   Notice Of Violation/Repeat Sampling And Reporting: If sampling
performed by a user indicates a violation, the user must notify the
superintendent within twenty four (24) hours of becoming aware of the
violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the
results of the repeat analysis to the superintendent within thirty (30) days
after becoming aware of the violation. The user is not required to resample if
the superintendent monitors at the user's facility at least once a month, or if
the superintendent samples between the user's initial sampling and when the
user receives the results of this sampling, or if the city has performed the
sampling and analysis in lieu of the industrial user.
   (I)   Notification Of The Discharge Of Hazardous Waste:
      1.   Any user who commences the discharge of hazardous waste shall notify
the POTW, the EPA regional waste management division director, and state
hazardous waste authorities, in writing, of any discharge into the POTW of a
substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40
CFR part 261. Such notification must include the name of the hazardous waste
number, and the type of discharge (continuous, batch, or other). If the user
discharges more than one hundred (100) kilograms of such waste per calendar
month to the POTW, the notification also shall contain the following
information to the extent such information is known and readily available to
the user: an identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the
wastes, an estimation of the mass and concentration of such constituents in the
waste stream discharged during that calendar month, and an estimation of the
mass of constituents in the waste stream expected to be discharged during the
following twelve (12) months. All notifications must take place no later than
one hundred eighty (180) days after the discharge commences. Any notification
under this subsection need be submitted only once for each hazardous waste
discharged. However, notifications of changed conditions must be submitted
under subsection (E) of this section. The notification requirement in this
section does not apply to pollutants already reported by users subject to
categorical pretreatment standards under the self-monitoring requirements of
subsections (A), (C) and (D) of this section.
      2.   Dischargers are exempt from the requirements of subsection (I)1 of
this section, during a calendar month in which they discharge no more than
fifteen (15) kilograms of hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute
hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e). Discharge of
more than fifteen (15) kilograms of nonacute hazardous wastes in a calendar
month, or of any quantity of acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR
261.30(d) and 261.33(e), requires a onetime notification. Subsequent months
during which the user discharges more than such quantities of any hazardous
waste do not require additional notification.
      3.   In the case of any new regulations under section 3001 of RCRA
identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any
additional substance as a hazardous waste, the user must notify the
superintendent, the EPA regional waste management waste division director, and
state hazardous waste authorities of the discharge of such substance within
ninety (90) days of the effective date of such regulations.
      4.   In the case of any notification made under this section, the user
shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity
of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has determined to be
economically practical.
      5.   This provision does not create a right to discharge any substance
not otherwise permitted to be discharged by this ordinance, a permit issued
thereunder, or any applicable federal or state law.
   (J)   Analytical Requirements: All pollutant analyses, including sampling
techniques, to be submitted as part of a wastewater discharge permit
application or report shall be performed in accordance with the techniques
prescribed in 40 CFR part 136 and amendments thereto, unless otherwise
specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment standard. If 40 CFR part
136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in
question, or where the EPA determines that the part 136 sampling and analytical
techniques are inappropriate for the pollutant in question, sampling and
analyses shall be performed by validated analytical methods or any other
applicable sampling and analytical procedures, including procedures suggested
by the superintendent or other parties approved by EPA.
   (K)   Sample Collection: Samples collected to satisfy reporting requirements
must be based on data obtained through appropriate sampling and analysis
performed during the period covered by the report, based on data that is
representative of conditions occurring during the reporting period.
      1.   Except as indicated in subsections (K)2 and (K)3 of this section,
the user must collect wastewater samples using twenty four (24) hour flow
proportional composite sampling techniques, unless time proportional composite
sampling or grab sampling is authorized by the superintendent. Where time
proportional composite or grab sampling is authorized by the city, the samples
must be representative of the discharge. Using protocols (including appropriate
preservation) specified in 40 CFR part 136 and appropriate EPA guidance,
multiple grab samples collected during a twenty four (24) hour period may be
composited prior to the analysis as follows: for cyanide, total phenols, and
sulfides the samples may be composited in the laboratory or in the field; for
volatile organics and oil and grease, the samples may be composited in the
laboratory. Composite samples for other parameters unaffected by the
compositing procedures as documented in approved EPA methodologies may be
authorized by the city, as appropriate. In addition, grab samples may be
required to show compliance with instantaneous limits.
      2.   Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, phenols,
sulfides, and volatile organic compounds must be obtained using grab collection
techniques.
      3.   For sampling required in support of baseline monitoring and ninety
(90) day compliance reports required in subsections (A) and (C) of this section
(40 CFR 403.12(b) and (d)), a minimum of four (4) grab samples must be used for
pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil and grease, sulfide and volatile organic
compounds for facilities for which historical sampling data are available, the
superintendent may authorize a lower minimum. For the reports required by
subsection (D) of this section (40 CFR 403.12(e) and (h)), the industrial user
is required to collect the number of grab samples necessary to assess and
assure compliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements.
   (L)   Date Of Receipt Of Reports: Written reports will be deemed to have
been submitted on the date postmarked. For reports which are not mailed,
postage prepaid, into a mail facility serviced by the United States postal
service, the date of receipt of the report shall govern.
   (M)   Recordkeeping: Users subject to the reporting requirements of this
ordinance shall retain, and make available for inspection and copying, all
records of information obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required
by this ordinance and any additional records of information obtained pursuant
to monitoring activities undertaken by the user independent of such
requirements. Records shall include the date, exact place, method, and time of
sampling, and the name of the person(s) taking the samples; the dates analyses
were performed; who performed the analyses; the analytical techniques or
methods used; and the results of such analyses. These records shall remain
available for a period of at least three (3) years. This period shall be
automatically extended for the duration of any litigation concerning the user
or the city of East Moline, or where the user has been specifically notified of
a longer retention period by the superintendent.
   (N)   Certification Statements:
      1.   Certification Of Permit Applications, User Reports And Initial
Monitoring Waiver: The following certification statement is required to be
signed and submitted by user submitting permit applications in accordance with
subsection
8-9-4(F) of this chapter; user submitting baseline monitoring reports under
subsection (A)2(e) of this section; users submitting reports on compliance with
the categorical pretreatment standard deadlines under subsection (C) of this
section; users submitting periodic compliance reports required by subsections
(D)1 through (D)4 of this section, and users submitting an initial request to
forego sampling of a pollutant on the basis of subsection (D)2(d) of this
section. The following certification statement must be signed by an authorized
representative as defined in subsection
8-9-1(D) of this chapter:
I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were
prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed
to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information
submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system,
or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the
information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true,
accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for
submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and
imprisonment for knowing violations.
      2.   Annual Certification For Nonsignificant Categorical Industrial
Users: A facility determined to be a nonsignificant categorical industrial user
by the superintendent pursuant to subsections
8-9-1(D) and
8-9-4(F)3 of this chapter must annually submit the following certification
statement signed in accordance with the signatory requirements in subsection
8-9-1(D) of this chapter. This certification must accompany an alternative
report required by the superintendent.
Based on my inquiry of the person or persons directly responsible for managing
compliance with the categorical Pretreatment Standards under 40 CFR [applicable
classification], I certify that, to the best of my knowledge and belief that
during the period from         ,          to         ,          [months, days,
year]:
(a) The facility described as             [facility name] met the definition of
a Non-Significant Categorical Industrial User as described in subsection
8-9-1(D) of the city code;
(b) The facility complied with all applicable Pretreatment Standards and
requirements during this reporting period; and (c) the facility never
discharged more than 100 gallons of total categorical wastewater on any given
day during this reporting periods.
This compliance certification is based on the following information.
      3.   Certification Of Pollutants Not Present: Users that have an approved
monitoring waiver based on subsection (D)2 of this section must certify on each
report with the following statement that there has been no increase in the
pollutant in its waste stream due to activities of the user:
Based on my inquiry of the person or persons directly responsible for managing
compliance with the Pretreatment Standard for 40 CFR        [applicable
National Pretreatment Standard part(s)], I certify that, to the best of my
knowledge and belief, there has been no increase in the level of        [list
pollutant(s)] in the wastewaters due to the activities at the facility since
filing of the last periodic report under subsection
8-9-6(D)1 of the city code.
(Ord. 09-08, 4-20-2009)
8-9-7: COMPLIANCE MONITORING:
   (A)   Right Of Entry; Inspection And Sampling: The superintendent shall have
the right to enter the premises of any user to determine whether the user is
complying with all requirements of this ordinance and any individual wastewater
discharge permit or order issued hereunder. Users shall allow the
superintendent ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of
inspection, sampling, records examination and copying, and the performance of
any additional duties.
      1.   Where a user has security measures in force which require proper
identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the user shall
make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that, upon presentation
of suitable identification, the superintendent will be permitted to enter
without delay for the purposes of performing specific responsibilities.
      2.   The superintendent shall have the right to set up on the user's
property, or require installation of, such devices as are necessary to conduct
sampling and/or metering of the user's operations.
      3.   The superintendent may require the user to install monitoring
equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall
be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the user
at its own expense. All devices used to measure wastewater flow and quality
shall be calibrated at the city's discretion, to ensure their accuracy.
      4.   Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to
the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the
user at the written or verbal request of the superintendent and shall not be
replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the user.
      5.   Unreasonable delays in allowing the superintendent access to the
user's premises shall be a violation of this ordinance.
   (B)   Search Warrants: If the superintendent has been refused access to a
building, structure, or property, or any part thereof, and is able to
demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this
ordinance, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a
routine inspection and sampling program of the city of East Moline designed to
verify compliance with this ordinance or any permit or order issued hereunder,
or to protect the overall public health, safety and welfare of the community,
then the superintendent may seek issuance of a search warrant from the Rock
Island circuit court of the county of Rock Island, Rock Island, Illinois.
   (C)   Confidential Information: Information and data on a user obtained from
reports, surveys, wastewater discharge permit applications, individual
wastewater discharge permits, and monitoring programs, and from the
superintendent's inspection and sampling activities, shall be available to the
public without restriction, unless the user specifically requests, and is able
to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the superintendent, that the release of
such information would divulge information, processes, or methods of production
entitled to protection as trade secrets under applicable state law. Any such
request must be asserted at the time of submission of the information or data.
When requested and demonstrated by the user furnishing a report that such
information should be held confidential, the portions of a report which might
disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for
inspection by the public, but shall be made available immediately upon request
to governmental agencies for uses related to the NPDES program or pretreatment
program, and in enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the
report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics and other "effluent data"
as defined by 40 CFR 2.302 will not be recognized as confidential information
and will be available to the public without restriction. (Ord. 09-08, 4-20-
2009)
8-9-8: PUBLICATION OF USERS IN SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE:
The superintendent shall publish annually, in the largest daily newspaper
published in the municipality where the POTW is located, a list of the users
which, during the previous twelve (12) months, were in significant
noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. The term
"significant noncompliance" shall be applicable to all significant industrial
users (or any other industrial user that violates subsections (C), (D) or (H)
of this section) and shall mean:
   (A)   "Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits", defined herein as
those in which sixty six percent (66%) or more of wastewater measurements taken
for the same pollutant parameter taken during a six (6) month period exceed (by
any magnitude) a numeric pretreatment standard or requirement, including
instantaneous limits as defined in section
8-9-2 of this chapter;
   (B)   "Technical review criteria (TRC) violations", defined herein as those
in which thirty three percent (33%) or more of wastewater measurements taken
for each pollutant parameter during a six (6) month period equals or exceeds
the product of the numeric pretreatment standard or requirement including
instantaneous limits, as defined by section
8-9-2 of this chapter multiplied by the applicable criteria (1.4 for BOD, TSS,
fats, oils and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH);
   (C)   Any other discharge violation of a pretreatment standard or
requirement as defined by section
8-9-2 of this chapter (daily maximum, long term average, instantaneous limit,
or narrative standard) that the superintendent determines has caused, alone or
in combination with other discharges, interference or pass-through, including
endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public;
   (D)   Any discharge of pollutants that has caused imminent endangerment to
the public or to the environment, or has resulted in the superintendent's
exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge;
   (E)   Failure to meet, within ninety (90) days of the scheduled date, a
compliance schedule milestone contained in a wastewater discharge permit or
enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or
attaining final compliance;
   (F)   Failure to provide within forty five (45) days after the due date, any
required reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on compliance
with categorical pretreatment standard deadlines, periodic self-monitoring
reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules;
   (G)   Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or
   (H)   Any other violation(s) which may include a violation of best
management practices, which the superintendent determines will adversely affect
the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program. (Ord. 09-08,
4-20-2009)
8-9-9: ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES:
   (A)   Notification Of Violation: When the superintendent finds that a user
has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this ordinance, a
wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement, the superintendent may serve upon that
user a written notice of violation. Within thirty (30) days of the receipt of
this notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory
correction and prevention thereof, to include specific required actions, shall
be submitted by the user to the superintendent. Submission of this plan in no
way relieves the user of liability for any violations occurring before or after
receipt of the notice of violation. Nothing in this section shall limit the
authority of the superintendent to take any action, including emergency actions
or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a notice of violation.
   (B)   Consent Orders: The superintendent may enter into consent orders,
assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents establishing an
agreement with any user responsible for noncompliance. Such documents will
include specific action to be taken by the user to correct the noncompliance
within a time period specified by the document. Such documents shall have the
same force and effect as the administrative orders issued pursuant to
subsections (D) and (E) of this section and shall be judicially enforceable.
   (C)   Show Cause Hearing: The superintendent may order a user which has
violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this ordinance, a
wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement, to appear before the superintendent and
show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. Notice
shall be served on the user specifying the time and place for the meeting, the
proposed enforcement action, the reasons for such action, and a request that
the user show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken.
The notice of the meeting shall be served personally or by registered or
certified mail, return receipt requested, at least ten (10) days prior to the
hearing. Such notice may be served on any authorized representative of the
user. A show cause hearing shall not be a bar against, or prerequisite for,
taking any other action against the user.
   (D)   Compliance Orders: When the superintendent finds that a user has
violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this ordinance, a
wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement, the superintendent may issue an order to
the user responsible for the discharge directing that the user come into
compliance within a specified time. If the user does not come into compliance
within the time provided, sewer service may be discontinued unless adequate
treatment facilities, devices, or other related appurtenances are installed and
properly operated. Compliance orders also may contain other requirements to
address the noncompliance, including additional self-monitoring and management
practices designed to minimize the amount of pollutants discharged to the
sewer. A compliance order may not extend the deadline for compliance
established for a pretreatment standard or requirement, nor does a compliance
order relieve the user of liability for any violation, including any continuing
violation. Issuance of a compliance order shall not be a bar against, or a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.
   (E)   Cease And Desist Orders: When the superintendent finds that a user has
violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this ordinance, a
wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement, or that the user's past violations are
likely to recur, the superintendent may issue an order to the user directing it
to cease and desist all such violations and directing the user to:
      1.   Immediately comply with all requirements; and
      2.   Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed
to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting
operations and/or terminating the discharge.
Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a bar against, or a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.
   (F)   Administrative Fines:
      1.   When the superintendent finds that a user has violated, or continues
to violate, any provision of this ordinance, a wastewater discharge permit or
order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the
superintendent may fine such user in an amount not to exceed one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00). Such fines shall be assessed on a per violation, per day
basis. In the case of monthly or other long term average discharge limits,
fines shall be assessed for each day during the period of violation.
      2.   Unpaid charges, fines, and penalties shall, after seventeen (17)
calendar days, be assessed an additional penalty of ten percent (10%) of the
unpaid balance, and interest shall accrue thereafter at a rate of zero percent
(0%) per month. A lien against the user's property will be sought for unpaid
charges, fines, and penalties.
      3.   Users desiring to dispute such fines must file a written request for
the superintendent to reconsider the fine along with full payment of the fine
amount within ten (10) days of being notified of the fine. Where a request has
merit, the superintendent may convene a hearing on the matter. In the event the
user's appeal is successful, the payment, together with any interest accruing
thereto, shall be returned to the user. The superintendent may add the costs of
preparing administrative enforcement actions, such as notices and orders, to
the fine.
      4.   Issuance of an administrative fine shall not be a bar against, or a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.
   (G)   Emergency Suspensions: The superintendent may immediately suspend a
user's discharge, after informal notice to the user, whenever such suspension
is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which reasonably appears
to present or cause an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or
welfare of persons. The superintendent may also immediately suspend a user's
discharge, after notice and opportunity to respond, that threatens to interfere
with the operation of the POTW, or which presents, or may present, an
endangerment to the environment.
      1.   Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall immediately
stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a user's failure to
immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the superintendent
may take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the
sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW, its receiving
stream, or endangerment to any individuals. The superintendent may allow the
user to recommence its discharge when the user has demonstrated to the
satisfaction of the superintendent that the period of endangerment has passed,
unless the termination proceedings in subsection (H) of this section are
initiated against the user.
      2.   A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge
presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement,
describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to
prevent any future occurrence, to the superintendent prior to the date of any
show cause or termination hearing under subsection (C) or (H) of this section.
Nothing in this subsection shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing prior to
any emergency suspension under this subsection.
   (H)   Termination Of Discharge: In addition to the provisions in subsection
8-9-5(F) of this chapter, any user who violates the following conditions is
subject to discharge termination:
      1.   Violation of wastewater discharge permit conditions;
      2.   Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and
characteristics of its discharge;
      3.   Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater
volume, constituents, and characteristics prior to discharge;
      4.   Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose
of inspection, monitoring, or sampling; or
      5.   Violation of the pretreatment standards in section
8-9-2 of this chapter.
Such user will be notified of the proposed termination of its discharge and be
offered an opportunity to show cause under subsection (C) of this section why
the proposed action should not be taken. Exercise of this option by the
superintendent shall not be a bar to, or a prerequisite for, taking any other
action against the user. (Ord. 09-08, 4-20-2009)
8-9-10: JUDICIAL ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES:
   (A)   Injunctive Relief: When the superintendent finds that a user has
violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this ordinance, an
individual wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement, the superintendent may petition the Rock
Island County circuit court, through the city of East Moline's attorney for the
issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate, which
restrains or compels the specific performance of the individual wastewater
discharge permit, order, or other requirement imposed by this ordinance on
activities of the user. The superintendent may also seek such other action as
is appropriate for legal and/or equitable relief, including a requirement for
the user to conduct environmental remediation. A petition for injunctive relief
shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action
against a user.
   (B)   Civil Penalties:
      1.   A user who has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of
this ordinance, an individual wastewater discharge permit, or order issued
hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall be liable to
the city of East Moline for a maximum civil penalty of one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) per violation, per day. In the case of a monthly or other long term
average discharge limit, penalties shall accrue for each day during the period
of the violation.
      2.   The superintendent may recover reasonable attorney fees, court
costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement activities, including
sampling and monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual damages incurred
by the city of East Moline.
      3.   In determining the amount of civil liability, the court shall take
into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the
extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration of the
violation, any economic benefit gained through the user's violation, corrective
actions by the user, the compliance history of the user, and any other factor
as justice requires.
      4.   Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a bar against, or a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user.
   (C)   Criminal Prosecution:
      1.   A user who wilfully or negligently violates any provision of this
ordinance, an individual wastewater discharge permit, or order issued
hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall, upon
conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than
one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation, per day, or imprisonment for
not more than six (6) months, per violation, or both.
      2.   A user who wilfully or negligently introduces any substance into the
POTW which causes personal injury or property damage shall, upon conviction, be
guilty of a misdemeanor and be subject to a penalty of at least one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00), or be subject to imprisonment for not more than six (6)
months, per violation, or both. This penalty shall be in addition to any other
cause of action for personal injury or property damage available under state
law.
      3.   A user who knowingly makes any false statements, representations, or
certifications in any application, record, report, plan, or other documentation
filed, or required to be maintained, pursuant to this ordinance, individual
wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or who falsifies,
tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method
required under this ordinance shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of
not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation, per day, or
imprisonment for not more than six (6) months, or both.
      4.   In the event of a second conviction, a user shall be punished by a
fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation, per day,
or imprisonment for not more than six (6) months, or both.
   (D)   Remedies Nonexclusive: The remedies provided for in this ordinance are
not exclusive. The superintendent may take any, all, or any combination of
these actions against a noncompliant user. Enforcement of pretreatment
violations will generally be in accordance with the city of East Moline's
enforcement response plan. However, the superintendent may take other action
against any user when the circumstances warrant. Further, the superintendent is
empowered to take more than one enforcement action against any noncompliant
user. (Ord. 09-08, 4-20-2009)
8-9-11: SUPPLEMENTAL ENFORCEMENT ACTION:
   (A)   Performance Bonds: The superintendent may decline to issue or reissue
a wastewater discharge permit to any user who has failed to comply with any
provision of this ordinance, a previous wastewater discharge permit, or order
issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, unless
such user first files a satisfactory bond, payable to the city of East Moline,
in a sum not to exceed a value determined by the superintendent to be necessary
to achieve consistent compliance.
   (B)   Water Supply Severance: Whenever a user has violated or continues to
violate any provision of this ordinance, a wastewater discharge permit, or
order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement,
water service to the user may be severed. Service will only recommence, at the
user's expense, after it has satisfactorily demonstrated its ability to comply.
   (C)   Public Nuisances: A violation of any provision of this ordinance, a
wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement is hereby declared a public nuisance and
shall be corrected or abated as directed by the superintendent. Any person(s)
creating a public nuisance shall be subject to the provisions of the city of
East Moline, sections
7-1-6 through
7-1-9 of this code, governing such nuisances, including reimbursing the city of
East Moline for any costs incurred in removing, abating, or remedying said
nuisance.
   (D)   Contractor Listing: Users which have not achieved compliance with
applicable pretreatment standards and requirements are not eligible to receive
a contractual award for the sale of goods or services to the city of East
Moline. Existing contracts for the sale of goods or services to the city of
East Moline held by a user found to be in significant noncompliance with
pretreatment standards or requirements may be terminated at the discretion of
the superintendent. (Ord. 09-08, 4-20-2009)
8-9-12: AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSES TO DISCHARGE VIOLATIONS:
   (A)   Upset:
      1.   For the purposes of this subsection, "upset" means an exceptional
incident in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with
categorical pretreatment standards because of factors beyond the reasonable
control of the user. An upset does not include noncompliance to the extent
caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities,
inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or
improper operation.
      2.   An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action
brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards if the
requirements of subsection (A)3 of this section are met.
      3.   A user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset
shall demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs, or
other relevant evidence that:
         (a)   An upset occurred and the user can identify the cause(s) of the
upset;
         (b)   The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and
workmanlike manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance
procedures; and
         (c)   The user has submitted the following information to the
superintendent within twenty four (24) hours of becoming aware of the upset if
this information is provided orally, a written submission must be provided
within five (5) days:
            (1)   A description of the indirect discharge and cause of
noncompliance;
            (2)   The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times
or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to
continue; and
            (3)   Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate, and
prevent recurrence of the noncompliance.
      4.   In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to establish the
occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof.
      5.   Users will have the opportunity for a judicial determination on any
claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for noncompliance with
categorical pretreatment standards.
      6.   Users shall control production of all discharges to the extent
necessary to maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment standards upon
reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is
restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement
applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power
of the treatment facility is reduced, lost, or fails.
   (B)   Prohibited Discharge Standards: A user shall have an affirmative
defense to an enforcement action brought against it for noncompliance with the
general prohibitions in subsection
8-9-2(A)1 of this chapter or the specific prohibitions in subsections
8-9-2(A)2(c) through (A)2(g), and (A)2(i) through (A)2(r) of this chapter if it
can prove that it did not know, or have reason to know, that its discharge,
alone or in conjunction with discharges from other sources, would cause pass-
through or interference and that either:
      1.   A local limit exists for each pollutant discharged and the user was
in compliance with each limit directly prior to, and during, the pass-through
or interference; or
      2.   No local limit exists, but the discharge did not change
substantially in nature or constituents from the user's prior discharge when
the city of East Moline was regularly in compliance with its NPDES permit, and
in the case of interference, was in compliance with applicable sludge use or
disposal requirements.
   (C)   Bypass:
      1.   For the purposes of this subsection:
   BYPASS: The intentional diversion of waste streams from any portion of a
user's treatment facility.
   SEVERE PROPERTY DAMAGE: Substantial physical damage to property, damage to
the treatment facilities which causes them to become inoperable, or substantial
and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be expected to
occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe property damage does not mean economic
loss caused by delays in production.
      2.   A user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause
pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it also is
for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. These bypasses are not
subject to the provisions of subsections (C)3 and (C)4 of this section.
      3.   (a) If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall
submit prior notice to the superintendent, at least ten (10) days before the
date of the bypass, if possible.
         (b)   A user shall submit oral notice to the superintendent of an
unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards within
twenty four (24) hours from the time it becomes aware of the bypass. A written
submission shall also be provided within five (5) days of the time the user
becomes aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a description
of the bypass and its cause; the duration of the bypass, including exact dates
and times, and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it
is expected to continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and
prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. The superintendent may waive the written
report on a case by case basis if the oral report has been received within
twenty four (24) hours.
      4.   (a) Bypass is prohibited, and the superintendent may take an
enforcement action against a user for a bypass, unless:
            (1)   Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal
injury, or severe property damage;
            (2)   There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as
the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or
maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not
satisfied if adequate backup equipment should have been installed in the
exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred
during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventive maintenance; and
            (3)   The user submitted notices as required under subsection (C)3
of this section.
         (b)   The superintendent may approve an anticipated bypass, after
considering its adverse effects, if the superintendent determines that it will
meet the three (3) conditions listed in subsection (C)4(a) of this section.
(Ord. 09-08, 4-20-2009)
8-9-13: MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS:
   (A)   Pretreatment Charges And Fees: The city of East Moline may adopt
reasonable fees for reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the city
of East Moline's pretreatment program which may include:
      1.   Fees for wastewater discharge permit applications including the cost
of processing such applications;
      2.   Fees for monitoring, inspection, and surveillance procedures
including the cost of collection and analyzing a user's discharge, and
reviewing monitoring reports submitted by users;
      3.   Fees for reviewing and responding to accidental discharge procedures
and construction;
      4.   Fees for filing appeals; and
      5.   Other fees as the city of East Moline may deem necessary to carry
out the requirements contained herein. These fees relate solely to the matters
covered by this ordinance and are separate from all other fees, fines, and
penalties chargeable by the city of East Moline. (Ord. 09-08, 4-20-2009)
8-9-14: USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED:
   (A)   Unlawful Sewage And/Or Liquid Waste Disposal: It shall be unlawful for
any person, firm, or corporation to place, deposit or discharge, or allow to
place, deposit or discharge any untreated sewage, or other untreated liquid
waste in any unsanitary manner on any public or private property within the
city of East Moline.
   (B)   Grease Interceptors Required: All food and beverage establishments,
and similar establishments in which grease, fats, culinary oils or similar
waste products from kitchens or food processing areas, or in which grease, fats
or culinary oils are wasted in connection with utensil, vat, dish, or floor
cleaning processes shall install outdoor grease interceptors. All waste lines
carrying culinary oil, grease, or fats shall be separate from those carrying
sanitary waste. Grease interceptors are the only acceptable pretreatment method
for such removal of grease, fats, culinary oils of animal or vegetable origin
or other similar waste. The use of bacterial enzymes or other biological or
chemical additions is not an approved method. Grease interceptors shall be
maintained on a periodic basis, as directed by the health department, plumbing
inspector, or pretreatment coordinator.
   (C)   Connection To Public Sewer: All homes, buildings or properties
intended or used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes
located in the city of East Moline and abutting on any street, alley, right of
way, or easement in which there is now located a public sanitary sewer shall be
required to connect to such public sewer in accordance with the provisions of
this ordinance within ninety (90) days after official notice to do so, provided
that said public sewer is within two hundred feet (200') of the property line.
(Ord. 09-08, 4-20-2009)
8-9-15: PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL:
   (A)   Private Sewage Disposal: Where a public sanitary sewer is not
available under the provisions of section
8-9-14 of this chapter, the building shall be connected to a private sewage
disposal system complying with the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   Grease Interceptors Required: All food and beverage establishments,
and similar establishments in which grease, fats, culinary oils or similar
waste products from kitchens or food processing areas, or in which grease, fats
or culinary oils are wasted in connection with utensil, vat, dish, or floor
cleaning processes shall install outdoor grease interceptors. All waste lines
carrying culinary oil, grease, or fats shall be separate from those carrying
sanitary waste. Grease interceptors are the only acceptable pretreatment method
for such removal of grease, fats, culinary oils of animal or vegetable origin
or other similar waste. The use of bacterial enzymes or other biological or
chemical additions is not an approved method. Grease interceptors shall be
maintained on a periodic basis, as dictated by the health department, plumbing
inspector, or pretreatment coordinator.
   (C)   Permit Required: Before commencement of construction (or renovation)
of a private sewage disposal system, a permit shall be obtained from the East
Moline health (inspector) department, and after all necessary plans,
specifications or other necessary information is provided.
   (D)   Inspection Required: The East Moline health (inspector) department
shall be allowed to inspect the installation of any and all components of the
private sewage disposal system, and in any event the health (inspector)
department shall be notified when the installation is ready for final
inspection and before any underground portions are covered.
   (E)   Requirements: All requirements, including, but not limited to, types,
capacities, location and design of private sewage disposal system shall comply
with the private sewage disposal licensing act and code (Illinois department of
public health) 1986, and any subsequent revisions thereof.
   (F)   Public Sewer Availability: At such time as a public sewer becomes
available to a property serviced by a private sewage disposal system, a direct
connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with this ordinance,
and any septic tanks and similar private sewage disposal facilities shall be
properly abandoned as specified in the private sewage disposal licensing act
and code (subsection (E) of this section). (Ord. 09-08, 4-20-2009)
CHAPTER 10
SMOKING REGULATIONS
SECTION:
8-10-1: Prohibited
8-10-1: PROHIBITED:
No person shall smoke in the city hall building, city hall annex, water plant,
wastewater plant, fire department buildings, maintenance services garage
building, or any other building owned by the city, or within fifteen feet (15')
from entrances, exits, windows that open, and ventilation intakes that serve an
enclosed area where smoking is prohibited. In addition, no person shall smoke
in any city vehicle. (Ord. 07-22, 11-5-2007, eff. 1-1-2008)
CHAPTER 11
STREETS AND PAVEMENT REPLACEMENT
SECTION:
8-11-1: Permit Required
8-11-2: Application To City Engineering Department
8-11-3: Contractor's Bond
8-11-4: Fees Required
8-11-5: Traffic Control And Public Safety
8-11-6: Pavement Replacement By Private Utilities
8-11-7: Specifications
8-11-8: Supervision
8-11-9: Exemptions
8-11-10: Authority
8-11-11: Penalty
8-11-1: PERMIT REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful to construct, repair, or replace, any street pavement
over, across, or upon any public right of way, curb, or sidewalk or that enters
or connects with any public street without first having obtained a separate
paving permit from the Engineering Department (Building Inspection Department
for new building construction). Failure to obtain a permit prior to
commencement of the work shall result in a stop work order until the proper
permit is obtained. (Ord. 95-10, 4-3-1995)
8-11-2: APPLICATION TO CITY ENGINEERING DEPARTMENT:
Prior to any work commencing, applications for such permit shall be made to the
Engineering Department and shall set forth:
   (A)   The nature or purpose, and exact location of the work to be done.
   (B)   The date of application, time when the work will commence and the
expected duration of the use or occupancy of any public way or public place
described in the application.
   (C)   The names and addresses of the contractor and owner, and the signature
of the applicant.
   (D)   The fee required.
The permit shall constitute an agreement that the applicant will comply with
all provisions of this Code relating to the work to be done. (Ord. 95-10, 4-3-
1995)
8-11-3: CONTRACTOR'S BOND:
No person shall be issued a permit unless a general contractor's license and
Code compliance bond has been executed to the City with a certificate that said
bond is presently in full force and effect in the penal sum of five thousand
dollars ($5,000.00) with good and sufficient sureties to be approved by the
Director of Engineering Services and the City. (Ord. 95-10, 4-3-1995)
8-11-4: FEES REQUIRED:
   (A)   The fee required for all such construction permits shall be thirty
five dollars ($35.00) for streets and pavement replacement. The fee shall be
applicable to original construction and any widening or replacement.
   (B)   The fee for permit issued under a stop work order will be twice the
required fee for each permit. All fees and previous permits must be paid in
full before any permits will be issued. (Ord. 95-10, 4-3-1995)
8-11-5: TRAFFIC CONTROL AND PUBLIC SAFETY:
   (A)   Traffic control shall be in accordance with the applicable sections of
the Illinois Department of Transportation Standard for Road and Bridge
Construction, latest edition, and the applicable guidelines contained in the
Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways,
latest edition.
   (B)   The permit holder shall insure that the work is performed with minimal
inconvenience and safety hazard to the public. The permit holder shall provide,
erect, and maintain all barricades and signs necessary to protect the work and
the public.
   (C)   No street or alley may be closed or partially closed without the
permission of the Director of Engineering Services. Once permission is granted,
the contractor must notify the Police, Fire, and Engineering Departments twenty
four (24) hours in advance of commencing the work. The contractor must also
notify those Departments when the work is completed and the street or alley is
reopened.
   (D)   Fire hydrants, gutters, and storm inlets adjacent to the work may not
be obstructed without the permission of the Director of Engineering Services.
(Ord. 95-10, 4-3-1995)
8-11-6: PAVEMENT REPLACEMENT BY PRIVATE UTILITIES:
Private utility companies shall be responsible for backfilling, restoration,
pavement replacement, and safeguarding excavations made by the companies in
street rights of way, and also backfilling and safeguarding excavations made on
boulevards or other City property. Said companies shall be liable for the
maintenance of pavement replacement for a period of forty eight (48) months
after the date of acceptance by the City for said paving, and shall hold the
City harmless for all claims for damages that may result because of the
pavement replacement during said period. Pavement replacement shall be done in
accordance with specifications provided by the Director of Engineering
Services. The sinking or deterioration within the aforesaid period of months
shall be held to be the responsibility of the utility company, who shall upon
direction of the Director of Engineering Services re-excavate and properly
remove and replace said street cut. (Ord. 95-10, 4-3-1995)
8-11-7: SPECIFICATIONS:
   (A)   Pavements shall be constructed in accordance with specifications
adopted by the City Council. Standard specifications for the improvement shall
be maintained on file by the Director of Engineering Services and available to
the public.
   (B)   Work or material not conforming to the applicable specifications may
be rejected at any time within four (4) years after completion of the work,
even though inspected and accepted through oversight or otherwise. (Ord. 95-10,
4-3-1995)
8-11-8: SUPERVISION:
The Director of Engineering Services or his designated representative shall
from time to time inspect all pavement being made over, across, or upon any
public right of way, or other public place in the City to see to the
enforcement of the provisions of this Chapter. Notice shall be given to him at
least twenty four (24) hours in advance of any work to be done in order that
inspection may be provided. (Ord. 95-10, 4-3-1995)
8-11-9: EXEMPTIONS:
The provisions of this Code relative to securing permits shall not apply to
officers or employees of the City engaged in doing work for the City, nor to
persons or corporations which are operating under a franchise or grant from the
City if such franchise provides for the making of excavations and tunnels
without securing a permit therefor. This exemption pertains only to the
applications, permits, and fees, but not to the supervision, inspection and
standards prescribed by this Article or specifications. (Ord. 95-10, 4-3-1995)
8-11-10: AUTHORITY:
The Director of Engineering Services shall have authority and it shall be his
duty to exercise his judgement in the public interest, in the issuance of
pavement replacement permits, with respect to the size, location,
specifications and timing of construction or other qualifications affecting
same. (Ord. 95-10, 4-3-1995)
8-11-11: PENALTY:
Any person convicted of a violation of any section of this Ordinance shall be
subject to the provisions of Section
1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 95-10, 4-3-1995)
CHAPTER 12
STORM WATER CONTROL
SECTION:
8-12-1: Authority
8-12-2: Purposes
8-12-3: Abbreviations
8-12-4: Definitions
8-12-5: Prohibited Actions
8-12-6: Exemptions
8-12-7: Requirements For Certain Discharges
8-12-8: Inspections And Plan Modifications
8-12-9: Responsibility
8-12-10: Maintenance Of Drainage Facilities
8-12-11: Enforcement
8-12-12: Implementation
8-12-13: Variances And Appeals
8-12-14: General Requirements For All Construction Sites
8-12-15: Grading And Drainage Permits
8-12-16: Permit Exceptions
8-12-17: Submittal, Review, And Approval Of Permits
8-12-18: Other Agency Permits
8-12-19: Permit Limitations
8-12-20: Revocation Of Permits
8-12-21: Liability
8-12-22: Retention Of Plans
8-12-23: Postconstruction Runoff Control
8-12-24: Hydrologic Design Criteria For Class 2 Projects
8-12-25: Detention System Design Criteria
8-12-26: Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP)
8-12-27: Fees
8-12-1: AUTHORITY:
These regulations provide for the regulation of matters relative to the
management of storm water within the city of East Moline and its
extraterritorial jurisdiction. Its provisions include, but are not limited to,
regulating drainage installations and improvements, requiring the preservation
and enhancement of certain natural environmental features, requiring the
installation of drainage improvements in developments, regulating uses,
maintenance, and activities in floodplains and flood hazard areas, requiring
permits, payment of fees and assurances of completion, and providing for
inspections and control of work. The requirements, standards and specifications
herein provided are in addition to any other applicable legal requirements.
(Ord. 07-18, 10-15-2007)
8-12-2: PURPOSES:
   (A)   To maintain and improve the quality of water impacted by the storm
drainage system within the city of East Moline.
   (B)   To promote and protect the public health, safety and general welfare
of the citizens from the hazards of flooding.
   (C)   To preserve property values by protecting new and existing buildings
and improvements to buildings from damage due to storm water flow.
   (D)   To assure that new developments and redevelopments do not increase
flood or drainage hazards to others, or create unstable conditions susceptible
to erosion.
   (E)   To preserve the natural characteristics of stream corridors in order
to moderate flood and storm water impacts, and to protect water quality.
   (F)   To prevent the discharge of contaminated storm water runoff and
illicit discharges from industrial, commercial, residential, and construction
sites into the storm drainage system within the city of East Moline.
   (G)   To promote public awareness of the hazards involved in the improper
discharge of trash, yard waste, lawn chemicals, pet waste, wastewater, oil,
petroleum products, cleaning products, paint products, hazardous waste,
sediment and other pollutants into the storm drainage system.
   (H)   To encourage recycling of used motor oil and safe disposal of other
hazardous consumer products.
   (I)   To facilitate compliance with state and federal standards and permits
by owners of construction sites within the city of East Moline.
   (J)   To enable the city of East Moline to comply with all federal and state
laws and regulations applicable to the national pollutant discharge elimination
system (NPDES) permitting requirements for storm water discharges. (Ord. 07-18,
10-15-2007)
8-12-3: ABBREVIATIONS:
The following abbreviations when used in this chapter shall have the designated
meanings:
BMP    - best management practices
CFR    - code of federal regulations
FEMA   - federal emergency management agency
HHW    - household hazardous waste
IDPH   - Illinois department of public health
IL EPA - Illinois environmental protection agency
MS4    - municipal separate storm sewer system
NPDES  - national pollutant discharge elimination system
NRCS   - natural resources conservation service
RISWCD - Rock Island soil and water conservation district
SWPPP  - storm water pollution prevention plan
USDA   - U.S. department of agriculture
US EPA - U.S. environmental protection agency
 
(Ord. 07-18, 10-15-2007)
8-12-4: DEFINITIONS:
Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the following terms and
phrases, as used in this ordinance, shall have the meanings hereinafter
designated:
ADVERSE IMPACTS: Any negative impact on plant, soil, air or water resources
affecting their beneficial uses including recreation, aesthetics, aquatic
habitat, quality, and quantity.
APPLICANT: Any person, firm, or governmental agency who executes the necessary
forms to procure official approval of a development or permit to carry out
construction of a new development or redevelopment from the city of East
Moline.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION: The elevation at all locations delineating the level of
flooding resulting from the 100-year frequency flood event, which has a one
percent (1%) probability of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. The
"base flood elevation" at any location is defined in the city of East Moline
zoning or floodplain ordinance.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs): Refers to management practices and methods to
control pollutants in storm water. BMPs are of two (2) types: "source controls"
(nonstructural) and "treatment controls" (structural). Source controls are
practices that prevent pollution by reducing potential pollutants at their
source, before they come into contact with storm water. Treatment controls
remove pollutants from storm water. The selection, application and maintenance
of BMPs must be sufficient to prevent or reduce the likelihood of pollutants
entering the storm drainage system. Specific BMPs may be imposed by the city of
East Moline and are discussed further in section
8-12-23 of this chapter.
BUILDING OFFICIAL: The officer or other designated authority charged with the
administration and enforcement of the international building code for the city
of East Moline.
BUILDING PERMIT: A permit issued by the city of East Moline, for the
construction, erection or alteration of a structure or building and the related
ground and surface preparation prior to and after completion of construction,
erection or alteration of a structure or building.
BYPASS FLOWS: Storm water runoff from upstream properties tributary to a
property's drainage system but not under its control.
CERTIFY OR CERTIFICATION: Formally attesting that the specific inspections and
tests were performed, and that such inspections and tests comply with the
applicable requirements of this ordinance.
CHANNEL: Any defined river, stream, creek, brook, natural or artificial
depression, ponded area, on stream lake or impoundment, abandoned mine,
flowage, slough, ditch, conduit, culvert, gully, ravine, wash, or natural or
manmade drainageway, which has a definite bed and bank or shoreline, in or into
which surface or ground water flows, either perennially or intermittently.
CHANNEL MODIFICATION: The alteration of a channel by changing the physical
dimensions or materials of its bed or banks. Channel modification includes
damming, riprapping (or other armoring), filling, widening, deepening,
straightening, relocating, lining, and significant removal of bottom or woody
rooted vegetation. Channel modification does not include the manmade clearing
of debris or removal of trash.
CLEARING: Any activity, which removes the natural vegetative ground cover.
COMMERCIAL: Pertaining to any business, trade, industry, or other activity
engaged in for profit.
COMPENSATORY STORAGE: An artificially excavated, hydraulically equivalent
volume of storage within the floodplain used to balance the loss of natural
flood storage capacity when fill or structures are placed within the
floodplain.
CONDUIT: Any channel, pipe, sewer or culvert used for the conveyance or
movement of water, whether open or closed.
CONSTRUCTION SITE: Any location where clearing, grading, filling, etc.,
activity occurs.
CONTAMINATED: Containing harmful quantities of pollutants.
CONTRACTOR: Any person or firm performing or managing construction work at a
construction site, including any construction manager, general contractor or
subcontractor. Also includes, but is not limited to, earthwork, paving,
building, plumbing, mechanical, electrical or landscaping contractors, and
material suppliers delivering materials to the site.
COUNTY: The county of Rock Island, Illinois.
DAM: As defined by the Illinois department of natural resources office of water
resources.
DETENTION BASIN: A facility constructed or modified to provide for the
temporary storage of storm water runoff and the controlled release by gravity
of this runoff at a prescribed rate during and after a flood or storm.
DETENTION TIME: The amount of time storm water is held within a detention
basin.
DEVELOPMENT: Any manmade change to real estate or property, including:
   (A)   The division or subdivision of any duly recorded parcel of property.
   (B)   Construction, reconstruction or placement of a building or any
addition to a building valued at more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00).
   (C)   Installation of a manufactured home on a site, preparing a site for a
manufactured home, or installing a travel trailer on a site for more than one
hundred eighty (180) days per year.
   (D)   Construction of roads, bridges, or similar projects.
   (E)   Redevelopment of a site.
   (F)   Filling, dredging, grading, clearing, excavating, paving, drilling,
mining or other nonagricultural alterations of a ground surface.
   (G)   Storage of materials or deposit of solid or liquid waste.
   (H)   Any other activity that might alter the magnitude, frequency,
direction, or velocity of storm water flows from a property.
DIRECTOR OF ENGINEERING: The director of engineering for the city of East
Moline or his/her designee.
DISCHARGE: Any addition or release of any pollutant, storm water or any other
substance whatsoever into a storm drainage system.
DISCHARGER: Any person who causes, allows, permits, or is otherwise responsible
for, a discharge, including, without limitation, any owner of a construction
site or industrial facility.
DOMESTIC SEWAGE: Sewage originating primarily from kitchen, bathroom and
laundry sources, including waste from food preparation, dishwashing, garbage
grinding, toilets, baths, showers and sinks.
DRAINAGE PLAN: A plan, including engineering drawings and supporting
calculations, which describes the existing storm water drainage system and
environmental features, including grading, as well as proposed alterations or
changes to the drainage system and environment of a property.
DRY BASIN: A detention basin designed to drain after temporary storage of storm
water flows and to normally be dry over much of its bottom area.
EARTHWORK: The disturbance of soils on a site associated with clearing,
grading, or excavation activities.
EROSION: The general process whereby soil or earth is moved by rainfall,
flowing water, wind or wave action.
EXCAVATION: Any act by which organic matter, earth, sand, gravel, rock or any
other similar material, is cut into, dug, quarried, uncovered, removed,
displaced, relocated or bulldozed and shall include the conditions resulting
from such actions.
EXCESS STORM WATER RUNOFF: The volume and rate of flow of storm water
discharged from a new development or redevelopment which is or will be in
excess of that volume and rate which existed before development or
redevelopment.
EXISTING GRADE: The vertical location of the existing ground surface prior to
excavation or filling.
FACILITY: Any building, structure, installation, process, or activity from
which there is or may be a discharge of a pollutant.
FERTILIZER: A substance or compound that contains an essential plant nutrient
element in a form available to plants and is used primarily for its essential
plant nutrient element content in promoting or stimulating growth of a plant or
improving the quality of a crop, or a mixture of two (2) or more fertilizers.
FILL: Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock, or any other material, is
deposited, placed, replaced, pushed, dumped, pulled, transported or moved by
man to a new location and shall include the conditions resulting therefrom.
FINAL GRADE: The vertical location of the ground surface after grading work is
completed in accordance with the plans.
FIRE PROTECTION WATER: Any water, and any substances or materials contained
therein, used by any person to control or extinguish a fire, or to inspect or
test fire equipment.
GARBAGE: Putrescible animal and vegetable waste materials from the handling,
preparation, cooking, or consumption of food, including waste materials from
markets, storage facilities, and the handling and sale of produce and other
food products.
GRADING: The excavation or fill or any combination thereof and shall include
the conditions resulting from any excavation or fill.
GROUND WATER: Any water residing below the surface of the ground or percolating
into or out of the ground.
HARMFUL QUANTITY: The amount of any substance that the director of engineering
determines will cause an adverse impact to a storm drainage system or will
contribute towards the failure of the city of East Moline to meet the water
quality based requirements of the NPDES permit for discharges from the MS4.
HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE: Any substance listed in table 302.4 of 40 CFR part 302.
HAZARDOUS WASTE: Any substance identified or listed as a hazardous waste by the
EPA pursuant to 40 CFR part 261.
HOUSEHOLD HAZARDOUS WASTE (HHW): Any material generated in a household
(including single and multiple residences) that would be classified as
hazardous pursuant to the Illinois EPA.
HYDROGRAPH: A graph showing for a given location on a stream or conduit, the
flow rate with respect to time.
HYDROGRAPH METHOD: This method estimates runoff volume and runoff hydrographs
for the point of interest by generating hydrographs for individual subareas,
combining them, and routing them through stream lengths and reservoir
structures. Factors such as rainfall amount and distribution, runoff curve
number, time of concentration, and travel time are included.
ILLEGAL DISCHARGE: See definition of Illicit Discharge.
ILLICIT CONNECTION: Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or
subsurface, which allows an illicit discharge to enter the storm drainage
system.
ILLICIT DISCHARGE: Any discharge to the storm drainage system that is
prohibited under this ordinance.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE: That area of property that is covered by materials other
than soil and vegetation and that has no intended capacity to absorb storm
water, such as parking lots, roadways, driveways, sidewalks, patios, tennis
courts, roofs and other structures.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE (OR COMMERCIAL WASTE): Any wastes produced as a byproduct of
any industrial, institutional or commercial process or operation, other than
domestic sewage.
INFILTRATION: The passage or movement of water into the soil surfaces.
JURISDICTION: The city of East Moline.
LOESSIAL SOIL: A sediment, commonly nonstratified and unconsolidated, composed
predominately of silt sized particles with accessory clay and sand.
LOT: An individual platted parcel in an approved subdivision.
MAJOR DRAINAGE SYSTEM: That portion of a drainage system needed to store and
convey flows beyond the capacity of the minor drainage system.
MECHANICAL FLUID: Any fluid used in the operation and maintenance of machinery,
vehicles and any other equipment, including lubricants, antifreeze, petroleum
products, oil and fuel.
MINOR DRAINAGE SYSTEM: That portion of a drainage system designed for the
convenience of the public. It consists of street gutters, storm sewers, small
open channels, and swales and, where manmade, is to be designed to handle the
10-year runoff event.
MITIGATION: When the prescribed controls are not sufficient and additional
measures are required to offset the development, including those measures
necessary to minimize the negative effects which storm water drainage and
development activities might have on the public health, safety and welfare.
Examples of mitigation include, but are not limited to, compensatory storage,
soil erosion and sedimentation control, and channel restoration.
MOBILE COMMERCIAL COSMETIC CLEANING (OR MOBILE WASHING): Power washing, steam
cleaning, and any other method of mobile cosmetic cleaning, of vehicles and/or
exterior surfaces, engaged in for commercial purposes or related to a
commercial activity.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4): The system of conveyances,
including roads, streets, curbs, gutters, ditches, inlets, drains, catch
basins, pipes, tunnels, culverts, channels, detention basins and ponds owned
and operated by the city of East Moline and designed or used for collecting or
conveying storm water, and not used for collecting or conveying sanitary
sewage.
NPDES: The national pollutant discharge elimination system.
NPDES PERMIT: A permit issued by the EPA that authorizes the discharge of
pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on
an individual, group, or general areawide basis.
NATURAL: Conditions resulting from physical, chemical, and biological processes
without intervention by man.
NATURAL DRAINAGE: Channels formed in the existing surface topography of the
earth prior to changes made by unnatural causes.
NOTICE OF VIOLATION: A written notice detailing any violations of this
ordinance and any action expected of the violators.
OIL: Any kind of oil in any form, including, but not limited to: petroleum,
fuel oil, crude oil, synthetic oil, motor oil, cooking oil, grease, sludge, oil
refuse, and oil mixed with waste.
100-YEAR EVENT: A rainfall, runoff, or flood event having a one percent (1%)
probability of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. A twenty four (24)
hour storm duration is assumed unless otherwise noted.
1-YEAR EVENT: A rainfall, runoff, or flood event having a one hundred percent
(100%) probability of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. A twenty
four (24) hour storm duration is assumed unless otherwise noted.
OWNER: The person who owns a facility, part of a facility, or land including
the contract seller and contract purchaser.
PARCEL: A contiguous lot or tract of land under one ownership. A lot or tract
of land is land intended as a unit for the purpose of development or transfer
of ownership.
PEAK FLOW: The maximum rate of flow of water at a given point in a channel or
conduit.
PERMITTEE: Any person to whom a building permit or a grading and drainage
permit is issued.
PERSON: Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, corporation,
association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity, or any
other legal entity; or their legal representatives, agents, or assigns,
including all federal, state, and local governmental entities.
PESTICIDE: A substance or mixture of substances intended to prevent, destroy,
repel, or migrate any pest.
PET WASTE (OR ANIMAL WASTE): Excrement and other waste from domestic animals.
PETROLEUM PRODUCT: A product that is obtained from distilling and processing
crude oil and that is capable of being used as a fuel or lubricant in a motor
vehicle or aircraft, including motor oil, motor gasoline, gasohol, other
alcohol blended fuels, aviation gasoline, kerosene, distillate fuel oil, and #1
and #2 diesel.
POLLUTANT: Any substance attributable to water pollution, including, but not
limited to, rubbish, garbage, solid waste, litter, debris, yard waste,
pesticides, herbicides, fertilizers, pet waste, animal waste, domestic sewage,
industrial waste, sanitary sewage, wastewater, septic tank waste, mechanical
fluid, oil, motor oil, used oil, grease, petroleum products, antifreeze,
surfactants, solvents, detergents, cleaning agents, paint, heavy metals,
toxins, household hazardous waste, small quantity generator waste, hazardous
substances, hazardous waste, soil and sediment.
POLLUTION: The alteration of the physical, thermal, chemical, or biological
quality of, or the contamination of, any water that renders the water harmful,
detrimental, or injurious to humans, animal life, plant life, property, or
public health, safety, or welfare, or impairs the usefulness or the public
enjoyment of the water for any lawful or reasonable purpose.
POSITIVE DRAINAGE: Provision for overland paths for all areas of a property
including depressional areas that may also be drained by storm sewer.
POTABLE WATER: Water that has been treated to drinking water standards and is
safe for human consumption.
PRIVATE DRAINAGE SYSTEM: All privately or publicly owned ground, surfaces,
structures or systems, excluding the MS4, that contribute to or convey storm
water, including, but not limited to, roofs, gutters, downspouts, lawns,
driveways, pavement, roads, streets, curbs, gutters, ditches, inlets, drains,
catch basins, pipes, tunnels, culverts, channels, detention basins, ponds,
draws, swales, streams and any ground surface.
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT PLANS: Engineering drawings subject to approval by the
director of engineering for the construction of public improvements.
QUALIFIED PERSON: A person who possesses the required certification, license,
or appropriate competence, skills, and ability as demonstrated by sufficient
education, training, and/or experience to perform a specific activity in a
timely and complete manner consistent with the regulatory requirements and
generally accepted industry standards for such activity.
RELEASE: To dump, spill, leak, pump, pour, emit, empty, inject, leach, dispose
or otherwise introduce into the storm drainage system.
RUBBISH: Nonputrescible solid waste, excluding ashes, that consist of: a)
combustible waste materials, including paper, rags, cartons, wood, excelsior,
furniture, rubber, plastics, yard trimmings, leaves, and similar materials; and
b) noncombustible waste materials, including glass, crockery, tin cans,
aluminum cans, metal furniture, and similar materials that do not burn at
ordinary incinerator temperatures (1600 to 1800 degrees Fahrenheit).
SANITARY SEWAGE: The domestic sewage and/or industrial waste that is discharged
into the city of East Moline jurisdiction sanitary sewer system and passes
through the sanitary sewer system to the city of East Moline sewage treatment
plant for treatment.
SANITARY SEWER: The system of pipes, conduits, and other conveyances which
carry industrial waste and domestic sewage from residential dwellings,
commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing facilities, and
institutions, whether treated or untreated, to the city of East Moline sewage
treatment plant (and to which storm water, surface water, and ground water are
not intentionally admitted).
SEDIMENT: Soil (or mud) that has been disturbed or eroded and transported
naturally by water, wind, gravity, or equipment tracking (tires, vehicles).
SEDIMENTATION: The process that deposits soils, debris, and other materials
either on other ground surfaces or in bodies of water or storm water drainage
systems.
SEPTIC TANK WASTE: Any domestic sewage from holding tanks such as vessels,
chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks and aerated tanks.
SHALL: Means mandatory; may means discretionary.
SITE: The land or water area where any facility or activity is physically
located or conducted, including adjacent land used in connection with the
facility or activity.
SLOPE DISTURBANCE LINE: The line which delineates relatively level building
areas from areas where slopes exceed seven percent (7%) and where special
precautions must be taken.
SMALL QUANTITY GENERATOR WASTE: Any hazardous waste generated by a small
quantity generator as defined by IL EPA.
SOLID WASTE: Any garbage, rubbish, refuse and other discarded material,
including solid, liquid, semisolid, or contained gaseous material, resulting
from industrial, municipal, commercial, construction, mining or agricultural
operations, and residential, community and institutional activities.
STATE: The state of Illinois.
STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM: All surfaces, structures and systems that contribute to
or convey storm water, including private drainage systems, the MS4, surface
water, ground water, waters of the state and waters of the United States.
STORM SEWER: A closed conduit for conveying collected storm water.
STORM WATER: Runoff resulting from precipitation.
STORM WATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (SWPPP): A document that describes the
best management practices to be implemented at a site, to prevent or reduce the
discharge of pollutants.
STREAM: Any river, creek, brook, branch, flowage, ravine, or natural or manmade
drainageway which has a definite bed and banks or shoreline, in or into which
surface or ground water flows, either perennially or intermittently.
STRIPPING: Any activity which removes the vegetative surface cover including
tree removal, by spraying or clearing, and storage or removal of topsoil.
SUBDIVISION DEVELOPMENT: Includes activities associated with the platting of
any parcel of land into two (2) or more lots and includes all construction
activity taking place thereon.
SURFACE WATER: Water bodies and any water temporarily residing on the surface
of the ground, including oceans, lakes, reservoirs, rivers, ponds, streams,
puddles, channelized flow and runoff.
10-YEAR EVENT: A runoff, rainfall, or flood event having a ten percent (10%)
probability of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. A twenty four (24)
hour storm duration is assumed unless otherwise noted.
TIME OF CONCENTRATION: The elapsed time for storm water to flow from the most
hydraulically remote point in a drainage basin to a particular point of
interest in that watershed.
TRIBUTARY WATERSHED: All of the land surface area that contributes runoff to a
given point.
2-YEAR EVENT: A runoff, rainfall, or flood event having two percent (2%)
probability of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. A twenty four (24)
hour storm duration is assumed unless otherwise noted.
UNCONTAMINATED: Not containing harmful quantities of pollutants.
USED OIL (OR USED MOTOR OIL): Any oil that as a result of use, storage, or
handling, has become unsuitable for its original purpose because of impurities
or the loss of original properties.
UTILITY AGENCY: Private utility companies, the city of East Moline or
contractors working for private utility companies or the city of East Moline,
engaged in the construction or maintenance of utility distribution lines and
services, including water, sanitary sewer, storm sewer, electric, gas,
telephone, television and communication services.
VACANT: Land on which there are no structures or only structures which are
secondary to the use or maintenance of the land itself.
WASTEWATER: Any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated storm water,
discharged from a facility.
WATER OF THE STATE (OR WATER): Any ground water, percolating or otherwise,
lakes, bays, ponds, impounding reservoirs, springs, rivers, streams, creeks,
estuaries, marshes, inlets, canals, inside the territorial limits of the state,
and all other bodies of surface water, natural or artificial, navigable or
nonnavigable, and including the beds and banks of all watercourses and bodies
of surface water, that are wholly or partially inside or bordering the state or
inside the jurisdiction of the state.
WATER QUALITY STANDARD: The designation of a body or segment of surface water
in the state for desirable uses and the narrative and numerical criteria deemed
by state or federal regulatory standards to be necessary to protect those uses.
WATERS OF THE UNITED STATES: All waters which are currently used, were used in
the past, or may be susceptible to use in interstate or foreign commerce,
including all waters which are subject to the ebb and the flow of the tide; all
interstate waters, including interstate wetlands; all other waters the use,
degradation, or destruction of which would affect or could affect interstate or
foreign commerce; all impoundments of waters otherwise defined as "waters of
the United States" under this definition; all tributaries of waters identified
in this definition; all wetlands adjacent to waters identified in this
definition; and any waters within the federal definition of "waters of the
United States" at 40 CFR section 122.2; but not including any waste treatment
systems, treatment ponds, or lagoons designed to meet the requirements of the
federal clean water act.
WATERSHED: All land area drained by, or contributing water to, the same
channel, lake, marsh, storm water facility, ground water or depressional area.
WET BASIN: A detention basin designed to maintain a permanent pool of water
after the temporary storage of storm water runoff.
WETLANDS: Defined by regulation as "those areas that are inundated or saturated
by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support,
and under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically
adapted for life in saturated soil conditions". Wetlands generally include
swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas.
For general, but not inclusive locations of designated wetlands refer to
mapping prepared jointly by the U.S. department of interior, fish and wildlife
service and the Illinois department of natural resources, office of resource
conservation; national wetlands inventory mapping, 1987. More specific wetland
information is published in the Rock River wetlands special area management
plan, by the bi-state regional commission in cooperation with the natural
resources conservation service (NRCS), the U.S. fish and wildlife service and
the U.S. army corps of engineers. The applicant may be required to provide a
field investigation by a qualified wetland delineator.
YARD WASTE: Leaves, grass clippings, tree limbs, brush, soil, rocks or debris
that result from landscaping, gardening, yard maintenance or land clearing
operations. (Ord. 07-18, 10-15-2007)
8-12-5: PROHIBITED ACTIONS:
   (A)   No person shall release or cause to be released into the storm
drainage system any discharge that is not composed entirely of uncontaminated
storm water, except as allowed in the listed exemptions of this chapter. Common
prohibited storm water contaminants include trash, yard waste, stones, earth,
concrete, wood, lawn chemicals, pet waste, wastewater, oil, petroleum products,
cleaning products, paint products, hazardous waste, and sediment.
   (B)   Notwithstanding the listed exemptions of this chapter, any discharge
shall be prohibited by this section if the discharge in question has been
determined by the director of engineering to be a source of pollutants to the
storm drainage system.
   (C)   The construction, use, maintenance, or continued existence of illicit
connections to the storm drainage system, are prohibited. This prohibition
expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made in the past,
regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices
applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. It is the intention of the
city council that this section shall apply retroactively.
   (D)   No person shall connect a line conveying sanitary sewage, domestic
sewage or industrial waste, to the storm drainage system, or allow such a
connection to or be made to continue.
   (E)   Surface water shall be allowed to travel its natural or preregulation
course unless changes are allowed by means of a drainage permit or drainage
plans approved by the director of engineering. It shall be unlawful for any
person to force surface water off that person's property and onto a neighboring
property or to prevent surface water which would have entered that person's
property from doing so without approval granted by a drainage permit.
   (F)   No buildings or permanent structures, including impervious surfaces,
may be placed wholly or in part within an easement that has been granted for
access to drainage facilities of any type, including agricultural drainage
conduit, without the written approval of the director of engineering; provided,
however, streets, sidewalks and driveways may be allowed to cross easements by
the shortest possible route, provided that the purpose of the easement is
maintained and all other requirements are met.
   (G)   It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or maintain any
obstruction within a watercourse or drainage facility of any type, except as
may be specifically authorized by this chapter.
   (H)   No person shall interfere with BMPs implemented pursuant to this
chapter.
   (I)   No owner or occupant of property abutting a public right of way, or
any other person acting as agent for either, shall discharge water originating
from sumps, sump pits, sump pumps, footing drains, or any other reservoir
serving as a drain or receptacle for water onto a street, alley, or other
public right of way so as to cause a hazardous accumulation of water or ice
upon said right of way. It should be noted that many areas in and around the
city of East Moline have a high ground water table which may necessitate
routine pumping from a sump pit or other similar dewatering facility. To ensure
sump pump discharge does not create a hazardous condition in a public right of
way, it is recommended that owners and/or developers direct such discharges
toward the rear of structures away from the right of way, assuming that said
discharge can be adequately and safely conveyed by either surface flow or by
connection to a private collector drainpipe that is provided specifically for
this purpose and maintained by a homeowners' association. (Ord. 07-18, 10-15-
2007)
8-12-6: EXEMPTIONS:
The following discharges are exempt from the regulations in this chapter:
   (A)   Water line and fire hydrant flushing;
   (B)   Landscape irrigation;
   (C)   Rising ground waters;
   (D)   Uncontaminated ground water infiltration;
   (E)   Uncontaminated pumped ground water;
   (F)   Discharges from potable water sources;
   (G)   Foundation drains;
   (H)   Air conditioning condensate;
   (I)   Irrigation water (except for wastewater irrigation);
   (J)   Springs;
   (K)   Water from crawl space pumps;
   (L)   Sump and footing drains (with adherence to subsection
8-12-5(I) of this chapter);
   (M)   Storm sewer cleaning;
   (N)   Water from private, noncommercial car washing on properties zoned
residential;
   (O)   Routine external building wash down which does not use detergents;
   (P)   Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands;
   (Q)   Dechlorinated pH neutral swimming pool discharges;
   (R)   Residual street wash water;
   (S)   Discharges or flows from firefighting activities;
   (T)   Dechlorinated water reservoir discharges; and
   (U)   Pavement wash waters where spills or leaks of toxic or hazardous
materials have not occurred (unless all spilled material has been removed) and
which do not use detergents. (Ord. 07-18, 10-15-2007)
8-12-7: REQUIREMENTS FOR CERTAIN DISCHARGES:
   (A)   Private Drainage System Maintenance: The owner of any private drainage
system shall maintain the system to prevent or reduce the discharge of
pollutants. This maintenance shall include, but is not limited to, sediment
removal, bank erosion repairs, maintenance of vegetative cover, and removal of
debris from pipes and structures.
   (B)   Minimization Of Irrigation Runoff: Irrigation systems shall be managed
to reduce the discharge of water from a site.
   (C)   Cleaning Of Paved Surfaces Required: The owner of any paved parking
lot, street or drive shall clean the pavement as required to prevent the
buildup and discharge of pollutants. The visible buildup of mechanical fluid,
waste materials, sediment or debris is a violation of this ordinance. Paved
surfaces shall be cleaned by dry sweeping, wet vacuum sweeping, collection and
treatment of wash water or other methods in compliance with this ordinance.
This section does not apply to pollutants discharged from construction
activities, which are otherwise specified.
   (D)   Mobile Commercial Cosmetic Cleaning Operations: Mobile commercial
cosmetic cleaning operations shall not discharge to the storm drainage system
in violation of this ordinance.
   (E)   Maintenance Of Equipment: Any leak or spill related to equipment
maintenance in an outdoor, uncovered area shall be contained to prevent the
potential release of pollutants. Vehicles, machinery and equipment must be
maintained to reduce leaking fluids.
   (F)   Materials Storage: In addition to other requirements of this
ordinance, materials shall be stored to prevent the potential release of
pollutants. The uncovered, outdoor storage of unsealed containers of hazardous
substances is prohibited.
   (G)   Pet Waste: Pet waste shall be disposed of as solid waste or sanitary
sewage in a timely manner, to prevent discharge to the storm drainage system.
   (H)   Pesticides, Herbicides And Fertilizers: Pesticides, herbicides and
fertilizers shall be applied in accordance with manufacturer recommendations
and applicable laws. Excessive application shall be avoided.
   (I)   Prohibition On Use Of Pesticides And Fungicides Banned From
Manufacture: Use of any pesticide, herbicide or fungicide, the manufacture of
which has been either voluntarily discontinued or prohibited by the U.S.
environmental protection agency, or any federal, state or local jurisdiction.
   (J)   Open Drainage Channel Maintenance: Every person owning or occupying
property through which an open drainage channel passes shall keep and maintain
that part of the drainage channel within the property free of trash, debris,
excessive vegetation, and other obstacles that would pollute, contaminate, or
retard the flow of water through the drainage channel. In addition, the owner
or occupant shall maintain existing privately owned structures adjacent to a
drainage channel, so that such structures will not become a hazard to the use,
function, or physical integrity of the drainage channel.
   (K)   Release Reporting And Cleanup: Any person responsible for a known or
suspected release of materials which are resulting in or may result in illegal
discharges to the storm drainage system shall take all necessary steps to
ensure the discovery, containment, abatement and cleanup of such release. In
the event of such a release of a hazardous material, said person shall comply
with all state, federal, and local laws requiring reporting, cleanup,
containment, and any other appropriate remedial action in response to the
release. In the event of such a release of nonhazardous materials, said person
shall notify the director of engineering no later than the close of the next
business day.
   (L)   Authorization To Adopt And Impose Best Management Practices: The city
of East Moline may adopt and impose requirements identifying best management
practices (BMPs) for any activity, operation, or facility, which may cause a
discharge of pollutants to the storm drainage system. Where specific BMPs are
required, every person undertaking such activity or operation, or owning or
operating such facility shall implement and maintain these BMPs at their own
expense. (Ord. 07-18, 10-15-2007)
8-12-8: INSPECTIONS AND PLAN MODIFICATIONS:
   (A)   Inspections: The city of East Moline shall make inspections as
required and shall notify the grading and drainage permit holder in the event
that the work fails to comply with the requirements of this ordinance. The
notification of any deficiencies in the work or violations of this ordinance
shall be posted at the site and mailed to the owner of the site by ordinary
mail.
The owner of the site shall notify the director of engineering:
      1.   Two (2) working days prior to the start of any land disturbing
activities,
      2.   Upon completion of installation of sediment and runoff control
measures (including perimeter controls and diversions), and
      3.   After final stabilization and landscaping and prior to removal of
temporary sediment controls.
   (B)   Special Precautions: If at any stage of the grading of any development
site the city of East Moline determines by inspection that the nature of the
site is such that further work authorized by an existing permit is likely to
imperil any property, public way, stream, lake, wetland, or drainage structure,
the city of East Moline shall require, as a condition of allowing the work to
be done, that such reasonable special precautions to be taken as is considered
advisable to avoid the likelihood of such peril. "Special precautions" may
include, but shall not be limited to, a more level exposed slope, construction
of additional drainage facilities, berms, terracing, compaction, cribbing,
installation of plant materials for erosion control, and recommendations of a
certified professional in erosion and sediment control or a professional
engineer, which may be made requirements for further work.
Where it appears that storm damage may result because the grading on any
development site is not complete, work shall be stopped and the grading and
drainage permit holder is required to install temporary structures or take such
other measures as may be required to protect adjoining property or the public
safety. On large developments or where unusual site conditions prevail, the
director of engineering shall specify the time of starting grading and time of
completion or may require that the operations be conducted in specific stages
so as to ensure completion of protective measures or devices prior to the
advent of seasonal rains.
   (C)   Amendment Of Plans: Major amendments to storm water drainage and
detention or grading and drainage plans shall be submitted to the director of
engineering and shall be processed and approved or disapproved in the same
manner as the original plans. Field modification of a minor nature may be
authorized and documented by the director of engineering. (Ord. 07-18, 10-15-
2007)
8-12-9: RESPONSIBILITY:
   (A)   Applicant: The applicant for a grading and drainage permit shall not
be relieved of responsibility for damage to persons or property otherwise
imposed by law.
   (B)   Jurisdiction: The city of East Moline or its officers or agents, will
not be made liable for such damage by: 1) the issuance of a grading and
drainage permit under this ordinance, 2) compliance with the provisions of that
grading and drainage permit or conditions attached to it by the director of
engineering, 3) failure of the city of East Moline to observe or recognize
hazardous or unsightly conditions, 4) failure of the city of East Moline
officials to recommend denial or to deny a grading and drainage permit, or 5)
exemptions from grading and drainage permit requirements of this ordinance.
(Ord. 07-18, 10-15-2007)
8-12-10: MAINTENANCE OF DRAINAGE FACILITIES:
The city of East Moline will maintain those drainage facilities that are on
public land and have been dedicated and accepted for maintenance or stipulated
by agreement for maintenance by the city of East Moline. All other drainage
facilities, when located on other than public property, shall be the
responsibility of the owner of the property on which they exist or the owner of
the drainage facility, regardless of whether or not dedicated easements exist
over said facilities.
The responsible party shall at all times properly operate and maintain all
facilities and systems of treatment and control (and related appurtenances)
which are installed to achieve compliance with conditions of this permit.
Proper operation and maintenance includes effective performance, adequate
funding, adequate operator staffing and training, and appropriate quality
assurance procedures. Abandonment and alteration, either structural or
operational, of all facilities and systems shall occur only following
application and issuance of a permit. (Ord. 07-18, 10-15-2007)
8-12-11: ENFORCEMENT:
   (A)   Right Of Entry And Sampling:
      1.   Whenever the appropriate official has cause to believe that there
exists, or potentially exists, in or upon any premises any condition which
constitutes a violation of this ordinance, the appropriate official shall have
the right to enter the premises at any reasonable time to determine if the
discharger is complying with all requirements of this section. In the event
that the owner or occupant refuses entry after a request to enter has been
made, the city attorney is hereby empowered to seek assistance from a court of
competent jurisdiction in obtaining such entry.
      2.   The appropriate official shall have the right to set up on the
property of any discharger to the storm drainage system such devices that are
necessary to conduct sampling of discharges.
   (B)   Notice Of Violation: Whenever an authorized enforcement person
determines that a person has violated or failed to meet a requirement of this
ordinance, the enforcement person will order compliance by written notice of
violation to the responsible person. Posting the written notice on the property
will constitute written notice. Whenever possible, a copy of the notice of
violation will be mailed by ordinary mail or e-mail when an address has been
provided through appropriate permitting procedures.
The notice of violation shall include:
      1.   The name of the responsible person or property owner.
      2.   The date and location of the violation.
      3.   A description of the violation.
      4.   Actions that must be taken by the responsible person to remedy the
violation.
      5.   The deadline within which the required actions must be completed.
      6.   Enforcement actions that may be taken by the city attorney.
      7.   Notice date.
      8.   Any person receiving a notice of violation may file a written appeal
of the notice to the director of engineering within fifteen (15) days of the
notice date. The director of engineering will affirm, modify or rescind the
notice in writing, within fifteen (15) days of the date of the appeal. If the
recipient of a notice of violation is dissatisfied with the outcome of the
appeal to the director of engineering, the appeal process outlined in section
8-12-13 of this chapter will be followed.
   (C)   Enforcement Action Without Prior Notice: Any person who violates or
fails to meet a requirement of this ordinance will be subject, without prior
notice, to one or more of the enforcement actions identified in this ordinance
when attempts to contact the person have failed and the enforcement actions are
necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may
present imminent danger to the environment or to the health or welfare of
persons or to the storm drainage system.
   (D)   Enforcement Actions: Any person who fails to comply with or appeal a
notice of violation, or fails to comply with an appeal decision of the director
of engineering, will be subject to one or more of the following enforcement
actions:
      1.   Stop Work Order: The director of engineering may issue a stop work
order to the owner and contractors on a construction site, by posting the order
at the construction site and distributing the order to all city of East Moline
departments whose decisions may affect any activity at the site. Unless express
written exception is made, the stop work order shall prohibit any further
construction activity at the site and shall bar any further inspection or
approval necessary to commence or continue construction or to assume occupancy
at the site. A notice of violation shall accompany the stop work order, and
shall define the compliance requirements.
      2.   Abatement Of An Illicit Connection: The director of engineering may
terminate an illicit connection. Any expense related to such abatement shall be
fully reimbursed by the property owner.
      3.   Abatement Of A Violation On Private Property: When a property owner
is not available, not able or not willing to correct a violation, the director
of engineering may enter private property to take any and all measures
necessary to abate the violation. It shall be unlawful for any person, owner,
agent or person in possession of any premises to refuse to allow the director
of engineering to enter upon the premises for these purposes. Any expense
related to such abatement shall be fully reimbursed by the property owner.
      4.   Recovery Of Costs: Within thirty (30) days after abatement by the
director of engineering, the director of engineering shall notify the property
owner of the costs of abatement, including administrative costs, and the
deadline for payment. The property owner may appeal the recovery costs as
outlined in section
8-12-13 of this chapter.
      5.   Termination Of Utility Services: After lawful notice to the customer
and property owner concerning the proposed disconnection, the director of
engineering shall have the authority to order the disconnection of city of East
Moline water, sanitary sewer and/or sanitation services, upon a finding by the
director of engineering that the disconnection of utility services will remove
a violation of this ordinance that poses a public health hazard or
environmental hazard.
      6.   Criminal Prosecution: Any person who violates or continues to
violate a prohibition or requirement of this ordinance shall be liable to
criminal prosecution to the fullest extent of the law, and shall be subject to
criminal penalties.
   (E)   Criminal Penalties: Any person violating this ordinance shall, upon an
adjudication of guilt or a plea of no contest, be fined a minimum of two
hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) to a maximum of one thousand five hundred
dollars ($1,500.00). Each separate day on which a violation is committed or
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
   (F)   Other Legal Action: Notwithstanding any other remedies or procedures
available to the city of East Moline, if any person violates this ordinance,
the city attorney may commence an action for appropriate legal and equitable
relief including damages and court costs. The city attorney may seek a
preliminary or permanent injunction or both which restrains or compels the
activities on the part of the discharger.
   (G)   Abrogation And Greater Restrictions: This ordinance is not intended to
repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed
restrictions. Where this ordinance and other ordinance, easements, covenants,
or deed restrictions conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent
restrictions shall prevail.
   (H)   Separability: The provisions and sections of this ordinance shall be
deemed separable and the invalidity of any portion of this ordinance shall not
affect the validity of the remainder. (Ord. 07-18, 10-15-2007)
8-12-12: IMPLEMENTATION:
This ordinance is effective upon passage with the following exceptions:
   (A)   Subdivision Improvements: The requirements for obtaining a grading and
drainage permit are waived for a period of three (3) years after the passage
date hereof if the preliminary plat of a subdivision was approved by the city
council prior to the passage date hereof. All other requirements of this
ordinance shall remain in effect.
   (B)   Nonsubdivision Improvements Requiring A Building Permit: The
requirements for obtaining a grading and drainage permit for nonsubdivision
related improvements requiring a building permit are waived for the duration of
the building permit if the building permit was issued prior to the passage date
hereof. All other requirements of this ordinance shall remain in effect.
   (C)   Improvements That Previously Did Not Require A Permit: The
requirements for obtaining a grading and drainage permit for construction that
did not require a permit prior to the passage date hereof are waived for a
period of one year if the construction commenced prior to the passage date
hereof. All other requirements of this ordinance shall remain in effect. (Ord.
07-18, 10-15-2007)
8-12-13: VARIANCES AND APPEALS:
The storm water board of appeals, after a public hearing, may: a) determine and
vary the requirements and regulations of this ordinance in harmony with their
general purpose and intent, where the storm water board of appeals makes
written findings of fact in accordance with the standards hereinafter
prescribed and further, find that there are practical difficulties or
particular hardships in the way of carrying out the strict letter of
requirements and regulations of this ordinance and b) uphold, modify or
overrule the decision of the director of engineering.
A written application for a variance from the requirements of this ordinance or
an appeal of a decision by the director of engineering shall be filed within
thirty (30) days of the time that the applicant became aware of the need for
the variance or the decision. The application shall fully state the grounds of
the request and the facts relied upon by the applicant. Each application shall
be filed with the director of engineering. And said application shall be
accompanied by a fee in the amount of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00)
toward the costs of processing the application. Should the application be
withdrawn prior to publication of legal notice thereon, such fee will be
returned upon the written request of the applicant.
The director of engineering will review and transmit recommendations to the
storm water board of appeals, which shall review such recommendations prior to
granting or denying the variance.
   (A)   Variances: The storm water board of appeals shall not vary the
requirements and regulations of this ordinance unless evidence is presented
that proves that all of the following three (3) situations exist:
      1.   The land in question is of such shape or size or is affected by such
physical conditions or is subject to such title limitations or record, that it
is impossible or impractical for the applicant to comply with all of the
requirements of this ordinance, and
      2.   The variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a
substantial property right of the applicant, and
      3.   The granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public
welfare, environment or injurious to other property in the vicinity of the
subject property.
The storm water board of appeals shall hold a public hearing on each
application for variance within sixty (60) days after the application for a
variance is received by the director of engineering. Within sixty (60) days
after the public hearing, the storm water board of appeals shall approve the
variance with the conditions it deems necessary, disapprove the variance or
take other such action as appropriate.
   (B)   Appeals: The storm water board of appeals shall consider each
application for modification to the decision of the director of engineering at
a public meeting within sixty (60) days after the appeal application is
received by the director of engineering. Within sixty (60) days after the
public meeting, the appropriate entity shall uphold, modify or overrule the
decision of the director of engineering.
   (C)   Judicial Review: All final administrative decisions of the storm water
board of appeals shall be subject to judicial review, pursuant to the
provisions of the "administrative review act", approved May 8, 1945, and all
amendments and modifications thereof, and the rules adopted pursuant thereto.
   (D)   Storm Water Board Of Appeals:
      1.   Creation, Membership And Procedure: A storm water board of appeals
consisting of six (6) members shall be appointed by the mayor and approved by
city council. Members shall be appointed for a term of two (2) years except
that the city council may remove any member of the board for cause prior to the
expiration of his/her term, with the initial terms being one year for three (3)
members and two (2) years for three (3) members.
         (a)   The board shall elect its own chairman and vice chairman and
have the power to adopt rules and regulations for its own government, not
inconsistent with law or with the provisions of this or any other ordinance of
the city of East Moline. Meetings shall be held at the call of the chairman and
at such other times as the board may determine. The chairman, or in his
absence, the vice chairman, may administer oaths and compel attendance of the
witnesses.
         (b)   Meetings of the board shall be open to the public, minutes shall
be kept of proceedings, showing the action of the board and the vote of each
member upon each question, or if absent, or failing to vote, indicating that
fact and records shall be made of the board's examinations and other official
actions, all of which shall be filed immediately in the office of the city
clerk.
         (c)   Three (3) members of the board shall constitute a quorum. The
board shall act by resolution, and the concurring vote of three (3) members
shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination
of the director of engineering, or to decide in favor of an applicant any
matter upon which it is required to pass under this ordinance, or to effect any
variation in the requirements of this ordinance.
         (d)   The board may call on the city's departments for assistance in
the performance of its duties, and it shall be the duty of such departments to
render such assistance to the board as may reasonably be required.
      2.   Judicial Review: All final administrative decisions of the BOSA
shall be subject to judicial review, pursuant to the provisions of the
"administrative review act", approved May 8, 1945, and all amendments and
modifications thereof, and the rules adopted pursuant thereto. (Ord. 07-18, 10-
15-2007)
8-12-14: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR ALL CONSTRUCTION SITES:
   (A)   Responsible Entity: The owner of a site of construction activity shall
be responsible for compliance with the requirements of this ordinance.
   (B)   Waste Disposal: Solid waste, industrial waste, yard waste and any
other pollutants or waste on any construction site shall be controlled through
the use of BMPs. Waste or recycling containers shall be provided and maintained
by the owner or contractor on construction sites where there is the potential
for release of waste. Uncontained waste that may blow, wash or otherwise be
released from the site is prohibited.
   (C)   Ready Mixed Concrete: Ready mixed concrete, or any materials resulting
from the cleaning of vehicles or equipment containing or used in transporting
or applying ready mixed concrete, shall be contained on construction sites for
proper disposal. Release of these materials is prohibited.
   (D)   Erosion And Sediment Control: BMPs shall be implemented to prevent the
release of sediment from construction sites. Disturbed areas shall be
minimized, disturbed soil shall be managed and construction site entrances
shall be managed to prevent sediment tracking. Excessive sediment tracked onto
public streets shall be removed immediately.
   (E)   Continued Compliance: Upon completion of permitted construction
activity on any site, the property owner and subsequent property owners will be
responsible for continued compliance with the requirements of this ordinance,
in the course of maintenance, reconstruction or any other construction activity
on the site. (Ord. 07-18, 10-15-2007)
8-12-15: GRADING AND DRAINAGE PERMITS:
   (A)   Class 1 Grading And Drainage Permit: Any construction that meets one
of the following thresholds shall require a class 1 grading and drainage
permit:
      1.   Any construction that will include the addition of an impervious
surface area (i.e., streets, roof, patio or parking area or any combination
thereof) greater than or equal to one thousand (1,000) square feet and less
than one acre (43,560 square feet).
      2.   Any land disturbing activity (i.e., clearing, grading, stripping,
excavation, fill, or any combination thereof) that will affect an area greater
than or equal to ten thousand (10,000) square feet and less than one acre
(43,560 square feet).
      3.   Any land disturbing activity that will exceed one hundred (100)
cubic yards, but does not otherwise require a class 2 grading and drainage
permit.
      4.   Any land disturbing activity on the sloping side of the slope
disturbance line, but does not otherwise require a class 2 grading and drainage
permit.
      5.   Construction of one or more single-family dwellings that is/are
constructed as part of a subdivision development with an approved storm water
pollution prevention plan. Those that are part of the development for which
there is a class 2 grading and drainage permit will not be required to
calculate preproject and postproject discharge rates.
The drainage system for a parcel containing the proposed construction site
shall be designed to restrict the peak rate of discharge from the total parcel
to preproject levels (based on a 1-year storm). The director of engineering
will estimate the peak discharge rates. If the estimated postdevelopment peak
discharge rate must be reduced, the director of engineering will recommend
appropriate storm water control options. If a mutually acceptable option cannot
be developed, the appeal process outlined in section
8-12-13 of this chapter will be followed.
The issuance of a grading and drainage permit shall constitute an authorization
to do only that work which is described on the approved sketch. A class 1
grading and drainage permit shall be valid for one year after the date of
issuance.
   (B)   Class 1 Grading And Drainage Permit And Application Forms: Class 1
grading and drainage permits and application forms shall include the following:
      1.   Name(s), address(es) and telephone numbers of the owner and
developer of the site, the contractor(s) and of any consulting firm retained by
the applicant identifying the principal contractor.
      2.   Certification that all construction covered by the grading and
drainage permit will be undertaken in compliance with section
8-12-14, "General Requirements For All Construction Sites", of this chapter.
      3.   A site plan acceptable to the director of engineering that shows: a)
existing and proposed topography, b) proposed grading and drainage, and c)
indicates the amount of impervious area being created.
      4.   An application fee as set forth in section
8-12-27 of this chapter.
   (C)   Class 2 Grading And Drainage Permit: Any construction that meets one
of the following thresholds shall require a class 2 grading and drainage
permit:
      1.   Any construction that will include the addition of an impervious
surface area (i.e., streets, roof, patio or parking area or any combination
thereof) greater than one acre (43,560 square feet).
      2.   Any land disturbing activity (i.e., clearing, grading, stripping,
excavation, fill, or any combination thereof) that will affect an area greater
than one acre (43,560 square feet).
   (D)   Class 2 Grading And Drainage Permit And Application Forms: Class 2
grading and drainage permits and application forms shall include the following:
      1.   Name(s), address(es) and telephone numbers of the owner and
developer of the site, the contractor(s) and of any consulting firm retained by
the applicant identifying the principal contractor.
      2.   Certification that any land clearing, construction, or development
involving the movement of earth shall be in accordance with the plans approved
upon issuance of the permit.
      3.   An application fee as set forth in section
8-12-27 of this chapter.
      4.   A faithful performance bond or bonds, letter of credit, or other
improvement security satisfactory to the city attorney in an amount deemed
sufficient by the director of engineering to cover all costs of improvements,
landscaping, maintenance of improvements and landscaping, and soil erosion and
sediment control measures for such period as specified by the director of
engineering and inspection costs to cover the cost of failure or repair of
improvements installed on the site on a form acceptable to the director of
engineering. (See sample in the appendix attached to the ordinance codified
herein.) Upon satisfactory completion of the improvements, the documented
security would be void.
      5.   A site plan shall be submitted for both existing and proposed
property conditions for applicable developments and for an appropriate distance
surrounding the subject property. The plan shall be based on a topographic
survey of the property, shall be drawn at a scale of not more than fifty feet
to one inch (50' : 1"), and include the following (unless otherwise specified
by the director of engineering):
         (a)   Proposed and existing grading shown with one foot (1') contours.
East Moline city datum shall be used (unless otherwise specified by the
director of engineering).
         (b)   Property boundary, interior lot lines (if applicable),
dimensions, and acreage.
         (c)   Zoning classification and required setback dimensions.
         (d)   All existing and proposed structures and sizes.
         (e)   Existing and proposed streets, driveways, sidewalks, parking
lots or other similar features.
         (f)   Square feet of existing and proposed impervious surface.
         (g)   Existing and proposed easements and right of way.
         (h)   Existing abandoned and proposed water or monitoring wellhead
locations.
         (i)   Existing abandoned and proposed water mains.
         (j)   Existing and proposed sanitary sewer lines and septic systems.
         (k)   The banks and centerline of streams and channels.
         (l)   Shoreline of lakes, ponds, and detention basins with normal
water level elevation.
         (m)   Farm drains and tiles.
         (n)   All existing and proposed storm water conduits and drainage
swales showing location, size and slope.
         (o)   Detention facilities.
         (p)   Overland flow path for storm water flow that exceeds the
capacity of on site drainage features.
         (q)   Existing and proposed storm water inlets, manholes, outlets or
other drainage structures, including finished grades.
         (r)   Existing and proposed utilities.
         (s)   Base flood elevation, flood fringe, and regulatory floodway.
         (t)   Location map, locating the site within the city of East Moline.
         (u)   Title, scale, north arrow, legend, seal of licensed professional
engineer, date, and name of person preparing plans.
         (v)   Subwatershed boundaries within the property.
         (w)   Abandoned mines.
         (x)   Soil classifications.
         (y)   Existing and proposed fencing indicating the type and height of
fence.
         (z)   Construction plans for public or private improvements for
streets, storm drainage, sewer, water, or other utilities.
      6.   The following certifications and design statements shall be
provided:
         (a)   Basis of design for the final drainage system components.
         (b)   A statement giving any applicable engineering assumptions and
calculations.
         (c)   A statement by the design engineer of the drainage system's
provision for handling events greater than the 100-year, twenty four (24) hour
runoff.
         (d)   Design calculations and other submittals as required by this
ordinance.
         (e)   A statement of certification of all drainage plans,
calculations, and supporting data by a licensed professional engineer.
      7.   A depiction of environmental features of the property and immediate
vicinity including the following:
         (a)   The limits of designated regulatory and nonregulatory wetland
areas.
         (b)   The location of trees greater than eight inches (8") in diameter
in areas to be disturbed.
         (c)   Any designated natural areas or prime farmland.
         (d)   Any proposed environmental mitigation features.
      8.   Any and all local, state or federal maps marked to reflect any
proposed change in the floodway delineation, base flood, or 100-year frequency
flood elevation will change due to the proposed project.
      9.   Conditional approval by FEMA or other regulatory agencies of the
proposed changes in the floodway map that have been made if the floodway
delineation, base flood, or 100-year frequency flood elevation will change due
to the proposed project.
      10.   Engineering calculations and data supporting all proposed plans.
Hydrologic design shall be completed in accordance with section
8-12-24, "Hydrologic Design Criteria For Class 2 Projects", of this chapter.
Detention system design shall be completed in accordance with section
8-12-25, "Detention System Design Criteria", of this chapter.
      11.   If the project involves channel modification, the following
information shall be submitted:
         (a)   A discussion of the purpose and need for the proposed work.
         (b)   Discussion of the practicability of using alternative locations
or methods to accomplish the purpose of the proposed work.
         (c)   Analysis of the impacts of the proposed project, considering
cumulative effects on the physical and biological conditions of the body of
water affected.
         (d)   Additional information as required by this ordinance.
      12.   Storm water pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) prepared in
accordance with section
8-12-26 of this chapter. (Ord. 07-18, 10-15-2007)
8-12-16: PERMIT EXCEPTIONS:
Except as exempted below, no person shall commence construction prior to
obtaining the appropriate grading and drainage permit as defined below. The
director of engineering will issue grading and drainage permits.
In order to preclude inappropriate phasing of developments to circumvent the
intent of this ordinance, when a proposed development activity will occur on a
lot or parcel of land that has contiguous lots or parcels of lands owned by the
same property owner, then the criteria as defined in this section will be
applied to the total land area compiled from aggregate ownership parcels.
A grading and drainage permit shall not be required for the following
circumstances:
   (A)   Any construction activity below the minimum thresholds for a class 1
grading and drainage permit.
   (B)   The agricultural use of land, including the implementation of
conservation measures included in a farm conservation plan approved by the
natural resources conservation service, and including the construction of
agricultural structures.
   (C)   The maintenance of any existing storm water control facility including
dredging, levee restoration, tree removal or other function that maintains the
original design capacities of the facility.
   (D)   The construction of, improvements to, or the maintenance of any
street, road, highway or interstate highway or other public infrastructure
performed by the city of East Moline. However the requirements of this
ordinance will be honored by the city of East Moline for such improvements.
(Ord. 07-18, 10-15-2007)
8-12-17: SUBMITTAL, REVIEW, AND APPROVAL OF PERMITS:
If a building permit is also required for the development, the grading and
drainage permit application shall be submitted to the building inspector at the
time application is made for a building permit. Departments of the city of East
Moline shall coordinate their activities to prevent additional, unnecessary
delays.
   (A)   Each application for an approved grading and drainage permit shall be
reviewed and acted upon according to the following procedures. The director of
engineering shall:
      1.   Provide a written evaluation to the applicant regarding the adequacy
and effectiveness of the proposal to address the provisions of this ordinance.
The director of engineering may retain the services of an independent
professional to perform this evaluation. The city of East Moline may assess a
fee for this evaluation service as set forth in section
8-12-27 of this chapter.
      2.   Attend a preconstruction meeting with the applicant or designated
agent to review implementation of grading and drainage permit.
      3.   Conduct on site inspections during the active construction phases of
and development projects to determine whether site development is in compliance
with the approved grading and drainage plans, and determine adjustments needed
to the approved plans. After construction has been completed, determine whether
permanent site stabilization has been achieved and identify operation and
maintenance needs.
      4.   Prepare correspondence as needed regarding the effectiveness (or
corrective measures needed) or adequacy of soil erosion and sediment control
measures.
      5.   Consult with land developers, consultants, and contractors
concerning the design criteria, installation and maintenance procedures and
other information regarding best management practices recommended under the
provisions of this ordinance.
      6.   After review of the application and required submissions if it is
found to be in conformance with the provisions of this ordinance.
         (a)   Approve the grading and drainage permit.
         (b)   Approve the grading and drainage permit subject to such
reasonable conditions as may be necessary to secure substantially the
objectives of this ordinance, and issue the approval subject to these
conditions.
         (c)   Disapprove the grading and drainage permit, indicating the
deficiencies and the procedure for submitting a revised application and/or
submission.
   (B)   No approval for a grading and drainage permit shall be issued for an
intended development site unless one or more of the following have been
obtained as applicable:
      1.   Land use regulations that apply to the development have been
approved by the city of East Moline where applicable.
      2.   Such permit is accompanied by or combined with a valid building
permit issued by the building inspector.
      3.   The proposed earthmoving is coordinated with any overall development
program previously approved by the director of engineering for the area in
which the site is situated.
      4.   All relevant federal, state, and local permits.
      5.   Applicant is successful in the appeals process.
   (C)   Failure of the director of engineering to act on an original or
revised application within sixty (60) days of receipt shall authorize the
applicant to proceed in accordance with the plans as filed and in compliance
with the regulations contained herein, unless such time is extended by
agreement between the director of engineering and the applicant. Pending
preparation and approval of a revised plan, development activities may be
allowed to proceed in accordance with conditions established by the director of
engineering. (Ord. 07-18, 10-15-2007)
8-12-18: OTHER AGENCY PERMITS:
   (A)   The director of engineering shall not issue a grading and drainage
permit unless all required federal, state and drainage district permits have
been obtained by the applicant and copies thereof reviewed by the director of
engineering. The acquisition of these permits shall be the sole responsibility
of the applicant. The granting of a grading and drainage permit under these
regulations shall in no way affect the owner's responsibility to obtain the
approval required by any other statute, ordinance or code, or to meet the
requirements of other city of East Moline ordinances and regulations,
including, but not limited to: building permits; section 404 of the clean
waters act; section 106 of the national historic preservation act; section 10
of the rivers and harbors act; or permitting required by the Illinois
department of natural resources, office of water resources in accordance with
the rivers, lakes and streams act, 615 Illinois Compiled Statutes; the soil and
water conservation districts act, 70 Illinois Compiled Statutes; the farmland
preservation act, 505 Illinois Compiled Statutes; the Illinois ground water
protection act, 415 Illinois Compiled Statutes; and the national pollutant
discharge elimination system permit (NPDES) and section 401 of the clean water
act through the Illinois environmental protection agency, division of water
pollution control; and the threatened and endangered species act, 16 USC 1531
et seq.
   (B)   Any work involving the construction, modification or removal of a
"dam" as defined herein, per 92 Illinois administrative code 702 (rules for
construction of dams), shall require an IDNR/OWR dam safety permit prior to
permit being issued by the city of East Moline. Any development involving work
in waters of the United States, including wetlands and streams as identified
and regulated by the U.S. army corps of engineers, shall require permits or
sign offs from the corps prior to the issuance of a city of East Moline permit.
(Ord. 07-18, 10-15-2007)
8-12-19: PERMIT LIMITATIONS:
   (A)   The issuance of a grading and drainage permit shall constitute an
authorization to do only that work which is described or illustrated on the
application for the permit or on the plans and specifications approved by the
director of engineering.
   (B)   The issuance of a permit or the approval of drawings and
specifications shall not be construed to be a permit for, nor an approval of,
any violation of or deviation from the provision of these regulations or any
other ordinance, law, rule, or regulation.
   (C)   The issuance of a permit, based upon drawings and specifications,
shall not prevent the director of engineering from thereafter requiring the
correction of errors in said drawings and specifications or from stopping
unlawful construction operations being carried on thereunder.
   (D)   The grading and drainage permit shall be valid until the completion
date noted in the permit. The director of engineering may grant an extension if
relevant design and construction standards have not changed and if in the
director of engineering's opinion, the work approved under the permit does not
unduly adversely affect the health, safety and general welfare of the public.
Otherwise, a new permit shall be acquired before work is started or continued.
The director of engineering may require modification of the SWPPP to prevent
any increase in erosion or off site sediment runoff resulting from any
extension. (Ord. 07-18, 10-15-2007)
8-12-20: REVOCATION OF PERMITS:
   (A)   The director of engineering may revoke a permit:
      1.   Where there has been any false or inaccurate statement or
misrepresentation as to a material fact in the application or plans on which
the permit was based.
      2.   When work is performed contrary to the provisions of the application
or plans on which the permit is based.
   (B)   When a permit is revoked, the director of engineering shall inform the
permittee, in writing, of the specific steps the permittee must take in order
to have the permit reissued.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful to continue any work authorized by a permit after
revocation of that permit until that permit is reissued or until a new permit
is issued.
   (D)   In cases where the permittee wishes to appeal the decision of the
director of engineering, the appeal process outlined in section
8-12-13 of this chapter will be followed. An appeal shall stay all proceedings
in furtherance of the action appealed from unless the director of engineering
certifies to the storm water board of appeals, after the notice of the appeal
has been filed with him, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a
stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. (Ord. 07-
18, 10-15-2007)
8-12-21: LIABILITY:
   (A)   Nothing in this chapter is intended to relieve the applicant for a
drainage permit of responsibility for damage to persons or property otherwise
imposed by law nor shall liability for any such damage be placed in any manner
upon the city.
   (B)   The city of East Moline, its employees, officers, or agents, will not
be made liable for any damage by: 1) the issuance of a drainage permit under
this chapter, 2) compliance with the provisions of that drainage permit or
conditions attached to it by the director of engineering, 3) failure of the
city of East Moline to observe or recognize hazardous or unsightly conditions,
4) failure of the city of East Moline officials to recommend denial or to deny
a drainage permit, or 5) exemptions from drainage permit requirements of this
chapter.
   (C)   The city of East Moline will maintain those drainage facilities that
are on public land, public rights of way, and easements, and have been
dedicated and accepted for maintenance or stipulated by agreement for
maintenance by the city of East Moline. All other drainage facilities, when
located on other than public property, shall be the responsibility of the owner
of the property on which they exist or the owner of the drainage facility,
regardless of whether or not dedicated easements exist over said facilities and
the city shall have no responsibility or liability therefor.
The responsible party shall at all times properly operate and maintain all
facilities and systems of treatment and control (and related appurtenances)
which are installed to achieve compliance with conditions of this permit.
Proper operation and maintenance includes effective performance, adequate
funding, adequate operator staffing and training, and appropriate quality
assurance procedures. Abandonment and alteration, either structural or
operational, of all facilities and systems shall occur only following
application and issuance of a permit. (Ord. 07-18, 10-15-2007)
8-12-22: RETENTION OF PLANS:
Plans, specifications, and reports for all site developments shall be retained
by the director of engineering as required by Illinois statute. (Ord. 07-18,
10-15-2007)
8-12-23: POSTCONSTRUCTION RUNOFF CONTROL:
Use of BMPs identified by this ordinance, or the use of any other BMPs not
herein discussed, are strongly encouraged by this ordinance. This list of
definitions is not exclusive and developers are encouraged to utilize whatever
BMPs may be appropriate for a specific site.
   (A)   Preserving Regulatory Floodplains, Flood Prone And Wetland Areas:
      1.   Buffer zones: An area along a shoreline, wetland, or stream where
development is restricted or prohibited. The primary function of aquatic
buffers is to physically protect and separate a stream, lake, or wetland from
future disturbance or encroachment. The three (3) types of buffers are water
pollution hazard setbacks, vegetated buffers, and engineered buffers.
      2.   Conservation easements: Voluntary agreements that allow an
individual or group to set aside private property to limit the type or amount
of development on their property. The conservation easement can cover all or a
portion of a property and can either be permanent or last for a specified time.
The easement is typically described in terms of the resource it is designed to
protect (e.g., agricultural, forest, historic, or open space easements) and
explains and mandates the restrictions on the uses of the particular property.
   (B)   Minimizing Impervious Surfaces On The Property:
      1.   Open Space Design, Conservation Development: A better site design
technique that concentrates dwelling units in a compact area in one portion of
the development site in exchange for providing open space and natural areas
elsewhere on the site. The minimum lot sizes, setbacks and frontage distances
for the residential zone are relaxed in order to create the open space.
      2.   Narrower Streets: In many residential settings, streets can be as
narrow as twenty two (22) to twenty six feet (26') wide without sacrificing
emergency access, on street parking or vehicular and pedestrian safety. Even
narrower access streets or shared driveways can be used when only a handful of
homes need to be served. Use of narrower streets will only be allowed on public
streets by requesting a variance from the city of East Moline subdivision
ordinance.
      3.   Eliminating Curbs And Gutters: Elimination of curbs and gutters
involves the use of grass swales and ditches as an alternative to curbs and
gutters along residential streets. Eliminating curbs and gutters from public
streets will only be allowed by requesting a variance from the city of East
Moline subdivision ordinance.
      4.   Alternative Turnarounds: Alternative turnarounds are designs for end
of street vehicle turnaround that replace cul-de-sacs and reduce the amount of
impervious cover created in residential neighborhoods. Numerous alternatives
create less impervious cover than the traditional forty foot (40') cul-de-sac.
These alternatives include reducing cul-de-sacs to a thirty foot (30') radius
and creating hammerheads, loop roads, and pervious islands in the cul-de-sac
center by requesting a variance from the city of East Moline subdivision
ordinance.
      5.   Alternative Pavers: Alternative pavers are permeable surfaces that
can replace asphalt and concrete and can be used for driveways, parking lots,
and walkways. Commercially available pavers are used which contain void spaces
for grass or clean, washed stone or gravel. Gravel, cobble, or mulch parking
lots are prohibited.
   (C)   Storm Water Wetlands, Gassed Swales And Vegetated Filter Strips:
      1.   Storm Water Wetlands: Storm water wetlands (a.k.a. constructed
wetlands) are structural practices similar to wet ponds that incorporate
wetland plants into the design. Storm water wetlands are designed specifically
for the purpose of treating storm water runoff. A distinction should be made
between using a constructed wetland for storm water management and diverting
storm water into a natural wetland. The latter practice is not recommended
because altering the hydrology of the existing wetland with additional storm
water can degrade the resource and result in plant die off and the destruction
of wildlife habitat.
      2.   Grassed Swales: The term swale (a.k.a. grassed channel, dry swale,
wet swale, biofilter) refers to a series of vegetated, open channel management
practices designed specifically to treat and attenuate storm water runoff for a
specified water quality volume. As storm water runoff flows through these
channels, it is treated through filtering by the vegetation in the channel,
filtering through a subsoil matrix, and/or infiltration into the underlying
soils.
      3.   Vegetated Filter Strips: Vegetated surfaces that are designed to
treat sheet flow from adjacent surfaces. Filter strips function by slowing
runoff velocities and filtering out sediment and other pollutants.
   (D)   Infiltrating Runoff On Site:
      1.   Sand And Organic Filters: Sand filters are usually two (2) chambered
storm water practices; the first is a settling chamber, and the second is a
filter bed filled with sand or another filtering media. As storm water flows
into the first chamber, large particles settle out, and then finer particles
and other pollutants are removed as storm water flows through the filtering
medium. There are several modifications of the basic sand filter design,
including the surface sand filter, underground sand filter, perimeter sand
filter, organic media filter, and multichamber treatment train.
      2.   Infiltration Trenches: An infiltration trench is a rock filled
trench with no outlet that receives storm water runoff. Storm water runoff
passes through some combination of pretreatment measures, such as a swale and
detention basin, and into the trench. There, runoff is stored in the void space
between the stones and infiltrates through the bottom and into the soil matrix.
      3.   Infiltration Basins: Infiltration basin is a shallow impoundment
which is designed to infiltrate storm water into the ground water. Infiltration
basins should only be used on small drainage areas (less than 10 acres), and
where soils are highly permeable.
      4.   Porous Pavements: Porous pavement is a permeable pavement surface
with an underlying stone reservoir to temporarily store surface runoff before
it infiltrates into the subsoil. This porous surface replaces traditional
pavement, allowing parking lot storm water to infiltrate directly and receive
water quality treatment. There are a few porous pavement options, including
porous asphalt, pervious concrete, and grass pavers.
      5.   Bioretention: Bioretention areas are landscaping features adapted to
provide on site treatment of storm water runoff. They are commonly located in
parking lot islands or within small pockets of residential land uses. Surface
runoff is directed into shallow, landscaped depressions. These depressions are
designed to incorporate many of the pollutant removal mechanisms that operate
in forested ecosystems. During storms, runoff ponds above the mulch and soil in
the system. Runoff from larger storms is generally diverted past the facility
to the storm drain system. The remaining runoff filters through the mulch and
prepared soil mix. Typically, the filtered runoff is collected in a perforated
underdrain and returned to the storm drain system.
   (E)   Providing Storm Water Retention Structures:
      1.   On Lot Treatment: On lot treatment is a series of practices that are
designed to collect runoff from individual residential or small commercial
lots. The primary purpose of most on lot practices is to manage rooftop runoff
and, to a lesser extent, driveway and sidewalk runoff. Although there are a
wide variety of on lot treatment options, they can all be classified into one
of three (3) categories: a) practices that collect and infiltrate rooftop
runoff; b) practices that divert runoff or soil moisture to a pervious area;
and c) practices that store runoff for later use.
      2.   Retention Basins: Retention basins are designed to collect and hold
storm water runoff, with no outlet pipes or structures. They are not
necessarily infiltration basins, and are best designed to rely mostly on
evaporation. Retention basins are only feasible when special circumstances of
land and soil type are available.
   (F)   Providing Wet Or Wetland Detention Structures: Wet detention
structures are defined and controlled under section
8-12-25, "Detention System Design Criteria", of this chapter.
   (G)   Providing Dry Detention Structures: Dry detention structures are
defined and controlled under section
8-12-25, "Detention System Design Criteria", of this chapter. Detention basins
shall be designed to remove floatables from storm water runoff by providing
trash grates or special outlet structures which separate floatables.
   (H)   Constructing Storm Sewers:
      1.   Manufactured Products For Storm Water Inlets: A variety of products
for storm water inlets are known as swirl separators, or hydrodynamic
structures. Swirl separators are modifications of the traditional oil grit
separator and include an internal component that creates a swirling motion as
storm water flows through a cylindrical chamber. The concept behind these
designs is that sediments settle out as storm water moves in this swirling
path. Additional compartments or chambers are sometimes present to trap oil and
other floatables. There are several different types of proprietary separators,
each of which incorporates slightly different design variations, such as off
line application.
      2.   Catch Basin Inserts: Catch basin efficiency can be improved using
commercially available inserts, which can be designed to remove oil and grease,
trash, debris, and sediment. Some inserts are designed to drop directly into
existing catch basins, while others may require being installed as part of the
construction of the basin.
      3.   In Line Storage Structures: In line storage refers to a number of
practices designed to use the storage within the storm drain system to detain
flows. Storage is achieved by placing devices in the storm drain system to
restrict the rate of flow. Devices can slow the rate of flow by backing up
flow, as in the case of a dam or weir, or through the use of vortex valves,
devices that reduce flow rates by creating a helical flow path in the
structure.
   (I)   Water Quality And Multiple Uses: The drainage system should be
designed to minimize adverse surface and ground water quality impacts off site
and on the property itself. Detention basins shall incorporate design features
to capture storm water runoff pollutants. All flows from the development shall
be routed through the basin (i.e., low flows shall not be bypassed). Detention
of storm water shall be promoted throughout the property's drainage system to
reduce the volume of storm water runoff and to reduce the quantity of runoff
pollutants. The drainage system should incorporate multiple uses where
practicable. Uses considered compatible with storm water management include
open space, aesthetics, aquatic habitat, recreation (boating, fishing, trails,
playing fields), wetlands and water quality mitigation. (Ord. 07-18, 10-15-
2007)
8-12-24: HYDROLOGIC DESIGN CRITERIA FOR CLASS 2 PROJECTS:
   (A)   Referenced Standards: Design standards for hydrologic design shall
comply with these regulations and with the applicable provisions of the IDOT
drainage and design manuals. Where the IDOT drainage and design manuals do not
detail requirements, the "Illinois Urban Manual", latest edition, shall be
used. Where this ordinance imposes greater restrictions than those imposed by
the IDOT drainage and design manuals or those required by other provisions of
law or ordinance, the provisions of this ordinance shall prevail.
   (B)   Release Rates: The drainage system for new developments or
redevelopments shall be designed to control the peak rate of discharge from the
total property under development so that in the event of a 100-year rainfall
event in the postdeveloped condition, the release rate is less than or equal to
the discharge from a 5-year rainfall event in the predeveloped condition. Under
no circumstances, with any rainfall event, shall the postdevelopment discharge
exceed the predevelopment discharge. Where a detailed hydrologic or hydraulic
model exists, release rates shall be established and incorporated as part of
this ordinance.
   (C)   Drainage System Design And Evaluation: The following criteria should
be used in evaluating and designing the drainage system. The design will
provide capacity to pass the 10-year, twenty four (24) hour peak flow in the
minor drainage system and an overload flow path (major drainage system) for
flows in excess of the design capacity. Whenever practicable, the storm water
systems shall not result in the interbasin transfer of drainage unless no other
alternative exists.
The design rainfall recurrence interval shall be set by the design application
as follows:
 
Detention                     100 year
Emergency overflow routing    100 year
Bridges                       100 year
Roadway underpasses           50 year
Swales, ditches, and culverts 25 year
Storm sewers                  10 year
 
   (D)   Design Methodologies: An applicable hydrologic design method may be
selected from the "IDOT Drainage Manual" with the following modifications and
clarifications. Minor conveyance systems for areas up to one hundred (100)
acres, and major conveyance systems up to ten (10) acres may be designed using
the rational method. Design runoff rates may be calculated using a continuous
simulation model or by event hydrographic methods. If event hydrographic
methods are used they must be HEC-HMS, HEC-1, SCS TR20, or SCS TR55. Event
methods must incorporate the following assumptions:
      1.   Antecedent moisture condition 2 (normal moisture).
      2.   Huff or SCS type 2 distribution.
For design events the Illinois state water survey bulletin 70 (northwest)
rainfall data must be used. Storage volumes for detention must be twenty four
(24) hour events. Storm water conveyance capacities must be designed for the
critical duration creating the highest peak. The following table lists data
from bulletin 70:
Frequency Distributions (In Inches) For Zone 1
Illinois State Water Survey, Bulletin 70
Duration Frequency
         2-month 6-month 1-year 2-year 5-year 10-year 25-year 50-year 100-year
         Frequency
Duration 2-month 6-month 1-year  2-year  5-year  10-year 25-year 50-year 100-
                                                                         year
48 hour     1.   2.   2.   3.   4.   4.   6.   7.   8.07
24 hour     1.   2.   2.   3.   3.   4.   5.   6.   7.36
18 hour     1.   1.   2.   2.   3.   4.   5.   6.   6.92
12 hour     1.   1.   2.   2.   3.   4.   4.   5.   6.51
6 hour      1.   1.   1.   2.   2.   3.   4.   4.   5.69
2 hour      0.   1.   1.   1.   2.   2.   3.   3.   4.47
1 hour      0.   0.   1.   1.   1.   2.   2.   3.   3.51
30          0.   0.   0.   1.   1.   1.   2.   2.   2.77
minute
15          0.   0.   0.   0.   1.   1.   1.   1.   1.99
minute
5 minute    0.   0.   0.   0.   0.   0.   0.   0.   0.89
 
   (E)   Positive Drainage: All developments must be provided an overland flow
path that will pass the 100-year, twenty four (24) hour flow within designated
drainage easements or the public right of way with a freeboard of at least one
foot (1'). Overland flow paths shall be provided drainage easements unless the
flow is contained in the public right of way.
   (F)   Culvert, Road And Driveway Crossings: Sizing of culvert crossings
shall consider entrance and exit losses as well as tail water conditions on the
culvert.
   (G)   Vegetated Filter Strips And Swales: To effectively filter storm water
pollutants and promote infiltration of runoff, sites should be designed to
maximize the use of vegetated filter strips and swales, shall be designed to
follow criteria in the "Illinois Urban Manual". Whenever practicable, runoff
from impervious surfaces should be directed onto filter strips and swales
comprised of native grasses and forbs before being routed to a storm sewer or
detention basin.
   (H)   Maintenance Considerations: The storm water drainage system shall be
designed to minimize and facilitate maintenance. Use of native vegetation is
strongly encouraged to reduce maintenance, increase wildlife habitat, and to
provide other benefits. Where nonnative vegetation is used, turfed side slopes
shall be designed to allow lawn mowing equipment to easily negotiate them. Wet
basins shall be provided with alternate outflows, which can be used to
completely drain the pool for sediment removal. Pumping may be considered if
drainage by gravity is not feasible. Presedimentation basins shall be included,
where feasible, for localizing sediment deposition and removal. Site access for
heavy equipment shall be provided. A maintenance plan for the ongoing
maintenance of all storm water management system components including wetlands
is required prior to plan approval. The plan shall include:
      1.   Maintenance tasks.
      2.   The party responsible for performing the maintenance tasks.
      3.   A description of all permanent public or private access maintenance
easements and overland flow paths, and compensatory storage areas.
      4.   A description of dedicated sources of funding for the required
maintenance.
   (I)   Provisions For Agricultural Drainage:
      1.   Existing easements for any agricultural drainage systems located
underneath areas that will be developed shall be preserved. If no such easement
exists, an easement shall be dedicated for access and maintenance as provided
for in this ordinance.
      2.   All agricultural drainage systems that serve upstream areas outside
of the development and that are located underneath areas that will be developed
shall be replaced with nonperforated conduit to prevent root blockage,
provided, however, that the existing drainage district system may remain in
place with the approval of the appropriate entity.
      3.   Agricultural drainage systems that, due to development, will be
located underneath streets, driveways, and other paved areas as allowed by this
ordinance, shall be replaced with conduits meeting the city of East Moline's
standards as needed to prevent the collapse of the agricultural drainage
conduit.
      4.   Agricultural drainage systems may be relocated within the
development area upon the approval of the director of engineering. Such
relocation shall maintain sufficient slope and capacity to prevent
sedimentation and to prevent an increase in scouring or structural damage to
the conduit. Such relocation shall only be with the consent and approval of the
appropriate entity responsible for the system. If the system is not under the
authority of a drainage district, the director of engineering shall consider
the interests of those landowners who are served by the system.
   (J)   Channel Modifications: Channel modification is acceptable if the
purpose is to restore natural conditions and improve water quality. If the
proposed development activity involves a channel modification, it must be
demonstrated that:
      1.   Water quality and other natural functions would be significantly
improved by the modification or the impacts are offset by the replacement of an
equivalent degree of natural resource values.
      2.   The activity has been planned and designed and will be constructed
in a way which will minimize its adverse impacts on the natural conditions of
the stream or body of water affected. (Ord. 07-18, 10-15-2007)
8-12-25: DETENTION SYSTEM DESIGN CRITERIA:
   (A)   Referenced Standards: Design standards for detention basin design and
construction shall comply with the provisions of the following, unless
otherwise stated by this ordinance:
      1.   "IL Urban Manual", latest edition.
      2.   "IDOT Standard Specifications", latest edition.
      3.   "IDOT Drainage Manual", latest edition.
      4.   IL department of natural resources dam safety regulations.
      5.   Clean water act (discharges regulated by the US EPA through NPDES
permits).
      6.   City of East Moline design standards and technical specifications.
      7.   The subdivision and zoning ordinances.
   (B)   Detention Storage Requirements: The design storage to be provided in
the detention basin shall be based on the runoff from the runoff difference
between the 5-year predeveloped condition and the 100-year postdeveloped
condition. All detention basin storage shall be computed using hydrograph
methods utilizing reservoir routing (also called modified puls or level pool)
or equivalent method as described by this ordinance.
   (C)   Waiver Of Requirements:
      1.   The requirement for storm water detention and release rate does not
apply when:
         (a)   The development is in accord with the approved site plan and is
on a lot in a new subdivision for which detention is otherwise provided.
         (b)   The development is on a lot or parcel in a subdivision for which
detention was provided and approved prior to the effective date of these
regulations.
      2.   The requirement for storm water detention and release rate shall be
waived by the director of engineering when he/she determines it is in the best
interest of the city of East Moline to require a fee in lieu of detention as
described in subsection (O) of this section.
   (D)   Ownership: Detention basins are owned by the property owner (often a
homeowners' association) unless otherwise described by this ordinance or
indicated by the director of engineering. Property developers shall contact the
director of engineering to inquire about the ownership and maintenance
responsibility of existing regional detention basins which may affect the
development.
   (E)   Maintenance And Repair Responsibilities:
      1.   Detention ponds and associated inflow and outflow systems are
maintained by the property owner absent any specific legal agreement to the
contrary.
      2.   Maintenance agreements may be required at the option of the director
of engineering to define parties responsible for the maintenance of commercial
detention basins.
      3.   The detention basin owner shall be responsible for the following
items:
         (a)   An annual report on the detention basin condition, using the
checklist attached to the ordinance codified herein, shall be submitted to the
director of engineering.
         (b)   At five (5) year intervals, the basin shall be inspected by a
professional engineer registered in the state of Illinois. A report of this
inspection shall be submitted to the director of engineering within sixty (60)
days of the inspection. The inspection shall include an evaluation of the
checklist items in the checklist attached to the ordinance codified herein. An
annual report is not required the year the five (5) year report is due.
         (c)   Detention basin owners shall notify subsequent owners of their
maintenance responsibilities and transfer basin maintenance records to the
party with active maintenance responsibility.
         (d)   These requirements shall be effective for all detention basins
existing in the city of East Moline on the adoption date hereof as well as
detention basins constructed after the effective date.
   (F)   General Basin Design Requirements:
      1.   Erosion Control: Temporary and permanent erosion control shall be
required for all detention basins in accordance with this ordinance.
      2.   Verification And Final Approval:
         (a)   Erosion protection shall be inspected throughout the project
duration.
         (b)   Detention basin storage volume shall be verified to the
satisfaction of the director of engineering through as built surveys or other
means.
         (c)   Inflow, outflow and emergency overflow elevations shall be
verified through as built surveys.
         (d)   Final vegetative cover and permanent erosion control shall be
inspected for completeness of cover.
         (e)   The basin will receive final approval upon fulfillment of
subsections (F)2(b), (F)2(c), and (F)2(d) of this section, and the anniversary
date of maintenance and repair reporting will be recorded as such.
         (f)   All basins must receive final approval within ninety (90) days
of the substantial completion as determined by the director of engineering of
any of the following:
            (1)   The first phase (as shown on approved plans) of construction
of public utilities and roadways in any approved subdivision project. Detention
structures for the ultimate development area must be constructed during the
first phase of the project, and approved at its completion. The detention
structures must then be maintained and repaired in conformance with this
ordinance, during future construction phases.
            (2)   Parking areas, floor slabs and/or other impervious areas (as
shown on approved plans, and not including sidewalks) for work on an individual
lot requiring an individual permit under this ordinance. Phased construction
will be treated as in the above case.
            (3)   Mass earthwork or rough grading, if no other phased
construction is scheduled to be started within one hundred eighty (180) days.
         (g)   Failure to receive final approval as required will be considered
a violation of this ordinance.
      3.   Infiltration Practices: To effectively reduce runoff volumes,
infiltration practices including basins, trenches, and porous pavement shall
follow criteria in the "Illinois Urban Manual" and other relevant permitting.
An appropriate sediment control device shall be provided to remove coarse
sediment from storm water flows before they reach infiltration basins or
trenches. Storm water shall not be allowed to stand more than seventy two (72)
hours over eighty percent (80%) of the dry basin's bottom area for the maximum
design event to be exfiltrated. The bottom of infiltration basins or trenches
shall be a minimum of three feet (3') above the seasonally high ground water
and bedrock level if practicable. Engineering calculations demonstrating
infiltration rates shall be included with the application.
      4.   Side Slopes: The side slopes of all detention basins at their design
(full) capacity should be as level as practicable to prevent accidental falls
into the basin and for stability and ease of maintenance. It is desirable for
the side slopes of detention basins and open channels to not be steeper than
three to one (3:1) (horizontal to vertical); certain types of basins have
different requirements as defined by this ordinance. Detention basin side
slopes above normal pool shall be designed with permanent erosion protection
consisting of grass, nongrass vegetation, or other permanent finish. At least
six inches (6") of topsoil must be provided on side slopes above normal pool
elevation whenever nonstructural, permanent erosion control is not being used.
Permanent erosion protection shall be aesthetically suitable to the development
or existing surrounding land use.
      5.   Overflow Structures: All storm water detention basins shall be
provided with an overflow structure capable of safely passing excess flows at a
stage at least one foot (1') below the lowest foundation grade in the vicinity
of the detention basin. The design flow rate of the overflow structure shall be
equivalent to the 100-year rainfall event inflow rate. Weirs, dams and
specialized outflows shall be designed by a professional engineer registered in
the state of Illinois.
      6.   Detention Basin Outlet Design:
         (a)   Backwater on the outlet structure from the downstream drainage
system shall be addressed when designing the outlet.
         (b)   Where a single pipe outlet or orifice plate is to be used to
control discharge, it shall have a minimum diameter of twelve inches (12"). If
design release rates call for smaller outlets, a design that minimizes the
possibility of clogging shall be used.
      7.   Other Design Requirements:
         (a)   "Bubble up" outlets are prohibited.
         (b)   Pumped outlets and other active control structures are
discouraged and must be preapproved on a case by case basis by the director of
engineering.
         (c)   Temporary erosion techniques shall be used as required to ensure
a full stand of cover vegetation in minimum time.
      8.   Location Requirements:
         (a)   In subdivisions, detention basins and their 100-year design high
water shall be contained within platted lots dedicated for drainage purposes.
In redevelopments, detention basins and their 100-year design high water shall
be contained within a drainage easement.
         (b)   Detention basin lots shall have a minimum of twenty feet (20')
of frontage on a right of way for the purpose of providing unrestricted access
for maintenance. Exceptions may be made for infill development.
         (c)   A twenty foot (20') minimum setback shall be required from all
property lines to the normal pool elevation which is considered to be the
elevation of the water level at the permanent depth of the wet basin pool
rather than the temporary depth during drainage events.
         (d)   Detention basins shall be provided with a minimum of one foot
(1') of freeboard above the 100-year design water elevation.
         (e)   There shall be at least two feet (2') of freeboard between the
100-year design water elevation and all boundaries of the parcel or easement
containing the basin.
      9.   Accommodating Flows From Upstream Tributary Areas: Storm water
runoff from areas tributary to the property shall be considered in the design
of the property's drainage system. Flows from upstream areas that are not to be
detained should be routed around the basin being provided for the site being
developed.
      10.   Upstream Areas Not Meeting Ordinance Requirements: When there are
areas not meeting the storage and release rates of this ordinance, tributary to
the applicant's property, the following steps shall be followed:
         (a)   The applicant shall compute the storage volume needed for his
property using the release rates and procedures described in this ordinance.
         (b)   Areas tributary to the applicant's property, not meeting the
storage and release rate requirements of this ordinance, shall be identified.
         (c)   Using the areas determined above plus the applicant's property
area, total storage and release rates needed for the combined properties shall
be computed using the release rates and procedures described in this ordinance.
If tributary areas are not developed, a reasonable fully developed land cover,
based on local zoning, shall be used for the purposes of computing storage.
         (d)   Once the necessary combined storage is computed, the city of
East Moline may choose to pay for oversizing the applicant's detention basin to
accommodate the regional flows. The applicant's responsibility will be limited
to the storage for his property as computed above. If regional storage is
selected by the city of East Moline, the director of engineering will work with
the applicant to implement the requirements of this ordinance. If regional
storage is rejected by the city of East Moline, the applicant shall bypass all
tributary area flows around the applicant's basin whenever practicable as
determined by the director of engineering. If the applicant must route upstream
flows through his basin and the upstream areas exceed one square mile in size,
the applicant must meet the provisions of on stream detention in this
ordinance.
      11.   Upstream Areas Meeting Ordinance Requirements: When there are areas
which meet the storage and release rate requirements of this ordinance,
tributary to the applicant's property, the upstream flows shall be bypassed
around the applicant's detention basin if this is the only practicable
alternative as determined by the director of engineering. Storage needed for
the applicant's property shall be computed as described in this ordinance.
However, if the city of East Moline decides to route tributary area flows
through an applicant's basin, the final design storm water releases shall be
based on the combined total of the applicant's property plus tributary areas.
It must be shown that at no time will the runoff rate from the applicant's
property exceed the allowable release rate for his/her property alone.
      12.   Early Completion Of Detention Facilities: Where detention or
retention are to be used as part of the drainage system for a property, they
shall be constructed as the first element of the initial earthwork program. Any
eroded sediment captured in these facilities shall be removed by the applicant
on a regular basis and before project completion in order to maintain the
design volume of the facilities.
   (G)   Wet Detention Basin Design: Wet detention basins shall be designed to
remove storm water pollutants, to be safe, to be aesthetically pleasing, and as
much as feasible to be available for recreational use.
      1.   Depths: Wet basins shall be at least three feet (3') deep, excluding
near shore banks and safety ledges. If fish habitat is to be provided they
shall be at least ten feet (10') deep over twenty five percent (25%) of the
bottom area to prevent winter kill.
      2.   Shoreline Slopes: The side slopes of wet basins at the normal pool
elevation shall not be steeper than five to one (5:1) horizontal to vertical.
It is recommended that native aquatic vegetation be established around the
perimeter to provide protection from shoreline erosion. Slopes below a depth of
eight feet (8') are permitted to be two to one (2:1), in accordance with IDOT
standard specifications section 204.
      3.   Permanent Pool Volume: The permanent pool volume in a wet basin at
normal depth shall be equal to the runoff volume from its watershed for the 2-
year, twenty four (24) hour event as a minimum.
      4.   Inlet And Outlet Orientation: The distance between detention inlets
and outlets shall be maximized. Inlets and outlets shall be at opposite ends of
the basin providing that the orientation does not create undue hardship based
on topography or other natural constraints. Designers are encouraged to use
baffles or berms in the basin bottom to prevent short circuiting. There shall
be no low flow bypass between the inlet and outlet. The minimum flow length
shall be ten feet (10') with a recommended minimum ratio of two to one (2:1)
for width.
      5.   Safety Ledge: All wet detention basins shall have a level safety
ledge at least four feet (4') in width, two and one-half (21/2) to three feet
(3') below the normal water depth.
      6.   Aeration: Wet bottom basins shall have a natural or artificial means
of aeration.
      7.   Dewatering: An outlet structure shall be provided to allow
dewatering of the pond for maintenance. Gravity dewatering is strongly
preferred.
      8.   Soil Permeability: Wet bottom basin design shall include an
evaluation of soil permeability. A basin liner shall be included in the design
if needed to ensure water retention to normal pool elevation.
      9.   Detention/Sedimentation: It is encouraged that consideration of
routing runoff from the development through a stilling basin be considered.
   (H)   Dry Detention Basin Design: In addition to the other requirements of
this ordinance, dry basins shall be designed to remove storm water pollutants,
to be safe, to be aesthetically pleasing and as much as feasible to be
available for multiple uses.
      1.   Dry Basin Drainage: Dry basins shall be designed so that eighty
percent (80%) of their bottom area shall have standing water no longer than
seventy two (72) hours for any runoff event less than the 100-year, twenty four
(24) hour event. Grading plans shall clearly distinguish the wet portion of the
basin bottom. Underdrains directed to the outlet may be used to accomplish this
requirement.
      2.   Minimum Bottom Slope: Dry bottom basins shall have two percent (2%)
minimum bottom slopes or underdrain systems as approved by the director of
engineering.
      3.   Low Flow Channel: Dry bottom basins may include a low flow channel
with some form of erosion protection.
      4.   Velocity Dissipation: Velocity dissipation measures shall be
incorporated into dry basin designs to minimize erosion at inlets and outlets
and to minimize resuspension of pollutants.
      5.   Dry Basin Inlet And Outlet Orientation: Dry basin inlet and outlet
orientation shall be the same as for wet basins.
      6.   Temporary Sediment Trap: A sediment trap shall be constructed at
each major inlet to a dry basin during construction. The temporary sediment
trap should be designed in accordance with criteria in the "Illinois Urban
Manual".
   (I)   Detention On Prime Farmland: The placement of detention basins shall
avoid the utilization of prime farmland. All detention basin construction shall
examine potential impacts to adjacent agricultural land and shall address
measures that will be implemented to eliminate such impacts and comply with
other relevant permitting.
   (J)   Detention In Floodplains: The placement of detention basins within the
floodplain is strongly discouraged because of questions about their reliable
operation during flood events. However, the storm water detention requirements
of this ordinance may be fulfilled by providing detention storage within flood
fringe areas on the project site, provided the following provisions are met as
well as all required state, federal and local permits.
      1.   Detention In Flood Fringe Areas: The placement of a detention basin
in a flood fringe area shall require compensatory storage for 1.5 times the
volume below the base flood elevation occupied by the detention basin,
including any berms. The release from the detention storage provided shall
still be controlled consistent with the requirements of this section. The
applicant shall demonstrate its operation for all stream flow and floodplain
backwater conditions. Excavations for compensatory storage along watercourses
shall be opposite or adjacent to the area occupied by detention. All floodplain
storage lost below the existing 10-year flood elevation shall be replaced below
the existing 10-year elevation. All floodplain storage lost above the existing
10-year flood elevation shall be replaced above the existing 10-year flood
elevation. All compensatory storage excavations shall be constructed to drain
freely and openly to the watercourse.
      2.   Detention In Floodways: Detention basins shall be placed in the
floodway only in accordance with subsection (J)3 of this section.
      3.   On Stream Detention: On stream detention basins are discouraged but
allowable if they provide regional public benefits and if they meet the other
provisions of this ordinance with respect to water quality and control of the
5-year and 100-year, twenty four (24) hour events from the property. The volume
of detention shall be provided in addition to the existing stream floodway
storage. Further criteria are presented in subsection (K) of this section. If
on stream detention is used in watersheds larger than one square mile, the
applicant will use hydrographic modeling to demonstrate that the design will
not increase the water level for any properties upstream or downstream of the
property. Also, impoundment of the stream as part of on stream detention:
         (a)   Shall not prevent the migration of indigenous fish species,
which require access to upstream areas as part of their life cycle, such as for
spawning;
         (b)   Shall not cause or contribute to the degradation of water
quality or stream aquatic habitat;
         (c)   Shall include a design calling for gradual bank slopes,
appropriate bank stabilization measures, and a presedimentation basin;
         (d)   Shall not involve any stream channelization or the filling of
wetlands;
         (e)   Shall require the implementation of an effective nonpoint source
management program throughout the upstream watershed which shall include as a
minimum: runoff reduction "best management practices" (BMPs) consistent with
section
8-12-23 of this chapter;
         (f)   Shall not occur downstream of a wastewater discharge;
         (g)   Shall not contribute to the duration or flood frequency of any
adjacent land.
   (K)   Drainage Into Wetlands, Rivers, Streams, Lakes, Ponds, And Areas:
Wetlands, rivers, streams, lakes and ponds shall be protected from damaging
modifications and adverse changes in runoff quality and quantity associated
with land developments. In addition to the other requirements of this
ordinance, the following requirements shall be met for all developments whose
drainage flows into wetlands, rivers, lakes or ponds:
      1.   Detention In Wetlands, Rivers, Streams, Lakes Or Ponds: Existing
wetlands, rivers, lakes, or ponds shall not be modified for the purposes of
storm water detention unless it is demonstrated that the proposed modifications
will maintain or improve its habitat and ability to perform beneficial
functions and shall comply with other relevant permitting. Existing storage and
release rate characteristics of wetlands, rivers, lakes or ponds shall be
maintained and the volume of detention storage provided to meet the
requirements of this section shall be in addition to this existing storage.
      2.   Sediment Control: The existing wetlands, rivers, lakes or ponds
shall be protected during construction and as further regulated in this
chapter.
      3.   Alteration Of Drainage Patterns: Site drainage patterns shall not be
altered to substantially decrease or increase the existing area tributary to
wetlands, rivers, lakes or ponds. Drainage patterns shall not be altered by
development to direct runoff off site to other than natural drainage outlets
existing prior to development.
      4.   Detention/Sedimentation: All runoff from the development shall be
routed through a preliminary detention/sedimentation basin designed to capture
the 2-year, twenty four (24) hour event and hold it for at least twenty four
(24) hours, before being discharged to the basin. This basin shall be
constructed before property grading begins and shall be maintained throughout
the construction process. In addition, the BMP hierarchy defined in section
8-12-23 of this chapter, should be followed to minimize runoff volumes and
rates being discharged.
      5.   Vegetated Buffer Strip: A buffer strip of at least twenty five feet
(25') in width, preferably vegetated with native plant species, shall be
maintained or restored around the periphery of a wetland, river, stream, lake
or pond.
   (L)   Street Detention: If streets are to be used as part of the minor or
major drainage system, ponding depths shall follow the criteria below:
      1.   Principal And Minor Arterials:
         (a)   Flow from a 10-year storm shall not inundate the center twenty
feet (20') of the pavement.
         (b)   Flow from a 50-year storm shall be carried without damage to any
building.
      2.   Collector Streets:
         (a)   Flow from a 10-year storm shall not inundate the center ten feet
(10') of the pavement.
         (b)   Flow from a 50-year storm shall be carried without damage to any
building.
      3.   Local Streets:
         (a)   Flow from a 10-year storm shall not top the curb.
         (b)   Flow from a 50-year storm shall be carried without damage to any
building.
   (M)   Parking Lot Detention: The maximum storm water ponding depth in any
parking area shall not exceed six inches (6").
   (N)   Rooftop Detention: Rooftop storage of excess storm water shall be
designed and constructed to meet with the city of East Moline building code.
   (O)   Fee In Lieu Of Detention:
      1.   For the purpose of satisfying the requirements for storm water
detention or compensatory storage for a development or redevelopment on a
property for which detention or compensatory storage was not previously
provided, a fee in lieu of detention or compensatory storage may be assessed
against the development prior to the issuance of a permit. Fees shall be
calculated to establish the property's fair share of costs to provide detention
or compensatory storage for the watershed or drainage basin in which the
property exists. The cost figures used for detention shall be actual costs for
detention or compensatory storage being provided by contract or estimated costs
for planned detention or compensatory storage facilities approved by the
director of engineering. All revenues received through such fees shall be used
for no purpose other than defraying public costs associated with providing
detention or compensatory storage facilities.
      2.   The city of East Moline also may require a fee for each acre/foot of
detention needed in lieu of the applicant building a basin on site, provided
the property will discharge storm water into existing or proposed detention
facilities with added capacity for the additional runoff.
   (P)   Cooperative Detention: The city of East Moline will consider joint
detention facilities developed through cooperative efforts that comply with all
requirements of this ordinance. (Ord. 07-18, 10-15-2007)
8-12-26: STORM WATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (SWPPP):
   (A)   General:
      1.   The area disturbed shall be assumed to include the entire property
area unless the applicable plans specifically exclude certain areas from
disturbance.
      2.   The owner bears the responsibility for implementation of the SWPPP
and notification of all contractors and utility agencies on the site.
      3.   SWPPPs must be provided for all phases of development, including
sanitary sewer construction, storm drainage system construction, water line,
street and sidewalk construction, general grading and the construction of
individual homes. The class 2 grading and drainage permit holder will not be
required to provide an SWPPP for the activities of utility agencies.
      4.   The regulations for construction or postconstruction management will
be used for all regulated construction sites that are contained in the most
recent edition of the "Illinois Urban Manual".
      5.   The city of East Moline will use the Illinois department of
transportation (IDOT) system of compliance that is outlined in the "Bureau Of
Design And Environment (BDE) Design Manual".
      6.   The subsequent owners of individual lots in a subdivision with an
approved SWPPP bears the responsibility for continued implementation of the
approved SWPPPs for all construction activity within or related to the
individual lot, excluding construction managed by utility agencies.
   (B)   Requirements For Utility Construction:
      1.   Utility companies shall be responsible for compliance with the
requirements of this ordinance.
      2.   Utility companies shall develop and implement best management
practices (BMPs) to prevent the discharge of pollutants on any site of utility
construction within the city of East Moline. Disturbed areas shall be
minimized, disturbed soil shall be managed and construction site entrances
shall be managed to prevent sediment tracking. Sediment tracked onto public
streets shall be removed immediately by the utility agency.
      3.   Prior to entering a construction site, utility agencies shall obtain
a copy of any SWPPPs for the project from the owner. Any disturbance to BMPs
resulting from utility construction shall be repaired immediately by the
utility company in compliance with the SWPPP.
   (C)   Required Documentation: A class 2 grading and drainage permit requires
the execution and record maintenance of the following forms and reports (see
also the erosion control plan action matrix, NPDES action matrix - IDOT). The
most current version of the standard forms from the Illinois department of
transportation and the Illinois environmental protection agency (IEPA) shall be
used. The approved project erosion control documents shall be kept on file at
the construction site or at a nearby field office and must be made available to
the general public upon request.
      1.   A storm water pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) using the IDOT SWPPP
template (form BDE 2342).
      2.   A contractor certification statement (CCS) prepared prior to the
start of construction by the contractor responsible for erosion control using
the IDOT CCS template (form BDE 2342a). The grading and drainage permit holder
shall provide the contractor responsible for erosion control with a copy of the
IEPA NPDES statewide permit ILR10.
      3.   A notice of intent (NOI) shall be filed at least forty eight (48)
hours prior to the start of construction and shall be prepared by the grading
and drainage permit holder (the original sent by certified mail to the IEPA
with transmittal copy to the director of engineering, and a copy kept in the
project erosion control file). Use the IDOT NOI template (found in forms
section of the "IDOT Construction Manual" WPC 623).
      4.   A NPDES/erosion control inspection report (ECIR) shall be prepared
by the grading and drainage permit holder on a weekly basis and after any one-
half inch (1/2") rainfall (to be kept in the project erosion control file). Use
current IDOT ECIR template (BC 2259).
      5.   An incidence of noncompliance (ION) and corrective action shall be
filed by the grading and drainage permit holder within five (5) working days of
the incident (the original sent by certified mail to the IEPA with transmittal
copy to the director of engineering and a copy kept in the project erosion
control file). Use current IDOT ION template (found in forms section of the
IDOT construction manual WPC 624).
      6.   A notice of termination (NOT) shall be filed upon final
stabilization of erosion (minimum 70 percent viable vegetative growth) by the
grading and drainage permit holder (the original sent by certified mail to the
IEPA with transmittal copy to the director of engineering and a copy kept in
the project erosion control file). Use current IDOT NOT template V (found in
forms section of the "IDOT Construction Manual" WPC 621).
   (D)   Applicability And Guidelines:
      1.   It is the responsibility of the grading and drainage permit holder
to prepare and maintain documentation to meet the NPDES permit requirements for
private grading and construction projects.
      2.   The director of engineering shall be given immediate access to all
required project NPDES documents.
      3.   All notices sent to the IEPA shall be copied to the director of
engineering.
   (E)   Referenced Standards: Design standards for erosion and sediment
control shall comply with the most current provisions of the US EPA
regulations, IEPA regulations, IDOT erosion control/NPDES guidelines and per
the "Illinois Urban Manual", prepared by the United States department of
agriculture, natural resources conservation service unless otherwise stated by
this ordinance.
   (F)   General Erosion And Sediment Control Design Features: The following
principles shall apply to all construction undertaken under the authorization
of a class 2 grading and drainage permit:
      1.   New development or redevelopment shall be designed to create the
least potential for erosion. The disturbance of slopes greater than seven
percent (7%) should be avoided wherever possible. Natural contours should be
followed as closely as possible.
      2.   Natural vegetation shall be retained and protected wherever
possible. Areas immediately adjacent to natural watercourses, lakes, ponds, and
wetlands are to be left undisturbed wherever possible. Temporary crossings of
watercourses, when permitted, must include appropriate stabilization measures.
      3.   Special precautions shall be taken to prevent damages resultant from
any necessary development activity within or adjacent to any stream, lake, pond
or wetland. Preventative measures shall reflect the sensitivity of these areas
to erosion and sedimentation.
      4.   The smallest practical area of land should be exposed for the
shortest practical time during development.
      5.   Sediment basins or traps, filter barriers, diversions, and any other
appropriate sediment or runoff control measures shall be installed prior to
site clearing and grading and maintained to remove sediment from runoff waters
from land undergoing development.
      6.   In the design of erosion control facilities and practices,
aesthetics and the requirements of continuing maintenance must be considered.
      7.   Provisions shall be made to accommodate the increased runoff caused
by changed soil and surface conditions during and after development.
Drainageways should be designed so that their final gradients and the resultant
velocities and rates of discharge will not create additional erosion on site or
downstream.
      8.   Permanent vegetation and structures shall be installed and
functional as soon as practical during development. Disturbed areas shall be
stabilized with approved permanent measures within seven (7) calendar days
following the end of active disturbance or redisturbance.
      9.   Those areas being converted from agricultural purposes to other land
uses shall be vegetated with an appropriate protective cover prior to
development.
      10.   All waste generated as a result of site development activity shall
be properly disposed of and shall be prevented from being carried off the site
by either wind or water.
      11.   All construction sites shall provide measures to prevent sediment
from being tracked onto public or private roadways.
      12.   All temporary soil erosion and sediment control practices shall be
maintained to function as intended until the contributing drainage area has
been permanently stabilized at which time they shall be removed within thirty
(30) days after final site stabilization.
   (G)   Materials And Construction Notes:
      1.   Silt fence and coconut fiber shall be installed in accordance with
the material and construction requirements of the "Illinois Urban Manual".
      2.   Erosion control blankets, bales, seeding and riprap shall be
installed in accordance with material and construction requirements of the
"Illinois Urban Manual", latest edition.
   (H)   Testing And Inspection: For testing and inspection use the residents
weekly NPDES/erosion control inspection report BC 2259 from the "Illinois DOT
Construction Manual".
   (I)   Grading And Drainage Plan Requirements: A grading and drainage plan
shall be submitted showing all measures necessary to meet the objectives of
this ordinance throughout all phases of construction. The development of a
grading and drainage plan shall follow the requirements of this ordinance and
the procedures in the latest edition of the "Illinois Procedures And Standards
For Urban Soil Erosion And Sedimentation Control" which is hereby incorporated
into this ordinance by reference. Standards and specifications for BMPs shall
follow the requirements of this ordinance and the criteria in the latest
edition of the "Illinois Urban Manual" which is hereby incorporated into this
ordinance by reference. The director of engineering may waive specific
requirements for the content of submissions upon finding that the information
submitted is sufficient to show that the work will comply with the objectives
and principles of this ordinance. Permanent soil erosion and sediment control
features needed at the completion of any development site shall be included in
the submittal.
The submitted grading and drainage plan shall include:
      1.   Mapping And Descriptions: The existing and proposed erosion and
sediment control features of the property and immediate vicinity including:
         (a)   Items as required for the grading and drainage plan submittal.
         (b)   Location of the slope disturbance line.
         (c)   Location and description of the soil erosion and sediment
control measures to be employed during construction.
         (d)   For any structures proposed to be located on the slope side of
the slope disturbance line, the map shall include the limits of disturbance
including: tree removal, soil erosion and sediment control measures during
construction, details of method(s) proposed for providing slope stability,
permanent storm water control measures, and permanent erosion and sediment
control measures all being certified by a registered professional engineer or a
"certified professional erosion control specialist".
         (e)   The predominant soil types on the site, their location, and
their limitations for the proposed use as defined by the USDA natural resources
conservation service (NRCS).
         (f)   Location and description, including standard details, of all
sediment control measures and specifics of sediment basins and traps, including
outlet details.
         (g)   Location and description (specification) of all soil
stabilization and erosion control measures, including seeding mixtures and
rates, types of sod, method of seedbed preparation (type and extent of tillage,
weed control, planting equipment, etc.), expected seeding dates, type, method
and rate of lime and fertilizer application (soil fertility testing required),
kind and quantity of mulching for both temporary and permanent vegetative
control measures, and types of nonvegetative stabilization measures.
         (h)   Location and description of all runoff control measures,
including diversions, waterways, and outlets.
         (i)   Location and description of methods to prevent tracking of
sediment off site including construction entrance details, as appropriate.
         (j)   Description of dust and traffic control measures.
         (k)   Provisions for maintenance of control measures, including type
and frequency of maintenance, easements, and estimates of the cost of
maintenance.
         (l)   Identification (name, address, and telephone) of the person(s)
or entity which will have legal responsibility for maintenance of soil erosion
control structures and measures during development and after development is
completed.
   (J)   Site Development Requirements: On site sediment control measures, as
specified by the following criteria, shall be constructed as specified in the
referenced handbooks, and functional prior to initiating clearing, grading,
stripping, excavating or fill activities on the site.
      1.   For new developments or redevelopments of more than one acre but
less than five (5) acres, a sediment trap or equivalent control measure shall
be constructed at the down slope point of the disturbed area.
      2.   For new developments or redevelopments of one acre or more, a
sediment basin or equivalent control measure shall be constructed at the down
slope point of the disturbed area.
      3.   Sediment basin and sediment trap designs shall provide for both
"dry" detention and "wet" detention sediment storage. The detention storage
shall be composed of equal volumes of "wet" detention storage and "dry"
detention storage and each shall be sized as regulated in this ordinance. The
release rate of the basin shall be that rate as regulated in this ordinance.
The elevation of the outlet structure shall be placed such that it only drains
the dry detention storage.
      4.   The sediment storage shall be sized to store the estimated sediment
load generated from the site over the duration of the construction period with
a minimum storage equivalent to the volume or sediment generated in one year.
For construction periods exceeding one year, the one year sediment load and a
sediment removal schedule may be substituted.
      5.   To the extent possible or as otherwise regulated in this ordinance
all desirable trees eight inches (8") in diameter and larger shall be protected
for their present and future value for erosion protection and other
environmental benefits. Trees that have been selected for preservation shall be
protected following criteria from the "Illinois Urban Manual" prior to the
beginning of any clearing, grading, stripping, excavation, or filling of the
site. A "no" construction zone shall be established and marked at the perimeter
of the drip line of each tree which is to be preserved.
      6.   Storm water conveyance channels, including ditches, swales, and
diversions, and the outlets of all channels and pipes shall be designed and
constructed as regulated in this ordinance. All constructed or modified
channels shall be stabilized within forty eight (48) hours, consistent with the
following standards and as required in the referenced handbooks:
         (a)   For grades up to four percent (4%), seeding in combination with
mulch, erosion blanket, or an equivalent control measure shall be applied. Sod
or erosion blanket or mat shall be applied to the bottom of the channel.
         (b)   For grades of four (4) to eight percent (8%), sod or an
equivalent control measure shall be applied in the channel.
         (c)   For grades greater than eight percent (8%), rock, riprap, or an
equivalent control measure shall be applied over filter fabric or other type of
soil protection, or the grade shall be effectively reduced using drop
structures.
      7.   Land disturbance activities in stream channels shall be avoided,
where possible, or as regulated by this ordinance. If disturbance activities
are unavoidable, the following requirements shall be met:
         (a)   Construction vehicles shall be kept out of the stream channel to
the maximum extent practicable. Where construction crossings are necessary,
temporary crossings shall be constructed of nonerosive material, such as riprap
or gravel.
         (b)   The time and area of disturbance of stream channels shall be
kept to a minimum. The stream channel, including bed and banks, shall be
stabilized within forty eight (48) hours after channel disturbance is
completed, interrupted, or stopped.
         (c)   Whenever channel relocation is necessary, the new channel shall
be constructed under dry conditions and fully stabilized before flow is
diverted, incorporating meanders, pool and riffle sequence, and riparian
planting.
      8.   Storm sewer inlets and culverts shall be protected by sediment traps
or filter barriers meeting accepted design standards and specifications.
      9.   Soil storage piles containing more than ten (10) cubic yards of
material shall not be located with a down slope drainage length of less than
fifty feet (50') to a roadway, drainage channel, or abandoned mine. Filter
barriers, including straw bales, filter fence, or equivalent, shall be
installed immediately surrounding the perimeter of the pile.
      10.   If dewatering devices are used, discharge locations shall be
protected from erosion. All pumped discharges shall be routed through
appropriately designed sediment traps or basins, or equivalent and shall not be
deposited into an abandoned mine.
      11.   Each site shall have graveled (or equivalent) entrance roads,
access drives, and parking areas of sufficient length and width to prevent
sediment from being tracked onto public or private roadways. Any sediment
reaching a public or private road shall be removed by shoveling or street
cleaning (not flushing) before the end of each workday and transported to a
controlled sediment disposal area. (Ord. 07-18, 10-15-2007)
8-12-27: FEES:
 
(A) Class 1 grading and drainage permit        $150.00
(B) Class 2 grading and drainage permit        250.00
(C) Appeal to the storm water board of appeals 150.00
    (Ord. 07-18, 10-15-2007)
 
CHAPTER 13
STORMWATER UTILITY
SECTION:
8-13-1: Purpose; Intent
8-13-2: In General
8-13-3: Property Subject To Stormwater Utility Service Charge
8-13-4: Billing
8-13-5: Appeals Concerning Fees
8-13-6: Collection; Lien
8-13-1: PURPOSE; INTENT:
   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to establish a stormwater utility to
protect the public health, safety, and welfare of the residents of East Moline
from damage caused by stormwater runoff and floods by reduction, control and
prevention of the discharge of pollutants to the city's municipal separate
storm sewer utility system. The stormwater utility shall be responsible for
collecting revenue to directly support maintenance and repair of the existing
storm drain systems, development of drainage plans, flood control measures, and
water quality programs, and funding of capital improvements. The stormwater
utility shall require that all property owners within the city, all of whom
ultimately benefit from the aforementioned, pay an appropriate share of the
cost of the drainage, detention and flood protection facilities necessary to
manage such stormwater and floods.
The stormwater utility shall function as a self-supported "enterprise fund" in
the city budget and accounting system, separate and apart from the city's
general fund for purpose of dedicating and protecting all funding applicable to
the utility's operation, maintenance, and capital financing costs.
   (B)   Some specific stormwater management services the city of East Moline
is responsible for include:
      1.   Maintaining the city's levees and flood protection infrastructure.
      2.   Developing, administering, inspecting, and enforcing a federally
mandated stormwater program that is required by USEPA's phase II of the
national pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) program.
      3.   Preventing harmful pollutants from being washed by stormwater runoff
into local streams and rivers as required by USEPA.
      4.   Keeping public streets drained and cleared to make travel safe and
minimize flood hazards.
      5.   Performing necessary maintenance, repairs and replacement of aging
stormwater infrastructure including stormwater inlets, pipes, culverts, and
other structures to safely collect and convey stormwater through all parts of
the city.
      6.   Making repairs to ravines, ditches, open stream channel systems, and
other public drainageways to reduce erosion and loss of property.
      7.   Ongoing inspection and maintenance to mitigate existing and future
problems.
   (C)   It is the intent of the city council in enacting this chapter:
      1.   To promote public health, safety, and welfare by permitting the
movement of emergency vehicles during flooding periods and minimizing flood
losses and the inconvenience and damage to property and infrastructure
resulting from uncontrolled and unplanned stormwater runoff in the city;
      2.   To establish a stormwater utility to coordinate, design, construct,
manage, operate, and maintain the city's stormwater conveyance system and flood
protection infrastructure and to fund the same;
      3.   To provide for and promote compliance by the city with federal and
state laws governing the discharge of pollutants from the municipal storm sewer
system and to provide for and promote compliance with a national pollutant
discharge elimination system (NPDES) permit issued to the city for such
discharge;
      4.   To establish reasonable stormwater fees based on the approximate
contribution of stormwater runoff from each parcel to the city's drainage
facilities which will provide a stable funding source to enable the city of
East Moline to construct, operate, maintain, administer and replace the city of
East Moline stormwater conveyance system, flood protection infrastructure and
for compliance with United States environmental protection agency (USEPA)
stormwater NPDES permit requirements;
      5.   To encourage and facilitate urban water resources management
techniques, including, without limitation, detention of stormwater and
floodwater, reduction of the need to construct storm sewers, reduction of
pollution, and enhancement of the environment;
      6.   To maintain and improve the quality of waterways impacted by the
storm drainage system within the city of East Moline;
      7.   To preserve property values by protecting new and existing buildings
and improvements to buildings from damage due to stormwater and/or floodwater;
      8.   To assure that new developments and redevelopments do not increase
flood or drainage hazards to others, or create unstable conditions susceptible
to erosion;
      9.   To preserve the natural characteristics of stream corridors in order
to moderate flood and storm water impacts, and to protect water quality;
      10.   To prevent the discharge of contaminated stormwater runoff and
illicit discharges from industrial, commercial, residential, and construction
sites into the storm drainage system within the city of East Moline;
      11.   To promote public awareness of the hazards involved in the improper
discharge of trash, yard waste, lawn chemicals, pet waste, wastewater, oil,
petroleum products, cleaning products, paint products, hazardous waste,
sediment and other pollutants into the storm drainage system;
      12.   To encourage recycling of used motor oil and safe disposal of other
hazardous consumer products. (Ord. 09-16, 8-17-2009)
8-13-2: IN GENERAL:
   (A)   All property owners and residents in the city benefit from a
stormwater management program. All property owners receive indirect benefits
from a properly maintained and operated stormwater management system for the
entire city which is on public property. Stormwater management activities with
broad benefits include keeping the public streets drained and cleared so random
flooding does not occur and travel is safe, making necessary stormwater
infrastructure upgrades, reducing erosion and other pollutants that enter
streams and rivers, and collecting and conveying stormwater safely through all
parts of the city. Upgrades and maintenance to the city's flood protection
facilities are also important to the city as a whole. The city as a whole is
also ultimately responsible for compliance with federal, state, and local
regulations for water quality improvements. Even in a case where an individual
property does not drain to the city drainage system, the property still
receives direct benefits, which include protecting the property from upstream
runoff, providing safe streets to travel on during rainfall and flooding,
regional water quality improvements, and other tangible and intangible
benefits.
   (B)   East Moline's public stormwater drainage system conveys rain and
snowmelt runoff from developed properties. Impervious areas on developed
properties increase the amount of runoff, which in turn increases the necessary
size of pipes, structures and ditches. The major contributing factor in water
pollution and erosion is the amount of runoff. Impervious area can be
quantified and is a reasonably objective measure of the amount of stormwater
that leaves a property as runoff.
   (C)   All owners of developed property located within the city of East
Moline shall be charged for and shall pay the city of East Moline, based on the
relative amount of stormwater which is determined to be generated by impervious
developed areas on the owner's real property. The impact of the stormwater
runoff from the aforementioned real property upon the city's stormwater and
flood protection facilities shall be determined on the basis of the rates and
measurements contained and set forth in this section.
   (D)   A stormwater rate study dated April 2009, was prepared by Stanley
Consultants, Inc. (Muscatine, Iowa), and was accepted by the city council by
resolution 09-31 on April 20, 2009.
   (E)   The rate structure utilizes a property's impervious surface area for
assessing the stormwater charge. A unit of impervious surface area on an
average single-family, residential property, or "equivalent residential unit
(ERU)", is the unit used for assessing stormwater charges. One ERU shall equal
two thousand two hundred (2,200) square feet of impervious surface area for the
city of East Moline.
      1.   Three Tiered Rate Structure For Residential And Agricultural Uses:
Single-family homeowners and agricultural customers with a developed property
and having a property gross area less than or equal to two (2) acres will be
charged according to a three (3) tiered rate structure based on the property's
gross area. The following table identifies the criteria for the three (3)
tiered rate structure:
 
Parcel Class Gross Parcel Size                                 Number Of ERUs
Small        Under 11,000 sq. ft. (1/4 acre)                   1 ERU/parcel
Medium       11,000 sq. ft. (1/4 acre) to under 21,800 sq. ft. 1.75 ERUs/parcel
             (1/2 acre)
Large        21,800 sq. ft. (1/2 acre) to 87,120 sq. ft. (2    2.5 ERUs/parcel
             acres)
 
      2.   Stormwater Rates:
         (a)   Commencing on September 20, 2009, to be charged on the October
31, 2009, utility bill, and continuing thereafter, the owners of developed
property shall pay to the city of East Moline a monthly stormwater utility
charge computed in the following manner:
 Utility Rates
 FY 10 FY 11 FY 12
                                                 Utility Rates
                                                 FY 10 FY 11 FY 12
For uses other than single-family residential and            
agricultural:
Stormwater unit rate (per ERU per month)1         $2.32 $2.54 $2.61
Residential and agricultural single-family:
Small parcel                                      2.32  2.54  2.61
Medium parcel                                     4.06  4.45  4.57
Large parcel                                      5.80  6.35  6.53
 
Note:
1.   Charge is unit rate times number of ERUs for measured properties. Actual
impervious area measurements shall be maintained by the city's engineering
department for all residential customers with parcels greater than 2 acres and
nonresidential customers to determine their share of the stormwater management
costs.
         (b)   Notwithstanding any other provision contained herein, in no
event shall any owner specified herein pay less than the rate required for one
ERU per month.
         (c)   City staff is hereby directed to request the city council to
initiate a review of the stormwater utility service charges and to request the
city council to retain, every three (3) years, an independent third party
professional to perform a cost of service rate analysis, and to recommend any
necessary changes to stormwater utility rates which accurately reflect the cost
to serve customers.
         (d)   As part of the building permit process, property owners shall
coordinate with the city's building inspection and engineering staff to ensure
that, as impervious areas change on the owner's property, due to construction
or demolition, the engineering department maintains up to date records of
impervious areas for use by the finance department in determining proper
stormwater utility billing. (Ord. 09-16, 8-17-2009)
8-13-3: PROPERTY SUBJECT TO STORMWATER UTILITY SERVICE CHARGE:
All developed property located within the city of East Moline, whether publicly
or privately owned and whether subject to or exempt from real property
taxation, shall be subject to the stormwater utility service charges fees
established and set forth under this section, with the following exceptions:
   (A)   Street, highway and railroad right of way;
   (B)   Undeveloped property (i.e., no structures, pavement, or other
impervious area on the lot of record). (Ord. 09-16, 8-17-2009)
8-13-4: BILLING:
The stormwater utility charge shall be computed by the director of engineering
and billed by the director of finance. The stormwater utility charge shall be
combined with the monthly billing for other city of East Moline utility
services or, where multiple water users are located in one building, the
director of finance may bill the property owner, who will then be responsible
for payment, but may allocate the charge among his tenants in an equitable
manner. (Ord. 09-16, 8-17-2009)
8-13-5: APPEALS CONCERNING FEES:
Any property owner aggrieved by the property classification or property type
assigned to the owner's property under this section, or aggrieved by the
computation of the stormwater utility charge affecting the owner's property
under this section, may appeal such actions, determination and/or computations
to the city's director of engineering, or to the director of engineering's
designee. Such appeal shall be in writing and shall state the reason and basis
for the appeal. The director of engineering shall consider the appeal and make
a written determination thereon, which such written determination shall be
provided to the property owner taking or filing the appeal. If the property
owner is not satisfied with the written determination of the director of
engineering, the property owner may then request in writing that the property
owner's appeal be heard and decided by the stormwater board of appeals as
previously provided for under the city of East Moline stormwater control
ordinance. If the property owner is not satisfied with the written
determination of the stormwater board of appeals, the property owner may then
request in writing that the property owner's appeal be heard and decided by the
city council. Such written request for city council review shall be filed with
the city clerk within ten (10) days of the property owner's receipt of the
written determination from the stormwater board of appeals. The decision of the
city council shall be final in such appeals. In case of a successful appeal by
the property owner, said property owner shall be entitled to no more than two
(2) years of refunds or recoveries of fees paid prior to the appeal. (Ord. 09-
16, 8-17-2009)
8-13-6: COLLECTION; LIEN:
The stormwater utility shall be billed as one bill with water and sewerage
charges. Stormwater service charges may be liens upon the real estate of the
property owner, whenever the charges become delinquent, only after the bill
therefor is sent to the owner or owners of record of the real estate. (Ord. 15-
04, 10-19-2015)
CHAPTER 14
STANDARDS FOR CONSTRUCTION OF FACILITIES ON RIGHTS OF WAY
SECTION:
8-14-1: Purpose And Scope
8-14-2: Definitions
8-14-3: Annual Registration Required
8-14-4: Permit Required; Applications And Fees
8-14-5: Action On Permit Applications
8-14-6: Effect Of Permit
8-14-7: Revised Permit Drawings
8-14-8: Insurance
8-14-9: Indemnification
8-14-10: Security
8-14-11: Permit Suspension And Revocation
8-14-12: Change Of Ownership Or Owner's Identity Or Legal Status
8-14-13: General Construction Standards
8-14-14: Traffic Control
8-14-15: Location Of Facilities
8-14-16: Construction Methods And Materials
8-14-17: Vegetation Control
8-14-18: Removal, Relocation, Or Modifications Of Utility Facilities
8-14-19: Cleanup And Restoration
8-14-20: Maintenance And Emergency Maintenance
8-14-21: Variances
8-14-22: Penalties
8-14-23: Enforcement
8-14-1: PURPOSE AND SCOPE:
   (A)   Purpose: The purpose of this chapter is to establish policies and
procedures for constructing facilities on rights of way within the city's
jurisdiction, which will provide public benefit consistent with the
preservation of the integrity, safe usage, and visual qualities of the city
rights of way and the city as a whole.
   (B)   Intent: In enacting this chapter, the city intends to exercise its
authority over the rights of way in the city and, in particular, the use of the
public ways and property by utilities, by establishing uniform standards to
address issues presented by utility facilities, including, without limitation:
      1.   Prevent interference with the use of streets, sidewalks, alleys,
parkways and other public ways and places;
      2.   Prevent the creation of visual and physical obstructions and other
conditions that are hazardous to vehicular and pedestrian traffic;
      3.   Prevent interference with the facilities and operations of the
city's utilities and of other utilities lawfully located in rights of way or
public property;
      4.   Protect against environmental damage, including damage to trees,
from the installation of utility facilities;
      5.   Protect against increased stormwater runoff due to structures and
materials that increase impermeable surfaces;
      6.   Preserve the character of the neighborhoods in which facilities are
installed;
      7.   Preserve open space, particularly the tree lined parkways that
characterize certain neighborhoods, districts, and corridors;
      8.   Prevent visual blight from the proliferation of facilities in the
rights of way; and
      9.   Assure the continued safe use and enjoyment of private properties
adjacent to utility facilities locations.
   (C)   Facilities Subject To This Chapter: This chapter applies to all
facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the rights of
way within the jurisdiction of the city. A facility lawfully established prior
to the effective date of this chapter may continue to be maintained, repaired
and operated by the utility as presently constructed and located, except as may
be otherwise provided in any applicable franchise, license or similar
agreement. Additionally, all facilities lawfully established prior to the
effective date of this chapter shall comply with the requirements of this
chapter within sixty (60) days of the expiration date of any applicable
franchise, license or similar agreement. If no such agreement exists, an
established facility must comply with the requirements of this chapter within
sixty (60) days of the effective date of this chapter. The director of
engineering may waive certain requirements of this chapter for lawfully
established facilities if such requirements are unduly burdensome or are not
feasible given that the facilities have already been established.
   (D)   Franchises, Licenses, Or Similar Agreements: The city, in its
discretion and as limited by law, may require utilities to enter into a
franchise, license or similar agreement for the privilege of locating their
facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the city
rights of way. Utilities that are not required by law to enter into such an
agreement may request that the city enter into such an agreement. In such an
agreement, the city may provide for terms and conditions inconsistent with this
chapter.
   (E)   Effect Of Franchises, Licenses, Or Similar Agreements:
      1.   Utilities Other Than Telecommunications Providers: In the event that
a utility other than a telecommunications provider has a franchise, license or
similar agreement with the city, such franchise, license or similar agreement
shall govern and control during the term of such agreement and any lawful
renewal or extension thereof.
      2.   Telecommunications Providers: In the event of any conflict with, or
inconsistency between, the provisions of this chapter and the provisions of any
franchise, license or similar agreement between the city and any
telecommunications provider, the provisions of such franchise, license or
similar agreement shall govern and control during the term of such agreement
and any lawful renewal or extension thereof.
   (F)   Conflicts With Other Chapters: This chapter supersedes all chapters or
parts of chapters adopted prior hereto that are in conflict herewith, to the
extent of such conflict.
   (G)   Conflicts With State And Federal Laws: In the event that applicable
federal or state laws or regulations conflict with the requirements of this
chapter, the utility shall comply with the requirements of this chapter to the
maximum extent possible without violating federal or state laws or regulations.
   (H)   Sound Engineering Judgment: The city shall use sound engineering
judgment when administering this chapter and may vary the standards,
conditions, and requirements expressed in this chapter when the city so
determines. Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the ability of the city
to regulate its rights of way for the protection of the public health, safety
and welfare. (Ord. 10-31, 10-18-2010)
8-14-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter and unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the
words and terms listed shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this
section. Any term not defined in this section shall have the meaning ascribed
to it in 92 Illinois administrative code section 530.30, unless the context
clearly requires otherwise.
AASHTO: American Association Of State Highway And Transportation Officials.
ANSI: American National Standards Institute.
ASTM: American Society For Testing And Materials.
APPLICANT: A person applying for a permit under this chapter.
BACKFILL: The methods or materials for replacing excavated material in a trench
or pit.
BORE OR BORING: To excavate an underground cylindrical cavity for the insertion
of a pipe or electrical conductor.
CABLE OPERATOR: That term as defined in 47 USC 522(5).
CABLE SERVICE: That term as defined in 47 USC 522(6).
CABLE SYSTEM: That term as defined in 47 USC 522(7).
CARRIER PIPE: The pipe enclosing the liquid, gas or slurry to be transported.
CASING: A structural protective enclosure for transmittal devices such as:
carrier pipes, electrical conductors, and fiber optic devices.
CITY: The city of East Moline.
CLEAR ZONE: The total roadside border area, starting at the edge of the
pavement, available for safe use by errant vehicles. This area may consist of a
shoulder, a recoverable slope, a nonrecoverable slope, and a clear run out
area. The desired width is dependent upon the traffic volumes and speeds, and
on the roadside geometry. Distances are specified in the AASHTO "Roadside
Design Guide".
COATING: Protective wrapping or mastic cover applied to buried pipe for
protection against external corrosion.
CODE: The city of East Moline code of ordinances.
CONDUCTOR: Wire carrying electrical current.
CONDUIT: A casing or encasement for wires or cables.
CONSTRUCTION OR CONSTRUCT: The installation, repair, maintenance, placement,
alteration, enlargement, demolition, modification or abandonment in place of
facilities.
COVER: The depth of earth or backfill over buried utility pipe or conductor.
CROSSING FACILITY: A facility that crosses one or more right of way lines of a
right of way.
DIRECTOR OF ENGINEERING: The city director of engineering or his or her
designee.
DISRUPT THE RIGHT OF WAY: For the purposes of this chapter, any work that
obstructs the right of way or causes a material adverse effect on the use of
the right of way for its intended use. Such work may include, without
limitation, the following: excavating or other cutting; placement (whether
temporary or permanent) of materials, equipment, devices, or structures; damage
to vegetation; and compaction or loosening of the soil, and shall not include
the parking of vehicles or equipment in a manner that does not materially
obstruct the flow of traffic on a highway.
EMERGENCY: Any immediate maintenance to the facility required for the safety of
the public using or in the vicinity of the right of way or immediate
maintenance required for the health and safety of the general public served by
the utility.
ENCASEMENT: Provision of a protective casing.
EQUIPMENT: Materials, tools, implements, supplies, and/or other items used to
facilitate construction of facilities.
EXCAVATION: The making of a hole or cavity by removing material, or laying bare
by digging.
EXTRA HEAVY PIPE: Pipe meeting ASTM standards for this pipe designation.
FACILITY: All structures, devices, objects, and materials (including, but not
limited to, track and rails, wires, ducts, fiber optic cable, antennas, vaults,
boxes, equipment enclosures, cabinets, pedestals, poles, conduits, grates,
covers, pipes, cables, and appurtenances thereto) located on, over, above,
along, upon, under, across, or within rights of way under this chapter. For
purposes of this chapter, the term "facility" shall not include any facility
owned or operated by the city.
FREESTANDING FACILITY: A facility that is not a crossing facility or a parallel
facility, such as an antenna, transformer, pump, or meter station.
FRONTAGE ROAD: Roadway, usually parallel, providing access to land adjacent to
the highway where it is precluded by control of access to a highway.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS: Any substance or material which, due to its quantity,
form, concentration, location, or other characteristics, is determined by the
director of engineering to pose an unreasonable and imminent risk to the life,
health or safety of persons or property or to the ecological balance of the
environment, including, but not limited to, explosives, radioactive materials,
petroleum or petroleum products or gases, poisons, etiology (biological)
agents, flammables, corrosives or any substance determined to be hazardous or
toxic under any federal or state law, statute or regulation.
HIGHWAY: A specific type of right of way used for vehicular traffic including
rural or urban roads or streets. "Highway" includes all highway land and
improvements, including roadways, ditches and embankments, bridges, drainage
structures, signs, guardrails, protective structures and appurtenances
necessary or convenient for vehicle traffic.
HIGHWAY CODE: The Illinois highway code, 605 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-101
et seq., as amended from time to time.
HOLDER: A person or entity that has received authorization to offer or provide
cable or video service from the ICC pursuant to the Illinois cable and video
competition law, 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-401.
ICC: Illinois commerce commission.
IDOT: Illinois department of transportation.
JULIE: The joint utility locating information for excavators utility
notification program.
JACKING: Pushing a pipe horizontally under a roadway by mechanical means with
or without boring.
JETTING: Pushing a pipe through the earth using water under pressure to create
a cavity ahead of the pipe.
JOINT USE: The use of pole lines, trenches or other facilities by two (2) or
more utilities.
MAJOR INTERSECTION: The intersection of two (2) or more major arterial
highways.
OCCUPANCY: The presence of facilities on, over or under right of way.
PARALLEL FACILITY: A facility that is generally parallel or longitudinal to the
centerline of a right of way.
PARKWAY: Any portion of the right of way not improved by street or sidewalk.
PAVEMENT CUT: The removal of an area of pavement for access to facility or for
the construction of a facility.
PERMITTEE: That entity to which a permit has been issued pursuant to sections
8-14-4 and
8-14-5 of this chapter.
PRACTICABLE: That which is performable, feasible or possible, rather than that
which is simply convenient.
PRESSURE: The internal force acting radially against the walls of a carrier
pipe expressed in pounds per square inch gauge (psig).
PETROLEUM PRODUCTS PIPELINES: Pipelines carrying crude or refined liquid
petroleum products including, but not limited to, gasoline, distillates,
propane, butane, or coal slurry.
PROMPT: That which is done within a period of time specified by the city. If no
time period is specified, the period shall be thirty (30) days.
PUBLIC ENTITY: A legal entity that constitutes or is part of the government,
whether at local, state or federal level.
RESTORATION: The repair of a right of way, highway, roadway, or other area
disrupted by the construction of a facility.
RIGHT OF WAY OR RIGHTS OF WAY: Any street, alley, other land or waterway,
dedicated or commonly used for pedestrian or vehicular traffic or other similar
purposes, including utility easements, in which the city has the right and
authority to authorize, regulate or permit the location of facilities other
than those of the city. "Right of way" or "rights of way" shall not include any
real or personal city property that is not specifically described in the
previous two (2) sentences and shall not include city buildings, fixtures and
other structures or improvements, regardless of whether they are situated in
the right of way.
ROADWAY: That part of the highway that includes the pavement and shoulders.
SALE OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS AT RETAIL: The transmitting, supplying, or
furnishing of telecommunications and all services rendered in connection
therewith for a consideration, other than between a parent corporation and its
wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, when the gross
charge made by one such corporation to another such corporation is not greater
than the gross charge paid to the retailer for their use or consumption and not
for sale.
SECURITY FUND: That amount of security required pursuant to section
8-14-10 of this chapter.
SHOULDER: A width of roadway, adjacent to the pavement, providing lateral
support to the pavement edge and providing an area for emergency vehicular
stops and storage of snow removed from the pavement.
SOUND ENGINEERING JUDGMENT: A decision(s) consistent with generally accepted
engineering principles, practices and experience.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS: This term includes, but is not limited to, messages or
information transmitted through use of local, toll and wide area telephone
service, channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter service, computer
exchange service, private line services, mobile radio services, cellular mobile
telecommunications services, stationary two-way radio, paging service and any
other form of mobile or portable one-way or two-way communications, and any
other transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar means,
between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio,
satellite, or similar facilities. "Private line" means a dedicated nontraffic
sensitive service for a single customer that entitles the customer to exclusive
or priority use of a communications channel, or a group of such channels, from
one or more specified locations to one or more other specified locations.
"Telecommunications" shall not include value added services in which computer
processing applications are used to act on the form, content, code and protocol
of the information for purposes other than transmission. "Telecommunications"
shall not include purchase of telecommunications by a telecommunications
service provider for use as a component part of the service provided by such
provider to the ultimate retail consumer who originates or terminates the end
to end communications. "Telecommunications" shall not include the provision of
cable services through a cable system as defined in the cable communications
act of 1984 (47 USC sections 521 and following), as now or hereafter amended,
or cable or other programming services subject to an open video system fee
payable to the city through an open video system as defined in the rules of the
federal communications commission (47 CFR section 76.1500 and following), as
now or hereafter amended.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER: Any person that installs, owns, operates or
controls facilities in the right of way used or designed to be used to transmit
telecommunications in any form.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS RETAILER: Means and includes every person engaged in making
sales of telecommunications at retail as defined herein.
TRENCH: A relatively narrow open excavation for the installation of an
underground facility.
UTILITY: The individual or entity owning or operating any "facility" as defined
in this chapter.
VENT: A pipe to allow the dissipation into the atmosphere of gases or vapors
from an underground casing.
VIDEO SERVICE: That term as defined in section 21-201(v) of the Illinois cable
and video competition law of 2007, 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 21-201(v).
WATER LINES: Pipelines carrying raw or potable water.
WET BORING: Boring using water under pressure at the cutting auger to soften
the earth and to provide a sluice for the excavated material. (Ord. 10-31, 10-
18-2010)
8-14-3: ANNUAL REGISTRATION REQUIRED:
Every utility that occupies right of way within the city shall register on
January 1 of each year with the director of engineering, providing the
utility's name, address and regular business telephone and telecopy numbers,
the name of one or more contact persons who can act on behalf of the utility in
connection with emergencies involving the utility's facilities in the right of
way and a twenty four (24) hour telephone number for each such person, and
evidence of insurance as required in section
8-14-8 of this chapter, in the form of a certificate of insurance. (Ord. 10-31,
10-18-2010)
8-14-4: PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATIONS AND FEES:
   (A)   Permit Required: No person shall construct (as defined in this
chapter) any facility on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within
any city right of way which: 1) changes the location of the facility, 2) adds a
new facility, 3) disrupts the right of way (as defined in this chapter), or 4)
materially increases the amount of area or space occupied by the facility on,
over, above, along, under, across or within the right of way, without first
filing an application with the director of engineering and obtaining a permit
from the city therefor, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. No permit
shall be required for installation and maintenance of service connections to
customers' premises where there will be no disruption of the right of way. No
permit shall be required for any right of way used by the city.
   (B)   Permit Application: All applications for permits pursuant to this
chapter shall be filed on a form provided by the city and shall be filed in
such number of duplicate copies as the city may designate. The applicant may
designate those portions of its application materials that it reasonably
believes contain proprietary or confidential information as "proprietary" or
"confidential" by clearly marking each page of such materials accordingly.
   (C)   Minimum General Application Requirements: The application shall be
made by the utility or its duly authorized representative and shall contain, at
a minimum, the following:
      1.   The utility's name and address and telephone and telecopy numbers;
      2.   The applicant's name and address, if different than the utility, its
telephone and telecopy numbers, e-mail address, and its interest in the work;
      3.   The names, addresses and telephone and telecopy numbers and e-mail
addresses of all professional consultants, if any, advising the applicant with
respect to the application;
      4.   A general description of the proposed work and the purposes and
intent of the facility and the uses to which the facility will be put. The
scope and detail of such description shall be appropriate to the nature and
character of the work to be performed, with special emphasis on those matters
likely to be affected or impacted by the work proposed;
      5.   Evidence that the utility has placed on file with the city:
         (a)   A written traffic control plan demonstrating the protective
measures and devices that will be employed consistent with the "Illinois Manual
On Uniform Traffic Control Devices", to prevent injury or damage to persons or
property and to minimize disruptions to efficient pedestrian and vehicular
traffic; and
         (b)   An emergency contingency plan which shall specify the nature of
potential emergencies, including, without limitation, construction and
hazardous materials emergencies, and the intended response by the applicant.
The intended response shall include notification to the city and shall promote
protection of the safety and convenience of the public. Compliance with ICC
regulations for emergency contingency plans constitutes compliance with this
section unless the city finds that additional information or assurances are
needed;
      6.   Drawings, plans and specifications showing the work proposed,
including the certification of an engineer that such drawings, plans, and
specifications comply with applicable codes, rules, and regulations;
      7.   Evidence of insurance as required in section
8-14-8 of this chapter;
      8.   Evidence of posting of the security fund as required in section
8-14-10 of this chapter;
      9.   Any request for a variance from one or more provisions of this
chapter (see section
8-14-21 of this chapter); and
      10.   Such additional information as may be reasonably required by the
city.
   (D)   Supplemental Application Requirements For Specific Types Of Utilities:
In addition to the requirements of subsection (C) of this section, the permit
application shall include the following items, as applicable to the specific
utility that is the subject of the permit application:
      1.   In the case of the installation of a new electric power,
communications, telecommunications, cable television service, video service or
natural gas distribution system, evidence that any "certificate of public
convenience and necessity" or other regulatory authorization that the applicant
is required by law to obtain, or that the applicant has elected to obtain, has
been issued by the ICC or other jurisdictional authority;
      2.   In the case of natural gas systems, state the proposed pipe size,
design, construction class, and operating pressures;
      3.   In the case of water lines, indicate that all requirements of the
Illinois environmental protection agency, division of public water supplies,
and the city have been satisfied;
      4.   In the case of sewer line installations, indicate that the land and
water pollution requirements of the Illinois environmental protection agency,
division of water pollution control and the city, have been satisfied; or
      5.   In the case of petroleum products pipelines, state the type or types
of petroleum products, pipe size, maximum working pressure, and the design
standard to be followed.
   (E)   Applicant's Duty To Update Information: Throughout the entire permit
application review period and the construction period authorized by the permit,
any amendments to information contained in a permit application shall be
submitted by the utility in writing to the city within thirty (30) days after
the change necessitating the amendment.
   (F)   Application Fees: Unless otherwise provided by franchise, license, or
similar agreement, all applications for permits pursuant to this chapter shall
be accompanied by a fee in the amount of five hundred sixty dollars ($560.00),
which amount may be amended from time to time by action of the city council. No
application fee is required to be paid by any electricity utility that is
paying the municipal electricity infrastructure maintenance fee pursuant to the
electricity infrastructure maintenance fee act. No application fee is required
to be paid by any telecommunications utility that is paying the municipal
telecommunications tax pursuant to the simplified municipal telecommunications
tax act.
Unless otherwise provided by franchise, license, or similar agreement or unless
prohibited by preemptive law, each permittee shall pay an annual fee of one
dollar fifty cents ($1.50) per linear foot of the facilities located in the
public right of way, up to a maximum of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) per
year. Any discrepancy in linear footage actually installed shall be reconciled
by the parties upon submission of as built drawings at the conclusion of the
project. Such fees shall serve as reimbursement for the city's costs in
connection with reviewing, inspecting, and supervising the use and occupancy of
the public right of way on behalf of the public and existing or future users.
(Ord. 10-31, 10-18-2010)
8-14-5: ACTION ON PERMIT APPLICATIONS:
   (A)   City Review Of Permit Applications: Completed permit applications,
containing all required documentation, shall be examined by the director of
engineering within a reasonable time after filing. If the application does not
conform to the requirements of applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules, and
regulations, the director of engineering shall reject such application in
writing, stating the reasons therefor. If the director of engineering is
satisfied that the proposed work conforms to the requirements of this chapter
and applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules, and regulations, the director of
engineering shall issue a permit therefor as soon as practicable. In all
instances, it shall be the duty of the applicant to demonstrate, to the
satisfaction of the director of engineering, that the construction proposed
under the application shall be in full compliance with the requirements of this
chapter.
   (B)   Additional City Review Of Applications Of Telecommunications
Retailers:
      1.   Pursuant to section 4 of the telephone company act, 220 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 65/4, a telecommunications retailer shall notify the city
that it intends to commence work governed by this chapter for facilities for
the provision of telecommunications services. Such notice shall consist of
plans, specifications, and other documentation sufficient to demonstrate the
purpose and intent of the facilities, and shall be provided by the
telecommunications retailer to the city not less than ten (10) days prior to
the commencement of work requiring no excavation and not less than thirty (30)
days prior to the commencement of work requiring excavation. The director of
engineering shall specify the portion of the right of way upon which the
facility may be placed, used and constructed.
      2.   In the event that the director of engineering fails to provide such
specification of location to the telecommunications retailer within either: a)
ten (10) days after service of notice to the city by the telecommunications
retailer in the case of work not involving excavation for new construction or
b) twenty five (25) days after service of notice by the telecommunications
retailer in the case of work involving excavation for new construction, the
telecommunications retailer may commence work without obtaining a permit under
this chapter.
      3.   Upon the provision of such specification by the city, where a permit
is required for work pursuant to section
8-14-4 of this chapter the telecommunications retailer shall submit to the city
an application for a permit and any and all plans, specifications and
documentation available regarding the facility to be constructed. Such
application shall be subject to the requirements of subsection (A) of this
section.
   (C)   Additional City Review Of Applications Of Holders Of State
Authorization Under The Cable And Video Competition Law Of 2007: Applications
by a utility that is a holder of a state issued authorization under the cable
and video competition law of 2007 shall be deemed granted forty five (45) days
after submission to the city, unless otherwise acted upon by the city, provided
the holder has complied with applicable city codes, ordinances, and
regulations. (Ord. 10-31, 10-18-2010)
8-14-6: EFFECT OF PERMIT:
   (A)   Authority Granted; No Property Right Or Other Interest Created: A
permit from the city authorizes a permittee to undertake only certain
activities in accordance with this chapter on city rights of way, and does not
create a property right or grant authority to the permittee to impinge upon the
rights of others who may have an interest in the rights of way.
   (B)   Duration: No permit issued under this chapter shall be valid for a
period longer than six (6) months unless construction is actually begun within
that period and is thereafter diligently pursued to completion.
   (C)   Preconstruction Meeting Required: No construction shall begin pursuant
to a permit issued under this chapter prior to attendance by the permittee and
all major contractors and subcontractors who will perform any work under the
permit at a preconstruction meeting. The preconstruction meeting shall be held
at a date, time and place designated by the city with such city representatives
in attendance as the city deems necessary. The meeting shall be for the purpose
of reviewing the work under the permit, and reviewing special considerations
necessary in the areas where work will occur, including, without limitation,
presence or absence of other utility facilities in the area and their
locations, procedures to avoid disruption of other utilities, use of rights of
way by the public during construction, and access and egress by adjacent
property owners.
   (D)   Compliance With All Laws Required: The issuance of a permit by the
city does not excuse the permittee from complying with other requirements of
the city and applicable statutes, laws, ordinances, rules, and regulations.
(Ord. 10-31, 10-18-2010)
8-14-7: REVISED PERMIT DRAWINGS:
In the event that the actual locations of any facilities deviate in any
material respect from the locations identified in the plans, drawings and
specifications submitted with the permit application, the permittee shall
submit a revised set of drawings or plans to the city within ninety (90) days
after the completion of the permitted work. The revised drawings or plans shall
specifically identify where the locations of the actual facilities deviate from
the locations approved in the permit. If any deviation from the permit also
deviates from the requirements of this chapter, it shall be treated as a
request for variance in accordance with section
8-14-21 of this chapter. If the city denies the request for a variance, then
the permittee shall either remove the facility from the right of way or modify
the facility so that it conforms to the permit and submit revised drawings or
plans therefor. (Ord. 10-31, 10-18-2010)
8-14-8: INSURANCE:
   (A)   Required Coverages And Limits: Unless otherwise provided by franchise,
license, or similar agreement, each utility occupying right of way or
constructing any facility in the right of way shall secure and maintain the
following liability insurance policies insuring the utility as named insured
and naming the city, and its elected and appointed officers, officials, agents,
and employees as additional insureds on the policies listed in subsections (A)1
and (A)2 of this section:
      1.   Commercial general liability insurance, including premises-
operations, explosion, collapse, and underground hazard (commonly referred to
as "X", "C", and "U" coverages) and products-completed operations coverage with
limits not less than:
         (a)   One million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for bodily injury or death
to each person;
         (b)   One million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for property damage
resulting from any one accident; and
         (c)   One million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for all other types of
liability;
         (d)   Two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) aggregate;
      2.   Automobile liability for owned, nonowned and hired vehicles with a
combined single limit of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for personal
injury and property damage for each accident;
      3.   Workers' compensation with statutory limits; and
      4.   Employer's liability insurance with limits of not less than one
million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per employee and per accident.
If the utility is not providing such insurance to protect the contractors and
subcontractors performing the work, then such contractors and subcontractors
shall comply with this section.
   (B)   Excess Or Umbrella Policies: The coverages required by this section
may be in any combination of primary, excess, and umbrella policies. Any excess
or umbrella policy must provide excess coverage over underlying insurance on a
following form basis such that when any loss covered by the primary policy
exceeds the limits under the primary policy, the excess or umbrella policy
becomes effective to cover such loss.
   (C)   Copies Required: The utility shall provide copies of any of the
policies required by this section to the city within ten (10) days following
receipt of a written request therefor from the city.
   (D)   Maintenance And Renewal Of Required Coverages: The insurance policies
required by this section shall contain the following endorsement:
It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be canceled nor the
intention not to renew be stated until ten (10) days after receipt by the City,
by registered mail or certified mail, return receipt requested, of a written
notice addressed to the City Administrator of such intent to cancel or not to
renew.
Within ten (10) days after receipt by the city of said notice, and in no event
later than ten (10) days prior to said cancellation, the utility shall obtain
and furnish to the city evidence of replacement insurance policies meeting the
requirements of this section.
   (E)   Self-Insurance: A utility may self-insure all or a portion of the
insurance coverage and limit requirements required by subsection (A) of this
section. A utility that self-insures is not required, to the extent of such
self-insurance, to comply with the requirement for the naming of additional
insureds under subsection (A) of this section, or the requirements of
subsections (B), (C) and (D) of this section. A utility that elects to self-
insure shall provide to the city evidence sufficient to demonstrate its
financial ability to self-insure the insurance coverage and limit requirements
required under subsection (A) of this section, such as evidence that the
utility is a "private self-insurer" under the workers' compensation act.
   (F)   Effect Of Insurance And Self-Insurance On Utility's Liability: The
legal liability of the utility to the city and any person for any of the
matters that are the subject of the insurance policies or self-insurance
required by this section shall not be limited by such insurance policies or
self-insurance or by the recovery of any amounts thereunder.
   (G)   Insurance Companies: All insurance provided pursuant to this section
shall be effected under valid and enforceable policies, issued by insurers
legally able to conduct business with the licensee in the state of Illinois.
(All insurance carriers and surplus line carriers shall be rated "A-" or better
and of a class size "X" or higher by A.M. Best Company.) (Ord. 10-31, 10-18-
2010)
8-14-9: INDEMNIFICATION:
By occupying or constructing facilities in the right of way, a utility shall be
deemed to agree to defend, indemnify and hold the city and its elected and
appointed officials and officers, employees, agents and representatives
harmless from and against any and all injuries, claims, demands, judgments,
damages, losses and expenses, including reasonable attorney fees and costs of
suit or defense, arising out of, resulting from or alleged to arise out of or
result from the negligent, careless or wrongful acts, omissions, failures to
act or misconduct of the utility or its affiliates, officers, employees,
agents, contractors or subcontractors in the construction of facilities or
occupancy of the rights of way, and in providing or offering service over the
facilities, whether such acts or omissions are authorized, allowed or
prohibited by this chapter or by a franchise, license, or similar agreement;
provided, however, that the utility's indemnity obligations hereunder shall not
apply to any injuries, claims, demands, judgments, damages, losses or expenses
arising out of or resulting from the negligence, misconduct or breach of this
chapter by the city, its officials, officers, employees, agents or
representatives. (Ord. 10-31, 10-18-2010)
8-14-10: SECURITY:
   (A)   Purpose: The permittee shall establish a security fund in a form and
in an amount as set forth in this section. The security fund shall be
continuously maintained in accordance with this section at the permittee's sole
cost and expense until the completion of the work authorized under the permit.
The security fund shall serve as security for:
      1.   The faithful performance by the permittee of all the requirements of
this chapter;
      2.   Any expenditure, damage, or loss incurred by the city occasioned by
the permittee's failure to comply with any codes, rules, regulations, orders,
permits and other directives of the city issued pursuant to this chapter; and
      3.   The payment by permittee of all liens and all damages, claims,
costs, or expenses that the city may pay or incur by reason of any action or
nonperformance by permittee in violation of this chapter including, without
limitation, any damage to public property or restoration work the permittee is
required by this chapter to perform that the city must perform itself or have
completed as a consequence solely of the permittee's failure to perform or
complete, and all other payments due the city from the permittee pursuant to
this chapter or any other applicable law.
   (B)   Form: The permittee shall provide the security fund to the city in the
form, at the permittee's election, of cash, a surety bond in a form acceptable
to the city, or an unconditional letter of credit in a form acceptable to the
city. Any surety bond or letter of credit provided pursuant to this subsection
shall, at a minimum:
      1.   Provide that it will not be canceled without prior notice to the
city and the permittee;
      2.   Not require the consent of the permittee prior to the collection by
the city of any amounts covered by it; and
      3.   Shall provide a location convenient to the city and within the state
of Illinois at which it can be drawn.
   (C)   Amount: The dollar amount of the security fund shall be sufficient to
provide for the reasonably estimated cost to restore the right of way to at
least as good a condition as that existing prior to the construction under the
permit, as determined by the director of engineering, and may also include
reasonable, directly related costs that the city estimates are likely to be
incurred if the permittee fails to perform such restoration. Where the
construction of facilities proposed under the permit will be performed in
phases in multiple locations in the city, with each phase consisting of
construction of facilities in one location or a related group of locations, and
where construction in another phase will not be undertaken prior to substantial
completion of restoration in the previous phase or phases, the director of
engineering may, in the exercise of sound discretion, allow the permittee to
post a single amount of security which shall be applicable to each phase of the
construction under the permit. The amount of the security fund for phased
construction shall be equal to the greatest amount that would have been
required under the provisions of this subsection for any single phase.
   (D)   Withdrawals: The city, upon fourteen (14) days' advance written notice
clearly stating the reason for, and its intention to exercise withdrawal rights
under this subsection, may withdraw an amount from the security fund, provided
that the permittee has not reimbursed the city for such amount within the
fourteen (14) day notice period. Withdrawals may be made if the permittee:
      1.   Fails to make any payment required to be made by the permittee
hereunder;
      2.   Fails to pay any liens relating to the facilities that are due and
unpaid;
      3.   Fails to reimburse the city for any damages, claims, costs or
expenses which the city has been compelled to pay or incur by reason of any
action or nonperformance by the permittee; or
      4.   Fails to comply with any provision of this chapter that the city
determines can be remedied by an expenditure of an amount in the security fund.
   (E)   Replenishment: Within fourteen (14) days after receipt of written
notice from the city that any amount has been withdrawn from the security fund,
the permittee shall restore the security fund to the amount specified in
subsection (C) of this section.
   (F)   Interest: The permittee may request that any and all interest accrued
on the amount in the security fund be returned to the permittee by the city,
upon written request for said withdrawal to the city, provided that any such
withdrawal does not reduce the security fund below the minimum balance required
in subsection (C) of this section.
   (G)   Closing And Return Of Security Fund: Upon completion of the work
authorized under the permit, the permittee shall be entitled to the return of
the security fund, or such portion thereof as remains on deposit, within a
reasonable time after account is taken for all offsets necessary to compensate
the city for failure by the permittee to comply with any provisions of this
chapter or other applicable law. In the event of any revocation of the permit,
the security fund, and any and all accrued interest therein, shall become the
property of the city to the extent necessary to cover any reasonable costs,
loss or damage incurred by the city as a result of said revocation, provided
that any amounts in excess of said costs, loss or damage shall be refunded to
the permittee.
   (H)   Rights Not Limited: The rights reserved to the city with respect to
the security fund are in addition to all other rights of the city, whether
reserved by this chapter or otherwise authorized by law, and no action,
proceeding or exercise of right with respect to said security fund shall affect
any other right the city may have. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the city
shall not be entitled to a double monetary recovery with respect to any of its
rights which may be infringed or otherwise violated. (Ord. 10-31, 10-18-2010)
8-14-11: PERMIT SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION:
   (A)   City Right To Revoke Permit: The city may revoke or suspend a permit
issued pursuant to this chapter for one or more of the following reasons:
      1.   Fraudulent, false, misrepresenting, or materially incomplete
statements in the permit application;
      2.   Noncompliance with this chapter;
      3.   Permittee's physical presence or presence of permittee's facilities
on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the rights of way
presents a direct or imminent threat to the public health, safety, or welfare;
or
      4.   Permittee's failure to construct the facilities substantially in
accordance with the permit and approved plans.
   (B)   Notice Of Revocation Or Suspension: The city shall send written notice
of its intent to revoke or suspend a permit issued pursuant to this chapter
stating the reason or reasons for the revocation or suspension and the
alternatives available to permittee under this section.
   (C)   Permittee Alternatives Upon Receipt Of Notice Of Revocation Or
Suspension: Upon receipt of a written notice of revocation or suspension from
the city, the permittee shall have the following options:
      1.   Immediately provide the city with evidence that no cause exists for
the revocation or suspension;
      2.   Immediately correct, to the satisfaction of the city, the
deficiencies stated in the written notice, providing written proof of such
correction to the city within five (5) working days after receipt of the
written notice of revocation; or
      3.   Immediately remove the facilities located on, over, above, along,
upon, under, across, or within the rights of way and restore the rights of way
to the satisfaction of the city providing written proof of such removal to the
city within ten (10) days after receipt of the written notice of revocation.
The city may, in its discretion, for good cause shown, extend the time periods
provided in this subsection.
   (D)   Stop Work Order: In addition to the issuance of a notice of revocation
or suspension, the city may issue a stop work order immediately upon discovery
of any of the reasons for revocation set forth within subsection (A) of this
section.
   (E)   Failure Or Refusal Of The Permittee To Comply: If the permittee fails
to comply with the provisions of subsection (C) of this section, the city or
its designee may, at the option of the city: 1) correct the deficiencies; 2)
upon not less than twenty (20) days' notice to the permittee, remove the
subject facilities or equipment; or 3) after not less than thirty (30) days'
notice to the permittee of failure to cure the noncompliance, deem them
abandoned and property of the city. The permittee shall be liable in all events
to the city for all costs of removal. (Ord. 10-31, 10-18-2010)
8-14-12: CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP OR OWNER'S IDENTITY OR LEGAL STATUS:
   (A)   Notification Of Change: A utility shall notify the city no less than
thirty (30) days prior to the transfer of ownership of any facility in the
right of way or change in identity of the utility. The new owner of the utility
or the facility shall have all the obligations and privileges enjoyed by the
former owner under the permit, if any, and applicable laws, ordinances, rules
and regulations, including this chapter, with respect to the work and
facilities in the right of way.
   (B)   Amended Permit: A new owner shall request that any current permit be
amended to show current ownership. If the new owner fails to have a new or
amended permit issued in its name, the new owner shall be presumed to have
accepted, and agreed to be bound by, the terms and conditions of the permit if
the new owner uses the facility or allows it to remain on the city's right of
way.
   (C)   Insurance And Bonding: All required insurance coverage or bonding must
be changed to reflect the name of the new owner upon transfer. (Ord. 10-31, 10-
18-2010)
8-14-13: GENERAL CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS:
   (A)   Standards And Principles: All construction in the right of way shall
be consistent with applicable ordinances (including, but not limited to, the
city of East Moline supplemental specifications), codes, laws, rules and
regulations, and commonly recognized and accepted traffic control and
construction principles, sound engineering judgment and, where applicable, the
principles and standards set forth in the following IDOT publications, as
amended from time to time:
      1.   "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction";
      2.   "Supplemental Specifications And Recurring Special Provisions";
      3.   "Highway Design Manual";
      4.   "Highway Standards Manual";
      5.   "Standard Specifications For Traffic Control Items";
      6.   "Illinois Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices" (92 Illinois
Administrative Code section 545);
      7.   "Flagger's Handbook"; and
      8.   "Work Site Protection Manual For Daylight Maintenance Operations".
   (B)   Interpretation Of Municipal Standards And Principles: If a discrepancy
exists between or among differing principles and standards required by this
chapter, the director of engineering shall determine, in the exercise of sound
engineering judgment, which principles apply and such decision shall be final.
If requested, the director of engineering shall state which standard or
principle will apply to the construction, maintenance, or operation of a
facility in the future. (Ord. 10-31, 10-18-2010)
8-14-14: TRAFFIC CONTROL:
   (A)   Minimum Requirements: The city's minimum requirements for traffic
protection are contained in IDOT's "Illinois Manual On Uniform Traffic Control
Devices" and this code.
   (B)   Warning Signs, Protective Devices, And Flaggers: The utility is
responsible for providing and installing warning signs, protective devices and
flaggers, when necessary, meeting applicable federal, state, and local
requirements for protection of the public and the utility's workers when
performing any work on the rights of way.
   (C)   Interference With Traffic: All work shall be phased so that there is
minimum interference with pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
   (D)   Notice When Access Is Blocked: At least forty eight (48) hours prior
to beginning work that will partially or completely block access to any
residence, business or institution, the utility shall notify the resident,
business or institution of the approximate beginning time and duration of such
work; provided, however, that in cases involving emergency repairs pursuant to
section
8-14-20 of this chapter, the utility shall provide such notice as is
practicable under the circumstances.
   (E)   Compliance: The utility shall take immediate action to correct any
deficiencies in traffic protection requirements that are brought to the
utility's attention by the city. (Ord. 10-31, 10-18-2010)
8-14-15: LOCATION OF FACILITIES:
   (A)   General Requirements: In addition to location requirements applicable
to specific types of utility facilities, all utility facilities, regardless of
type, shall be subject to the general location requirements of this subsection.
      1.   No Interference With City Facilities: No utility facilities shall be
placed in any location if the director of engineering determines that the
proposed location will require the relocation or displacement of any of the
city's utility facilities or will otherwise interfere with the operation or
maintenance of any of the city's utility facilities.
      2.   Minimum Interference And Impact: The proposed location shall cause
only the minimum possible interference with the use of the right of way and
shall cause only the minimum possible impact upon, and interference with the
rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin said right of
way. Facilities shall be placed underground whenever feasible. Additionally,
the provisions of section 28-6100 apply where applicable.
      3.   No Interference With Travel: No utility facility shall be placed in
any location that interferes with the usual travel on such right of way.
      4.   No Limitations On Visibility: No utility facility shall be placed in
any location so as to limit visibility of or by users of the right of way.
      5.   Size Of Utility Facilities: The proposed installation shall use the
smallest suitable vaults, boxes, equipment enclosures, power pedestals, and/or
cabinets then in use by the facility owner, regardless of location, for the
particular application.
      6.   Screening: Screening shall be required for all units equal to or
greater than four feet (4') in height as measured from existing grade, with the
exception of streetlight and traffic signal controller cabinets.
         (a)   Where screening is required, it shall be provided in accordance
with chapter 35, article V, division 2, landscape and bufferyard standards.
         (b)   Equipment shall be located so that its visual impact is
minimized. Equipment shall not be permitted to be located within the parkway
area between the public sidewalk and street curb, unless another feasible
location is not available within or outside of the right of way.
         (c)   The equipment shall be positioned to maximize the effectiveness
of the screening, including locating the equipment so that the access panel is
located on the side that is least visible; however, boxes shall not be placed
to impede views for pedestrians, cyclists, or drivers.
         (d)   Screening requirements may be waived by the director of
engineering where installation of screening may have negative impacts on the
public safety, such as impeding views for pedestrians, cyclists, and drivers on
the adjacent roadways, sidewalks, bikepaths, and driveways, or if such
installation would be unduly burdensome.
         (e)   All screening must be maintained by the permittee.
   (B)   Parallel Facilities Located Within Highways:
      1.   Overhead Parallel Facilities: An overhead parallel facility may be
located within the right of way lines of a highway only if:
         (a)   Lines are located as near as practicable to the right of way
line and as nearly parallel to the right of way line as reasonable pole
alignment will permit;
         (b)   Where pavement is curbed, poles are as remote as practicable
from the curb with a minimum distance of two feet (2') (0.6 m) behind the face
of the curb, where available;
         (c)   Where pavement is uncurbed, poles are as remote from pavement
edge as practicable with minimum distance of four feet (4') (1.2 m) outside the
outer shoulder line of the roadway and are not within the clear zone;
         (d)   No pole is located in the ditch line of a highway; and
         (e)   Any ground mounted appurtenance is located within one foot (1')
(0.3 m) of the right of way line or as near as possible to the right of way
line.
      2.   Underground Parallel Facilities: An underground parallel facility
may be located within the right of way lines of a highway only if:
         (a)   The facility is located as near the right of way line as
practicable and not more than eight feet (8') (2.4 m) from and parallel to the
right of way line;
         (b)   A new facility may be located under the paved portion of a
highway only if other locations are impracticable or inconsistent with sound
engineering judgment (e.g., a new cable may be installed in existing conduit
without disrupting the pavement); and
         (c)   In the case of an underground power or communications line, the
facility shall be located as near the right of way line as practicable and not
more than five feet (5') (1.5 m) from the right of way line and any above
grounded appurtenance shall be located within one foot (1') (0.3 m) of the
right of way line or as near as practicable.
   (C)   Facilities Crossing Highways:
      1.   No Future Disruption: The construction and design of crossing
facilities installed between the ditch lines or curb lines of city highways may
require the incorporation of materials and protections (such as encasement or
additional cover) to avoid settlement or future repairs to the roadbed
resulting from the installation of such crossing facilities.
      2.   Cattle Passes, Culverts, Or Drainage Facilities: Crossing facilities
shall not be located in cattle passes, culverts, or drainage facilities.
      3.   Ninety Degree Crossing Required: Crossing facilities shall cross at
or as near to a ninety degree (90°) angle to the centerline as practicable.
      4.   Overhead Power Or Communication Facility: An overhead power or
communication facility may cross a highway only if:
         (a)   It has a minimum vertical line clearance as required by ICC's
rules entitled, "construction of electric power and communication lines" (83
Ill. adm. code 305);
         (b)   Poles are located within one foot (1') (0.3 m) of the right of
way line of the highway and outside of the clear zone; and
         (c)   Overhead crossings at major intersections are avoided.
      5.   Underground Power Or Communication Facility: An underground power or
communication facility may cross a highway only if:
         (a)   The design materials and construction methods will provide
maximum maintenance free service life; and
         (b)   Capacity for the utility's foreseeable future expansion needs is
provided in the initial installation.
      6.   Markers: The city may require the utility to provide a marker at
each right of way line where an underground facility other than a power or
communication facility crosses a highway. Each marker shall identify the type
of facility, the utility, and an emergency phone number. Markers may also be
eliminated as provided in current federal regulations (49 CFR section 192.707
(1989)).
   (D)   Facilities To Be Located Within Particular Rights Of Way: The city may
require that facilities be located within particular rights of way that are not
highways, rather than within particular highways.
   (E)   Freestanding Facilities:
      1.   The city may restrict the location and size of any freestanding
facility located within a right of way.
      2.   The city may require any freestanding facility located within a
right of way to be screened from view.
   (F)   Facilities Installed Aboveground: Aboveground facilities may be
installed only if:
      1.   No other existing facilities in the area are located underground;
      2.   New underground installation is not technically feasible; and
      3.   The proposed installation will be made at a location, and will
employ suitable design and materials, to provide the greatest protection of
aesthetic qualities of the area being traversed without adversely affecting
safety. Suitable designs include, but are not limited to, self-supporting
armless, single pole construction with vertical configuration of conductors and
cable. Existing utility poles and light standards shall be used wherever
practicable; the installation of additional utility poles is strongly
discouraged.
   (G)   Facility Attachments To Bridges Or Roadway Structures:
      1.   Facilities may be installed as attachments to bridges or roadway
structures only where the utility has demonstrated that all other means of
accommodating the facility are not practicable. Other means shall include, but
are not limited to, underground, underwater, independent poles, cable supports
and tower supports, all of which are completely separated from the bridge or
roadway structure. Facilities transmitting commodities that are volatile,
flammable, corrosive, or energized, especially those under significant pressure
or potential, present high degrees of risk and such installations are not
permitted.
      2.   A utility shall include in its request to accommodate a facility
installation on a bridge or roadway structure supporting data demonstrating the
impracticability of alternate routing. Approval or disapproval of an
application for facility attachment to a bridge or roadway structure will be
based upon the following considerations:
         (a)   The type, volume, pressure or voltage of the commodity to be
transmitted and an evaluation of the resulting risk to persons and property in
the event of damage to or failure of the facility;
         (b)   The type, length, value, and relative importance of the highway
structure in the transportation system;
         (c)   The alternative routings available to the utility and their
comparative practicability;
         (d)   The proposed method of attachment;
         (e)   The ability of the structure to bear the increased load of the
proposed facility;
         (f)   The degree of interference with bridge maintenance and painting;
         (g)   The effect on the visual quality of the structure; and
         (h)   The public benefit expected from the utility service as compared
to the risk involved.
   (H)   Appearance Standards:
      1.   The city may prohibit the installation of facilities in particular
locations in order to preserve visual quality.
      2.   A facility may be constructed only if its construction does not
require extensive removal or alteration of trees or terrain features visible to
the right of way user or to adjacent residents and property owners, and if it
does not impair the aesthetic quality of the lands being traversed. (Ord. 10-
31, 10-18-2010)
8-14-16: CONSTRUCTION METHODS AND MATERIALS:
   (A)   Standards And Requirements For Particular Types Of Construction
Methods:
      1.   Boring Or Jacking:
         (a)   Pits And Shoring: Boring or jacking under rights of way shall be
accomplished from pits located at a minimum distance specified by the director
of engineering from the edge of the pavement. Pits for boring or jacking shall
be excavated no more than forty eight (48) hours in advance of boring or
jacking operations and backfilled within forty eight (48) hours after boring or
jacking operations are completed. While pits are open, they shall be clearly
marked and protected by barricades. Shoring shall be designed, erected,
supported, braced, and maintained so that it will safely support all vertical
and lateral loads that may be imposed upon it during the boring or jacking
operation.
         (b)   Wet Boring Or Jetting: Wet boring or jetting shall not be
permitted under the roadway.
         (c)   Borings With Diameters Greater Than Six Inches: Borings over six
inches (6") (0.15 m) in diameter shall be accomplished with an auger and
following pipe, and the diameter of the auger shall not exceed the outside
diameter of the following pipe by more than one inch (1") (25 mm).
         (d)   Borings With Diameters Six Inches Or Less: Borings of six inches
(6") or less in diameter may be accomplished by either jacking, guided with
auger, or auger and following pipe method.
         (e)   Tree Preservation: Any facility located within the drip line of
any tree designated by the city to be preserved or protected shall be bored
under or around the root system.
      2.   Trenching: Trenching for facility installation, repair, or
maintenance on rights of way shall be done in accord with the applicable
portions of section 603 of IDOT's "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge
Construction" and the latest edition of the city of East Moline supplemental
specifications.
         (a)   Length: The length of open trench shall be kept to the
practicable minimum consistent with requirements for pipe line testing. Only
one-half (1/2) of any intersection may have an open trench at any time unless
special permission is obtained from the director of engineering.
         (b)   Open Trench And Excavated Material: Open trench and windrowed
excavated material shall be protected as required by chapter 6 of the "Illinois
Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices". Where practicable, the excavated
material shall be deposited between the roadway and the trench as added
protection. Excavated material shall not be allowed to remain on the paved
portion of the roadway. Where right of way width does not allow for windrowing
excavated material off the paved portion of the roadway, excavated material
shall be hauled to an off road location.
         (c)   Drip Line Of Trees: The utility shall not trench within the drip
line of any tree designated by the city to be preserved.
      3.   Backfilling:
         (a)   Any pit, trench, or excavation created during the installation
of facilities shall be backfilled for its full width, depth, and length using
methods and materials in accordance with IDOT's "Standard Specifications For
Road And Bridge Construction". When excavated material is hauled away or is
unsuitable for backfill, suitable granular backfill shall be used.
         (b)   For a period of three (3) years from the date construction of a
facility is completed, the utility shall be responsible to remove and restore
any backfilled area that has settled due to construction of the facility. If so
ordered by the director of engineering, the utility, at its expense, shall
remove any pavement and backfill material to the top of the installed facility,
place and properly compact new backfill material, and restore new pavement,
sidewalk, curbs, and driveways to the proper grades, as determined by the
director of engineering.
      4.   Pavement Cuts: Pavement cuts for facility installation or repair
shall be permitted on a highway only if that portion of the highway is closed
to traffic. If a variance to the limitation set forth in this subsection (A)4
is permitted under section
8-14-21 of this chapter, the following requirements shall apply:
         (a)   Any excavation under pavements shall be backfilled and compacted
as soon as practicable with granular material of CA-6 or CA-10 gradation, as
designated by the director of engineering.
         (b)   Restoration of pavement, in kind, shall be accomplished as soon
as practicable, and temporary repair with bituminous mixture shall be provided
immediately. Any subsequent failure of either the temporary repair or the
restoration shall be rebuilt upon notification by the city.
         (c)   All saw cuts shall be full depth.
         (d)   For all rights of way which have been reconstructed with a
concrete surface/base in the last seven (7) years, or resurfaced in the last
three (3) years, permits shall not be issued unless such work is determined to
be an emergency repair or other work considered necessary and unforeseen before
the time of the reconstruction or unless a pavement cut is necessary for a
JULIE locate.
         (e)   For PCC pavement restoration, pavement shall be replaced in full
panels.
      5.   Encasement:
         (a)   Casing pipe shall be designed to withstand the load of the
highway and any other superimposed loads. The casing shall be continuous either
by one piece fabrication or by welding or jointed installation approved by the
city.
         (b)   The venting, if any, of any encasement shall extend within one
foot (1') (0.3 m) of the right of way line. No aboveground vent pipes shall be
located in the area established as clear zone for that particular section of
the highway.
         (c)   In the case of water main or service crossing, encasement shall
be furnished between bore pits unless continuous pipe or city approved jointed
pipe is used under the roadway. Casing may be omitted only if pipe is installed
prior to highway construction and carrier pipe is continuous or mechanical
joints are of a type approved by the city. Bell and spigot type pipe shall be
encased regardless of installation method.
         (d)   In the case of gas pipelines of sixty (60) psig or less,
encasement may be eliminated.
         (e)   In the case of gas pipelines or petroleum products pipelines
with installations of more than sixty (60) psig, encasement may be eliminated
only if: 1) extra heavy pipe is used that precludes future maintenance or
repair and 2) cathodic protection of the pipe is provided.
         (f)   If encasement is eliminated for a gas or petroleum products
pipeline, the facility shall be located so as to provide that construction does
not disrupt the right of way.
      6.   Minimum Cover Of Underground Facilities: Cover shall be provided and
maintained at least in the amount specified in the following table for minimum
cover for the type of facility:
 
Type Of Facility                         Minimum Cover
Electric lines                           30 inches (0.8 m)
Communication, cable or video service    18 to 24 inches (0.46 m to 0.6 m, as
lines                                    determined by city)
Gas or petroleum products                30 inches (0.8 m)
Water line                               Sufficient cover to provide freeze
                                         protection
Sanitary sewer, storm sewer, or drainage Sufficient cover to provide freeze
line                                     protection
 
   (B)   Standards And Requirements For Particular Types Of Facilities:
      1.   Electric Power Or Communication Lines:
         (a)   Code Compliance: Electric power or communications facilities
within city rights of way shall be constructed, operated, and maintained in
conformity with the provisions of 83 Illinois administrative code part 305
(formerly general order 160 of the Illinois commerce commission) entitled
"rules for construction of electric power and communications lines", and the
national electrical safety code.
         (b)   Overhead Facilities: Overhead power or communication facilities
shall use single pole construction and, where practicable, joint use of poles
shall be used. Utilities shall make every reasonable effort to design the
installation so guys and braces will not be needed. Variances may be allowed if
there is no feasible alternative and if guywires are equipped with guy guards
for maximum visibility.
         (c)   Underground Facilities:
            (1)   Cable may be installed by trenching or plowing, provided that
special consideration is given to boring in order to minimize damage when
crossing improved entrances and side roads.
            (2)   If a crossing is installed by boring or jacking, encasement
shall be provided between jacking or bore pits. Encasement may be eliminated
only if: a) the crossing is installed by the use of "moles", "whip augers", or
other approved methods which compress the earth to make the opening for cable
installation or b) the installation is by the open trench method which is only
permitted prior to roadway construction.
            (3)   Cable shall be grounded in accordance with the national
electrical safety code.
         (d)   Burial Of Drops: All temporary service drops placed between
November 1 of the prior year and March 15 of the current year, also known as
snow drops, shall be buried by May 31 of the current year, weather permitting,
unless otherwise permitted by the city. Weather permitting, utilities shall
bury all temporary drops, excluding snow drops, within ten (10) business days
after placement.
      2.   Underground Facilities Other Than Electric Power Or Communication
Lines: Underground facilities other than electric power or communication lines
may be installed by:
         (a)   The use of "moles", "whip augers", or other approved methods
which compress the earth to move the opening for the pipe;
         (b)   Jacking or boring with vented encasement provided between the
ditch lines or toes of slopes of the highway;
         (c)   Open trench with vented encasement between ultimate ditch lines
or toes of slopes, but only if prior to roadway construction; or
         (d)   Tunneling with vented encasement, but only if installation is
not possible by other means.
      3.   Gas Transmission, Distribution And Service: Gas pipelines within
rights of way shall be constructed, maintained, and operated in a city approved
manner and in conformance with the federal code of the office of pipeline
safety operations, department of transportation, part 192 – transportation of
natural and other gas by pipeline: minimum federal safety standards (49 CFR
section 192), IDOT's "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge
Construction", and all other applicable laws, rules, and regulations.
      4.   Petroleum Products Pipelines: Petroleum products pipelines within
rights of way shall conform to the applicable sections of ANSI standard code
for pressure piping. (Liquid petroleum transportation piping systems ANSI-
B 31.4.)
      5.   Waterlines, Sanitary Sewer Lines, Stormwater Sewer Lines Or Drainage
Lines: Water lines, sanitary sewer lines, storm sewer lines, and drainage lines
within rights of way shall meet or exceed the recommendations of the current
"Standard Specifications For Water And Sewer Main Construction In Illinois".
      6.   Ground Mounted Appurtenances: Ground mounted appurtenances to
overhead or underground facilities, when permitted within a right of way, shall
be provided with a vegetation free area extending one foot (1') (305 mm) in
width beyond the appurtenance in all directions. The vegetation free area may
be provided by an extension of the mounting pad, or by heavy duty plastic or
similar material approved by the director of engineering. With the approval of
the director of engineering, shrubbery surrounding the appurtenance may be used
in place of vegetation free area. The housing for ground mounted appurtenances
shall be painted a neutral color to blend with the surroundings.
   (C)   Materials:
      1.   General Standards: The materials used in constructing facilities
within rights of way shall be those meeting the accepted standards of the
appropriate industry, the applicable portions of IDOT's "Standard
Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction", the requirements of the
Illinois commerce commission, or the standards established by other official
regulatory agencies for the appropriate industry.
      2.   Material Storage On Right Of Way: No material shall be stored on the
right of way without the prior written approval of the director of engineering.
When such storage is permitted, all pipe, conduit, wire, poles, cross arms, or
other materials shall be distributed along the right of way prior to and during
installation in a manner to minimize hazards to the public or an obstacle to
right of way maintenance or damage to the right of way and other property. If
material is to be stored on right of way, prior approval must be obtained from
the city.
      3.   Hazardous Materials: The plans submitted by the utility to the city
shall identify any hazardous materials that may be involved in the construction
of the new facilities or removal of any existing facilities.
   (D)   Operational Restrictions:
      1.   Construction operations on rights of way may, at the discretion of
the city, be required to be discontinued when such operations would create
hazards to traffic or the public health, safety, and welfare. Such operations
may also be required to be discontinued or restricted when conditions are such
that construction would result in extensive damage to the right of way or other
property.
      2.   These restrictions may be waived by the director of engineering when
emergency work is required to restore vital utility services.
      3.   Unless otherwise permitted by the city, the hours of construction
are those set forth in section
4-1-8 of this code.
   (E)   Location Of Existing Facilities: Any utility proposing to construct
facilities in the city shall contact JULIE and ascertain the presence and
location of existing aboveground and underground facilities within the rights
of way to be occupied by its proposed facilities. The city will make its permit
records available to a utility for the purpose of identifying possible
facilities. When notified of an excavation or when requested by the city or by
JULIE, a utility shall locate and physically mark its underground facilities
within forty eight (48) hours, excluding weekends and holidays, in accordance
with the Illinois underground facilities damage prevention act 1 .
Any utility that constructs facilities in the right of way within the city must
become a member of JULIE and mark the location of its facilities when alerted
to do so as a participating member of JULIE. The city shall have no obligation
to mark the location of any utility's facilities nor shall it be obligated to
alert any utility to proposed work by itself or others. (Ord. 10-31, 10-18-
2010)
 
Notes
1 1. 220 ILCS 50/1 et seq.
8-14-17: VEGETATION CONTROL:
   (A)   Electric Utilities; Compliance With State Laws And Regulations: An
electric utility shall conduct all tree trimming and vegetation control
activities in the right of way in accordance with applicable Illinois laws and
regulations, and additionally, with such local franchise or other agreement
with the city as permitted by law.
   (B)   Specimen Trees Or Trees Of Special Significance: The city may require
that special measures be taken to preserve specimen trees or trees of special
significance. The required measures may consist of higher poles, side arm
extensions, covered wire or other means.
   (C)   Chemical Use:
      1.   Except as provided in the following subsection, no utility shall
spray, inject or pour any chemicals on or near any trees, shrubs or vegetation
in the city for any purpose, including the control of growth, insects or
disease.
      2.   Spraying of any type of brush killing chemicals will not be
permitted on rights of way unless the utility demonstrates to the satisfaction
of the director of engineering that such spraying is the only practicable
method of vegetation control. (Ord. 10-31, 10-18-2010)
8-14-18: REMOVAL, RELOCATION, OR MODIFICATIONS OF UTILITY FACILITIES:
   (A)   Notice: Within ninety (90) days following written notice from the
city, a utility shall, at its own expense, protect, support, temporarily or
permanently disconnect, remove, relocate, change or alter the position of any
utility facilities within the rights of way whenever the corporate authorities
have determined that such removal, relocation, change or alteration, is
reasonably necessary for the construction, repair, maintenance, or installation
of any city improvement in or upon, or the operations of the city in or upon,
the rights of way.
   (B)   Removal Of Unauthorized Facilities: Within thirty (30) days following
written notice from the city, any utility that owns, controls, or maintains any
unauthorized facility or related appurtenances within the rights of way shall,
at its own expense, remove all or any part of such facilities or appurtenances
from the rights of way. A facility is unauthorized and subject to removal in
the following circumstances:
      1.   Upon expiration or termination of the permittee's license or
franchise, unless otherwise permitted by applicable law;
      2.   If the facility was constructed or installed without the prior grant
of a license or franchise, if required;
      3.   If the facility was constructed or installed without prior issuance
of a required permit in violation of this chapter; or
      4.   If the facility was constructed or installed at a location not
permitted by the permittee's license or franchise.
   (C)   Emergency Removal Or Relocation Of Facilities: The city retains the
right and privilege to cut or move any facilities located within the rights of
way of the city, as the city may determine to be necessary, appropriate or
useful in response to any public health or safety emergency. If circumstances
permit, the municipality shall attempt to notify the utility, if known, prior
to cutting or removing a facility and shall notify the utility, if known, after
cutting or removing a facility.
   (D)   Abandonment Of Facilities: Upon abandonment of a facility within the
rights of way of the city, the utility shall notify the city within ninety (90)
days. Following receipt of such notice the city may direct the utility to
remove all or any portion of the facility if the director of engineering
determines that such removal will be in the best interest of the public health,
safety and welfare. In the event that the city does not direct the utility that
abandoned the facility to remove it, by giving notice of abandonment to the
city, the abandoning utility shall be deemed to consent to the alteration or
removal of all or any portion of the facility by another utility or person.
(Ord. 10-31, 10-18-2010)
8-14-19: CLEANUP AND RESTORATION:
The utility shall remove all excess material and restore all turf and terrain
and other property within ten (10) days after any portion of the rights of way
are disturbed, damaged or destroyed due to construction or maintenance by the
utility, all to the satisfaction of the city. This includes restoration of
entrances and side roads. Restoration of roadway surfaces shall be made using
materials and methods approved by the director of engineering. Such cleanup and
repair may be required to consist of backfilling, regrading, reseeding,
resodding, or any other requirement to restore the right of way to a condition
substantially equivalent to that which existed prior to the commencement of the
project. The time period provided in this section may be extended by the
director of engineering for good cause shown. (Ord. 10-31, 10-18-2010)
8-14-20: MAINTENANCE AND EMERGENCY MAINTENANCE:
   (A)   General: Facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or
within rights of way are to be maintained by or for the utility in a manner
satisfactory to the city and at the utility's expense.
   (B)   Emergency Maintenance Procedures: Emergencies may justify
noncompliance with normal procedures for securing a permit:
      1.   If an emergency creates a hazard on the traveled portion of the
right of way, the utility shall take immediate steps to provide all necessary
protection for traffic on the highway or the public on the right of way
including the use of signs, lights, barricades or flaggers. If a hazard does
not exist on the traveled way, but the nature of the emergency is such as to
require the parking on the shoulder of equipment required in repair operations,
adequate signs and lights shall be provided. Parking on the shoulder in such an
emergency will only be permitted when no other means of access to the facility
is available.
      2.   In an emergency, the utility shall, as soon as possible, notify the
director of engineering or his or her duly authorized agent of the emergency,
informing him or her as to what steps have been taken for protection of the
traveling public and what will be required to make the necessary repairs. If
the nature of the emergency is such as to interfere with the free movement of
traffic, the city police shall be notified immediately.
      3.   In an emergency, the utility shall use all means at hand to complete
repairs as rapidly as practicable and with the least inconvenience to the
traveling public.
   (C)   Emergency Repairs: The utility must file in writing with the city a
description of the repairs undertaken in the right of way within forty eight
(48) hours after an emergency repair. (Ord. 10-31, 10-18-2010)
8-14-21: VARIANCES:
   (A)   Request For Variance: A utility requesting a variance from one or more
of the provisions of this chapter must do so in writing to the city's
administrative hearing officer through the director of engineering as a part of
the permit application. The request shall identify each provision of this
chapter from which a variance is requested and the reasons why a variance
should be granted.
   (B)   Authority To Grant Variances: The city's administrative hearing
officer shall decide whether a variance is authorized for each provision of
this chapter identified in the variance request on an individual basis.
   (C)   Conditions For Granting Of Variance: The city's administrative hearing
officer may authorize a variance only if the utility requesting the variance
has demonstrated that:
      1.   One or more conditions not under the control of the utility (such as
terrain features or an irregular right of way line) create a special hardship
that would make enforcement of the provision unreasonable, given the public
purposes to be achieved by the provision; and
      2.   All other designs, methods, materials, locations or facilities that
would conform with the provision from which a variance is requested are
impracticable in relation to the requested approach.
   (D)   Additional Conditions For Granting Of A Variance: As a condition for
authorizing a variance, the city's administrative hearing officer may require
the utility requesting the variance to meet reasonable standards and conditions
that may or may not be expressly contained within this chapter but which carry
out the purposes of this chapter.
   (E)   Right To Appeal: Any utility aggrieved by any order, requirement,
decision or determination, including denial of a variance, made by the city's
administrative hearing officer under the provisions of this chapter shall have
the right to appeal in circuit court pursuant to the Illinois administrative
review law. (Ord. 10-31, 10-18-2010)
8-14-22: PENALTIES:
Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with
any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to fine in accordance
with the penalty provisions of this code. There may be times when the city will
incur delay or other costs, including third party claims, because the utility
will not or cannot perform its duties under its permit and this chapter. Unless
the utility shows that another allocation of the cost of undertaking the
requested action is appropriate, the utility shall bear the city's costs of
damages and its costs of installing, maintaining, modifying, relocating, or
removing the facility that is the subject of the permit. No other
administrative agency or commission may review or overrule a permit related
cost apportionment of the city. Sanctions may be imposed upon a utility that
does not pay the costs apportioned to it. (Ord. 10-31, 10-18-2010)
8-14-23: ENFORCEMENT:
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as limiting any additional or
further remedies that the city may have for enforcement of this chapter. (Ord.
10-31, 10-18-2010)
CHAPTER 15
TRAIL USE IN THE QUAD CITIES
SECTION:
8-15-1: Purpose
8-15-2: Definitions
8-15-3: General Guidelines
8-15-4: Establishment
8-15-5: Rules
8-15-1: PURPOSE:
The trail system is intended for the activities of individuals and permitted
groups for recreation, transportation, fitness and other similar purposes using
human powered propulsion. Activities using power equipment are to be permitted
by the unit of government given authority to issue permits. Individuals with
disabilities are allowed to use ADA compliant power assisted devices intended
for personal transport on trails.
The intent of this chapter is to establish consistent rules and regulations for
trail use. The rules set forth herein are a supplement to any existing state of
Iowa and/or state of Illinois vehicle codes or other applicable federal, state,
or local rules and regulation pertaining to trail use. (Ord. 13-21, 9-30-2013)
8-15-2: DEFINITIONS:
COMPLIANT VEHICLE: Human powered devices no wider than four feet (4') with the
exception of equipment approved by the governing agency for use to maintain the
trail, provide for public safety, or specially permitted for use by the
governing agency responsible for the trail.
TRAIL: For the purposes of this chapter "trail" is a multiuse trail, side path
or shared use path defined by the American Association Of State Highway And
Transportation Officials (AASHTO) as: a bikeway physically separated from
motorized vehicular traffic by an open space or barrier and either within the
highway right of way or on other public property or within an easement
dedicated for public use. These facilities may also be used by pedestrians,
skaters, wheelchair users, joggers, and other nonmotorized users. Sidewalks may
be separately defined, and regulated by this municipality. (Ord. 13-21, 9-30-
2013)
8-15-3: GENERAL GUIDELINES:
Trails may be established for the purposes of recreation, transportation,
fitness and other similar purposes. They are intended for human powered
activities including, but not limited to: walking and running; the use of
devices such as bicycles, skates, skateboards, skis and other similar
activities; and recognized disability equipment for disabled individuals. (Ord.
13-21, 9-30-2013)
8-15-4: ESTABLISHMENT:
There is hereby established in the city a trail system in the lands, public
parks, and/or rights of way heretofore designated or set apart by the city for
use as trails. (Ord. 13-21, 9-30-2013)
8-15-5: RULES:
Users of the trails shall not:
   (A)   Travel at a rate of speed that is greater than reasonable and prudent.
   (B)   Use the trail in a negligent manner that is likely to endanger persons
or property. Trail users shall use common courtesy and respect the rights and
safety of others. The applicable state regulations regarding the equipment
required to allow the safe operation of bicycles or other wheeled vehicles
during the times of the day when natural light is diminished shall be applied
to the trails subject to this chapter.
   (C)   Use the trail under the influence of alcohol or other controlled
substances.
   (D)   Walk any animal unless on a leash no longer than six feet (6') and
with the owner in complete physical control at all times.
   (E)   Litter, leave animal waste, or discard any other items along or near
the trail.
   (F)   Operate any vehicle other than a "compliant vehicle" as previously
defined in this chapter. (Ord. 13-21, 9-30-2013)
TITLE 9
TRAFFIC
CHAPTER 1
DEFINITIONS AND GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
9-1-1: Definitions
9-1-2: Obedience To Police
9-1-3: Scene Of Fire
9-1-4: Sign And Signals
9-1-5: Traffic-Control Signal Legend
9-1-6: Flashing Signals
9-1-7: Lane Control Signals
9-1-8: School Signals
9-1-9: Pedestrian Control Signals
9-1-10: Unauthorized Signs
9-1-11: Interference With Sign And Signals
9-1-12: Bicycles
9-1-13: Exemptions
9-1-14: Advertising Signs
9-1-15: Procedure For No Contest Plea To Certain Violations
9-1-16: Registration Of Bicycles
9-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
Whenever in this Chapter the following terms are used, they shall have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them in this Chapter:
ALLEY:        A public way within a block, generally giving access to the rear of lots or
              buildings, and not used for general traffic circulation.
              Every device propelled by human power upon which any person may ride,
BICYCLE:      having two (2) tandem wheels either of which is more than twenty inches
              (20") in diameter.
              The territory within the City contiguous to and including a street or
              highway when within any six hundred feet (600') along such highway there
BUSINESS      are buildings in use for business or industrial purposes, including, but
DISTRICT:     not limited to, hotels, banks, or office buildings, railroad stations and
              public buildings which occupy at least three hundred feet (300') of
              frontage on one side or three hundred feet (300') collectively on both
              sides of the street or highway.
COMMERCIAL    Any vehicle operated for the transportation of persons or property in the
VEHICLE:      furtherance or any commercial or industrial enterprise.
CROSSWALK:    That portion of the roadway included within the prolongation of the
              sidewalk lines at street intersections.
DRIVER:       Every person who drives or is in actual physical control of a vehicle.
              Police vehicles, vehicles of the Fire Department, ambulances, vehicles
EMERGENCY     carrying a State, County or Municipal officer employee in response to an
VEHICLE:      emergency call, and emergency vehicles of public service corporations on an
              emergency call.
              Any chemical compound or mechanical mixture that is commonly used or
              intended for the purpose of producing an explosion and which contains any
              oxidizing and combustive units or other ingredients in such proportions,
EXPLOSIVES:   quantities, or packing that an ignition by fire, by friction, by
              concussion, by percussion, or by detonator of any part of the compound or
              mixture may cause such a sudden generation of highly heated gases that the
              resultant gaseous pressures are capable of producing destructible effects
              on contiguous objects or of destroying life or limb.
FARM TRACTOR: Every motor vehicle designed and used primarily as a farm implement for
              drawing plows, mowing machines, and other implements of husbandry.
FLAMMABLE     Any liquid which has a flash point of seventy degrees Fahrenheit (70°F) or
LIQUIDS:      less as determined by Tagliabue or equivalent quantity closes or closed cup
              test device.
IMPROVED      A roadway of concrete, brick, asphalt, macadam or gravel.
HIGHWAY:
INTERSECTION: The area embraced within the prolongation of the property lines of two (2)
              or more streets which join at an angle, whether or not such streets cross.
LANED         A street, the roadway of which is divided into two (2) or more clearly
ROADWAY:      marked lanes for vehicular traffic.
LOADING ZONE: The space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles
              during the loading or unloading of passengers or materials.
              A maneuver executed by the drivers of vehicles on converging roadways to
MERGING       permit simultaneous or alternate entry into the junction thereof, wherein
TRAFFIC:      the driver of each vehicle involved is required to adjust his vehicular
              speed and lateral position so as to avoid a collision with any other
              vehicle.
METAL TIRES:  Every tire the surface of which in contact with the roadway is wholly or
              partially of metal or other hard, nonresilient material.
MOTOR         Every vehicle which is self-propelled and every vehicle which is propelled
VEHICLE:      by electric power obtained from overhead wires, but not operated upon
              rails.
              Every motor vehicle having a saddle for the use of the rider and designed
MOTORCYCLE:   to travel on not more than three (3) wheels in contact with the ground, but
              excluding a tractor.
              To stand a vehicle, whether occupied or not, for a period of time greater
PARK:         than is reasonably necessary for the actual loading or unloading of
              persons.
PEDESTRIAN:   Any person afoot.
PNEUMATIC     Every tire in which compressed air is designed to support the load.
TIRE:
PROPERTY      The line marking the boundary between any street and the lots or property
LINE:         abutting thereon.
PUBLIC        A building used by the Municipality, the County, any park district, school
BUILDING:     district, the State of Illinois or the United States Government.
              The territory of any city, village or incorporated town contiguous to and
RESIDENCE     including a highway not comprising a business district when the property on
DISTRICT:     such highway for a distance of three hundred feet (300') or more is in the
              main improved with residences or residences and buildings in use for
              business.
RIGHT OF WAY: The privilege of the immediate use of the roadway.
              Every motor vehicle designed and used for drawing other vehicles and not so
ROAD TRACTOR: constructed as to carry any load thereon either independently or any part
              of the weight of a vehicle or load so drawn.
SAFETY ZONE:  The portion of a roadway reserved for the exclusive use of pedestrians,
              suitably marked or elevated.
              Every motor vehicle of the second division operated by or for a public or
SCHOOL BUS:   governmental agency or by or for a private or religious organization solely
              for the transportation of pupils in connection with school activities.
              Every vehicle without motive power designed for carrying persons or
SEMI-TRAILER: property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle and so constructed that
              some part of its weight and that of its load rests upon or is carried by
              another vehicle.
SIDEWALK:     That portion of a street between the curb line or roadway and the adjacent
              property line designated for pedestrian use.
SOLID TIRE:   Every tire of rubber or other resilient material which does not depend upon
              compressed air for the support of the load.
              The entire width between property lines of each side or place of whatever
STREET OR     nature when any part thereof is open to the use of the public, as a matter
HIGHWAY:      of right, for the public’s purpose of vehicular traffic and each way set
              aside for public travel by vehicles.
SUBURBAN      That portion of any city, village or incorporated town other than the
DISTRICT:     business and residence districts.
              Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles and other conveyances
TRAFFIC:      either singly or together while using any highway for the purpose of
              travel.
              Every vehicle without motive power designed for carrying passengers or
TRAILER:      property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle and so constructed that no
              part of its weight rests upon the towing vehicle.
TRUCK         Every motor vehicle designed and used primarily for drawing other vehicles
TRACTOR:      and not so constructed as to carry a load other than a part of the weight
              of the vehicle and load so drawn.
              The territory contiguous to and including any street which is built up with
URBAN         structures devoted to business, industry or dwelling houses situated at
DISTRICT:     intervals of less than one hundred feet (100') for a distance of a quarter
              mile or more.
              Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be
VEHICLE:      transported or drawn upon a highway except devices moving by human power or
              used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
              When required by an official sign means the act of granting the privilege
YIELD RIGHT   of the immediate use of the intersecting roadway to traffic within the
OF WAY:       intersection and to vehicles approaching from the right or left; provided,
              that when the roadway is clear the vehicle may proceed into the
              intersection. (M.C. 1962, sec. 18.101; amd. Ord. 21-03, 4-19-2021)
 
9-1-2: OBEDIENCE TO POLICE:
Members of the Police Department, and special police assigned to traffic duty,
are hereby authorized to direct all traffic in accordance with the provisions
of this Title, or in emergencies as public safety or convenience may require,
and it shall be unlawful for any person to fail or refuse to comply with any
lawful order, signal or direction of a policeman. Except in case of emergency
it shall be unlawful for any person not authorized by law to direct or attempt
to direct traffic. (M.C. 1962, sec. 18.102)
9-1-3: SCENE OF FIRE:
The Fire Department officer in command or any fireman designated by him, may
exercise the powers and authority of a policeman in directing traffic at the
scene of any fire where the Fire Department has responded to an emergency call
for so long as Fire Department equipment is on the scene, in the absence of or
in assisting the police. (M.C. 1962, sec. 18.103)
9-1-4: SIGN AND SIGNALS:
It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to disobey the instructions
of any traffic sign or signal placed in view by authority of the City Council
or in accordance with the laws of the State of Illinois, excepting on direction
of a police officer. All signs and signals established by direction of the
government shall conform to the State Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices
for Streets and Highways. (M.C. 1962, sec. 18.104)
9-1-5: TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNAL LEGEND:
Whenever traffic is controlled by traffic-control signals exhibiting the words
"go", "caution" or "stop", or exhibiting different colored lights successively
the following colors only shall be used and said terms and lights shall
indicate as follows:
   (A)   Green alone or "Go".
      1.   Vehicular traffic facing the signal may proceed straight through or
turn right or left unless a sign at such place prohibits either such turn. But
vehicular traffic shall yield the right of way to other vehicles and to
pedestrians lawfully within the intersection at the time such signal is
exhibited.
      2.   Pedestrians facing the signal may proceed across the roadway within
any marked or unmarked crosswalk.
   (B)   Yellow or "Caution" when shown with or following the green or "Go"
signal.
      1.   Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop before entering the
nearest crosswalk at the intersection, but if such stop cannot be made in
safety, a vehicle may be driven cautiously through the intersection.
      2.   Pedestrians facing such signal are thereby advised that there is
insufficient time to cross the roadway, and any pedestrian then starting across
shall yield the right of way to all vehicles.
   (C)   Red alone or "Stop".
      1.   Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop before entering the
nearest crosswalk at an intersection or at such other point as may be indicated
by a clearly visible line and shall remain standing until green or "go" is
shown alone. (M.C. 1962, sec. 18.105)
      2.   No pedestrian facing such signal shall enter the roadway unless he
can do so safely and without interfering with any vehicular traffic.
   (D)   Red with green arrow.
      1.   Vehicular traffic facing such signal may cautiously enter the
intersection only to make the movement indicated by such arrow but shall not
interfere with other traffic or endanger pedestrians lawfully within a
crosswalk.
      2.   No pedestrian facing such signal shall enter the roadway unless he
can do so safely and without interfering with any vehicular traffic.
   (E)   Yellow when shown alone.
      1.   Vehicular traffic facing the signal is warned that either a red or
flashing red signal will be exhibited immediately thereafter, and such traffic
will be required to obey the ensuing red or flashing red signal, as the case
may be.
   (F)   Green arrows alone.
      1.   Vehicular traffic facing the signal may enter the intersection only
to make the movement or movements indicated by the arrows, but shall not
interfere with other traffic or endanger pedestrians lawfully within a
crosswalk. This signal will normally be used only at intersections where one-
way street operation is involved. (M.C. 1962, sec. 18.105)
   (G)   Yellow arrow. A yellow arrow appearing after a green arrow means the
signal light will be changing immediately (serving the same purpose as a yellow
signal light); applying only to the lane indicated by the green arrow. (1974
Code)
   (H)   In the event an official traffic-control signal or flashing red signal
is erected and maintained at a place other than an intersection, the provisions
of this Section shall be applicable except as to provisions which by their
nature can have no application. Any stop required shall be at a sign or marking
on the pavement indicating where the stop shall be made, but in the absence of
any such sign or marking, the stop shall be made at the signal. (M.C. 1962,
sec. 18.105)
9-1-6: FLASHING SIGNALS:
Whenever flashing red or yellow signals are used, they shall require obedience
by vehicles, vehicular traffic, as follows:
   (A)   Flashing Red (Stop Signal): When a red lens is illuminated by rapid
intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles shall stop before entering the
nearest crosswalk at an intersection or at a limit line when marked, or if
none, then before entering the intersection and the right to proceed shall be
subject to the rules applicable after making a stop at a stop sign.
   (B)   Flashing Yellow (Caution Signal): When a yellow lens is illuminated
with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicle may proceed through the
intersection or post such signal only with caution. (M.C. 1962, sec. 18.106)
9-1-7: LANE CONTROL SIGNALS:
Whenever lane control signals are used in conjunction with official signs, they
shall have the following meanings:
   (A)   Opaque Arrow On Green, Green Arrow On Opaque Background, Or Green
Alone: Drivers of vehicles facing such signals are permitted to use the lane or
lanes over which the signal is displayed providing that no intersection traffic
control signal gives a stop indication affecting the lane or lanes involved.
   (B)   Opaque "X" On Red, Red "X" On Opaque Background, Or Red Alone: Drivers
of vehicles facing such signal are prohibited from using the lane over which
the signal is displayed. (M.C. 1962, sec. 18.107)
9-1-8: SCHOOL SIGNALS:
When school signals are in operation if a yellow lens is illuminated by rapid
intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles shall pass such signals with extra
caution; if a red lens is illuminated by a steady light, drivers shall stop
short of the crosswalk and remain stopped as long as the red signal is shown.
(M.C. 1962, sec. 18.108)
9-1-9: PEDESTRIAN CONTROL SIGNALS:
Whenever special pedestrian control signals exhibiting words "Walk" or "Wait",
or "Don't Walk" are in place such signals shall indicate as follows:
   (A)   Walk: Pedestrians facing such signal may proceed across the roadway in
the direction of the signal and shall be given the right of way by the drivers
of all vehicles.
   (B)   Wait Or Don't Walk: No pedestrian shall start to cross the roadway in
the direction of such signal, but any pedestrian who has partially completed
his crossing on the walk signal shall proceed to a sidewalk or safety island
while the wait or don't walk signal is showing. (M.C. 1962, sec. 18.109)
9-1-10: UNAUTHORIZED SIGNS:
No person shall place, maintain or display upon or in view of any highway any
unauthorized sign, signal, marking or device which purports to be or is in an
imitation of or resembles an official traffic-control device or railroad sign
or signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic, nor shall any
person place or maintain or display upon or in view of any highway any other
sign which hides from view or interferes with the movement of traffic or
effectiveness of any traffic-control device or any railroad sign or signal, and
no person shall place or maintain nor shall any public authority permit upon
any highway any traffic or signal bearing thereon any commercial advertising.
(M.C. 1962, sec. 18.110)
9-1-11: INTERFERENCE WITH SIGN AND SIGNALS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to deface, injure, move or interfere with
any official traffic sign or signal. Any such unauthorized device is hereby
declared to be a nuisance and may be removed by any policeman. (M.C. 1962, sec.
18.111)
9-1-12: BICYCLES:
   (A)   Application Of Rules:
      1.   It is unlawful for any person to do any act forbidden or fail to
perform any act required in this Section.
      2.   The parent of any child and the guardian of any ward shall not
authorize or knowingly permit any such child or ward to violate any of the
provisions of this Section.
   (B)   Traffic Laws Apply To Persons Riding Bicycles: Every person riding a
bicycle upon a highway shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject
to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle by this Code, except
as to special regulations in this Section.
   (C)   Riding On Bicycles:
      1.   A person propelling a bicycle shall not ride other than upon or
astride a permanent and regular seat attached thereto.
      2.   No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at one time than the
number for which it is designed and equipped, except that an adult rider may
carry a child securely attached to his person in a backpack or sling.
   (D)   Clinging To Vehicles: No person riding upon any bicycle, coaster,
roller skates, sled or toy vehicle shall attach the same or himself to any
vehicle upon a roadway.
   (E)   Position Of Bicycles And Motorized Pedal Cycle On Roadways: Any person
operating a bicycle or motorized pedal cycle upon a roadway at less than the
normal speed of traffic at the time and place and under the conditions then
existing shall ride as close as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of
the roadway except under the following situations:
      1.   When overtaking and passing another bicycle, motorized pedal cycle
or vehicle proceeding in the same direction; or
      2.   When preparing for a left turn at an intersection or into a private
road or driveway; or
      3.   When reasonably necessary to avoid conditions including, but not
limited to, fixed or moving objects, parked or moving vehicles, bicycles,
motorized pedal cycles, pedestrians, animals, surface hazards, or substandard
width lanes that make it unsafe to continue along the right-hand curb or edge.
   (F)   Riding Bicycles Or Motorized Pedal Cycles On Roadways: Persons riding
bicycles or motorized pedal cycles upon a roadway shall not ride more than two
(2) abreast, except on paths or parts of roadways set aside for their exclusive
use. Persons riding two (2) abreast shall not impede the normal and reasonable
movement of traffic and, on a laned roadway, shall ride within a single lane,
subject to the provisions of subsection (E) of this Section.
   (G)   Left Turns:
      1.   A person riding a bicycle or motorized pedal cycle intending to turn
left shall follow a course described in Section
9-2-4 of this Title or subsection (B) of this Section.
      2.   A person riding a bicycle or motorized pedal cycle intending to turn
left shall approach the turn as close as practicable to the right curb or edge
of the roadway. After proceeding across the intersecting roadway, the turn
shall be made as close as practicable to the curb edge of the roadway on the
far side of the intersection. After turning, the bicycle or motorized pedal
cycle shall comply with any official traffic-control device or police officer
regulating traffic on the highway along which he intends to proceed.
   (H)   Turn And Stop Signals:
      1.   Except as provided in this subsection, a person riding a bicycle
shall comply with Sections
9-1-4 and
9-1-5 of this Chapter.
      2.   A signal of intention to turn right or left when required shall be
given during not less than the last one hundred feet (100') traveled by the
bicycle before turning, and shall be given while the bicycle is stopped waiting
to turn. A signal by hand and arm need not be given continuously if the hand is
needed in the control or operation of the bicycle.
   (I)   Bicycles On Sidewalks: A person propelling a bicycle upon and along a
sidewalk or across a roadway upon and along a crosswalk, shall yield the right
of way to any pedestrian and shall give audible signal before overtaking and
passing such pedestrian.
   (J)   Bicycle Parking:
      1.   A person may park a bicycle on a sidewalk unless prohibited or
restricted by an official traffic-control device.
      2.   A bicycle parked on a sidewalk shall not impede the normal and
reasonable movement of pedestrian or other traffic.
   (K)   Penalty: Every person riding a bicycle found in violation of this
Section shall be subject to a fine based upon the following schedule:
 
First violation  $4.00, reduced to $2.00, if paid within 24 hours
Second violation $10.00
Third violation  $25.00
 
(Ord. 84-37, 11-5-1984)
9-1-13: EXEMPTIONS:
The provisions of this Chapter regulating the movement or parking of vehicles
shall not apply to the driver of any authorized emergency vehicle when
responding to an emergency call, but such driver on approaching a red or stop
signal or any stop sign shall slow down as necessary for safety but may proceed
cautiously past such red or stop sign or signal; at other times drivers of
authorized emergency vehicles shall stop in obedience to a stop sign or signal.
No driver of any authorized emergency vehicle shall assume any special
privileges under the act except when such vehicle is operated in response to an
emergency call or in the immediate pursuit of an actual or suspected violator
of the law.
The provisions of this Chapter regulating the movement and parking of vehicles
shall not apply to equipment or vehicles while actively engaged in installing,
repairing, or otherwise improving streets or street pavement. (M.C. 1962, sec.
18.113)
9-1-14: ADVERTISING SIGNS:
It shall be unlawful to maintain anywhere in the City any sign, signal, marking
or device, other than a traffic sign or signal authorized by the City Council
or the Illinois Department of Public Works and Buildings, which purports to be
or is an imitation of or resembles an official traffic-control device or
railroad sign or signal, in view of any street or highway, and it shall be
unlawful to place or maintain any sign which hides from view any lawful
traffic-control devices.
It shall be unlawful to maintain or operate, in view of any street or highway,
any flashing or rotating beacon of light. (M.C. 1962, sec. 18.114)
9-1-15: PROCEDURE FOR NO CONTEST PLEA TO CERTAIN VIOLATIONS:
Any person, firm, or corporation charged with any of the following violations
of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes:
5/3-402        No valid registration
5/3-413(4)     Operation of vehicle with expired registration, plates or
               registration sticker
5/3-416        Failure to notify Secretary of State of change of address/name
5/3-703        Improper use of registration or title
5/6-101        No valid driver's license (Expired less than 6 months)
5/6-104 (a)    M.C. violation of license classification (A.B.C.D.E.F.)
5/3-809        Illegal operation of fertilizer spreader
5/6-304        Permitting unauthorized person to drive
5/11-804       Failure to signal where required, improper signal, improper use
               of turn signal
5/11-1303      Parking where prohibited
5/11-1401      Unattended motor vehicle left illegally
5/11-1501 -    Operation of bicycle or motorized pedacycle
5/11-1511
5/12-201 -     Improper lighting, taillights (none), no red taillights,
5/12-215       only one red taillight, one headlight
5/12-502       No rearview mirrors
5/12-503 (ABC) Obstructed windshield, front side windows or rear window
5/12-602       Muffler, loud, excessive noise or no muffler
5/12-603.1     No seat belts, driver and passenger
 
within forty eight (48) hours of receiving a citation, shall have the option of
pleading "No Contest" and paying a penalty of twenty five dollars ($25.00). At
said time, the State of Illinois charge shall be dismissed by the office of the
City Attorney or by the Special City Prosecutor. (Ord. 88-15, 2-15-1988)
9-1-16: REGISTRATION OF BICYCLES:
   (A)   Registration Mandatory: It shall be mandatory for all bicycle dealers
dealing in the retail sale of bicycles within the City of East Moline, to
register all bicycles size twenty inches (20") and over at the time of sale.
The registration forms and bicycle license plates shall be made available to
the businesses at no cost through the Police Department. The completed
registration forms shall be picked up twice a month by a member of the Police
Department. It shall be the responsibility of the business owner and/or manager
to notify the Police Department if they are in need of additional registration
forms and/or license plates.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of these
ordinances relating to bicycle registration procedures shall be subject to a
fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00).
   (B)   Operation Of A Bicycle Without A License: No person who resides within
this City shall ride or propel a bicycle on any street, highway, road, etc., or
upon any public way set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles unless such
bicycle has been licensed and a license plate is attached thereto as provided
herein. In the event a bicycle has been purchased outside the corporate limits
of the City of East Moline or was sold within the City and has not been
processed for a license plate as set forth above, the bicycle shall be licensed
through the procedure set forth below:
      1.   Registration Agency: Applications for registration should be issued
by the Chief of Police.
      2.   Application Form: The application for a bicycle license shall be on
a form provided by the City.
      3.   Proof Of Ownership: The Chief of Police shall refuse to issue a
license where he has reason to believe the applicant is not the owner of, or
entitled to possession of, the bicycle.
      4.   Inspection: The Chief of Police or an officer assigned such
responsibility shall inspect each bicycle before licensing the same and shall
refuse to issue a license for any bicycle which he determines is in unsafe
mechanical condition.
      5.   Registration Plate Or Tag: Upon issuing a bicycle license, the Chief
of Police must also issue a plate or tag, which shall be firmly attached to the
bicycle in a manner as to be plainly visible from the rear.
      6.   Records: The Chief of Police shall keep a record of the number of
each license, the date issued, the name and address of the person to whom
issued and the number of the frame of the bicycle for which issued, and a
record of all bicycle license fees collected by him.
      7.   Duration: A bicycle license shall have a duration for the ownership
of the bicycle by the same owner.
      8.   Transfer Of Ownership: Upon sale or other transfer of a licensed
bicycle, the licensee shall remove the license plate or tag and shall either
surrender the same to the Chief of Police or may upon proper application, but
without paying of additional fee, have the plate or tag assigned to another
bicycle owned by the applicant.
      9.   Penalty: Any person violating the provisions of this Section shall
be subject to a fine of not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) or more than
one hundred dollars ($100.00). In the event a person accused with a violation
of this Section who does not wish to contest the allegation prior to the time
that complaint is issued for said violation, said person may pay to the City at
the East Moline Police Headquarters a penalty in the sum of fifteen dollars
($15.00) for and in full satisfaction of said violation. In the event a person
is found guilty of violating the provisions of this Section a second or more
time, he or she shall be fined in an amount equal the minimal fine. (Ord. 97-
43, 10-20-1997)
CHAPTER 2
RULES FOR DRIVING
SECTION:
9-2-1: Position, Method Of Turning At Intersections
9-2-2: Turning On Crest Of Hill
9-2-3: Starting Parked Vehicles
9-2-4: Driver's Signal
9-2-5: Driving From Alleys, Driveways And Parking Lots
9-2-6: Driving On Sidewalks, Dikes Or Floodwalls
9-2-7: Right Of Way
9-2-8: Turning Left
9-2-9: Limitations On Turning Around
9-2-10: U-Turns
9-2-11: No Left Turn
9-2-12: Fire Department Vehicles, Fires
9-2-13: Driving On Right Side
9-2-14: Passing Vehicles
9-2-15: Overtaking Vehicles
9-2-16: Overtaking On Right
9-2-17: Limitations On Overtaking On Left
9-2-18: One-Way Roadways And Rotary Traffic Islands
9-2-19: Roadways Laned For Traffic
9-2-20: Authorized Emergency Vehicles
9-2-21: Reckless Or Careless Driving
9-2-22: Speed Restrictions
9-2-23: Special Speed Limit; Schools
9-2-24: Obstructing Traffic
9-2-25: Bicycles And Motorcycles
9-2-26: Unattended Vehicles
9-2-27: Unattended Animals
9-2-28: Clinging To Vehicles (Rep. by Ord. 84-37, 11-5-1984)
9-2-29: Skateboarding And Toy Vehicles
9-2-30: Unlawful Riding Upon Vehicles
9-2-31: Train Signals
9-2-32: Driving Through Funeral, Other Processions
9-2-33: Drivers In A Procession
9-2-34: Funeral Processions To Be Identified
9-2-35: Backing
9-2-36: Restricted Access
9-2-37: Trucks Prohibited On Certain Streets
9-2-38: Limited Load Streets
9-2-39: School Buses
9-2-40: Truck Route
9-2-41: Agreements For Regulation Of Motor Vehicles And Traffic
9-2-42: Snowmobiles Prohibited On Right Of Way
9-2-43: Commercial Vehicles Prohibited From Parking In Residence Districts
(Rep. by Ord. 19-21, 7-1-2019)
9-2-44: Semi-Trailers Prohibited At Boat Launch Parking Lot
9-2-45: No Wake Area, Boat Launch
9-2-46: Engine Braking Prohibited
9-2-1: POSITION, METHOD OF TURNING AT INTERSECTIONS:
The driver of a vehicle intending to run at an intersection shall do so as
follows:
   (A)   Both the approach for a right turn and a right turn shall be made as
close as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway.
   (B)   At any intersection where traffic is permitted to move in both
directions on each roadway entering the intersection, an approach for a left
turn shall be made in that portion of the right half of the roadway nearest the
center line thereof and by passing to the right of such center line where it
enters the intersection and after entering the intersection the left turn shall
be made so as to leave the intersection to the right of the center line of the
roadway being entered. Whenever practicable the left turn shall be made in that
portion of the intersection to and left of the center of the intersection.
   (C)   At any intersection where traffic is restricted to one direction on
one or more of the roadways, the driver of a vehicle intending to turn left at
any such intersection shall approach the intersection in the extreme left-hand
lane lawfully available to traffic moving in the direction of travel of such
vehicle and after entering the intersection and left turn shall be made so as
to leave the intersection, as nearly as practicable in the left lane lawfully
available to traffic moving in such direction upon the roadway being entered.
The driver of a vehicle about to enter or cross a highway from a private road
or driveway shall yield the right of way to all vehicles approaching on said
highway. (M.C. 1962, sec. 18.301)
9-2-2: TURNING ON CREST OF HILL:
No vehicle shall be turned so as to proceed in the opposite direction upon any
curve, or upon the approach to, or near the crest of a grade, where such
vehicle cannot be seen by the driver of any other vehicle approaching from
either direction within five hundred feet (500'). (M.C. 1962, sec. 18.302)
9-2-3: STARTING PARKED VEHICLES:
No person shall start a vehicle which is stopped, standing or parked unless and
until such movement can be made with reasonable safety. (M.C. 1962, sec.
18.303)
9-2-4: DRIVER'S SIGNAL:
No driver of a vehicle shall suddenly start, slow down, stop or attempt to turn
without first giving a suitable signal in such a manner as to surprise others
who might be affected by his action.
   (A)   No person shall turn a vehicle from a direct course upon a highway
unless and until such movement can be made with reasonable safety and then only
after giving a clearly audible signal by sounding the horn if any pedestrian
may be affected by such movement or after giving an appropriate signal in the
manner hereinafter provided in the event any other vehicle may be affected by
such movement.
   (B)   A signal of intention to turn right or left shall be given during not
less than the last one hundred feet (100') traveled by the vehicle before
turning.
      The signals herein required shall be given either by means of the hand
and arm or by a signal lamp or signal device, but when a vehicle is so
constructed or loaded that a hand and arm signal would not be visible both to
the front and rear of such vehicle, then said signals must be given by such a
lamp or device.
      All signals herein required given by hand and arm shall be given from the
left side of the vehicle in the following manner and such signals shall
indicate as follows:
         Left turn--Hand and arm extended horizontally.
         Right turn--Hand and arm extended upward.
         Stop or decrease of speed--Hand and arm extended downward. (M.C. 1962,
sec. 18.304)
9-2-5: DRIVING FROM ALLEYS, DRIVEWAYS AND PARKING LOTS:
The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, driveway or garage shall stop
such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk, or across a sidewalk
line projected across such alley, and shall exercise extreme care in driving
upon said sidewalk or across such line. (M.C. 1962, sec. 18.305)
9-2-6: DRIVING ON SIDEWALKS, DYKES OR FLOODWALLS:
No driver of a vehicle, whether manually or motor propelled, shall drive within
any sidewalk area, except at a permanent or temporary driveway, nor onto or
upon any portion of a roadway marked as a safety zone, nor upon any portion of
the dyke or floodwall system within the City. This provision shall not apply to
City maintenance vehicles performing their normal duties. Any person convicted
of a violation of this Section shall be fined in a sum not less than ten
dollars ($10.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). (Ord. 75-46, 11-
3-1975)
9-2-7: RIGHT OF WAY:
Excepting as otherwise herein provided, the driver of a vehicle approaching an
intersection shall yield the right of way to a vehicle which has entered the
intersection from a different highway; and when two (2) vehicles enter an
intersection from different highways at approximately the same time, the driver
of the vehicle on the left shall yield the right of way to the vehicle on the
right. (M.C. 1962, sec. 18.307)
9-2-8: TURNING LEFT:
The driver of a vehicle within an intersection intending to turn to the left
shall yield the right of way to any vehicle approaching from the opposite
direction which is within the intersection or so close thereto as to constitute
an immediate hazard, but said driver, having so yielded and having given a
signal when and as required, may make such left turn and the drivers of all
other vehicles approaching the intersection from said opposite direction shall
yield the right of way to the vehicle making the left turn. (M.C. 1962, sec.
18.308)
9-2-9: LIMITATION ON TURNING AROUND:
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to turn such vehicle so as
to proceed in the opposite direction unless such movement can be made in safety
and without backing into traffic or otherwise interfering with traffic. (M.C.
1962, sec. 18.309)
9-2-10: U-TURNS:
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to make a U-turn at any
place where such turns are prohibited by ordinance. (M.C. 1962, sec. 18.310)
9-2-11: NO LEFT TURN:
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any motor vehicle to turn left at any
of the following locations:
Exit of the alley between the North Service Road of 42nd Avenue and 41st
Avenue, west of 9th Street, and proceeding in an easterly direction. (Ord. 85-
1, 1-7-1985)
9-2-12: FIRE DEPARTMENT VEHICLES, FIRES:
Upon the approach of a Fire Department vehicle, drivers of vehicles shall
comply with the provisions of this Chapter relating to the approach of
authorized emergency vehicles.
It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle, other than one on official
business, to follow any fire apparatus in response to a fire alarm, closer than
one block, or to park any vehicle within the block where fire apparatus has
stopped to answer a fire alarm.
It shall be further unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to drive over any
unprotected hose of the Fire Department without the consent of the Fire Marshal
or the assistant in command. (M.C. 1962, sec. 18.312)
9-2-13: DRIVING ON RIGHT SIDE:
Upon all roadways of sufficient width a vehicle shall be driven upon the right
half of the roadway except as follows:
   (A)   When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same
direction under the rules governing such movement.
   (B)   When the right half of a roadway is closed to traffic while under
construction or repair.
   (C)   Upon a roadway designated and sign posted for one-way traffic.
   (D)   Upon a roadway divided into three (3) marked lanes for traffic under
the rules applicable thereon; or
   (E)   Whenever there is a single track paved road on one side of the public
highway and two (2) vehicles meet thereon, the driver on whose right is the
wider shoulder shall give the right of way on such pavement to the other
vehicle. (M.C. 1962, sec. 18.313)
9-2-14: PASSING VEHICLES:
Drivers of vehicles proceeding in opposite directions shall pass each other to
the right and upon roadways having width for not more than one line of traffic
in each direction each driver shall give to the other at least one-half (1/2)
of the main traveled portion of the roadway as nearly as possible. (M.C. 1962,
sec. 18.314)
9-2-15: OVERTAKING VEHICLES:
The following rules shall govern the overtaking and passing of vehicles
proceeding in the same direction, subject to those limitations, exceptions, and
special rules hereinafter stated:
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle overtaking another vehicle proceeding the same
direction shall pass to the left thereof at a safe distance and shall not again
drive to the right side of the roadway until safely clear of the overtaken
vehicle.
   (B)   Except when overtaking and passing on the right is permitted, the
driver of an overtaken vehicle shall give way to the right in favor of the
overtaking vehicle on suitable signal and shall not increase the speed of his
vehicle until completely passed by the overtaking vehicle. (M.C. 1962, sec.
18.315)
9-2-16: OVERTAKING ON RIGHT:
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass upon the right of
another vehicle which is making or about to make a left turn.
   (B)   The driver of a vehicle may overtake and, following sufficient
clearance, pass another vehicle proceeding in the same direction either upon
the left or upon the right on a roadway with unobstructed pavement of
sufficient width for four (4) or more lines of moving traffic when such
movement can be made safely. No person shall drive off the pavement or upon the
shoulder of the roadway in overtaking or passing on the right.
   (C)   The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass another vehicle upon the
right on a one-way street, or on any street on which traffic is restricted to
one direction of movement where the roadway is free from obstructions and of
sufficient width for two (2) or more lanes of moving vehicles. (M.C. 1962, sec.
18.316)
9-2-17: LIMITATIONS ON OVERTAKING ON LEFT:
   (A)   No vehicle shall be driven to the left side of the center of the
roadway in overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same
direction unless such left side is clearly visible and is free of oncoming
traffic for a sufficient distance ahead to permit such overtaking and passing
to be completely made without interfering with the safe operation of any
vehicle approaching from the opposite direction of any overtaken vehicle. In
every event the overtaking vehicle must return to the right-hand side of the
roadway before coming within one hundred feet (100') of any vehicle approaching
from the opposite direction.
   (B)   No vehicle shall in overtaking and passing another vehicle or at any
other time, be driven to the left side of the roadway under the following
conditions:
      1.   When approaching the crest of a grade or upon a curve in the
highway, where the driver's view is obstructed within sufficient distance as to
create a hazard in the event another vehicle might approach from the opposite
direction.
      2.   When approaching within one hundred feet (100') of or traversing any
intersection or railroad grade crossing.
      3.   Where official signs are in place directing that traffic keep to the
right, or a distinctive center line is marked, which distinctive line also so
directs traffic as declared in the sign manual adopted by the State Department
of Public Works and Buildings.
      4.   The limitations in subsections (B)1 and (B)2 of this Section shall
not apply upon a one-way street or upon a street with unobstructed pavement of
sufficient width for two (2) or more lanes of moving traffic in each direction
when such movement can be made with safety. (M.C. 1962, sec. 18.317)
      5.   From 7th Street east on 15th Avenue to one hundred seventy feet
(170') east of the intersection of 10th Street and 15th Avenue which area is
marked with a distinctive double yellow line indicating a no passing area.
(Ord. 66-25, 10-17-1966)
9-2-18: ONE-WAY ROADWAYS AND ROTARY TRAFFIC ISLANDS:
   (A)   Upon a roadway designated and sign-posted for one-way traffic a
vehicle shall be driven only in the direction designated.
   (B)   A vehicle passing around a rotary traffic island shall be driven only
on the right of such island. (M.C. 1962, sec. 18.318)
9-2-19: ROADWAYS LANED FOR TRAFFIC:
Whenever any roadway has been divided into three (3) or more clearly marked
lanes for traffic the following rules in addition to all others consistent
herewith shall apply:
   (A)   A vehicle shall be driven as nearly as practical entirely within a
single lane and shall not be moved from such lane until the driver has first
ascertained that such movement can be made with safety.
   (B)   Upon a roadway which is divided into three (3) lanes a vehicle shall
not be driven in the center lane except when overtaking and passing another
vehicle where the roadway is clearly visible and such center lane is clear of
traffic within a safe distance, or in preparation for a left turn or where such
center lane is at the time allocated exclusively to traffic moving in the
direction that the vehicle is proceeding and is sign-posted to give notice of
such allocation.
   (C)   Official signs may be erected, directing slow-moving traffic to use a
designated lane or allocating specified lanes to traffic moving in the same
direction and drivers of vehicles shall obey the directions of every such sign.
(M.C. 1962, sec. 18.319)
9-2-20: AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES:
Upon the immediate approach of an authorized emergency vehicle, when the driver
is giving audible sign by siren, or red flashing beacon, the driver of every
other vehicle shall yield the right of way and shall immediately drive to a
position parallel and as close as possible to the right-hand edge or curb of
the highway clear of any intersection and shall stop and remain in such
position until the authorized emergency vehicle has passed, except when
otherwise directed by a policeman.
This section shall not operate to relieve the driver of an authorized emergency
vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons
using the highway. (M.C. 1962, sec. 18.320)
9-2-21: RECKLESS OR CARELESS DRIVING:
It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle in the city in a reckless or wanton
manner, or carelessly, so as to endanger life or property. This ordinance shall
apply on both public rights of way in the city, or any parking lots or driving
areas within the city where the city police department has authority to
regulate traffic.
A driver who operates a motor vehicle while any passenger of said vehicle is
riding the vehicle in violation of section
9-2-30 of this chapter is guilty of reckless driving. (Ord. 00-42, 10-16-2000)
9-2-22: SPEED RESTRICTIONS:
It shall be unlawful to drive any motor vehicle on any street not under the
jurisdiction of the department of public works and buildings, state of
Illinois, or the county, in an urban district within the city at a speed in
excess of thirty (30) miles per hour, or in an alley at a speed in excess of
ten (10) miles per hour.
Provided that if the city council, by ordinance, sets other limits as provided
by statute after an engineering or traffic survey then such limits shall govern
the rate of speed on the streets indicated in such ordinance. The
superintendent of streets shall post appropriate signs showing such speed
limits.
Provided further, that the speed of all vehicles of the second division as
defined by statute, having two (2) or more solid tires shall not exceed ten
(10) miles per hour.
The fact that the speed of a vehicle does not exceed the applicable maximum
speed limit does not relieve the driver from the duty to decrease speed when
approaching and crossing an intersection, when approaching and going around a
curve, when approaching a hillcrest, when traveling upon any narrow or winding
roadway or when special hazards exist with respect to pedestrians or other
traffic by reason of weather or highway conditions; and speed shall be
decreased as may be necessary to avoid colliding with any person or vehicle on
or entering the highway in compliance with legal requirements and the duty of
all persons to use due care.
It shall be unlawful to drive any vehicle on any street or highway within the
city under the jurisdiction of the state department of public works and
buildings, or of the county, at a speed exceeding that lawfully set for such
street.
Provided further, that pursuant to a traffic survey, the following speed limits
have been set for the following streets:
   45 miles per hour on 42nd Avenue.
   35 miles per hour on J.F. Kennedy Drive.
   35 miles per hour on north and south service roads, paralleling 42nd Avenue
from J.F. Kennedy Drive to 19th Street. (1974 Code; amd. Ord. 75-3, 2-3-1975)
   30 miles per hour in any business district.
   30 miles per hour in any residence district.
   30 miles per hour on 7th Street commencing at 17th Avenue and continuing
south to 42nd Avenue.
   30 miles per hour on any arterial highway or boulevard.
   30 miles per hour on Thirtieth Avenue between J.F. Kennedy Drive and Archer
Drive. (Ord. 70-25, 7-6-1970; amd. 1974 Code)
   35 miles per hour on Seventh Street between Forest Road to a point 650 feet
south of Forest Road, and from said point to the south city limits, 45 miles
per hour. (Ord. 78-6, 3-6-1978)
   40 miles per hour on Archer Drive from 18th Avenue to 30th Avenue.
   35 miles per hour on Archer Drive from 30th Avenue to 42nd Avenue. (Ord. 75-
3, 2-3-1975)
   20 miles per hour on 12th Street from 30th Avenue to 38th Avenue. (Ord. 75-
29, 7-21-1975)
   35 miles per hour on Morton Drive from 27th Street to 37th Street. (Ord. 78-
6, 3-6-1978)
   30 miles per hour on 3rd Avenue from 19th Street to Sugar Creek.
   35 miles per hour on 4th Avenue from Sugar Creek to a point 220 feet west of
Rita Street (37th Street) and from a point 860 feet east of Ruth Road (40
Street) to Cook School Road (172 Street North). (Ord. 79-71, 12-17-1979)
   25 miles per hour on the following streets and avenues:
      71/2 Street from 28th Avenue to 30th Avenue;
      8th Street from 28th Avenue to 30th Avenue;
      9th Street from 25th Avenue to 30th Avenue;
      91/2 Street from 25th Avenue to 30th Avenue;
      10th Street from 28th Avenue to 30th Avenue;
      25th Avenue from 9th Street to 91/2 Street;
      28th Avenue from 7th Street to 10th Street. (Ord. 80-35, 9-15-1980)
   20 miles per hour on 10th Street from 21st Avenue to 24th Avenue. (Ord. 80-
50, 12-1-1980)
   35 miles per hour on 12th Avenue from 1st Street to 10th Street. (Ord. 95-
36, 11-20-1995)
   25 miles per hour on 4th Street A from 22nd Avenue to 30th Avenue. (Ord. 96-
28, 12-2-1996)
The chief of police shall post appropriate signs indicating the speed limits in
the city. (M.C. 1962, sec. 18.322)
9-2-23: SPECIAL SPEED LIMIT; SCHOOLS:
No person shall drive a motor vehicle at a speed in excess of twenty (20) miles
per hour while passing the following designated school zones on a school days
between 6:30 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. when school children are present.
   4th Avenue, from 673 feet east of 27th Street to 1,467 feet west of 36th
Street.
   18th Avenue, from 66 feet west of 7th Street to 25 feet east of 5th Street.
   30th Avenue, from 775 feet east of 5th Street to 9 1/2th Street.
   7th Street, from 29th Avenue to 165 feet north of 36th Avenue.
   J.F. Kennedy Drive, from 227 feet south of 18th Avenue to 32 feet south of
22nd Avenue Court.
   22'' Avenue, from J.F. Kennedy Drive to 5th Street.
   11th Street, from 689 feet south of 45th Avenue to 222 feet north of 48th
Avenue.
   Avenue of the Cities South Service Road, from 57 feet east of 5th Street to
367 feet west of 5th Street.
   5th Street, from 79 feet south of Avenue of the Cities South Service Road to
303 feet north of 43rd Avenue Court.
   Oaklawn Avenue, 5th Street to Forest Road.
   Avenue of the Cities North Service Road, from 11th Street to Archer Drive.
   Archer Drive, from 429 feet south of 37th Avenue to Avenue of the Cities
North Service Road.
   46th Avenue, from 140 feet east of 9th Street to 100 feet west of 11th
Street.
The chief of police shall post or cause to be posted appropriate signs
indicating the school zone and the maximum speed in effect during school days
when children are present. (M.C. 1962, sec. 18.323) (Ord. 23-05, 2-20-2023)
9-2-24: OBSTRUCTING TRAFFIC:
No vehicle shall be operated or allowed to remain upon the street in such a
manner as to form an unreasonable obstruction to the traffic thereon. (M.C.
1962, sec. 18.324)
9-2-25: BICYCLES AND MOTORCYCLES:
It shall be unlawful for more than one person to ride upon any bicycle
propelled by human power upon any street, or for any person to ride upon any
motorcycle other than a seat permanently attached to said vehicle to the right
or rear of the operator. (M.C. 1962, sec. 18.325)
9-2-26: UNATTENDED VEHICLES:
No vehicle shall be left unattended while the motor of such vehicle is running;
and no vehicle shall be left without a driver on any hill or incline unless the
vehicle is secured against moving.
Whenever any police officer finds a vehicle unattended upon any bridge or
causeway or in any tunnel where such vehicle constitutes an obstruction to
traffic, such officer is hereby authorized to provide for the removal of such
vehicle to the nearest garage or other place of safety. (M.C. 1962, sec.
18.326)
9-2-27: UNATTENDED ANIMALS:
It shall be unlawful to leave any horse or other draft animal unattended in any
street without having such animal securely fastened. (M.C. 1962, sec. 18.327)
9-2-28: CLINGING TO VEHICLES:
(Rep. by Ord. 84-37, 11-5-1984)
9-2-29: SKATEBOARDING AND TOY VEHICLES:
   (A)   Definitions:
    SKATEBOARD: As used in this ordinance shall mean a single platform mounted
on wheels which is propelled solely by human power.
   SKATEBOARDING: As used in this ordinance shall mean the use of a skateboard
by any person as a means of transporting or propelling said person from one
point to another.
   (B)   Skateboarding Prohibited:
      1.   Skateboarding shall be prohibited on any public street, roadway or
highway within the city, except within the designated crosswalk.
      2.   Skateboarding shall be prohibited on any sidewalk located within a
business district of the city, but shall be permitted on all other sidewalks.
      3.   Skateboarding shall be prohibited in or upon private property
without the knowledge and consent of the owner thereof.
      4.   Skateboarding shall be prohibited in or upon public or private
parking lots within the city unless the skateboard operator shall have first
secured the property owner's written permission to do so. (Ord. 90-32, 8-20-
1990)
   (C)   Skates Or In-Line Skates Prohibited: It shall be prohibited for any
person on skates, in-line skates, a coaster, sled or other toy vehicle, to go
upon any roadway other than a crosswalk. (Ord. 92-33, 8-17-1992)
   (D)   Right Of Way: The operator of a skateboard has the status of a
pedestrian, but shall yield the right of way to all vehicular and to all other
pedestrian (nonskateboard) traffic.
   (E)   Skateboard Operations: Skateboard operators shall have all the rights
and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to nonskateboard
pedestrians as set forth in the Illinois vehicle code being 625 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/1-100 to 5/20-101 as amended from time to time.
Notwithstanding their status as pedestrians, skateboard operators on sidewalks
and bike paths shall yield the right of way to all vehicular and to all other
pedestrian (nonskateboard) traffic upon the sidewalk or bike path.
   (F)   Operator Only: No more than one person shall operate or ride on a
skateboard at one time.
   (G)   Penalty: Any person violating or failing to comply with the provisions
of this ordinance shall be issued a traffic citation, and upon conviction,
shall be subject to a fine of not less than fifteen dollars ($15.00), and no
more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). A person issued his or her first
citation may voluntarily pay a fine of ten dollars ($10.00) at the East Moline
police department, within twenty four (24) hours. (Ord. 90-32, 8-20-1990)
9-2-30: UNLAWFUL RIDING UPON VEHICLES:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to ride upon the exterior portions
of any automobile, truck or other enclosed moving vehicle or for any person to
protrude from any window or truck bed of a moving vehicle.
   (B)   No person shall ride in or on any portion of a vehicle that was not
primarily designed, manufactured and intended for use by motor vehicle
passengers. This section shall preclude persons from riding within truck bodies
in space designed, manufactured or intended for hauling goods or merchandise,
enclosed or unenclosed pickup truck beds, luggage racks and similar devices or
areas. This section shall not apply to employees, eighteen (18) years of age or
older, actively engaged in the necessary discharge of a duty that requires the
employee to ride within the unenclosed body of a truck or an enclosed or
unenclosed bed of a pickup truck; or upon private property within the city not
within the jurisdiction of the police department to regulate traffic; or while
such vehicle is participating in an organized and permitted parade or special
event within the city. (Ord. 00-42, 10-16-2000)
9-2-31: TRAIN SIGNALS:
The driver of a vehicle approaching a railroad grade crossing when a signal
device gives warning of the immediate approach of a train, shall stop within
fifty feet (50') but not less than ten feet (10') from the nearest track of
such railroad and shall not proceed until he can do so safely.
The driver of a vehicle shall stop at and not traverse such grade crossing when
a crossing gate is lowered or when a flagman, or automatic signal warns of the
approach of a train.
The driver of any motor vehicle carrying passengers for hire, or any school bus
carrying any school children, or any vehicle carrying explosives or flammable
liquid as cargo shall stop such vehicle within fifty feet (50') but not less
than ten feet (10') from the nearest rail of the tracks and shall listen and
look in both directions along such track from which a train might come, before
proceeding across such tracks at a grade crossing. Provided that no such stop
need be made at any such crossing where a police officer or a traffic control
signal directs traffic to proceed. (M.C. 1962, sec. 18.331)
9-2-32: DRIVING THROUGH FUNERAL, OTHER PROCESSIONS:
No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral or
other authorized procession while they are in motion and when such vehicles are
conspicuously designated as required in this chapter. This provision shall not
apply at intersections where traffic is controlled by traffic control signals
or police officers. (M.C. 1962, sec. 18.332)
9-2-33: DRIVERS IN A PROCESSION:
Each driver in a funeral or other procession shall drive as near to the right
hand edge of the roadway as practical and shall follow the vehicle ahead as
close as practical and safe. (M.C. 1962, sec. 18.333)
9-2-34: FUNERAL PROCESSIONS TO BE IDENTIFIED:
A funeral composed of a procession of vehicles shall be identified as such by
the display upon the outside of each vehicle of a pennant or other identifying
insignia and by having the lights of each vehicle lighted. (M.C. 1962, sec.
18.334)
9-2-35: BACKING:
The driver of a vehicle shall not back the same unless such movement can be
made with reasonable safety and without interference with other traffic. (M.C.
1962, sec. 19.335)
9-2-36: RESTRICTED ACCESS:
No person shall drive a vehicle onto or from any controlled or limited
controlled access roadway except at such entrances and exits as are established
by public authority. (M.C. 1962, sec. 18.336)
9-2-37: TRUCKS PROHIBITED ON CERTAIN STREETS:
It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle weighing in excess of twelve
thousand (12,000) pounds over or upon 3rd Avenue from 19th Street to 27th
Street.
It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle weighing in excess of eight
thousand (8,000) pounds over or upon 10th Avenue between 13th Street and 13th
Avenue. (Ord. 98-42, 12-7-1998)
9-2-38: LIMITED LOAD STREETS:
Whenever the weight of vehicles permitted on a street is limited by ordinance
and signs indicating such limitations are posted, it shall be unlawful to
operate a vehicle in excess of such weight on such street, except for the
purpose of making delivery or picking up a load, in which case such vehicle may
be driven on such street for not more than the minimum distance necessary for
the purpose. (M.C. 1962, sec. 18.338)
It shall be unlawful to operate a vehicle weighing in excess of ten thousand
(10,000) pounds on 9th Avenue from 19th Street East to the alley east of 21st
Street, and on 1st Street from 17th Avenue continuing south a distance of one
thousand feet (1,000'), and on 3X Avenue from 19th Street East to 25th Street.
(Ord. 65-33, 9-7-1965; amd. Ord. 69-14, 3-17-1969)
It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle carrying and/or hauling a load
weighing in excess of six thousand (6,000) pounds over or upon 1st Street from
18th Avenue, continuing south a distance of one thousand feet (1,000'). (Ord.
64-21, 5-18-1964)
It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle carrying and/or hauling a load
weighing in excess of five thousand (5,000) pounds over or upon the alley
between 16th and 17th Avenues from 6th Street to 7th Street. (Ord. 79-44, 7-2-
1979)
It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle carrying and/or hauling a load
weighing in excess of six thousand (6,000) pounds over or upon 14th Avenue from
17th Street to 19th Street. (Ord. 79-30, 6-4-1979)
It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle carrying and/or hauling a load
weighing in excess of six thousand (6,000) pounds over or upon 8th, 9th, 10th,
11th, 12th, and 13th Avenues from 13th to 19th Streets. (Ord. 01-34, 11-5-2001)
It shall be unlawful to operate a vehicle with licensed weight in excess of
twelve thousand (12,000) pounds over and upon 7th Street from 17th Avenue to
41st Avenue. (Ord. 80-42, 10-20-1980)
It shall be unlawful to operate a vehicle with licensed weight in excess of
twelve thousand (12,000) pounds over and upon 17th Street from 13th Avenue to
18th Avenue. (Ord. 83-35, 12-5-1983)
9-2-39: SCHOOL BUSES:
The driver of a vehicle on a street or highway upon meeting or overtaking from
either direction any school bus which has stopped on the highway for the
purpose of receiving or discharging any school children, shall stop the vehicle
before reaching such school bus when there is in operation on the bus a visual
signal as required by statute for operation while the bus is transporting
pupils; provided that the driver of a vehicle upon a street or highway of which
the roadway for traffic moving in opposite directions are separated by a strip
of ground at least four feet (4') wide, which is not surfaced or suitable for
vehicle traffic need not stop his vehicle upon meeting or passing a school bus
which is on the opposite roadway. (M.C. 1962, sec. 18.339)
9-2-40: TRUCK ROUTE:
The following streets within the city of East Moline may be used as alternate
truck routes. Motor vehicles using these streets shall be bound by the size,
weight, and access limits pertaining to city streets as detailed in 625
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/15-111(a) and (b).
   (A)   13th Street from 18th Avenue to 7th Avenue;
   (B)   8th Avenue from 19th Street to 27th Street;
   (C)   Morton Drive from Illinois Route 5 to 13th Street;
   (D)   12th Avenue from 13th Street to 1st Street. (Ord. 01-34, 11-5-2001)
9-2-41: AGREEMENTS FOR REGULATION OF MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC:
The mayor is authorized to execute any contracts with school boards, shopping
centers and apartment complex owners for the regulation of traffic pursuant to
625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-209, as amended. Upon execution of each
contract, they shall be recorded in the office of recorder of deeds and shall
have the force of law and be enforceable three (3) days after the contract is
so recorded. It shall be a petty offense punishable by a fine of not more than
five hundred dollars ($500.00) for any person to do any act forbidden or fail
to perform any act required by such parking and traffic contract. (Ord. 76-8,
3-1-1976)
The violation of the regulation of any of the following matters shall
constitute a violation of this section:
   (A)   The erection of stop signs, flashing signals, handicapped parking area
signs or yield signs at specified locations in a parking area and the adoption
of appropriate regulations thereto pertaining, or the designation of any
intersection in the parking area as a stop intersection or as a yield
intersection and the ordering of like signs or signals at one or more entrances
to such intersection.
   (B)   The prohibition or regulation of the turning of vehicles or specified
types of vehicles at intersection or other designated locations in the parking
area.
   (C)   The regulation of a crossing of any roadway in the parking area by
pedestrians.
   (D)   The designation of any separate roadway in the parking area for one-
way traffic.
   (E)   The establishment and regulation of loading zones.
   (F)   The prohibition, regulation, restriction or limitation of the
stopping, standing or parking of vehicles in specified areas of the parking
lot.
   (G)   The designation of safety zones in the parking area and fire lanes.
(Ord. 81-65, 8-21-1981)
9-2-42: SNOWMOBILES PROHIBITED ON RIGHT OF WAY:
It is unlawful for any person to drive or operate any snowmobile on a public
street, public sidewalk or upon any other public right of way within the city
of East Moline. Any person convicted of a violation of this section shall be
fined in a sum not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00). (Ord. 78-2, 1-3-1978)
9-2-43: COMMERCIAL VEHICLES PROHIBITED FROM PARKING IN RESIDENCE DISTRICTS:
(Rep. by Ord. 19-21, 7-1-2019)
9-2-44: SEMITRAILERS PROHIBITED AT BOAT LAUNCH PARKING LOT:
It shall be unlawful to park any semitrailer truck in the parking lot of the
Riverfront park and boat launch at any time. Any person convicted of a
violation of this section shall be fined in a sum of not less than one hundred
dollars ($100.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). (Ord. 88-24, 4-
4-1988)
9-2-45: NO WAKE AREA, BOAT LAUNCH:
There is hereby established a "No Wake" area for the immediate area of the city
boat launch at Riverfront park. The director of municipal services is hereby
directed and authorized to erect and maintain no wake signs at said location
with buoys or appropriate signs. All buoys or signs posting such "No Wake" area
shall meet the specifications as prescribed by the United States coast guard or
the Illinois department of conservation.
Any person operating a motorboat or any vessel in excess of five (5) miles per
hour in a properly posted "No Wake" area, shall be in violation of this
ordinance and shall be subject to a general penalty provision of this code.
(Ord. 89-19, 8-7-1989)
9-2-46: ENGINE BRAKING PROHIBITED:
   (A)   No person shall operate or cause to be used or operated within the
City an engine braking system that emits excessive noise on any commercial
vehicle within the corporate limits of the City of East Moline where visible
signs are posted (see division (B) of this section) for the purpose of this
ordinance, an engine braking system shall be deemed to be any device which uses
the force of the engine in any commercial vehicle to slow or alter the speed of
the vehicle by the application of force to the drive train thereof, including
but not limited to engine brakes, exhaust brakes or other similar systems. A
commercial vehicle shall be deemed to be emitting excessive noise if the
vehicle is operating an engine braking system, and if the vehicle in not
equipped with an adequate sound muffling system on the exhaust thereof. It is a
defense to this paragraph that the driver used an engine braking system that
emits excessive noise in an emergency to avoid a collision with a person or
another vehicle on the roadway.
   (B)   Excessive engine braking noise signs, in accordance with Section 12-
602.1 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, and the City Director of Maintenance
Services shall cause signs to be erected and maintained that prohibit the
driver of a commercial vehicle, as defined in Section 1-111.8 of the Illinois
Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/1-111.8), from operating or actuating any engine
braking system that emits excessive noise. The sign shall state, “EXCESSIVE
ENGINE BRAKING NOISE PROHIBITED”. (Ord. 21-03, 4-19-2021)
CHAPTER 3
PARKING RULES
SECTION:
9-3-1: No Parking Places
9-3-2: Parking Prohibited During Certain Hours
9-3-3: Parking Prohibited During Snow Removal
9-3-4: Parking Prohibited During Street Cleaning
9-3-5: Parking At Curb
9-3-6: Vehicles For Sale
9-3-7: Loading Zone
9-3-8: All Night Parking (Rep. by Ord. 09-36, 12-21-2009)
9-3-9: Parking In Alleys
9-3-10: Cab Stands, Bus Stands
9-3-11: Time Limit Parking
9-3-12: Signs
9-3-13: Temporary Parking
9-3-14: No Standing Or Stopping
9-3-15: Handicapped Parking
9-3-16: Commercial Vehicle Parking Prohibited
9-3-1: NO PARKING PLACES:
At any time it shall be unlawful to permit any vehicle to stand in any of the
following places, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or
in compliance with the directions of a policeman or traffic control device:
   1.   In any intersection.
   2.   In a crosswalk.
   3.   Upon any bridge or viaduct, or in any subway or tunnel or the approach
thereto.
   4.   Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within thirty feet (30')
of a point of the curb immediately opposite the end of a safety zone.
   5.   Within thirty feet (30') of a traffic signal, beacon or sign on the
approaching side.
   6.   Within twenty feet (20') of any intersection or crosswalk.
   7.   At any place where the standing of a vehicle will reduce the usable
width of the roadway for moving traffic to less than eighteen feet (18').
   8.   Within fifteen feet (15') of a fire hydrant.
   9.   At any place where the vehicle would block the use of a driveway.
   10.   Within fifty feet (50') of the nearest rail of a railroad grade
crossing.
   11.   Within twenty feet (20') of the driveway entrance to any fire
department station and on the side of the street opposite the entrance to any
such station within seventy five feet (75') of such entrance when properly
signposted.
   12.   On any sidewalk or parkway.
   13.   On the north side of 3rd Avenue from 19th Street east to 27th Street,
and on either side of 4th Avenue from 27th Street east to the city limits.
   14.   On the west side of 3rd Street commencing at the southwest corner of
17th Avenue south to the northwest corner of 26th Avenue. Parking is also
prohibited on John F. Kennedy Drive, formerly known as 3rd Street, from 39th
Avenue to 42nd Avenue on both sides of the street.
   15.   On both sides of 3rd Street from the CRI&P right of way to the north
line of 15th Avenue.
   16.   On the west side of 4th Street between 15th and 18th Avenues.
   17.   On the east side of 4th Street between 15th and 18th Avenues.
   18.   On the east side of 6th Street between 15th and 18th Avenues.
   19.   On the west side of 6th Street from 17th to 18th Avenues.
   20.   On either side of 7th Avenue commencing at 19th Street and continuing
east for a distance of one hundred feet (100').
   21.   On either side of 7th Street from 12th Avenue to the alley south of
18th Avenue except that on the west side of 7th Street from 15th Avenue to 16th
Avenue parking shall be permitted with one-half (½) hour limit Monday through
Saturday, and no parking from three o’clock (3:00) P.M. to five thirty o’clock
(5:30) P.M. Monday through Friday.
   22.   On the west side of 7th Street commencing at 17th Avenue, thence south
to a point thirty feet (30') south of the intersection of 21st Avenue and 7th
Street.
   23.   Either side of 30th Avenue between J.F. Kennedy Drive and the west
corporate limits of East Moline within the corporate limits of East Moline.
   24.   On either side of 8th Avenue, commencing from 19th Street and
continuing east for sixty feet (60').
   25.   On the south side of 9th Avenue, commencing from 19th Street east one
hundred feet (100').
   26.   On the north side of 9th Avenue east from 19th Street to the end of
9th Avenue.
   27.   On both sides of 10th Street from 16th Avenue to 22nd Avenue.
   28.   On the south side of 13th Avenue from 13th to 15th Streets. On the
south side of 13th Avenue from 13th Street due west two hundred fifty feet
(250').
   29.   On either side of 13th Avenue from the east line of 15th Street to the
west line of 19th Street.
   30.   On the south side of 13th Avenue “A” from its intersection with 13th
Street East to the alley.
   31.   On the north side of 15th Avenue from 3rd Street to 4th Street between
the hours of six o’clock (6:00) A.M. and eight o’clock (8:00) A.M.
   32.   On either side of 13th Street between the Chicago, Burlington and
Quincy Railroad tracks.
   33.   On the west side of 13th Street from a point two hundred sixty feet
(260') south of the south boundary line of the Chicago, Burlington and Quincy
Railroad right of way to the north boundary line of the Chicago, Rock Island
and Pacific Railroad right of way.
   34.   On the north side of 15th Avenue from 12th to 16th Street.
   35.   (a)   On the south side of 16th Avenue from the east curb line of
First Street to a point five hundred feet (500') east.
      (b)   On the south side of 16th Avenue from the east curb line of 4th
Street to a point three hundred feet (300') east.
      (c)   On the south side of 16th Avenue from 7th Street to a point three
hundred feet (300') east.
      (d)   On the north side of 16th Avenue from the east curb line of 7th
Street to a point three hundred feet (300') east.
   36.   On the east side of 16th Street from 15th to 18th Avenues.
   37.   On either side of 17th Avenue for a distance of one hundred fifty feet
(150') east of its intersection with 2nd Street.
   38.   On the south side of 17th Avenue for a distance of two hundred feet
(200') east and west of its intersection with 4th Street; on the north side of
17th Avenue for a distance of two hundred feet (200') east of its intersection
with 4th Street; on the north side of 17th Avenue for a distance of three
hundred feet (300') west of its intersection with 4th Street.
   39.   On the south side of 17th Avenue for a distance of fifty five feet
(55') east and west of its intersection with 9th Street.
   40.   On the south side of 17th and 18th Avenues at their intersections with
3rd, 10th, 12th, 14th, 15th and 17th Streets, for a distance of fifty feet
(50') east and west of said intersections.
   41.   On the south side of 17th and 18th Avenues to a point two hundred
forty feet (240') east from the east line of 8th Street to the west line of
10th Street extended south.
   42.   On the south side of 18th Avenue from 5th to 7th Streets.
   43.   On the south side of 17th Avenue for a distance of two hundred feet
(200') east and west of its intersection with 7th Street; on the north side of
17th Avenue for a distance of two hundred feet (200') east of its intersection
with 7th Street; on the north side of 17th Avenue for a distance of three
hundred feet (300') west of its intersection with 7th Street.
   44.   On the east side of 20th Street, commencing at the northeast corner of
10th Avenue north to the southeast corner of 8th Avenue.
   45.   On the east side of 21st Street, commencing at the northeast corner of
10th Avenue north to the southeast corner of 8th Avenue.
   46.   At any place where official signs prohibit parking.
   47.   On the south side of 18th Avenue commencing from the middle of 18th
Street west one hundred feet (100').
   48.   On the west side of 7th Street commencing at the northwest corner of
15th Avenue north two hundred feet (200').
      The above parking restriction shall be further excepted to permit parking
at all times on the east side of 7th Street between 14th and 15th Avenues.
   49.   On the east and west sides of 18th Street A commencing at the
southeast and southwest corners of the alley of 18th Avenue south five hundred
feet (500').
   50.   21st Avenue from the alley west to 6th Street Court, on the south side
of the Avenue.
   51.   On either side of 18th Avenue for a distance of two hundred feet
(200') west of its intersection with 19th Street.
   52.   On either side of 2nd Street from 15th Avenue north to the railroad
tracks.
   53.   On either side of North 21st Street from 1st Avenue north two thousand
six hundred feet (2,600') to Avenue “E”.
   54.   On the south side of the Service Road south of 42nd Avenue, commencing
at the intersection of 5th Street West for a distance of three hundred feet
(300').
   55.   On the north side of 15th Avenue starting at the northeast corner of
7th Street, thence east for a distance of 232.2 feet.
   56.   On the north side of 15th Avenue starting at the northwest corner of
8th Street thence west for a distance of 108.5 feet.
   57.   On the south side of 15th Avenue starting at a point 475.8 feet east
of the southeast corner of 7th Street and 15th Avenue, thence east 47.2 feet.
   58.   No parking shall be allowed on the south side of the South Service
Road from 7th Street to John F. Kennedy Drive, whereas parking shall be allowed
on the north side of said road.
   59.   On the south side of 15th Avenue starting at a point 657.6 feet east
of the southeast corner of 7th Street and 15th Avenue, thence east 13.6 feet.
   60.   On the south side of 15th Avenue starting at a point 80.8 feet west of
the southeast corner of 8th Street and 15th Avenue; thence west a distance of
70.6 feet to the east line of a crosswalk running north and south across 15th
Avenue just east of 8th Street; thence north along this line 10 feet; thence
northeast to a point 20.0 feet north of the south curb face and 33.5 feet west
of the southeast corner of 8th Street and 33.5 feet west of the southeast
corner of 8th Street and 15th Avenue; thence northeast to a point 22.6 feet
north of the south curb face and a distance of 67.8 feet west of the southwest
corner of 8th Street and 15th Avenue; the said point being on the west line of
the first parking stall on the south side of 15th Avenue between 8th and 9th
Streets; thence southeast along this line until it intersects with the south
curb face of 15th Avenue, said point being the place of beginning.
   61.   On the south side of 15th Avenue starting at a point 232.2 feet east
of the southeast corner of 8th Street and 15th Avenue, thence east fifteen feet
(15').
   62.   On the south side of 15th Avenue starting at a point 433.4 feet east
of the southeast corner of 8th Street and 15th Avenue, thence east 19.5 feet.
   63.   On the south side of 15th Avenue starting at a point 75.9 feet east of
the southeast corner of 9th Street and 15th Avenue; thence west 67.2 feet to a
point on the east line of a crosswalk extending north and south across 15th
Avenue just east of 9th Street; thence north along this line 10 feet; thence at
a northeast angle to a point which is 20 feet north of the south curb face of
15th Avenue and 37 feet east of the southeast corner of 9th Street and 15th
Avenue; thence northeast to a point 22.6 feet north of the south curb face of
15th Avenue and 62.9 feet east of the southeast corner of 9th Street and 15th
Avenue, said point being on the west line of the first parking stall on the
south side of 15th Avenue between 9th Street and 10th Street; thence along this
line until it intersects with the south curb face of 15th Avenue, said point
being the place of beginning.
   64.   On the south side of 15th Avenue starting at a point 440.1 feet east
of the southeast corner of 9th Street and 15th Avenue, thence east 18.1 feet.
   65.   On the west side of 7th Street commencing at the south side of 15th
Avenue, thence south 70.6 feet.
   66.   On the north side of 15th Avenue commencing at the northwest corner of
9th Street, thence west 69.4 feet.
   67.   On the north side of 15th Avenue commencing at the northwest corner of
10th Street, thence west 69.6 feet.
   68.   On the south side of 15th Avenue at the southeast corner of 10th
Street, thence east 95.5 feet.
   69.   On either side of the road sometimes referred to as 12th Avenue and
more commonly known as John Deere Road; said road being located east of 7th
Street, north of the railroad tracks running east and west; thence from this
point and continuing on said road east in a northerly direction for a distance
of three thousand feet (3,000') and to a point which would intersect with 13th
Avenue, if extended west, at a point west of the railroad tracks which run
north and south across 13th Avenue.
   70.   On the east side of 14th Street from 23rd Avenue south to 24th Avenue.
   71.   On the east side of 15th Street Court from 23rd Avenue south to 24th
Avenue.
   72.   On the east and west side of 8th Street from 17th Avenue south one
hundred twenty feet (120').
   73.   On the north side of 17th Avenue for a distance of three hundred feet
(300') east of its intersection with 1st Street.
   74.   On the south side of 18th Avenue commencing at the southeast corner of
18th Street to the southwest corner of 19th Street.
   75.   On the south side of 18th Avenue commencing at the southeast corner of
14th Street to the southwest corner of 16th Street.
   76.   On the south side of 18th Avenue commencing at the southeast corner of
15th Street to the southwest corner of 18th Street.
   77.   On the south side of 16th Avenue commencing at the southeast corner of
7th Street and continuing east for a distance of eighty two feet (82').
   78.   On the east and west sides of 13th Street commencing at the south side
of 15th Avenue and extending to the north side of 18th Avenue.
   79.   On the south side of 15th Avenue commencing at the southeast corner of
12th Street to the southwest corner of 13th Street.
   80.   On the north side of 34th Avenue, commencing at the northwest comer of
7th Street to the northeast corner of John F. Kennedy Drive. On the south side
of the 34th Avenue (130') east of its intersection with John F. Kennedy Drive.
   81.   On the west side of 9th Street commencing at the northwest corner of
15th Avenue, continuing north to the railroad tracks.
   82.   (Rep. by Ord. 80-2, 2-18-1980)
   83.   On the west side of 10th Street from 22nd Avenue to 24th Avenue.
   84.   On the west side of 17th Street from the northwest corner of 18th
Avenue to the south side of the Chicago, Rock Island and Pacific Railroad
tracks.
   85.   On the south side of 41st Avenue commencing on the southwest corner of
Kennedy Drive to the western City limits.
   86.   On both sides of 5th Avenue from 19th Street to 25th Street.
   87.   On the west side of 5th Street from 17th to 18th Avenue.
   88.   On the north and south sides of 9th Avenue from 13th Street
intersection, east one hundred forty feet (140') to the alley.
   89.   On the west side of 8th Street from 16th Avenue north to its
intersection with 15th Avenue.
   90.   On the west side of 6th Street from its intersection with 17th Avenue
north to the alley.
   91.   Along either side of North 20th Street from the north corporate limits
to 1st Avenue, and along 19th Street from 1st Avenue to 2nd Avenue.
   92.   (Rep. by Ord. 74-60, 11-4-1974)
   93.   On the west side of 13th Street between 15th and 18th Avenues, and on
both sides of 13th Street from 5th Avenue in a northeasterly direction to 19th
Street.
   94.   On the north side of 12th Avenue between 13th and 19th Streets.
   95.   On the north side of 11th Avenue between 13th and 19th Streets.
   96.   On the north side of 10th Avenue between 13th and 19th Streets.
   97.   On the north side of 8th Avenue between 13th and 19th Streets.
   98.   On the south side of Morton Drive between 13th Street and the alley
east of 13th Street and on the south side of Morton Drive between 15th Street
and 19th Street.
   99.   On the north side of Morton Drive between 13th and 19th Streets.
   100.   On the north side of 6th Avenue between 13th and 19th Streets.
   101.   On the north side of 5th Avenue between 13th and 19th Streets.
   102.   On the east side of 13th Street between Morton Drive and 8th Avenue.
   103.   On the east side of 23rd Street between Morton Drive and 8th Avenue.
   104.   On the east side of 24th Street between Morton Drive and 8th Avenue.
   105.   On the east side of 25th Street between Morton Drive and 8th Avenue.
   106.   On the east side of 26th Street between Morton Drive and 8th Avenue.
   107.   On the east side of 27th Street between Morton Drive and 8th Avenue.
   108.   Parking is prohibited on the south side of 15th Avenue from the west
curb line of 7th Street to one hundred eighty feet (180') west.
   109.   Parking is prohibited on the south side of 13th Avenue between the
two (2) utility poles immediately east and immediately west of the entrance to
the parking lot due south of the building at the street address of 1209 - 13th
Street, East Moline, Illinois, and in addition parking is prohibited forty five
feet (45') east of the utility pole immediately east of the entrance to said
lot.
   110.   On the east side of 1st Street between 17th Avenue and the
Mississippi River.
   111.   Parking is prohibited on the north side of 16th Avenue from the west
curb line of 7th Street to the curb cut at the exit of the State Bank Of East
Moline. Fifteen (15) minute parking shall be allowed at the next five (5)
spaces available on the north side of 16th Avenue and west of the said curb
cut.
   112.   On both sides of 18th Street between 18th Avenue and 20th Avenue.
   113.   On both sides of 18th Avenue from 11th Street to 19th Street, except
that parking shall be permitted during church hours in those areas adjacent to
churches.
   114.   On the west side of 18th Street between 13th Avenue and 15th Avenue.
   115.   On both sides of 26th Avenue east of 7th Street to the adjoining
north-south alley.
   116.   On the east side of 13th Street for a distance of forty (40) yards
south of the southeasterly corner of 13th Street and 20th Avenue.
   117.   On the east side of 12th Street between 20th and 21st Avenues, and on
the west side of 12th Street from the centerline of 21st Avenue north a
distance of four hundred sixty two feet (462').
   118.   On the north and south sides of 20th Avenue between 12th and 13th
Streets.
   119.   (Rep. by Ord. 77-50, 11-7-1977)
   120.   On the south side of 38th Avenue between 11th and 12th Streets.
   121.   Parking shall be prohibited on the south side of 2nd Avenue from 7th
Street east to the nearest alley; parking shall be prohibited on the east side
of the alley between 2nd and 3rd Avenues, said alley being located one hundred
twenty feet (120') east of 7th Street.
   122.   On the south side of 3X Avenue between 21st Street and the alley
immediately west of 21st Street.
   123.   On both sides of 16th Avenue for a distance of forty four feet (44')
east of its intersection with 8th Street, 9th Street and 10th Street.
   124.   On both sides of 3rd Avenue for a distance of forty four feet (44')
east of its intersection with 19th Street.
   125.   On the east and west sides of 13th Street south of 42nd Avenue to the
city limits.
   126.   On both sides of 46th Avenue between 10th and 11th Streets.
   127.   On the east side of 13th Street between 13th and 14th Avenues.
   128.   On the south side of 18th Avenue between 3rd Street and JFK Drive and
on the north side of 18th Avenue from JFK Drive to the driveway of
International Harvester Credit Union.
   129.   On both sides of 12th Street between 37th and 38th Avenues.
   130.   Parking shall be prohibited on the west side of 13th Street between
6th Avenue and 8th Avenue for a period of not more than two (2) hours.
   131.   On the north side of 20th Avenue from 8th Street to 13th Street.
   132.   On the east side of 19th Street from 3rd Avenue south for forty four
feet (44') and north for forty four feet (44').
   133.   On the east side of 5th Street from the southern boundary of the
Wells Elementary School property to the school parking lot entrance/exit drive,
except that parking shall be permitted on the west side of 5th Street from the
south boundary line of Wells Elementary School to the north boundary line of
Black Hawk Hills Apartment property; and parking shall be restricted on the
south side of Oaklawn from 5th Street to Forest Road.
   134.   On the south side of 25th Avenue from 6th Street to 7th Street and
from 7th Street to 8th Street.
   135.   On the east side of 71/2 Street from 25th Avenue north three hundred
thirty feet (330').
   136.   On the north side of 23rd Avenue between 13th and 19th Streets and on
the south side of 23rd Avenue between 18th and 19th Streets.
   137.   On the north side of 15th Avenue commencing at the crosswalk at the
northeast corner of 1st Street and 15th Avenue for a distance of one hundred
feet (100') east.
   138.   Parking shall be prohibited on both sides of 21st Avenue from 8th
Street to 10th Street and within the limits of the intersections on 21st Avenue
at 8th Street and 10th Street.
   139.   On the north and south sides of 26th Avenue west of 7th Street to the
adjoining alley.
   140.   On the east side of 8th Street from 21st Avenue to 22nd Avenue.
   141.   On the west side of 71/2 Street from 20th Avenue to 21st Avenue.
   142.   Truck parking shall be prohibited on the south side of 16th Avenue
from the east curb line of 10th Street east one hundred fifteen feet (115').
   143.   The west side of 14th Street in the 1500 block shall be changed from
“no parking” to “unlimited parking”, and a reserved parking spot closest to
18th Avenue shall be designated as a handicapped parking space. The east side
of 14th Street from 15th Avenue to 18th Avenue shall remain “no parking”.
   144.   On the north and south sides of 14th Avenue from 3rd Street to 5th
Street.
   145.   On the north and south sides of 13th Avenue from the west line of
13th Street in a westerly direction to the Milwaukee railroad tracks.
   146.   On the north and south sides of 50th Avenue from the west side of
11th Street to 9th Street.
   147.   On the south side of 8th Avenue from 17th Street intersection for a
distance of one hundred fifty feet (150') in a westerly direction.
   148.   Parking shall be prohibited on the north side of 16th Avenue from 9th
Street east to the fire station driveway, except for the parking of police
vehicles within that area in which parking is otherwise permitted.
   149.   On the west side of 2nd Street from the north curb line of 16th
Avenue in a northerly direction for a distance of sixty feet (60').
   150.   On both sides of J.F. Kennedy Drive from 42nd Avenue south to the
city limits.
   151.   On the north side of 39th Avenue from 7th Street west to the west
side of the second driveway.
   152.   No trucks shall be permitted to park on the east side of 13th Street
south of Morton Drive for a distance of one hundred feet (100').
   153.   On the east side of 13th Street for a distance of twenty feet (20')
north of the northeast corner of 13th Street and 9th Avenue, and for a distance
of twenty feet (20') south of the southeast corner of 13th Street and 9th
Avenue.
   154.   On both sides of 5th Street from the south service road of 42nd
Avenue to the south city limits.
   155.   On the north side of 16th Avenue, east of its intersection with 11th
Street, for a distance of the east seventy feet (70') of the west one hundred
seventy feet (170'), said location being the frontage at those premises
described as 1116 - 16th Avenue, East Moline.
   156.   On the north and south sides of 30th Avenue from 13th Street west two
hundred feet (200') and on the north and south sides of 30th Avenue from 13th
Street east two hundred feet (200').
   157.   On the north side of 21st Avenue from 7th Street west for a distance
of fifty feet (50').
   158.   On the east and west sides of 7th Street from 42nd Avenue to the
south city limits.
   159.   On the north and south sides of 12th Avenue, from First Street to a
point approximately three hundred seventy feet (370') east of Seventh Street.
   160.   On both sides of Third Street south of 17th Avenue, south to the
south side of the driveway to St. Mary’s Cemetery.
   161.   On both sides of 11th Street from 42nd Avenue through 51st Avenue.
   162.   On the east side of 27th Street from 4th to 8th Avenue.
   163.   On the north and south sides of 32nd Avenue from Kennedy Drive east
to the cul-de-sac.
   164.   On the south side of 1st Avenue between 6th and 7th Streets.
   165.   On 18th Avenue from 18th Street to 19th Street; and on 19th Street
beginning four hundred twenty five feet (425') north of the intersection of
Illinois Routes 84 and 92 and extending southerly one thousand feet (1,000')
from the intersection, a total distance of one thousand four hundred twenty
five feet (1,425').
   166.   On the north side of 48th Avenue from 11th Street to Archer Drive.
   167.   21st Avenue to 25th Avenue on 7th Street, the distance from each
intersection, north and south on 7th Street as follows:
      21st Avenue intersection fifty five feet (55') south on east side.
      21st Avenue intersection sixty feet (60') south on west side.
      23rd Avenue intersection fifty seven feet (57') south on west side.
      23rd Avenue intersection fifty eight feet (58') south on east side.
      23rd Avenue intersection fifty two feet (52') north on east side.
      23rd Avenue intersection fifty nine feet (59') north on west side.
      25th Avenue intersection eighty two feet (82') south on east side.
      25th Avenue intersection seventy five feet (75') south on west side.
      25th Avenue intersection eighty one feet (81') north on east side.
      25th Avenue intersection eighty feet (80') north on west side.
   168.   On the north service road of 42nd Avenue from 11th Street east to
Archer Drive on both sides of the service road, from the hours of seven o’clock
(7:00) A.M. to two thirty o’clock (2:30) P.M.
   169.   On the east side of 10th Street from a point immediately south of
3804 10th Street, and running south around the curve to the south side of 39th
Avenue, and terminating on the southeast corner of 10th Street at 39th Avenue.
   170.   On the east side of 1st Street between 39th and 41st Avenues.
   171.   1800 block of 18th Avenue, north alley.
   172.   On the north side of 28th Avenue between John F. Kennedy Drive and
4th Street A.
   173.   On the east side of 5th Street between 16th and 17th Avenues.
   174.   On 11th Street Place from 20th Avenue to 21st Avenue.
   175.   On the south side of the North Service Road from Kennedy Drive to 7th
Street.
   176.   Both sides of 2nd Avenue North between 20th Street North and 21st
Street North.
   177.   On the east side of 2nd Street between 15th Avenue and 16th Avenue.
   178.   On the south side of 16th Avenue from a point one hundred twenty five
feet (125') west of the west curb line of 8th Street, to the southeast corner
of 7th Street and 16th Avenue.
   179.   On the north side of 24th Avenue from 8th to 10th Street, and on the
south side of 24th Avenue from a point located two hundred thirty feet (230')
east of 8th Street to a point located five hundred eighty five feet (585') east
of 8th Street.
   180.   On both sides of Kennedy Drive between 15th Avenue and the alley
north of 15th Avenue.
   181.   On 20th Street from the corner of 3X Avenue to forty feet (40')
north, between the hours of eight o’clock (8:00) A.M. and two o’clock (2:00)
P.M. on Sundays.
   182.   On the south side of 20th Avenue Way from a point one hundred sixty
feet (160') west of 13th Street to the west right of way line of 13th Street.
   183.   On 6th Street Court from 21st Avenue south to where the pavement ends
south of 25th Avenue.
   184.   Alternate overnight parking on 15th Avenue between 6th Street and
12th Street with odd and even days on the north and south side of the avenue;
no parking shall be permitted on the south side on Monday, Wednesday and
Friday, and no parking on the north side on Tuesday and Thursday, all between
the hours of four o’clock (4:00) A.M. and seven o’clock (7:00) A.M.
   185.   On the west side of 5th Street between 20th Avenue and 22nd Avenue.
   186.   On the west side of 6th Street between 21st Avenue and 22nd Avenue.
   187.   On the south side of 21st Avenue between 5th Street and 6th Street.
   188.   On the south side of 22nd Avenue between 5th Street and 6th Street.
   189.   On the north side of the 900 block of 22nd Avenue.
   190.   West side of 7th Street from the alley directly south of 2257 7th
Street and extending north for sixty nine feet (69') and to prohibit parking on
the east side of 7th Street and extending north for sixty two feet (62').
   191.   No parking on the south side of 30th Avenue, five hundred feet (500')
west of 7th Street.
   192.   No parking from the intersection of 13th Street to the alley on the
south side of 8th Avenue.
   193.   No parking along the south side of 21st Avenue between 10th Street
and 12th Street.
   194.   No parking along the west side of Archer Drive between 23rd Avenue
and 30th Avenue.
   195.   No parking on the north and south side of Morton Drive for a distance
of eight hundred (800) feet west of the intersection with Illinois Route 5.
(1962 Code § 18.501) (Ord. 65-17, 6-7-1965; amd. Ord. 65-19, 7-6-1965; Ord. 65-
21, 7-19-1965; Ord. 65-32, 9-7-1965; Ord. 65-49, 10-18-1965; Ord. 65-57, 11-15-
1965; Ord. 65-63, 12-20-1965; Ord. 66-25, 10-17-1966; Ord. 67-9, 4-17-1967;
Ord. 67-17, 7-17-1967; Ord. 67-35, 8-21-1967; Ord. 69-51, 10-6-1969; Ord. 69-
56, 11-17-1969; 70-10, 4-20-1970; Ord. 70-13, 5-4-1970; Ord. 71-7, 2-1-1971;
Ord. 71-10, 3-1-1971; Ord. 71-24, 5-3-1971; Ord. 71-58, 10-4-1971; Ord. 72-25,
5-15-1972; Ord. 72-51, 9-5-1972; Ord. 73-7, 1-15-1973; Ord. 73-20, 3-5-1973;
Ord. 73-22, 3-19-1973; Ord. 73-35, 9-24-1973; 1974 Code; Ord. 74-1, 1-7-1974;
Ord. 74-2, 1-7-1974; Ord. 74-5, 1-21-1974; Ord. 74-11, 2-18-1974; Ord. 74-19,
4-1-1974; Ord. 74-22, 5-6-1974; Ord. 74-39, 8-5-1974; Ord. 74-56, 10-21-1974;
Ord. 74-60, 11-4-1974; Ord. 74-60, 11-4-1974; Ord. 75-12, 4-7-1975; Ord. 75-23,
5-5-1975; Ord. 75-30, 7-21-1975; Ord. 75-58, 12-1-1975; Ord. 76-5, 2-16-1976;
Ord. 76-19, 5-3-1976; Ord. 76-25, 6-7-1976; Ord. 76-26, 6-7-1976; Ord. 76-35,
7-19-1976; Ord. 76-43, 8-2-1976; Ord. 77-12, 4-4-1977; Ord. 77-48, 10-1977;
Ord. 77-49, 11-7-1977; Ord. 77-50, 11-7-1977; Ord. 77-52, 11-21-1977; Ord. 77-
57, 12-19-1977; Ord. 78-12, 4-3-1978; Ord. 78-21, 5-15-1978; Ord. 78-22, 3-15-
1978; Ord. 78-37, 9-18-1978; Ord. 78-38, 9-18-1978; Ord. 78-42, 10-16-1978;
Ord. 78-47, 11-20-1978; Ord. 79-58, 8-20-1979; Ord. 80-2, 2-18-1980; Ord. 80-8,
4-7-1980; Ord. 80-15, 4-21-1980; Ord. 80-21, 6-2-1980; Ord. 80-33, 9-2-1980;
Ord. 80-34, 9-2-1980; Ord. 80-40, 10-6-1980; Ord. 81-31, 4-6-1981; Ord. 81-32,
4-6-1981; Ord. 81-33, 4-6-1981; Ord. 81-34, 4-6-1981; Ord. 81-71, 12-21-1981;
Ord. 82-27, 5-17-1982; Ord. 82-33, 9-20-1982; Ord. 82-42, 12-6-1982; Ord. 83-8,
3-21-1983; Ord. 83-9, 3-21-1983; Ord. 83-34, 11-21-1983; Ord. 84-18, 5-7-1984;
Ord. 84-34, 11-5-1984; Ord. 85-6, 2-4-1985; Ord. 85-7, 2-4-1985; Ord. 85-21, 6-
17-1985; Ord. 87-21, 7-6-1987; Ord. 88-9, 2-1-1988; Ord. 89-2, 2-20-1989; Ord.
89-4, 3-6-1989; Ord. 89-27, 10-16-1989; Ord. 90-41, 9-17-1990; Ord. 97-32, 5-
19-1997; Ord. 98-4, 3-2-1998; Ord. 99-16, 5-17-1999; Ord. 99-46, 10-18-1999;
Ord. 01-16, 6-4-2001; Ord. 01-23, 8-6-2001; Ord. 01-31, 11-5-2001; Ord. 02-06,
2-4-2002; Ord. 02-20, 7-15-2002; Ord. 03-36, 10-20-2003; Ord. 04-11, 4-19-2004;
Ord. 04-28, 7-19-2004; Ord. 04-29, 8-2-2004; Ord. 05-12, 4-18-2005; Ord. 05-14,
5-2-2005; Ord. 05-25, 9-19-2005; Ord. 06-03, 2-6-2006; Ord. 07-16, 9-17-2007;
Ord. 08-10, 10-6-2008; Ord. 08-14, 11-3-2008; Ord. 08-17, 12-1-2008; Ord. 09-
15, 8-3-2009; Ord. 10-28, 9-7-2010; Ord. 10-30, 10-18-2010; Ord. 10-33, 10-18-
2010; Ord. 11-20, 5-16-2011; Ord. 12-08, 6-18-2012; Ord. 13-12, 6-17-2013; Ord.
13-20, 9-3-2013; Ord. 14-12, 9-15-2014; Ord. 14-18, 11-17-2014; Ord. 15-08, 12-
7-2015; Ord. 20-36, 11-16-2020; Ord. 22-04, 4-18-2022; Ord. 23-07, 4-3-2023;
Ord. 25-07, 5-5-2025)
9-3-2: PARKING PROHIBITED DURING CERTAIN HOURS:
There shall be no parking between the hours of three o'clock (3:00) P.M. and
four thirty o'clock (4:30) P.M. in any of the following places:
On the north side of 13th Avenue from the BNSF Railroad, f.k.a. Chicago,
Milwaukee And St. Paul Railroad right of way, east to an alley between the said
right of way and 13th Street. (1962 Code § 18.502; amd. 1974 Code)
There shall be no parking on either side of 17th Avenue from the east line of
1st Street and the intersection of 1st Street and 17th Avenue continuing east
to the west line of 10th Street at the intersection of 10th Street and 17th
Avenue on either side of 18th Avenue from the east line of 10th Street and the
intersection of 10th Street and 18th Avenue continuing east to the west line of
19th Street at the intersection of 19th Street and 18th Avenue from six o'clock
(6:00) A.M. to eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and from three o'clock (3:00) P.M. to
five o'clock (5:00) P.M., Monday through Saturday, except Sunday and all
holidays. There shall be two (2) hour parking for said above described area
from the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. to three o'clock (3:00) P.M.,
Monday through Saturday, except Sunday and all holidays, except in the
following described areas where there shall be no parking at any time:
   (A)   On either side of 17th Avenue for a distance of two hundred fifty feet
(250') east and west of its intersection with 4th Street.
   (B)   On either side of 17th Avenue from a distance of two hundred fifty
feet (250') east and west of its intersection with 7th Street.
   (C)   On the south side of 18th Avenue beginning at the southwest corner of
13th Street and 18th Avenue, thence west for a distance of two hundred fifty
feet (250').
   (D)   On the south side of 18th Avenue commencing with the middle of 18th
Street west one hundred feet (100').
   (E)   On either side of 18th Avenue for a distance of two hundred fifty feet
(250') west of its intersection with 19th Street. (Ord. 66-25, 10-17-1966)
There shall be no parking on the following streets between the hours of eight
o'clock (8:00) A.M. and five o'clock (5:00) P.M., Monday through Friday:
   (A)   On the south side of 7th Avenue from the west curb line of 13th Street
in a westerly direction to the Deere & Company property line.
   (B)   On the north side of 7th Avenue from a point one hundred fourteen feet
(114') west of the west curb line of 13th Street in a westerly direction to the
Deere & Company property line. (Ord. 79-24, 5-7-1979)
There shall be no parking on the north side of 13th Avenue from the west line
of 13th Street in a westerly direction to the Milwaukee railroad tracks except
from eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. to two o'clock (2:00) P.M., Monday through
Friday. (Ord. 81-52, 6-6-1981)
There shall be no parking on the south side of 9th Avenue from 13th Street to
seventy feet (70') east of the alley from seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to four
o'clock (4:00) P.M., Monday through Friday. (Ord. 93-51, 10-4-1993)
9-3-3: PARKING PROHIBITED DURING SNOW REMOVAL:
It shall be unlawful for any person to allow a vehicle to remain on any city
street, avenue, alley, designated snow route or city parking lot within the
city following a snowfall occurrence of two inches (2") or more until the snow
has been plowed. Each designated snow route will be plainly marked with snow
route signs.
   (A)   Whenever the city administrator or mayor perceives an emergency to
exist in the city, or in any section or sections thereof, because of snow,
freezing rain, sleet, ice, snowdrifts or other natural phenomena which create
hazardous conditions or impede the free movement of fire, police, health,
emergency or other vehicular traffic or otherwise endanger the safety and
welfare of the public, the city administrator or mayor may declare an emergency
to exist. Notice of the existence of an emergency and the terms and termination
thereof shall be given to the print, radio and television media, which shall be
requested to cooperate with the city in the dissemination of such information
to the public. When given, such notice shall constitute due and proper notice
of the emergency and the terms and conditions thereof.
   (B)   Any agent or employee of the city designated to enforce the parking
ordinances of the city is hereby authorized to cause any motor vehicle parked
in violation of this section to be towed from any snow route. In such a case,
the owner of the vehicle may be assessed the cost of towing and any storage
charges in relation thereto, subject to the owner's right of appeal to the
mayor, city administrator or chief of police. (Ord. 07-07, 5-7-2007)
9-3-4: PARKING PROHIBITED DURING STREET CLEANING:
It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle on any public street or portion
thereof in the city at any time when such street is being cleaned. Signs
indicating that a street or portion thereof is being cleaned shall be posted
immediately before the cleaning of the street and shall be removed after the
cleaning of the street is finished. (1962 Code § 18.504)
9-3-5: PARKING AT CURB:
No vehicle shall be parked with the left side of such vehicle next to the curb,
except on one-way streets, and it shall be unlawful to stand or park any
vehicle in a street other than parallel with the curb and with the two (2)
right wheels of the vehicle within twelve inches (12") of the regularly
established curb line, except that upon those streets that have been marked for
angle parking, vehicles shall be parked at the angle to the curb indicating or
indicated by such marks. (1962 Code § 18.505)
9-3-6: VEHICLES FOR SALE:
It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle upon any street for the purpose of
displaying it for sale, or to park any vehicle upon any business street from
which vehicle merchandise is peddled. (1962 Code § 18.506)
9-3-7: LOADING ZONE:
It shall be unlawful for the driver of a vehicle to stand a passenger vehicle
for a period of time longer than is necessary for the loading or unloading of
passengers, not to exceed three (3) minutes, and for the driver to stand any
freight carrying vehicles for a period of time longer than is necessary to
load, unload and deliver materials, not to exceed thirty (30) minutes, in any
place designated by the city council as a loading zone and marked as such, or
in any of the following designated places:
   (A)   At any place not to exceed seventy five feet (75') along the curb
before the entrance to any hospital or hotel at any time.
   (B)   At any place not to exceed seventy five feet (75') along the curb
before the entrance to a public building between eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and
six o'clock (6:00) P.M. except on Sunday.
   (C)   Directly in front of the entrance to any theater at any time that the
theater is open for business. (1962 Code § 18.507)
   (D)   On the south side of Thirteenth Avenue from Thirteenth Street due west
two hundred fifty feet (250'), between the hours of three o'clock (3:00) P.M.
to five o'clock (5:00) P.M. (Ord. 74-56, 10-21-1974)
9-3-8: ALL NIGHT PARKING:
(Rep. by Ord. 09-36, 12-21-2009)
9-3-9: PARKING IN ALLEYS:
No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in such a manner or under such
conditions as to leave available less than ten feet (10') of the width of the
roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic, and no person shall stop,
stand or park a vehicle within an alley in such a position as to block the
driveway entrance to any abutting property. (1962 Code § 18.509)
No person shall park a vehicle within a marked private parking area without a
visible sticker issued by the owner pursuant to 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/11-209.1. The following locations are hereby designated private parking
areas:
The north thirty feet (30') from the north edge of the first alley north of
15th Avenue between 2nd Street and 3rd Street. (Ord. 77-3, 2-7-1977)
In the alley north of 15th Avenue and south of the railroad tracks, from 1st
Street to 6th Street. (Ord. 79-61, 9-17-1979)
9-3-10: CAB STANDS, BUS STANDS:
No vehicle other than a licensed taxicab shall be parked in an area designated
by ordinance as a cab stand; and no vehicle other than a bus shall be parked in
a place so designated as a bus loading zone. (1962 Code § 18.510)
The following areas are hereby designated as bus loading zones:
   (A)   On the north side of 15th Avenue from the west curb line of 7th Street
to fifty feet (50') west.
   (B)   On the north side of 15th Avenue from the east curb line of 8th Street
to eighty feet (80') east.
   (C)   On the north side of 15th Avenue from the west curb line of 9th Street
to fifty feet (50') west.
   (D)   On the north side of 15th Avenue from the west curb line of 10th
Street to forty five feet (45') west.
   (E)   On the south side of 15th Avenue from the east curb line of 7th Street
to fifty feet (50') east. (Ord. 75-2, 1-6-1975)
   (F)   On the south side of 15th Avenue from the west curb line of 8th Street
to eighty feet (80') west. (Ord. 77-58, 12-19-1977)
   (G)   On the south side of 15th Avenue from the east curb line of 9th Street
to forty five feet (45') east.
   (H)   On the south side of 15th Avenue from the east curb line of 10th
Street to fifty feet (50') east.
   (I)   On the west side of 7th street from the north alley line between 15th
and 16th Avenues to forty five feet (45') north. (Ord. 75-2, 1-6-1975)
   (J)   On the north side of 15th Avenue, sixty five feet (65') east of 8th
Street for a distance of sixty five feet (65'). (Ord. 75-43, 10-20-1975)
9-3-11: TIME LIMIT PARKING:
Except on Sundays or holidays, it shall be unlawful to park any vehicle for a
longer consecutive period of time than that designated in the following areas
during the hours or parts of hours herein designated: (1962 Code § 18.511)
   (A)   Three (3) hours between eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and five o'clock (5:
00) P.M.:
         9th Street on the east side thereof, from 113th Avenue to 17th Avenue;
         13th Avenue on the north side thereof from the CB&Q Railroad to 13th
Street;
         13th Street on both sides thereof, from 13th Avenue to 5th Avenue;
         15th Avenue on both sides thereof, from 6th Street to 12th Street;
         16th Avenue on the north side thereof, from 7th Street to 9th Street
and from no. 1 fire station east to a point one hundred feet (100') east of the
northeast corner of the intersection of 11th Street and 16th Avenue;
         16th Avenue on the south side thereof, from 1st Street to 11th Street;
         17th Avenue on the north side thereof, from 1st Street to 921 17th
Avenue;
         18th Avenue on the north side thereof, from 921 17th Avenue to 11th
Street and 18th Avenue. (Ord. 76-6, 3-1-1976; amd. Ord. 85-7, 2-4-1985; Ord.
02-19, 6-17-2002)
   (B)   Thirty (30) minute parking between eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and three
o'clock (3:00) P.M.:
         On the west side of 7th Street between 15th Avenue and 16th Avenue.
   (C)   Fifteen (15) minute parking between eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and five
o'clock (5:00) P.M.:
         On the north side of 16th Avenue between the no. 1 fire station and
9th Street.
         On both sides of 9th Street between 16th Avenue and the alley north of
16th Avenue. (Ord. 76-6, 3-1-1976)
   (D)   Ten (10) minute parking:
         On the north side of 16th Avenue from the northeast corner of 8th
Street to the eastern boundary line of the property owned by the United States
post office. (Ord. 76-58, 10-4-1976)
   (E)   Two (2) hour parking between eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and four
o'clock (4:00) P.M.:
         On both sides of 20th Avenue A from 12th Street to Archer Drive. (Ord.
80-22, 6-2-1980)
   (F)   Two (2) hour parking:
         On the south side of 20th Avenue Way from 12th Street to 13th Street.
(Ord. 83-19, 6-20-1983)
9-3-12: SIGNS:
The chief of police or any other person authorized by the mayor or council
shall cause signs to be posted in all areas where parking is limited or
prohibited indicating such limitations or prohibitions. (1962 Code § 18.513)
9-3-13: TEMPORARY PARKING:
Automobiles, trucks and other vehicles shall be temporarily permitted to park
on the south side of 16th Avenue and on the north side of 17th Avenue and 18th
Avenue (marked Illinois Route 92) between 1st Street and 11th Street until such
time when the above parking shall be eliminated as may be determined to be
necessary by the state from traffic capacity studies. Parking shall be
prohibited on the opposite side of the above avenues with the exception of
along the north side of 16th Avenue between 7th Street and 11th Street where
parking shall be permitted. Parking within this improvement shall be parallel
parking only, diagonal parking being hereby expressly prohibited. Such parallel
parking shall be so executed that the wheels of the vehicles nearest the curb
shall be not farther away from the curb than twelve inches (12"). Parking will
not be permitted within the limits of the intersections as determined by the
state from intersection studies.
In addition, parking shall be prohibited along either side of 18th Avenue from
11th Street to 19th Street. (Ord. 71-5, 1-18-1971)
9-3-14: NO STANDING OR STOPPING:
It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle, or to permit any vehicle to stand or
stop while unattended, in the following designated area:
The south service road of 42nd Avenue, from Kennedy Drive, east for a distance
of three hundred sixty six feet (366'). (Ord. 80-1, 2-18-1980)
9-3-15: HANDICAPPED PARKING:
It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle in a parking space specifically
reserved for use by the handicapped, and is so marked or posted, unless said
vehicle bears state of Illinois license plates for the handicapped, a disabled
veteran plate, or any other special handicapped plate issued by another state.
Any person convicted of a violation of this section shall be fined in an amount
of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). Any person charged with a violation of
this section may pay the sum of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) to the city
at the police station, whereupon the prosecution for the alleged offense shall
not be pursued. (Ord. 08-13, 10-20-2008)
The chief of police, or his designee, shall be authorized to post or remove
appropriate signage indicating that a parking space is reserved for use by the
handicapped, upon review and approval of an application, as submitted by the
resident of the subject property, qualifying as handicapped, and for which the
resident's physician has submitted a written request for the handicapped only
parking space. (Ord. 10-08, 4-5-2010)
9-3-16: COMMERCIAL VEHICLE PARKING PROHIBITED:
   (A)   Commercial Vehicles Prohibited From Parking In Residence Districts.
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any person to park and leave unattended on
any public street, right of way, or on private property within the city,
located within or adjacent to a residential zoned district, any commercial
vehicle, except that the following commercial vehicles shall be permitted to be
parked on private property only:
         (a)   A motor vehicle bearing a “B” truck license as designated and
issued by the Illinois Secretary of State.
         (b)   A motor vehicle bearing a “D” truck license as designated and
issues by the Illinois Secretary of State.
      2.   A “truck tractor”, as defined in section
9-1-1 of this title, shall be parked for a period of no longer than twenty-four
(24) hours, within any seven (7) day period on a residential tract. Only one
truck tractor without trailer shall be permitted on a residential tract owned
by the same property, at any one time.
      3.   All commercial trailers, as defined in section
9-1-1 of this title, are prohibited from parking on a residentially zoned
property, on property adjacent to a residentially zoned district, or on streets
or rights of way within a residentially zoned district.
      4.   This prohibition shall not apply to any vehicle parked in a
residential district for the purpose of loading or unloading the vehicle for
the minimum period of time necessary for said loading or unloading, nor shall
it apply to a commercial vehicle enclosed within a building or private
property.
      5.   The provisions of this section shall apply regardless of the state
in which the vehicle is licensed. In cases where a vehicle is registered in a
state other than Illinois, the equivalent state of Illinois licensing
requirements shall be applied to the state where the vehicle is licensed.
   (B)   Commercial Vehicles Parking Limited.
      1.   No person shall park a motor truck, semi-trailer, or other motor
vehicle with trailer attached in violation of the following regulations. The
provisions of this section shall apply to any vehicle requiring a license plate
for a vehicle more than an 8,000 lb. license plate or Apportioned License plate
as defined in 625ILCS Chapters Section 1.
      2.   No such vehicle shall be left standing or parked upon any street or
alley between the hours of ten o’clock (10:00) p.m. and six o’clock (6:00) a.m.
with the engine, auxiliary engine, air compressor, refrigerating equipment or
other device in operation.
      3.   Downtown District: Excepting only when such vehicles are actually
engaged in the delivery or receiving of merchandise or cargo, no person shall
park or leave unattended such vehicle, in the following areas:
         (a)   On both the north or south side of 16th Avenue from 11th Street
to 7th Street;
         (b)   On both the north or south side of 17th Avenue from 11th Street
to 7th Street;
         (c)   On both the north or south side of 15th Avenue from 13th Street
to 7th Street.
   (C)   Violation.
      1.   Any person convicted of a violation of this section shall be fined a
sum not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than five hundred
dollars ($500,00). Each day during which the violation continues shall be
deemed a violation of this section. (Ord. 87-28, 10- 5-1987; amd. Ord. 89-22,
8-21-1989; Ord. 19-21, 7-1-2019)
CHAPTER 4
CITY PARKING LOTS
SECTION:
9-4-1: Supervision
9-4-2: Use
9-4-3: Hours Of Operation
9-4-4: Parking Spaces
9-4-5: City Parking Lots Designated
9-4-6: City Hall Parking Regulations
9-4-1: SUPERVISION:
The municipal parking lots now or hereafter acquired or established by the city
shall be under the supervision of the chief of police. (Ord. 87-1, 1-5-1987)
9-4-2: USE:
It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle in any municipal parking lot in
violation of any ordinance; or to so park contrary to the rules established by
the city council for the use of such or park in any place or manner other than
that designated by the custodian thereof. No commercial or freight carrying
vehicle or trailer shall be parked in a city parking lot. (Ord. 87-1, 1-5-1987)
9-4-3: HOURS OF OPERATION:
It shall be unlawful to park or stand any vehicle in any city parking lot
except as described in this chapter for more than twenty four (24) consecutive
hours. (Ord. 87-1, 1-5-1987)
9-4-4: PARKING SPACES:
The chief of police shall have markings painted or placed upon parking lots for
the purpose of designating the parking space and the angle at which vehicles
are to be parked. Each vehicle parking within any parking zone shall park
within the lines or markings so established. It shall be unlawful to park any
vehicle across any such line or marking or to park said vehicle in such
position that the same shall not be entirely within the area designated by such
lines or markings. (Ord. 87-1, 1-5-1987)
9-4-5: CITY PARKING LOTS DESIGNATED:
The following described lot, lots, tract or tracts of land shall constitute
nonmeter parking lots and shall be known as follows: (Ord. 87-1, 1-5-1987)
#1 Parking lot (west of city hall)
Lots 20, 21 and 22 in block 171 in the city of East Moline.
There shall be no parking meters in said lot.
The two (2) rows of parking spaces located in the eastern half of said lot
containing twenty two (22) spaces shall be reserved for city employees. Said
restriction shall be in force between the hours of six o'clock (6:00) A.M. and
five o'clock (5:00) P.M. on Mondays through Fridays except for holidays, and
shall be so posted. The remaining spaces in said lot shall be available for
public parking. (Ord. 96-14, 6-3-1996; amd. Ord. 02-19, 6-17-2002)
#2 Parking lot (15th Avenue and 8th Street)
Lots 3, 4 and 5 in block 157 in the town, now city, of East Moline and that
portion of 8th Street that has been vacated. (Ord. 87-1, 1-5-1987; amd. Ord.
02-19, 6-17-2002)
#3 Parking lot
Lot 3 in block 155 in the town, now city, of East Moline.
#4 Parking lot (east of Birleys)
Lots 10 and 11 in block 156 in the city of East Moline, Rock Island County,
state of Illinois, located at 8th Street and 15th Avenue and east of parking
lot #2, East Moline. (Ord. 87-1, 1-5-1987)
9-4-6: CITY HALL PARKING REGULATIONS:
All parking spaces located directly behind the police station in the "court"
area of the city hall shall be limited to parking for vehicles with municipal
license plates only, and shall be so posted.
All parking spaces located directly north of the city hall and west of the
"court" area shall be limited to parking for city employees, and shall be so
posted.
All parking spaces located directly north of the fire station and east of the
"court" area shall be limited to designated city employees, and shall be so
posted.
All parking spaces on the east side of the city hall annex building shall be
limited to city employees and shall be so posted. (Ord. 87-1, 1-5-1987)
CHAPTER 5
THROUGH, ONE-WAY STREETS
SECTION:
9-5-1: Through Streets
9-5-2: One-Way Streets And Alleys
9-5-3: Stop And Yield Streets
9-5-4: Traffic Signal Intersections
9-5-5: Left Turn Only Lanes
9-5-6: Right Turn Only Lanes
9-5-7: Alleys
9-5-8: Posting Signs
9-5-9: No Passing
9-5-1: THROUGH STREETS:
The streets and parts of streets of the City designated by ordinance as through
streets are hereby declared to be through streets. The driver of a vehicle
shall stop at the entrance to a through street and shall yield the right of way
to other vehicles which have entered the intersection or which are approaching
so close on a through street as to constitute an immediate hazard, unless
directed otherwise by the traffic officer or a traffic-control signal.
The following streets are hereby established as through streets:
1st Street from River Drive (vacated) to 16th Avenue, inclusive.
15th Avenue from 2nd Street to 12th Street, inclusive, excepting traffic at the
intersection of 7th Street and 15th Avenue, as hereinafter provided under the
heading "Traffic Signals".
16th Avenue from 2nd Street to 11th Street inclusive, excepting 7th and 4th
Streets.
18th Avenue from 11th Street to 19th Street, inclusive.
7th Street from the River Drive to the south boundary of the City limits
inclusive, excepting traffic at the intersection of 7th Street and 15th, 16th
and 17th Avenues, as hereinafter provided under the heading "Traffic Signals".
13th Street from 21st Avenue north to 4th Avenue inclusive, except 18th Avenue.
Morton Drive from 13th Street east to City limits, except 19th Street.
30th Avenue from Kennedy Drive to Archer Drive, except 7th Street.
Archer Drive from 18th Avenue to 46th Avenue, except 30th and 42nd Avenues.
(1974 Code)
19th Street from 1st Avenue to the south boundary of the City limits inclusive.
North 20th Street from the north boundary of the City limits to 1st Avenue
inclusive. (M.C. 1962, sec. 18.201)
15th Avenue from 2nd Street to 7th Street.
16th Avenue from 2nd Street to 10th Street, excepting at the intersection of
7th Street and 16th Avenue as hereinafter provided under the heading of "Stop
Streets".
17th Avenue from 1st Street to 9th Street, inclusive, except traffic at the
intersection of 7th Street and 17th Avenue as hereinafter provided under the
heading "Stop Streets".
18th Avenue from 9th Street to 19th Street, inclusive, except traffic at the
intersection of 13th Street and 18th Avenue as hereinafter provided under the
heading of "Stop Streets".
7th Street from the River Drive to the south boundary of the City limits
inclusive, excepting traffic at the intersections of 7th Street and 15th
Avenue, 7th Street and 17th Avenue and 7th Street and 42nd Avenue as
hereinafter provided under the heading of "Stop Streets".
10th Street from 15th Avenue to 18th Avenue. (Ord. 66-25, 10-17-1966)
9-5-2: ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS:
It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle on any street or alley designated
as a one-way street or alley by ordinance, in any direction other than that so
designated.
The following streets and alleys have been designated as one-way:
13th Avenue "A" from 13th Street to intersection with 13th Avenue--east bound.
16th Avenue from 7th Street to 1st Street--west bound.
18th Street "A" along its entire length in the City-- north bound.
3rd Street from the Chicago, Rock Island and Pacific right of way south to 15th
Avenue between the hours of three thirty o'clock (3:30) P.M. and four thirty
o'clock (4:30) P.M. daily except Saturdays and Sundays--south bound.
The alley east of 13th Street between 18th and 20th Avenues--north bound.
The alley south of 15th Avenue between 12th and 13th Streets--west bound.
The alley between 15th Avenue and 18th Avenue from 12th Street to 13th Street--
west bound. (M.C. 1962, sec. 18.202; amd. Ord. 68-43, 12-23-1968; Ord. 73-19,
3-5-1973)
16th Avenue shall be designated as one-way from 11th Street to 1st Street--west
bound.
17th Avenue shall be designated as one-way from 1st Street to 11th Street--east
bound. (Ord. 74-46, 9-3-1974)
The alley east of 2nd Street, between the Chicago, Rock Island and Pacific
right of way and 15th Avenue--east bound.
The alley east of 3rd Street, between the Chicago, Rock Island and Pacific
right of way and 15th Avenue--west bound. (Ord. 77-16, 5-16-1977)
The alley located between 19th and 20th Streets and between 3rd Avenue and 3X
Avenue--east bound. (Ord. 78-43, 10-16-1978)
18th Street from 14th Avenue north to the next adjoining alley which lies south
of the John Deere Foundry Credit Union--north bound.
The alley located between 18th Street and 19th Street north of 14th Avenue and
south of the John Deere Foundry Credit Union--east bound. (Ord. 82-8A, 2-1-
1982)
Morton Drive from the East Gate of Quad City Downs easterly to Route 5, for a
period of thirty (30) minutes after the last race of a racing program, to be
under supervision of the Chief of Police. (Ord. 84-27, 6-18-1984)
9-5-3: STOP AND YIELD STREETS:
The driver of a vehicle shall stop in obedience to a stop sign at an
intersection where a stop sign is erected at one or more entrances thereto, and
shall proceed cautiously yielding to the vehicles not so obliged to stop which
are within the intersection or approaching so close as to constitute an
immediate hazard, unless traffic at such intersection is controlled by a police
officer on duty, in which event the directions of the police officer shall be
complied with.
The driver of a vehicle shall stop in obedience to a stop sign when leaving an
alley and entering an open street or avenue and shall proceed cautiously
yielding to the vehicles not so obliged to stop which are within the
intersection or approaching so close as to constitute an immediate hazard
unless traffic at such intersection is controlled by a police officer on duty
in which event the directions of the police officer shall be complied with.
(Ord. 66-25, 10-17-1966)
The following streets are hereby established as stop streets:
FOUR WAY STOPS:
15th Avenue and 9th Streets. (M.C. 1962, sec. 18.203)
28th Avenue at its intersection with 5th Street for eastbound, westbound,
northbound and southbound traffic. (Ord. 70-26, 1970)
30th Avenue and 7th Street. (Ord. 71-17, 4-19-1971)
29th Avenue and 5th Street. (Ord. 73-32, 9-24-1973)
9th Street and 15th Avenue.
13th Street and 30th Avenue. (1974 Code)
15th Avenue and 8th Street.
15th Avenue and 10th Street. (Ord. 84-13, 4-2-1984; amd. Ord. 87-14, 5-4-1987)
5th Street and 31st Avenue. (Ord. 84-32, 9-17-1984)
21st Avenue and 10th Street. (Ord. 99-50, 11-15-1999)
TWO-WAY STOPS:
20th Avenue at its intersection with 10th Street.
20th Avenue at its intersection with 71/2 Street. (M.C. 1962, sec. 18.203; amd.
Ord. 84-13, 4-2-1984)
16th Avenue at its intersection with 10th Street.
   (A)   Stop Sign Locations:
Intersection Stop Sign Locations Direction From Which Traffic Enters
Intersection                            Stop Sign Locations Direction From
                                        Which Traffic Enters
Archer Dr. and 23rd Ave.                East
Archer Dr. and 33rd Ave.                West
Archer Dr. and 36th Ave.                West
Archer Dr. and 37th Ave.                West
Archer Dr. and N. 42nd Ave. Service Rd. East
Archer Dr. and N. 42nd Ave. Service Rd. West
Archer Dr. and S. 42nd Ave. Service Rd. East
Archer Dr. and S. 42nd Ave. Service Rd. West
Archer Dr. and 46th Ave.                West
Forrest Rd. and 7th St.                 West
Kennedy Dr. and 3rd St.                 North
Kennedy Dr. and 18th Ave.               East
Kennedy Dr. and 18th Ave.               West
Kennedy Dr. and 20th Ave.               East
Kennedy Dr. and 20th Ave.               West
Kennedy Dr. and 22nd Ave.               East
Kennedy Dr. and 22nd Ave. Ct.           West
Kennedy Dr. and 25th Ave.               East
Kennedy Dr. and 27th Ave.               West
Kennedy Dr. and 28th Ave.               East
Kennedy Dr. and 28th Ave.               West
Kennedy Dr. and 29th Ave.               East
Kennedy Dr. and 29th Ave.               West
Kennedy Dr. and 30th Ave.               East
Kennedy Dr. and 30th Ave.               West
Kennedy Dr. and 31st Ave.               East
Kennedy Dr. and 31st Ave.               West
Kennedy Dr. and 32nd Ave.               East
Kennedy Dr. and 32nd Ave.               West
Kennedy Dr. and 33rd Ave.               East
Kennedy Dr. and 33rd Ave.               West
Kennedy Dr. and 34th Ave.               East
Kennedy Dr. and 34th Ave.               West
Kennedy Dr. and 35th Ave.               West
Kennedy Dr. and 37th Ave.               West
Kennedy Dr. and 39th Ave.               East
Kennedy Dr. and 39th Ave.               West
Kennedy Dr. and 40th Ave.               East
Kennedy Dr. and 40th Ave.               West
Kennedy Dr. and 41st Ave.               West
Kennedy Dr. and N. 42nd Ave. Service    East
Rd.
Kennedy Dr. and S. 42nd Ave. Service    East
Rd.
Kennedy Dr. and S. 42nd Ave. Service    West
Rd.
Morton Dr. and Rte. 2 and 92            North
Morton Dr. and Rte. 2 and 92            South
Morton Dr. and 15th St.                 North
Morton Dr. and 15th St.                 South
Morton Dr. and 20th St.                 South
Morton Dr. and 21st St.                 South
Morton Dr. and 22nd St.                 South
Morton Dr. and 23rd St.                 North
Morton Dr. and 23rd St.                 South
Morton Dr. and 24th St.                 South
Morton Dr. and 25th St.                 South
Morton Dr. and 26th St.                 South
Morton Dr. and 27th St.                 South
Oaklawn Ave. and Forest Rd.             South
Oaklawn Ave. and 5th St.                East
Oaklawn Ave. and 7th St.                East
Oaklawn Ave. and 7th St.                West
1st St. and 37th Ave.                   East
1st St. and 38th Ave.                   East
1st St. and 39th Ave.                   East
1st St. and 40th Ave.                   East
2W Ave. and 20th St.                    North
2W Ave. and 20th St.                    South
2W Ave. and 21st St.                    North
2W Ave. and 22nd St.                    South
3rd Ave. and 12th St.                   North and south
3rd Ave. and 20th St.                   North
3rd Ave. and 20th St.                   South
3rd Ave. and 22nd St.                   North
3rd Ave. and 22nd St.                   South
3rd Ave. and 23rd St.                   South
3rd Ave. and 25th St.                   North
3rd Ave. and 25th St.                   South
3rd Ave. and 26th St.                   North
3rd St. and 18th Ave.                   East
3rd St. and 23rd Ave.                   East
3rd St. and 24th Ave.                   East
3rd St. and 24th Ave.                   West
3rd St. and 25th Ave.                   East
3rd St. and 25th Ave.                   West
3X Ave. and 20th St.                    South
3X Ave. and 21st St.                    South
3X Ave. and 22nd St.                    South
3X Ave. and 23rd St.                    South
4th St. and 25th Ave.                   North
4th St. and 25th Ave.                   South
4th St. and 25th Ave.                   West
5th St. and 28th Ave.                   East
5th St. and 28th Ave.                   West
5th St. and 29th Ave.                   East
5th St. and 29th Ave.                   West
6th St. and 34th Ave.                   South
7th St. and 6th St. Ct. (a north-south
right of way which curves into 7th St.   
at the 4900 block)
7th St. and 18th Ave.                   East
7th St. and 18th Ave.                   West
7th St. and 20th Ave.                   East
7th St. and 21st Ave.                   East
7th St. and 21st Ave.                   West
7th St. and 23rd Ave.                   East
7th St. and 23rd Ave.                   West
7th St. and 25th Ave.                   East
7th St. and 25th Ave.                   West
7th St. and 26th Ave.                   East
7th St. and 26th Ave.                   West
7th St. and 27th Ave.                   East
7th St. and 28th Ave.                   East
7th St. and 31st Ave.                   West
7th St. and 32nd Ave.                   West
7th St. and 33rd Ave.                   West
7th St. and 34th Ave.                   West
7th St. and 36th Ave.                   East
7th St. and 38th Ave.                   East
7th St. and 39th Ave.                   East
7th St. and 39th Ave.                   West
7th St. and 40th Ave.                   East
7th St. and 40th Ave.                   West
7th St. and 41st Ave.                   East
7th St. and 41st Ave.                   West
7th St. and 45th Ave.                   West
71/2 St. and 20th Ave.                  South
71/2 St. and 21st Ave.                  North
8th St. and 21st Ave.                   East
8th St. and 21st Ave.                   West
9th St. and 14th Ave.                   West
10th Ave. and 13th Ave.                 West
10th St. and 9th St. Ct.                West
10th St. and 10th St. Pl.               South
10th St. and 14th Ave.                  East
10th St. and 14th Ave.                  West
10th St. and 20th Ave.                  East
10th St. and 20th Ave.                  West
10th St. and 21st Ave.                  West
10th St. and 21st Ave.                  West
10th St. and 24th Ave.                  North
10th St. and 42nd Ave.                  South
11th Ave. and 13th Ave.                 West
12th Ave. and 13th Ave.                 West
12th St. and 36th Ave.                  North
12th St. and 36th Ave.                  South
13th St. and Archer Dr.                 North
13th St. and 6th Ave.                   East
13th St. and 6th Ave.                   West
13th St. and 7th Ave.                   East
13th St. and 7th Ave.                   West
13th St. and 8th Ave.                   East
13th St. and 8th Ave.                   West
13th St. and 9th Ave.                   East
13th St. and 9th Ave.                   West
13th St. and 10th Ave.                  East
13th St. and 10th Ave.                  West
13th St. and 11th Ave.                  East
13th St. and 12th Ave.                  East
13th St. and 13th Ave.                  East
13th St. and 13th Ave.                  West
13th St. and 14th Ave.                  West
13th St. and 19th Ave.                  West
13th St. and 20th Ave.                  East
13th St. and 20th Ave.                  West
13th St. and 20th Ave. Way              West
13th St. and 21st Ave.                  West
15th Ave. and 1st St.                   East
15th Ave. and 2nd St.                   North
15th Ave. and 2nd St.                   South
15th Ave. and 4th St.                   North
15th Ave. and 4th St.                   South
15th Ave. and 5th St.                   North
15th Ave. and 5th St.                   South
15th Ave. and 6th St.                   North
15th Ave. and 6th St.                   South
15th Ave. and 8th St.                   East
15th Ave. and 8th St.                   West
15th Ave. and 10th St.                  East
15th Ave. and 10th St.                  West
15th Ave. and 11th St.                  North
15th Ave. and 11th St.                  South
15th Ave. and 12th St.                  North
15th Ave. and 12th St.                  South
15th Ave. and 14th St.                  South
15th St. and 5th Ave.                   North
15th St. and 5th Ave.                   South
15th St. and 6th Ave.                   North
15th St. and 6th Ave.                   South
15th St. and 8th Ave.                   North
15th St. and 8th Ave.                   South
15th St. and 9th Ave.                   North
15th St. and 9th Ave.                   South
15th St. and 10th Ave.                  North
15th St. and 10th Ave.                  South
15th St. and 11th Ave.                  North
15th St. and 11th Ave.                  South
15th St. and 12th Ave.                  North
15th St. and 12th Ave.                  South
15th St. and 13th Ave.                  South
16th Ave. and 2nd St.                   North
16th Ave. and 2nd St.                   South
16th Ave. and 4th St.                   North
16th Ave. and 4th St.                   South
16th Ave. and 5th St.                   North
16th Ave. and 5th St.                   South
16th Ave. and 6th St.                   North
16th Ave. and 6th St.                   South
16th Ave. and 8th St.                   North
16th Ave. and 8th St.                   South
16th Ave. and 9th St.                   North
16th Ave. and 9th St.                   South
16th Ave. and 10th St.                  North
16th Ave. and 10th St.                  South
16th Ave. and 11th St.                  North
16th Ave. and 11th St.                  South
17th Ave. and 2nd St.                   North
17th Ave. and 3rd St.                   North
17th Ave. and 3rd St.                   South
17th Ave. and 5th St.                   North
17th Ave. and 5th St.                   South
17th Ave. and 6th St.                   North
17th Ave. and 6th St.                   South
17th Ave. and 8th St.                   North
17th Ave. and 8th St.                   South
17th St. and 8th Ave.                   East
17th St. and 8th Ave.                   West
17th St. and 9th Ave.                   North
17th St. and 9th Ave.                   South
17th St. and 10th Ave.                  East
17th St. and 10th Ave.                  West
17th St. and 11th Ave.                  West
17th St. and 13th Ave.                  East
17th St. and 14th Ave.                  East
17th St. and 14th Ave.                  West
18th Ave. and 10th St.                  North
18th Ave. and 10th St.                  South
18th Ave. and 11th St.                  North
18th Ave. and 12th St.                  North
18th Ave. and 14th St.                  North
18th Ave. and 15th St.                  North
18th Ave. and 15th St.                  South
18th Ave. and 17th St.                  North
18th Ave. and 18th St.                  South
19th St. and 1st Ave.                   East
19th St. and 1st Ave.                   North
19th St. and 1st Ave.                   West
19th St. and 2nd Ave.                   East
19th St. and 2W Ave.                    East
19th St. and 2W Ave.                    West
19th St. and 3rd Ave.                   East
19th St. and 3rd Ave.                   West
19th St. and 3X Ave.                    East
19th St. and 3Y Ave.                    East
19th St. and 4Z Ave.                    East
19th St. and 5th Ave.                   East
19th St. and 5th Ave.                   West
19th St. and 6th Ave.                   West
19th St. and 8th Ave.                   East
19th St. and 8th Ave.                   West
19th St. and 9th Ave.                   East
19th St. and 9th Ave.                   West
19th St. and 13th Ave.                  West
N. 20th St. and N. 2nd Ave.             East
21st Ave. and 11th St.                  North
21st Ave. and 11th St. Pl.              North
21st Ave. and 12th St.                  North
21st St. and 1st Ave.                   North
21st St. and 1st Ave.                   South
23rd Ave. and 18th St.                  North
23rd Ave. and 18th St.                  West
30th Ave. and 4th St. A                 North
30th Ave. and 5th St.                   North
30th Ave. and 5th St.                   South
30th Ave. and 71/2 St.                  North
30th Ave. and 8th St.                   North
30th Ave. and 9th St.                   North
30th Ave. and 9th St.                   South
30th Ave. and 91/2 St.                  North
30th Ave. and 10th St.                  North
30th Ave. and 10th St.                  South
30th Ave. and 11th St.                  South
30th Ave. and 12th St.                  South
34th Ave. and 3rd St. A                 North
34th Ave. and 3rd St. A                 South
34th Ave. and 3rd St. B                 South
34th Ave. and 3rd St. C                 South
34th Ave. and 4th St.                   North
34th Ave. and 4th St.                   South
34th Ave. and 5th St.                   North
34th Ave. and 5th St.                   South
34th Ave. and 6th St.                   South
38th Ave. and 4th St.                   East
39th Ave. and 4th St.                   South
42nd Ave. and 10th St.                  North
47th Ave. and 5th St.                   West
N. 42nd Ave. Service Rd. and 4th St.    North
N. 42nd Ave. Service Rd. and 7th St.    East
N. 42nd Ave. Service Rd. and 7th St.    West
N. 42nd Ave. Service Rd. and 9th St.    North
N. 42nd Ave. Service Rd. and 10th St.   North
N. 42nd Ave. Service Rd. and 11th St.   East
N. 42nd Ave. Service Rd. and 11th St.   West
S. 42nd Ave. Service Rd. and 5th St.    South
S. 42nd Ave. Service Rd. and 9th St.    South
S. 42nd Ave. Service Rd. and 10th St.   South
S. 42nd Ave. Service Rd. and 11th St.   East
S. 42nd Ave. Service Rd. and 11th St.   West
 
   (B)   Yield Right Of Way Intersections:
Intersection Yield Right Of Way Entrances Direction From Which Traffic Enters
Intersection                         Yield Right Of Way Entrances Direction
                                     From Which Traffic Enters
Oaklawn Ave. and Forest Rd.          South
1st St. A and 24th Ave.              South
1st St. Ct. and 27th Ave.            North
2nd St. and 29th Ave.                South
2nd St. and 30th Ave.                South
2nd St. and 34th Ave.                South
2nd St. and 35th Ave.                South
2nd St. and 37th Ave.                North
2nd St. Ct. and 37th Ave.            North
3rd St. A and 38th Ave.              East
3rd St. A and 39th Ave.              North
3rd St. A and 40th Ave.              South
3rd St. B and 38th Ave.              North
4th St. and 40th Ave.                East
4th St. A and 23rd Ave.              East
4th St. A and 23rd Ave.              West
4th St. A and 24th Ave.              East
4th St. A and 25th Ave.              West
4th St. A and 26th Ave.              West
4th St. A and 27th Ave.              West
4th St. A and 28th Ave.              West
4th St. A and 29th Ave.              West
4th St. A and 30th Ave.              West
4th St. A and 31st Ave.              West
4th St. Ct. and 27th Ave.            East
4th St. Ct. and 28th Ave.            East
5th St. and 18th Ave.                South
5th St. and 19th Ave.                South
5th St. and 21st Ave.                East
5th St. and 23rd Ave.                South
5th St. and 24th Ave.                West
5th St. and 25th Ave. Ct.            West
5th St. and 26th Ave. Ct.            East
5th St. and 26th Ave. Ct.            West
5th St. and 27th Ave.                East
5th St. and 27th Ave.                West
5th St. and 31st Ave.                East
5th St. and 31st Ave.                West
5th St. and 32nd Ave.                East
5th St. and 32nd Ave.                West
5th St. and 33rd Ave.                East
5th St. and 33rd Ave.                West
5th St. and 39th Ave.                East
5th St. and 41st Ave.                East
5th St. and 41st Ave.                North
5th St. Ct. and 28th Ave.            North
6th St. and Forrest Rd.              South
6th St. and 28th Ave.                North
6th St. and 39th Ave.                North
6th St. Ct. and 20th Ave. Ct.        North
6th St. Ct. and 23rd Ave.            East
6th St. Ct. and 25th Ave.            East
7th St. and 1st Ave.                 East
7th St. and 1st Ave.                 West
7th St. and 2nd Ave.                 East
7th St. and 2nd Ave.                 West
7th St. and 3rd Ave.                 East
7th St. and 3rd Ave.                 West
7th St. at 3rd Ave.
(traffic entering 3rd Ave. on the
alleyway east of 7th St. from both   North and south
the north and the south, shall yield
the right of way to the traffic on
3rd Ave.)
7th St. and 4th Ave.                 East
7th St. and 4th Ave.                 West
7th St. and 5th Ave.                 East
7th St. and 5th Ave.                 West
71/2 St. and 23rd Ave.               North
71/2 St. and 23rd Ave.               South
71/2 St. and 25th Ave.               North
71/2 St. and 25th Ave.               South
71/2 St. and 28th Ave.               South
71/2 St. and 36th Ave.               South
71/2 St. and 38th Ave.               North
8th Ave. and 20th St.                North
8th Ave. and 20th St.                South
8th Ave. and 21st St.                North
8th Ave. and 21st St.                South
8th Ave. and 22nd St.                North
8th Ave. and 23rd St.                North
8th Ave. and 24th St.                North
8th Ave. and 25th St.                North
8th Ave. and 26th St.                North
8th St. and Oaklawn Ave.             South
8th St. and 21st Ave. A              East
8th St. and 22nd Ave.                East
8th St. and 23rd Ave.                East
8th St. and 23rd Ave.                West
8th St. and 24th Ave.                East
8th St. and 28th Ave.                South
8th St. and 36th Ave.                North
8th St. and 36th Ave.                South
8th St. and 38th Ave.                North
8th St. and 40th Ave.                West
8th St. and 41st Ave.                North
8th St. Ct. and 8th St.              West
8th St. Ct. and 38th Ave.            North
9th St. and 28th Ave.                North
9th St. and 28th Ave.                South
9th St. and 34th Ave.                East
9th St. and 35th Ave.                East
9th St. and 351/2 Ave.               East
9th St. and 36th Ave.                East
9th St. and 37th Ave.                East
9th St. and 38th Ave.                North
9th St. and 41st Ave.                East
9th St. and 46th Ave.                North and south
9th St. and 47th Ave.                North and south
9th St. Ct. and 10X St.              East
9th St. Ct. and 33rd Ave.            North
91/2 St. and 26th Ave.               East
91/2 St. and 27th Ave.               East
91/2 St. and 28th Ave.               North
91/2 St. and 28th Ave.               South
10th St. and 12th Ave.               South
10th St. and 22nd Ave.               West
10th St. and 34th Ave.               West
10th St. and 35th Ave.               West
10th St. and 351/2 Ave.              West
10th St. and 36th Ave.               North
10th St. and 36th Ave.               South
10th St. and 361/2 Ave.              West
10th St. and 37th Ave.               East
10th St. and 37th Ave.               West
10th St. and 38th Ave.               North
10th St. and 38th Ave.               South
10th St. and 39th Ave.               West
10th St. and 40th Ave.               West
11th St. and 3rd Ave.                East
11th St. and 20th Ave.               South
11th St. and 45th Ave.               South
11th St. Pl. and 20th Ave.           South
12th St. and 20th Ave.               South
12th St. and 20th Ave.               West
12th St. and 20th Ave. Way           East
12th St. and 33rd Ave.               East
12th St. and 33rd Ave.               West
12th St. and 34th Ave. Ct.           West
12th St. and 35th Ave. Ct.           West
12th St. and 37th Ave.               North
12th St. and 37th Ave.               South
12th St. and 46th Ave.               North
13th Ave. A and 13th Ave.            West
13th St. and 4th Ave.                East
13th St. and 4th Ave.                West
13th St. and 5th Ave.                East
13th St. and 15th Ave.               West
14th St. and 5th Ave.                North
14th St. and 23rd Ave.               South
14th St. and 23rd Ave. Ct.           West
15th St. Ct. and 23rd Ave.           South
18th Ave. and 5th St.                North
18th Ave. and 5th St.                South
18th Ave. and 6th St.                North
18th St. and 13th Ave.               South
18th St. and 14th Ave.               North
18th St. and 14th Ave.               South
18th St. and 21st Ave.               East
19th St. and 1st Ave.                East
20th St. and 2nd Ave.                East
20th St. and 2nd Ave.                West
20th St. and 3X Ave.                 North
20th St. and 3X Ave.                 South
20th St. and 3Y Ave.                 North
20th St. and 3Y Ave.                 South
20th St. and 4Z Ave.                 South
20th St. and 4Z Ave.                 West
20th St. and 9th Ave.                North
20th St. and 9th Ave.                South
20th St. and 10th Ave.               North
21st St. and 2nd Ave.                West
21st St. and 9th Ave.                North
21st St. and 9th Ave.                South
21st St. and 10th Ave.               North
22nd St. and 3X Ave.                 North
22nd St. and 3Y Ave.                 North
23rd St. and 3X Ave.                 North
23rd St. and 3X Ave.                 South
42nd Ave. Service Rd. (south)
intersection with Oaklawn Ave.       North
(east of Seventh St.)
42nd Ave. Service Rd. (south)
intersection with Oaklawn Ave.       North
(west of Seventh St.)
45th Ave. and 5th St.                West
47th Ave. and 4th St. Ct.            South
 
(Ord. 70-11, 5-4-1970; amd. Ord. 79-13, 3-5-1979; Ord. 79-50, 8-6-1979; Ord.
82-6, 1-4-1982; Ord. 82-16, 4-19-1982; Ord. 84-50, 12-3-1984; Ord. 85-35, 10-7-
1985; Ord. 87-14, 5-4-1987; Ord. 88-37, 6-20-1988; Ord. 88-49, 9-6-1988; Ord.
91-14, 6-3-1991; Ord. 91-17, 6-17-1991; Ord. 92-39, 9-21-1992; Ord. 92-44, 10-
5-1992; Ord. 93-48, 9-7-1993; Ord. 94-21, 9-19-1994; Ord. 99-49, 11-15-1999;
Ord. 00-23, 7-3-2000; Ord. 02-61, 12-16-2002; Ord. 03-04, 3-3-2003; Ord. 04-44,
12-6-2004; Ord. 05-11, 4-18-2005; Ord. 22-13, 8-1-2022)
9-5-4: TRAFFIC SIGNAL INTERSECTIONS:
The following intersections are hereby established as stop and go traffic
signal legend intersections: (Ord. 92-43, 10-5-1992)
TRAFFIC SIGNALS
Right turn is permitted on red after stop at all intersections, with the
exception of all four (4) approaches to the intersection of 30th Avenue and 7th
Street, at which intersection, right turn on red is prohibited on school days
when children are present. (Ord. 02-34, 9-16-2002)
IL Route 5 and Morton Dr.
1st St. and north of 12th Ave. (case IH)
1st St. and 12th Ave.
1st St. and 16th Ave.
1st St. and 17th Ave.
3rd St. and 12th Ave.
4th St. and 16th Ave.
4th St. and 17th Ave.
7th St. and 12th Ave.
7th St. and 15th Ave.
7th St. and 16th Ave.
7th St. and 17th Ave.
13th St. and 18th Ave.
18th Ave. and Archer Dr.
19th St. and Colona Ave.
19th St. and 7th Ave.
19th St. and 14th Ave.
19th St. and 18th Ave.
19th St. and 30th Ave.
30th Ave. and Archer Dr.
30th Ave. and Kennedy Dr.
30th Ave. and 7th St.
42nd Ave. and Kennedy Dr.
42nd Ave. and 7th St.
42nd Ave. and 11th St.
42nd Ave. and 13th St.
SCHOOL CROSSING SIGNALS
6th St. and 17th Ave. (Ord. 92-43, 10-5-1992)
9-5-5: LEFT TURN ONLY LANES:
Left lane traffic must make left turns, and signs shall be erected for the
following traffic:
LEFT TURN ARROW
4th St. and 17th Ave.     Westbound
7th St. and 17th Ave.     Eastbound
7th St. and 17th Ave.     Westbound
13th St. and 18th Ave.    Eastbound
19th St. and 18th Ave.    Eastbound
19th St. and 18th Ave.    Westbound
42nd Ave. and Kennedy Dr. Eastbound
42nd Ave. and Kennedy Dr. Westbound
42nd Ave. and 7th St.     Eastbound
42nd Ave. and 7th St.     Westbound
42nd Ave. and 13th St.    Eastbound
42nd Ave. and 13th St.    Westbound
 
(Ord. 70-11, 5-4-1970; amd. 1974 Code)
9-5-6: RIGHT TURN ONLY LANES:
Signs indicating "Right lane traffic must make right turn" shall be erected for
the following traffic:
   Eastbound traffic on 15th Avenue approaching 13th Street.
   On 18th Avenue from 14th Street to 15th Street, eastbound.
The right northbound lane south of 15th Avenue at 7th Street shall be
designated a right turn only lane. (Ord. 70-11, 5-4-1970; amd. 1974 Code; 05-
25, 9-19-2005)
9-5-7: ALLEYS:
No alley within the corporate limits of the city shall be used for a
thoroughfare or for any through traffic whatsoever.
This provision is not intended to prevent delivery of goods to be made and any
vehicle delivering goods may continue through an alley. (Ord. 73-40, 10-15-
1973)
9-5-8: POSTING SIGNS:
The chief of police or any other person designated by the mayor or council,
shall post or cause to be posted suitable signs for all such through streets,
one-way streets or alleys and stop intersections, as well as left and right
turn lanes. (M.C. 1962, sec. 18.204)
9-5-9: NO PASSING:
It shall be unlawful for a vehicle to be driven to the left side of the center
of the roadway in overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same
direction, on the portions of the streets designated below. All such no passing
zones shall be designated by appropriate signs or markings on the roadway and
shall indicate the beginning and end of such zones:
7th Street from 1st Avenue to 12th Avenue. (Ord. 77-44, 10-17-1977)
CHAPTER 6
DRIVERS
SECTION:
9-6-1: Liquor Or Drugs
9-6-2: Accidents
9-6-1: LIQUOR OR DRUGS:
It shall be unlawful for the habitual user of narcotic drugs to operate any
motor vehicle on any street; and it shall be unlawful for any intoxicated
person, or any person under the influence of alcoholic beverage or of a
narcotic drug, to operate or attempt to operate any motor vehicles on any
street. (M.C. 1962, sec. 18.801)
9-6-2: ACCIDENTS:
The driver of a vehicle which has collided with, or been in an accident with
any vehicle, person or property in such a manner as to cause injury or damage
shall stop immediately, and render such assistance as may be possible, and to
give his true name and residence to the injured person or any other persons
requesting the same on behalf of the injured person, or the owner of the
property damaged, and to a policeman if one is present. A report of each such
accident shall be given by the driver of each vehicle concerned in it to the
Chief of Police within twenty four (24) hours after the accident. (M.C. 1962,
sec. 18.802)
CHAPTER 7
PEDESTRIANS
SECTION:
9-7-1: Right Of Way
9-7-2: Pedestrians Crossing Roadway
9-7-3: Signals
9-7-4: Standing On Sidewalk
9-7-5: Pedestrian Crossing
9-7-6: Pedestrian Walking Along Roadways
9-7-7: Blind Pedestrians, Right Of Way
9-7-1: RIGHT OF WAY:
Where traffic-control signals are not in place or in operation, the driver of a
vehicle shall yield the right of way, slowing down or stopping if need be, to a
pedestrian crossing the roadway or street within any marked crosswalk or within
an unmarked crosswalk.
Whenever stop signals or flashing red signals are in place at an intersection
or a marked crosswalk between intersections the pedestrian shall have the right
of way over drivers of vehicles; and at such marked places drivers of vehicles
shall stop before entering the nearest crosswalk and any pedestrian within or
entering the crosswalk at either edge of the roadway shall have the right of
way over any vehicle so stopped.
The driver of a vehicle shall stop before entering any crosswalk when any
vehicle proceeding in the same direction is stopped at such crosswalk for the
purpose of permitting a pedestrian to cross. (M.C. 1962, sec. 18.401)
9-7-2: PEDESTRIANS CROSSING ROADWAY:
At no place shall a pedestrian cross any roadway other than by the most direct
route to the opposite curbing, and when crossing at any place other than a
crosswalk he shall yield the right of way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
No person shall stand or loiter in any roadway other than in a safety zone, if
such act interferes with the lawful movement of traffic. (M.C. 1962, sec.
18.402)
9-7-3: SIGNALS:
At intersections where traffic is directed by a policeman or by a stop and go
signal, it shall be unlawful for any pedestrian to cross the roadway other than
with released traffic, if such crossing interferes with the lawful movement of
traffic. (M.C. 1962, sec. 18.403)
9-7-4: STANDING ON SIDEWALK:
It shall be unlawful for a pedestrian to stand upon any sidewalk except as near
as reasonably possible to the building line or curb line, if such standing
interferes with the use of said sidewalk by other pedestrians. (M.C. 1962, sec.
18.404)
9-7-5: PEDESTRIAN CROSSING:
   (A)   Between adjacent intersections at which traffic-control signals are in
operation, pedestrians shall not cross at any place except in a crosswalk.
   (B)   No pedestrian shall cross a roadway other than in a crosswalk in any
business section. (MC. 1962, sec. 18.405)
9-7-6: PEDESTRIAN WALKING ALONG ROADWAYS:
   (A)   Where sidewalks are provided it shall be unlawful for any pedestrian
to walk along and upon an adjacent roadway.
   (B)   Where sidewalks are not provided, any pedestrian walking along and
upon a highway shall when practicable walk only on the left side of the roadway
or its shoulder facing traffic and upon meeting a vehicle shall step off to the
left.
   (C)   No person shall stand in a roadway for the purpose of soliciting a
ride from the driver of any vehicle. (M.C. 1962, sec. 18.406)
9-7-7: BLIND PEDESTRIANS, RIGHT OF WAY:
Any blind person who is carrying in a raised or extended position a cane or
walking stick which is white in color or white tipped with red, or who is being
guided by a dog, shall have the right of way in crossing any street or highway,
whether or not traffic on such street or highway is controlled by traffic
signals, anything in this Section to the contrary notwithstanding. The driver
of every vehicle approaching the place where a blind person, so carrying such a
cane or walking stick or being so guided, is crossing a street or highway shall
bring vehicle to a full stop and before proceeding shall take such precautions
as may be necessary to avoid injury to the blind person. The provisions of this
Section shall not apply to a blind person who is not carrying such a cane or
walking stick or is not guided by a dog, but the other provisions of this
Chapter relating to pedestrians shall be applicable to such person. However,
the failure of a blind person to use or so carry such a cane or walking stick
or to be guided by a guide dog when walking on streets, highways or sidewalks
shall not be considered evidence of contributory negligence. (M.C. 1962, sec.
18.407)
CHAPTER 8
CONDITION OF VEHICLES
SECTION:
9-8-1: Clear Vision
9-8-2: Signal Lamps
9-8-3: Unnecessary Noise
9-8-4: Horn
9-8-5: Gas And Smoke
9-8-6: Projecting Loads, Width And Height
9-8-7: Brakes
9-8-8: Muffler
9-8-9: Lights
9-8-10: Volunteer Firemen
9-8-11: Nonskid Devices
9-8-12: Tires
9-8-13: Weight
9-8-14: Spilling Loads
9-8-15: Bicycles
9-8-16: Unsafe Vehicles
9-8-1: CLEAR VISION:
It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle which is loaded or in such a
condition that the operator does not have a clear vision of all parts of the
roadway essential to the safe operation of the vehicle. Any view of the roadway
to the rear so obstructed shall be equipped with a mirror so attached as to
give him a view of the roadway behind him. (M.C. 1962, sec. 18.701)
9-8-2: SIGNAL LAMPS:
Any motor vehicle in use on a highway shall be equipped with, and required
signal shall be given by a signal lamp or lamps or mechanical signal device
when the distance from the center of the top of the steering post to the left
outside limit of the body, cab or load of such motor vehicle exceeds twenty
four inches (24"), or when the distance from the center of the top of the
steering post to the rear limit of the body or load thereof exceeds fourteen
feet (14'). The latter measurement shall apply to any single vehicle, also to
any combination of vehicles. (M.C. 1962, sec. 18.70)
9-8-3: UNNECESSARY NOISE:
It shall be unlawful to operate a vehicle which makes unusually loud or
unnecessary noise. (M.C. 1962, sec. 18.703)
9-8-4: HORN:
Every motor vehicle shall be equipped with a good and sufficient audible
signalling device in efficient working condition. Such signalling device shall
be sounded when necessary to give timely warning of the approach of a vehicle,
but such horn or other signalling shall not be sounded for any purpose other
than as a warning of impending danger.
No motor vehicle other than an emergency vehicle shall be equipped with a siren
or gong signalling device. (M.C. 1962, sec. 18.704)
9-8-5: GAS AND SMOKE:
It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle which emits dense smoke or such an
amount of smoke or fumes as to be dangerous to the health of persons or as to
endanger the drivers of other vehicles. (M.C. 1962, sec. 18.705)
9-8-6: PROJECTING LOADS, WIDTH AND HEIGHT:
The maximum width and height of any vehicle and its load shall not exceed the
limits expressed in the State traffic law.
No passenger type vehicle shall be operated on the streets with a load
extending beyond the line of the fenders on the left side of the vehicle nor
extending more than six inches (6") beyond the line of the fenders on the right
side thereof.
No vehicle, unladen or with load, shall exceed a length of forty two feet (42')
extreme over all dimensions.
No combination of vehicles coupled together shall consist of more than two (2)
units, and no such combination of vehicles, unloaded or with load, shall exceed
a total length of fifty feet (50'); but such length limitations shall not apply
to vehicles operated in daytime when transporting pipes, poles, machinery and
other objects which cannot be readily dismembered, nor to such vehicles
operated at nighttime by a public utility when engaged in emergency repair
work; but such loads carried at night shall be clearly marked with sufficient
lights to show the full dimensions of the load.
No part of the load of a vehicle shall extend more than three feet (3') in
front of the extreme front portion of the vehicle. (M.C. 1962, sec. 18.706)
9-8-7: BRAKES:
It shall be unlawful to drive any motor vehicle upon a street unless such
vehicle is equipped with good and sufficient brakes in good working condition,
as required by the State traffic law, or to operate any vehicle which is so
loaded that the operator does not have ready access to the mechanics operating
the brakes of such vehicle. (M.C. 1962, sec. 18.707)
9-8-8: MUFFLER:
No motor vehicle shall be operated on any street or on private property unless
such vehicle is provided with a muffler in efficient actual working condition;
and the use of a cutout is prohibited. (Ord. 77-47, 10-17-1977)
9-8-9: LIGHTS:
It shall be unlawful to operate or park on any street any vehicle not equipped
with adequate lights conforming to the requirements of the State law, provided
that vehicles may be parked at nighttime without lights on any street or
portion thereof, designated by ordinance as a place where vehicles may so park
at nighttime. (M.C. 1962, sec. 18.709)
9-8-10: VOLUNTEER FIREMEN:
Any motor vehicle owned or usually operated by a volunteer fireman may be
equipped with not to exceed two (2) lamps which shall emit a blue light without
glare. One such lamp may be mounted on the rear of any such vehicle. A flashing
blue light may be used only when such fireman is responding to a fire call.
(M.C. 1962, sec. 18.710)
9-8-11: NONSKID DEVICES:
It shall be unlawful to operate upon any street any motor vehicle equipped with
any non-skid device so constructed that any rigid or non-flexible portion
thereof comes into contact with the pavement or roadway. (M.C. 1962, sec.
18.711)
9-8-12: TIRES:
It shall be unlawful to operate on any street any motor vehicle which is not
equipped with tires conforming to the requirements of the State traffic law.
(M.C. 1962, sec. 18.712)
9-8-13: WEIGHT:
It shall be unlawful to drive on any street any motor vehicle with a weight,
including load, in excess of that permitted by the State traffic law for
driving on improved highways, or with weight distributed in a manner not
conforming to such law. (M.C. 1962, sec. 18.713)
9-8-14: SPILLING LOADS:
No vehicle shall be so loaded that any part of its load spills or drops on any
street or alley in the Municipality. (M.C. 1962, sec. 18.714)
9-8-15: BICYCLES:
   (A)   Every bicycle when in use at nighttime shall be equipped with a lamp
on the front which shall emit a white light visible from a distance of at least
five hundred feet (500') to the front and with a reflector on the rear of a
type of which shall be visible from all distances from fifty feet (50') to
three hundred feet (300') to the rear when directly in front of lawful upper
beams of headlamps on a motor vehicle. A lamp emitting a red light visible from
a distance of five hundred feet (500') to the rear may be used in addition to
the red reflector.
   (B)   No person shall operate a bicycle that is not equipped with a bell or
other device capable of giving a signal audible for a distance of at least one
hundred feet (100'), except that a bicycle shall not be equipped with nor shall
any persons use upon a bicycle any siren or whistle.
   (C)   Every bicycle shall be equipped with a good and adequate brake. (M.C.
1962, sec. 18.715)
9-8-16: UNSAFE VEHICLES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or move or cause to be moved for
the owner or knowingly permit to be driven or moved on any highway in the City,
any vehicle or combination of vehicles which is in such unsafe condition as to
endanger any person or property, or which does not contain those parts or is
not at all times equipped with such lamps and other equipment in proper
condition and adjustment as required by this Chapter, or which is equipped in
any manner in violation to this Chapter. (M.C. 1962, sec. 18.716)
CHAPTER 9
LOCAL MASS TRANSIT DISTRICT
SECTION:
9-9-1: District Established
9-9-2: Area
9-9-1: DISTRICT ESTABLISHED:
There be and hereby is created and established a Local Mass Transit District to
be known as "The Rock Island County Metropolitan Mass Transit District" in
accordance with and pursuant to the provisions of 70 Illinois Compiled Statutes
3610/3. (Ord. 70-40, 10-19-1970)
9-9-2: AREA:
"The Rock Island County Metropolitan Mass Transit District" shall encompass the
areas within the corporate limits of Rock Island, Moline, East Moline and
Silvis, and shall have all the powers, rights and duties enumerated and granted
pursuant to the provisions of the Local Mass Transit District Act, being 720
Illinois Compiled Statutes 3610/1 through 3610/9, and such others as are
provided by law. (Ord. 70-40, 10-19-1970)
CHAPTER 10
VIOLATION; ARREST
SECTION:
9-10-1: General
9-10-2: Arrests
9-10-3: Tickets
9-10-4: Prima Facie Proof
9-10-5: Parking Violations
9-10-1: GENERAL:
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provisions of this title shall be
subject to penalty as provided by section
1-4-1 of this code. (1962 Code § 18.901)
9-10-2: ARRESTS:
Any person arrested for a violation of any provision of this title shall be
released upon proper bail being furnished as required by statute. The police
officer in command at the station may, in the absence of a police magistrate or
justice, prescribe the amount of bail or bond in each instance. Provided that
any arrested person may, at his own request, have the amount of such bond set
by a magistrate or justice of the peace as provided by statute. (1962 Code §
18.902)
9-10-3: TICKETS:
For offenses other than driving while intoxicated or reckless driving, police
officers, after making note of the license number of the vehicle (and name of
the offender where possible) may issue a traffic violation ticket notifying the
offender to appear in court at the time designated for hearing such cases. Such
officer may sign a complaint for the issuance of a warrant if the offender does
not appear at the time and place so specified. (1962 Code § 18.903)
9-10-4: PRIMA FACIE PROOF:
The fact that an automobile is illegally parked is registered in the name of a
person shall be considered prima facie proof that such person was in control of
the automobile at the time of such parking. (1962 Code § 18.904)
9-10-5: PARKING VIOLATIONS:
Any person accused of a violation of an ordinance prohibiting parking a vehicle
in a designated area, or restricted area, or restricting the length of time a
vehicle may be parked there, except for a handicapped parking violation, may
settle and compromise the against him or her for such illegal parking by paying
to the City, within seven (7) days of the time the alleged offense was
committed, the sum of twenty-five dollars ($25.00).
First Notice shall be considered the initial ticket/violation issued. First
notice is payable within seven (7) calendar days of issuance.
After the first seven (7) days expires a late fee of ten dollars ($10.00) will
be added to the initial twenty-five dollar ($25.00) fine. Second notice will be
issued/mailed after the first seven (7) calendar days expire.
After thirty (30) calendar days from the issuance of the second notice expires
with no payment, the fine may be tamed into collections.
Such payment may be made at the police station, and a receipt shall be issued
for all money so received, and such money shall be promptly turned over to the
treasurer to be used in the manner provided for the disposition of fines for
traffic violations. When such payments are made, the members of the police
department are hereby authorized to refrain from instituting a prosecution for
the alleged offense involved. When such payments are not made, the members of
the police department are hereby authorized to institute a prosecution for the
alleged offense involved.
Provided that this section shall not apply to person parking a vehicle so as to
obstruct the entrance or exit of any place where police or fire department
apparatus or other emergency equipment is kept or housed, or so to block an
emergency entrance to a hospital. Nor shall this section apply to any person
charged with parking a vehicle so as to entirely obstruct traffic in any street
or alley, or parking in such a way as to reduce traffic on an arterial street
to one-way traffic only, nor to any person who refuses to move a vehicle
illegally parked, at the request of any member of the police department. (Ord.
08-12, 10-20-2008; amd. Ord. 21-07, 7-19-2021)
CHAPTER 11
NUISANCE VEHICLES
SECTION:
9-11-1: Definitions
9-11-2: Nuisance Vehicles Regulated
9-11-3: Authority To Abate Nuisance Vehicles By Towing
9-11-4: Pre-tow Notice Of Removal
9-11-5: Application To Court For Warrant To Remove
9-11-6: Reports On Towed Vehicles
9-11-7: Record Searches
9-11-8: Identifying And Tracing Vehicle Ownership By State Police
9-11-9: Reclaimed Vehicles; Expenses
9-11-10: Disposal Of Unclaimed Vehicles
9-11-11: Disposal Of Unclaimed Vehicle Without Notice
9-11-12: Police Report After Vehicle Is Reclaimed Or Disposed Of
9-11-13: Disposition Of Proceeds Of Sale Of Unclaimed Vehicles
9-11-14: Liability
9-11-15: Penalty, Fines, And Towing Costs
9-11-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of
this article:
ABANDONED    One that is parked or otherwise located on property owned or operated by the city
VEHICLE ON   (except for a city street or alley) for longer than two (2) hours or in a city owned
CITY         parking lot for longer than twelve (12) hours, without percussion of the city.
PROPERTY:
ABANDONED
VEHICLE ON   One that is parked or otherwise located on private property that has not been moved
PRIVATE      for a period of seven (7) days and is open to the view of the public.
PROPERTY:
ABANDONED    One that is parked or otherwise located on any highway, street, alley, or other
VEHICLE ON   public right of way. Continuous standing of a vehicle on a highway, street, alley or
STREET OR    other public right of way for over a seventy-two (72) hour period shall be prima
ALLEY:       facie evidence of abandonment of such vehicle.
             Any motor vehicle on private or public property that is declared to be a health or
             safety hazard by a duly authorized police officer, community service officer, or
             city inspector, when the vehicle is found to be:
                (1)   A breeding ground or harbor for mosquitoes or other insects, snakes, rats,
             or other pests; or
                (2)   A point of weed growth and/or other vegetation over ten inches (10") in
             height; or
HAZARDOUS       (3)   A point of collection for pools or ponds of water; or
VEHICLE:        (4)   A point of concentration of gasoline, oil or other flammable or explosive
             materials; or
                (5)   So situated that there is a danger of the vehicle falling or taming over;
             or
                (6)   A place in which debris, bottles or other solid waste is discarded and is
             present within the vehicle or immediately next to or around the vehicle; or
                (7)   A source of danger for children through entrapment in areas of confinement
             that cannot be opened from the inside or from exposed surfaces of metal, glass or
             other rigid materials.
             A vehicle from which the engine, wheels or other essential parts have been removed,
             or on which the engine, wheels or other parts have been altered, damaged or
             otherwise treated such that the vehicle is incapable of being driven under its own
             power for a period of at least seven (7) days. Inoperable Motor Vehicle shall not
INOPERABLE   include:
MOTOR           (1)   A motor vehicle which has been rendered temporarily incapable of being
VEHICLE:     driven under its own power in order to perform ordinary service or repair
             operations;
                (2)   Any motor vehicle that is kept concealed within a building when not in use;
             or
                (3)   A motor vehicle on the premises of a place of business engaged in
             repairing, wrecking or junking of motor vehicles where properly zoned.
             An individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, governmental agency or
             any combination thereof, as evidenced by the title to the vehicle. If no title to
OWNER:       the vehicle is available, then the last record owner as contained in the records of
             the Secretary of State of the state in which the vehicle was last titled shall be
             rebuttably presumed to be the current owner.
SEIZED       Any vehicle which is seized as a result of an arrest, pursuant to 720 Illinois
VEHICLE:     Compiled Statutes 5/36-1 et seq., recovery of a stolen vehicle, or any other lawful
             seizure.
             One that:
                (1)   Does not have an attached current registration (license plate) valid in any
UNREGISTERED state; or
VEHICLE:        (2)   Does not have displayed a current temporary registration valid in any
             state; or
                (3)   Has a registration (license plate) which is expired pursuant to the laws of
             the issuing state.
             A machine propelled by power, other than human power, designed to travel by use of
             wheels, treads, runners or slides and to transport persons or property or pull
VEHICLE:     machinery and shall include, without limitation, automobile, truck, trailer,
             motorcycle, tractor, buggy, RV, SUV, snowmobile, personal watercraft conversion van,
             boat, camper, mobile home, pop-up camper, pickup truck, and wagon.
VEHICLE      Any vehicle which is seized so it can be searched for evidence of a crime (hit-and-
HAVING       run, blood, fingerprints, etc.). (Ord. 76-19, 5-3-1976; amd. Ord. 01-30, 11-5-2001;
EVIDENTIARY  Ord. 17-18, 10-2-2017)
VALUE:
 
9-11-2: NUISANCE VEHICLES REGULATED:
No person shall park, store, leave or permit the parking, storage or leaving of
any vehicle which is an abandoned vehicle on private property, abandoned
vehicle on city property, abandoned vehicle on street or alley, hazardous
vehicle, vehicle having evidentiary value, inoperable motor vehicle, or
unregistered vehicle, whether upon public or private property within the city
except as authorized herein. The presence of such vehicle in violation of the
provisions hereof is hereby declared a public nuisance which may be abated as
such in accordance with the provisions of this section.
This section shall not apply to any vehicle enclosed within a building on
private property or to any vehicle stored on the premises of a business
enterprise actively operated on the subject premises and being properly
operated in the appropriate business zone pursuant to the zoning ordinance of
the city and engaged in such business enterprise as would properly be
associated with the storage of such vehicles. (Ord. 17-18, 10-2-2017)
9-11-3: AUTHORITY TO ABATE NUISANCE VEHICLES BY TOWING:
The chief of police or his or her designee is hereby authorized to immediately
tow away, or cause to be towed away, any vehicle on any public street, public
place, or private property at any time:
   (A)   When the vehicle is an abandoned vehicle on city property as defined
herein;
   (B)   When the vehicle is a hazardous vehicle as defined herein;
   (C)   When the vehicle is a seized vehicle as defined herein:
   (D)   When the vehicle is a vehicle having evidentiary value as defined
herein;
   (E)   When a vehicle is on private residential property and is parked there
without consent of the property owner, proprietor or agent of the property,
provided:
      1.   That signs approved by the city posted on the property give notice
that parking is prohibited; and
      2.   That the person requesting the tow signs a statement that he is the
owner, proprietor, or agent of the property with the authority to request the
tow. (Ord. 17-18, 10-2-2017)
9-11-4: PRE-TOW NOTICE OF REMOVAL:
In all other instances of a violation of this article, the chief of police or
his or her designee is hereby authorized to tow away, or cause to be towed
away, any vehicle on any public street, public place, or private property at
any time, but the police shall first deliver or mail a notice to the registered
owner and to the lawful owner or occupant of the premises where the vehicle is
located and, if the vehicle is on private property, the police shall obtain a
warrant for such removal. The notice shall notify the recipient of an
opportunity for a pre-tow hearing to determine whether the vehicle is subject
to removal from the property under the provisions of this chapter.
   (A)   Notice.
      1.   If the vehicle is on private property, notice shall be given
personally to the owner or occupant of the premises or, if the owner or
occupant is not available, the notice shall be left in a conspicuous spot on
the premises. The notice shall provide notice of intent to tow, the statutory
grounds for removal, information regarding the opportunity for hearing, the
earliest date upon which the tow may occur if no hearing is requested, and the
police department address and phone number.
      2.   Additionally, notice shall be given by placement of a sticker on the
vehicle which provides notice of intent to tow, the statutory grounds for
removal, information regarding the opportunity for hearing, the earliest date
upon which the tow may occur if no hearing is requested, and the police
department address and phone number.
      3.   If the registered owner of the vehicle does not reside at nor own
the premises where the vehicle is located, notice shall also be sent by mail to
the registered owner of the vehicle.
   (B)   Opportunity for hearing: The registered owner or lawful owner or
occupant of the premises where the vehicle is located shall have seven (7) days
from the notice's mailing date or personal delivery to request a pre-tow
hearing in writing. If the recipient of the notice does not file a written
request for hearing within the seven (7) day period, any hearing rights under
this section will be deemed waived, and if the Vehicle is on private property,
the police may immediately apply to the circuit court for a warrant to tow the
Vehicle from the property.
   (C)   Scheduling of pre-tow hearings: In the event that a pre-tow hearing is
requested as provided herein, the removal shall be delayed until the next
scheduled hearing date of the city's administrative hearing officer, at which
time the administrative hearing officer shall conduct a hearing as hereinafter
provided to determine whether grounds exist for removal. If the administrative
hearing officer rinds that grounds exist for removal, the vehicle may be
immediately removed.
   (D)   Nature of hearing: The hearing shall be informal in nature, and the
rules of evidence shall not apply. The hearing will not be determinative of, or
adjudicate, any nuisance citation issued pursuant to the vehicle. After
receiving all relevant evidence, the administrative hearing officer shall make
a decision based upon a preponderance of the evidence as to whether towing of
the vehicle is authorized by the laws of the state or this chapter.
   (E)   Decision to tow: If the preponderance of the evidence supports towing
and compliance with the provisions of this chapter, the administrative hearing
officer shall direct that the vehicle be towed from the premises.
   (F)   Decision not to tow: If the preponderance of the evidence fails to
support towing of the vehicle, the administrative hearing officer shall direct
that the vehicle not be towed. The city shall tow no vehicle about which such a
decision has been rendered unless the circumstances under which the decision
was rendered subsequently changes. If, pursuant to altered circumstances, the
city determines removal of the vehicle is necessary, it shall follow the same
procedures set forth in this section. (Ord. 17-18, 10-2-2017)
9-11-5: APPLICATION TO COURT FOR WARRANT TO REMOVE:
   (A)   In order to tow a vehicle from private property, the police shall
apply to the circuit court for a determination that a vehicle has been
abandoned or is inoperative and request the circuit court to issue a warrant to
remove the vehicle. The police may also request a warrant to remove a vehicle
from public property in lieu of making the determination to tow themselves.
   (B)   The proceeding held pursuant to subsection (A) shall be an in rem
proceeding against the vehicle.
   (C)   The application to the court shall be verified and shall state facts
sufficient to allow the court to make a determination that there is probable
cause to consider the vehicle abandoned or inoperative, and that the vehicle is
parked in violation of this chapter.
   (D)   In the proceedings under this section, the sole question before the
court shall be whether there is probable cause to believe the vehicle is
abandoned or inoperable and whether the vehicle is parked in violation of this
chapter.
   (E)   If the court enters an order finding that there is probable cause to
believe the vehicle is abandoned or inoperable and that this chapter is being
violated, a warrant to remove the vehicle shall issue and the police shall
thereafter proceed in accordance with this chapter as regards towing. (Ord. 17-
18, 10-2-2017)
9-11-6: REPORTS ON TOWED VEHICLES:
When a motor vehicle or other vehicle is authorized to be towed away pursuant
to this Chapter, the police department shall keep and maintain a record of the
vehicle towed, listing the color, the year of manufacture, the manufacturer's
trade name, the manufacturer's series name, the body style, the vehicle
identification number and the license plate year and number displayed on the
vehicle. The record shall also include the date and hour of the tow, the
location towed from, the location towed to, the reason for the towing and the
name of the officer authorizing the tow. (Ord. 17-18, 10-2-2017)
9-11-7: RECORD SEARCHES:
   (A)   When the police department does not know the identity of the
registered owner or other legally entitled person, it will cause the motor
vehicle registration records of the state to be searched by a directed
communication to the Secretary of State for the purpose of obtaining the
required ownership information.
   (B)   The police department will cause the stolen motor vehicle files of the
state police to be searched by a directed communication to the state police for
stolen or wanted information on the vehicle. When the state police files are
searched with negative results, the information contained in the National Crime
Information Center (NCIC) files will be searched by the state police. The
information determined from these record searches will be used by the police
department in sending a notification by certified mail to the owner or legally
entitled person advising where the vehicle is held, requesting a disposition be
made and setting forth public sale information. (Ord. 17-18, 10-2-2017)
9-11-8: IDENTIFYING AND TRACING VEHICLE OWNERSHIP BY STATE POLICE:
When the registered owner or other person legally entitled to the possession of
a motor vehicle or other vehicle impounded pursuant to this chapter cannot be
identified from the registration files of this state or from the registration
files of a foreign state, if applicable, the police department shall notify the
state police for the purpose of identifying the vehicle's owner or other person
legally entitled to the possession of the vehicle. The information obtained by
the state police will be immediately forwarded to the law enforcement agency
having custody of the vehicle for notification of the owner. (Ord. 17-18, 10-2-
2017)
9-11-9: RECLAIMED VEHICLES; EXPENSES:
Any time before a motor vehicle or other vehicle is sold at public sale or
disposed of as provided in this chapter, the owner or other person legally
entitled to its possession may reclaim the vehicle by presenting to the police
department proof of ownership or proof of the right to possession of the
vehicle. No vehicle shall be released to the owner or other person under this
section until all towing and storage charges have been paid. (Ord. 17-18, 10-2-
2017)
9-11-10: DISPOSAL OF UNCLAIMED VEHICLES:
   (A)   Whenever an abandoned, lost, stolen or unclaimed motor vehicle or
other vehicle, seven (7) years of age or newer, remains unclaimed by the
registered owner or other person legally entitled to its possession for a
period of thirty (30) days after notice has been given as provided in this
chapter, the police department having possession of the vehicle shall cause it
to be sold at public sale to the highest bidder. Notice of the time and place
of the sale shall be posted in a conspicuous place for at least ten (10) days
prior to the sale on the premises where the vehicle has been impounded. At
least ten (10) days prior to the sale, the police department shall cause a
notice of the time and place of the sale to be sent by certified mail to the
registered owner or other person known by the police department or towing
service to be legally entitled to the possession of the vehicle. Such notice
shall contain a complete description of the vehicle to be sold and what steps
must be taken by any legally entitled person to reclaim the vehicle.
   (B)   In those instances where the certified notification specified herein
has been returned by the postal authorities to the police department due to the
addressee having moved or being unknown at the address obtained from the
registration records of this state, the sending of a second certified notice
will not be required. (Ord. 17-18, 10-2-2017)
9-11-11: DISPOSAL OF UNCLAIMED VEHICLE WITHOUT NOTICE:
   (A)   When the identity of the registered owner or other person legally
entitled to the possession of an abandoned, lost or unclaimed vehicle of seven
(7) years of age or newer cannot be determined by any means provided for in
this division, the vehicle may be sold as provided herein or disposed of in the
manner authorized by this division without notice to the registered owner or
other person legally entitled to the possession of the vehicle.
   (B)   When an abandoned vehicle of more than seven (7) years of age is
impounded as specified by this division, it will be kept in custody for a
minimum of ten (10) days for the purpose of determining ownership, the
contacting of the registered owner by the U.S. mail, public service or in
person for a determination of disposition and, an examination of the state
police stolen motor vehicle files for theft and wanted information. At the
expiration of the ten-day period, without the benefit of disposition
information being received from the registered owner, the chief of police will
authorize the disposal of the vehicle as junk only. (Ord. 17-18, 10-2-2017)
9-11-12: POLICE REPORT AFTER VEHICLE IS RECLAIMED OR DISPOSED OF:
When a motor vehicle or other vehicle in the custody of the police department
is reclaimed by the registered owner or other legally entitled person, or when
the vehicle is sold at public sale or otherwise disposed of as provided in this
division, a report of the transaction will be maintained by the police
department for a period of one (1) year from the date of the sale or disposal.
(Ord. 17-18, 10-2-2017)
9-11-13: DISPOSITION OF PROCEEDS OF SALE OF UNCLAIMED VEHICLES:
When a vehicle located within the corporate limits of the city is authorized to
be towed away by the chief of police and disposed of as set forth in this
chapter, the proceeds of the public sale or disposition after the deduction of
towing, storage and processing charges shall be deposited in the City Treasury.
(Ord. 17-18, 10-2-2017)
9-11-14: LIABILITY:
Any police officer, towing service owner, operator or employee shall not be
held to answer or be liable for damages in any action brought by the registered
owner, former registered owner, or legal representative, or any other person
legally entitled to the possession of a motor vehicle or other vehicle when the
vehicle was processed and sold or disposed of as provided by this chapter.
(Ord. 17-18, 10-2-2017)
9-11-15: PENALTY, FINES, AND TOWING COSTS:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be guilty of
an offense and shall be subject to a fine of twenty-five dollars ($25.00), as
with other parking violations, each act in violation of any of the provisions
hereof shall be deemed a separate offense.
First notice shall be considered the initial ticket/violation issued. First
notice is payable within seven (7) calendar days of issuance.
After the first seven (7) days expires a late fee of ten dollars ($10.00) will
be added to the initial twenty-five dollar ($25.00) fine. Second notice will be
issued after the first seven (7) calendar days expire.
After thirty (30) calendar days from the issuance of the second notice expires
with no payment, the fine may be turned into collections.
The owner of any vehicle towed pursuant to this Chapter, and all other Chapters
shall be responsible for all reasonable costs incurred by the towing agent who
towed the vehicle in addition to these costs, the owner will also pay an
administrative fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) if the vehicle is claimed
within thirty days (30) of the towing of the vehicle.
In the event the vehicle is not claimed after the completion of thirty (30)
calendar days, to include if the vehicle is properly disposed of after this
time period, the owner will still be assessed the one hundred dollar ($100.00)
administrative fee. If unpaid, this fee may be forwarded to collections. (Ord.
17-18, 10-2-2017; amd. Ord. 21-07, 7-19-2021)
TITLE 10
ZONING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
PURPOSE AND TITLE
SECTION:
10-1-1: Purpose
10-1-2: Title
10-1-1: PURPOSE:
The Zoning Ordinance of the City of East Moline, Illinois adopted July 24,
1967, be and is hereby amended by striking all of said ordinance and inserting
in lieu thereof the chapters contained in this title. (Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-1-2: TITLE:
This title shall be known, cited and referred to as the ZONING TITLE OF THE
CITY. (Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
CHAPTER 2
INTERPRETATION
SECTION:
10-2-1: Minimum Requirements
10-2-1: MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS:
The provisions of this title shall be minimum requirements, adopted for the
promotion of the public health, safety, convenience, comfort, prosperity and
general welfare. Where this title imposes greater restrictions upon the use of
buildings or other structures, or law or ordinance, the provisions of this
title shall prevail. (Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
CHAPTER 3
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
10-3-1: Definitions
10-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this title, certain terms or words are used in a limited or
special sense, as herein defined. Words used in the present tense include the
future, words in the singular number include the plural, and words in the
plural include the singular; the word "shall" is mandatory and not directory.
ACCESSORY BUILDING OR USE:
Accessory Structure: A subordinate structure detached but located on the same
lot as the principal structure, the use of which is incidental and accessory to
that of the principal structure.
Accessory Use: A structure or use that: a) is clearly incidental to and
customarily found in connection with a principal building or use; b) is
subordinate to and serves a principal building or a principal use; c) is
subordinate in area, extent, or purpose to the principal building or principal
use serviced; d) contributes to the comfort, convenience, or necessity of
occupants, business, or industry in the principal building or principal use
served; and e) is located on the same lot as the principal building or use
served.
ADULT BOOKSTORE: An establishment having more than forty percent (40%) of its
stock-in-trade, floor area, or display area used for the sale or rental of
books, magazines, publications, tapes or films that are distinguished or
characterized by the emphasis on sexually oriented material depicting,
describing, or relating to sexual activities or anatomical genital areas.
ADULT MINI-MOTION PICTURE THEATERS: Often referred to as peep shows and
characterized by small private booths rented to individuals to view sexually
explicit films or tapes.
ADULT MODELING AND ENTERTAINMENT FACILITY: An establishment, either with or
without a liquor license, offering sexually oriented live entertainment, which
may include topless and go-go dancers, strippers, or male or female
impersonators.
ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATERS: A building used for presenting films
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing,
or relating to sexual activities or anatomical genital areas.
ADULT-USE CANNABIS BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENT: An adult-use cannabis cultivation
center, craft grower, processing organization, infuser organization, dispensing
organization or transporting organization.
ADULT-USE CANNABIS CRAFT GROWER: A facility operated by an organization or
business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of Agriculture to
cultivate, dry, cure and package cannabis and perform other necessary
activities to make cannabis available for sale at a dispensing organization or
use at a processing organization, per the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act,
(P.A. 101-0027), as it may be amended from time-to-time, and regulations
promulgated thereunder.
ADULT-USE CANNABIS CULTIVATION CENTER: A facility operated by an organization
or business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of Agriculture to
cultivate, process, transport and perform necessary activities to provide
cannabis and cannabis-infused products to licensed cannabis business
establishments, per the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, (P.A. 101-0027), as it
may be amended from time-to-time. and regulations promulgated thereunder.
ADULT-USE CANNABIS DISPENSING ORGANIZATION: A facility operated by an
organization or business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of
Financial and Professional Regulation to acquire cannabis from licensed
cannabis business establishments for the purpose of selling or dispensing
cannabis, cannabis-infused products, cannabis seeds, paraphernalia or related
supplies to purchasers or to qualified registered medical cannabis patients and
caregivers, per the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, (P.A. 101 -0027), as it
may be amended from time-to-time, and regulations promulgated thereunder.
ADULT-USE CANNABIS INFUSER ORGANIZATION OR INFUSER: A facility operated by an
organization or business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of
Agriculture to directly incorporate cannabis or cannabis concentrate into a
product formulation to produce a cannabis- infused product, per the Cannabis
Regulation and Tax Act, (P.A. 101-0027), as it maybe amended from time-to-time.
and regulations promulgated thereunder.
ADULT-USE CANNABIS PROCESSING ORGANIZATION OR PROCESSOR: A facility operated by
an organization or business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of
Agriculture to either extract constituent chemicals or compounds to produce
cannabis concentrate or incorporate cannabis or cannabis concentrate into a
product formulation to produce a cannabis product, per the Cannabis Regulation
and Tax Act (P.A. 101-0027), as it may be amended from time-to-time, and
regulations promulgated thereunder.
ADULT-USE CANNABIS TRANSPORTING ORGANIZATION OR TRANSPORTER: An organization or
business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of Agriculture to
transport cannabis on behalf of a cannabis business establishment or a
community college licensed under the Community College Cannabis Vocational
Training Pilot Program, per the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act (P.A. 101-
0027), as it may be amended from time-to-time, and regulations promulgated
thereunder.
ALLEY: A public right-of-way which affords a secondary means of vehicular
access to the side or rear of premises that front on a nearby street.
AMUSEMENT CENTER: Any premises which contains four (4) or more coin or token
operated devices played for a fee, such as pinball machines, foosball tables,
pool tables and other similar entertainment or amusement devices.
APARTMENT: A room or suite of rooms in a multi-family structure, which is
arranged, designed, used or intended to be used as a single housekeeping unit.
Complete kitchen, bath and toilet facilities, permanently installed, must
always be included for each apartment.
APARTMENT/DORMITORY: A multi-unit dwelling for which each dwelling unit
contains fewer than ten (10) occupants whether related or unrelated. Each unit
shall have two (2) exits and a common area of not less than three hundred (300)
square feet, which may include cooking and dining facilities and shall be
subject to relevant codes or regulations for behavior by students and others in
effect at such educational facility which are enforced by resident personnel of
such educational facility.
AUTOMOBILE REPAIR - MAJOR: General repair, rebuilding of or reconditioning of
engines of any type, motor vehicles, trucks, buses or trailers. Collision
service, including bodywork, frame or fender straightening or repair, overall
painting of motor vehicles, trucks, trailers or painting booth.
AUTOMOBILE REPAIR - MINOR: Minor repairs, incidental body and fender work,
touch-up painting and upholstering, replacement of minor parts and general
tune-up service to passenger automobiles and trucks not exceeding one and one-
half (11/2) tons' capacity.
AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION: Any building, land area, or other premises, or
portion thereof, used for the retail dispensing or sales of vehicular fuels;
minor or light servicing and repair of automobiles; and including as an
accessory use the sale and installation of lubricants, tires, batteries, and
similar vehicle accessories. Does not include major automobile repair, i.e.,
anything not defined in automobile repair - minor.
AUTOMOBILE WRECKING YARD: Any place where two (2) or more vehicles not in
running condition, or parts thereof, are stored in the open, and are not being
restored to operation, or any land, building or structure used for wrecking or
storing of such motor vehicles or parts thereof, and including any used farm
vehicles or farm machinery, or parts thereof, stored in the open and not being
restored to operating condition; and including the commercial salvaging of any
other goods, articles or merchandise.
BALCONY: Is an outside deck located at least on the second floor or any higher
floor of a dwelling building, and can be cantilevered or supported on piers.
BAR: An establishment in which alcoholic beverages are served for on-site
consumption, primarily by the drink.
BED AND BREAKFAST: Shall mean an operator-occupied residence providing
accommodations for a charge to the public with no more than five (5) guest
rooms for rent, in operation for more than ten (10) nights in a twelve-month
period. Breakfast may be provided to the guests only. Bed and breakfast
establishments shall not include motels, hotels, boarding houses, or food
service establishments. "Operator" shall mean the owner of the bed and
breakfast establishment, or the owner's agent, who is required to reside in the
bed and breakfast establishment or on contiguous property.
BOARDING HOUSE: An establishment with lodging for compensation offering
accommodations for short-term transients or extended periods of time. Meals may
or may not be provided (also referred to as rooming house, lodging house,
lodging room, does not include bed and breakfast).
BOOK/STATIONERY STORE: An establishment dealing in books, printed materials and
stationery supplies, which is not an adult bookstore.
BUILDING: Any permanently anchored structure used or intended for supporting or
sheltering any use or occupancy. When a building is divided into separate parts
by unpierced walls, each part shall be deemed a separate building (see
definition of structure).
BUILDING, COMPLETELY ENCLOSED: A building separated on all sides from the
adjacent open space, or from other buildings or other structures, by a
permanent roof and by exterior walls or party walls, pierced only by windows
and normal entrance or exit doors.
BUILDING, HEIGHT OF: The vertical distance above a reference datum measured to
the highest point of the coping of a flat roof or to the deck line of a mansard
roof or to the average height of the highest gable of a pitched or hipped roof.
The reference datum shall be selected by either of the following, whichever
yields a greater height of building:
   (A)   The elevation of the highest adjoining sidewalk or ground surface
within a five foot (5') horizontal distance of the exterior wall of the
building when such sidewalk or ground surface is not more than ten feet (10')
above lowest grade.
   (B)   An elevation ten feet (10') higher than the lowest grade when the
sidewalk or ground surface described in subsection (A) of this definition is
more than ten feet (10') above lowest grade.
The height of a stepped or terraced building is the maximum of any segment of
the building.
BUILDING SET-BACK LINE: See definition of "set-back".
BUILDING, STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on
the ground or attached to something having a fixed location on the ground.
Structures include, but not limited to: buildings, walls, swimming pools, signs
and fences.
BULK STORAGE: Means the storage of flammable or combustible liquid in an above
ground tank that is not for dispensing purposes. If an above ground tank is
used for any bulk storage purposes, it is classified as a "bulk storage tank"
for the remainder of the calendar year in which it was so used.
CARE HOME, LARGE RESIDENTIAL: A residential care home for more than eight (8)
persons, plus supervisory or oversight personnel, living together as a single
housekeeping unit who are disabled, as defined by "disability" in this section,
for the primary purpose of providing shelter.
CARE HOME, SMALL RESIDENTIAL: A residential care home containing a single one
family dwelling unit for eight (8) persons or fewer, plus supervisory or
oversight personnel, living together as a single housekeeping unit for the
primary purpose of providing shelter in a family-like atmosphere.
CARPORT: A roofed structure providing space for the parking of motor vehicles
that may be enclosed on not more than three (3) sides.
CHURCH: A building, together with its accessory buildings and uses, where
persons regularly assemble for religious worship, and which building, together
with its accessory buildings and uses, is maintained and controlled by a
religious body organized to sustain public worship.
CLINIC OR MEDICAL HEALTH CENTER: A building containing an individual
practitioner or an association or group of physicians, dentists, clinical
psychologists, or similar professional health care practitioners, including
assistants. The clinic may include apothecary, dental and mental laboratories,
and/or X-ray facilities, but shall not include inpatient or overnight care.
CLUB OR LODGE, PRIVATE: Non-profit association of persons, who are bona fide
members paying annual dues, which owns, hires, or leases a building, or portion
thereof, the use of such premises being restricted to members and their guests.
It shall be permissible to serve food and meals on such premises provided
adequate dining room space and kitchen facilities are available. The sale of
alcoholic beverages to members and their guests shall be allowed provided such
sale of alcoholic beverages is in compliance with the applicable Federal, State
and Municipal laws.
COMMERCIAL EQUIPMENT STORAGE FACILITY (LARGE STORAGE UNITS, RECREATIONAL
VEHICLE STORAGE, MOBILE AGRICULTURAL VEHICLE OR EQUIPMENT STORAGE): A building
or group of buildings containing separate, individual, and private storage
spaces of varying sizes available for lease or rent for commercial or
agricultural vehicles or equipment, or personal recreational vehicles, often
with storage units at a size larger than traditional mini- warehouse storage
units or other self-storage facilities.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN: The plan or any portion thereof adopted by the City to
guide and coordinate the physical and economic development of the City. The
comprehensive plan includes, but is not limited to, plans and programs
regarding the location, character, and extent of highways, bridges, public
buildings or uses, utilities, schools, residential, commercial or industrial
land uses, parks, drainage facilities, etc.
CONVENIENCE STORE: Any retail establishment offering for sale prepackaged food
products, household items, commercial products associated with minor auto
servicing (but not automobile parts), and other goods commonly associated with
the same including the retail dispensing of vehicular fuels.
CORRECTIONAL CENTER: Please see definition for prison.
DAY CARE CENTER: A child care facility meeting all State regulation which
regularly provides day care for less than twenty four (24) hours per day for:
a) more than eight (8) children in a family dwelling unit, or b) more than
three (3) children in a facility other than a family dwelling unit.
DAY CARE HOME: A family dwelling unit occupied by attending family which
receives more than three (3) and up to a maximum of eight (8) children for less
than twenty four (24) hours a day. The maximum of eight (8) children includes
the family's natural or adopted children and all other persons under the age of
twelve (12). A day care home may also be a family home which receives adults
who are sixty (60) years of age or older, and must meet all State regulation.
DECK: Is an outside porch without a roof not necessarily attached to a dwelling
wall, whose floor is built on a foundation, piers, or blocks, as a distinct
structure requiring a building permit, above ground grade. Decks can be
adjacent to the first floor level of a dwelling, or occasionally adjacent to
second floors or higher (see definition of balcony).
DISABILITY: As defined by the Americans With Disabilities Act (ADA), a person
who has:
   (A)   A physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more
major life activities;
   (B)   A record of such an impairment; or
   (C)   Is regarded as having such an impairment.
DISTRICT, ZONING: A portion of the territory of the City wherein uniform
requirements or various combinations thereof apply to structures, lots, and
uses under the terms of this title.
DORMITORY: A building used as group living quarters for a student body operated
by a college or university or other such institution of higher education,
subject to relevant codes and regulations for behavior of students and others
in effect at such educational facility which are enforced by resident personnel
at such institution.
DWELLING GROUP: Two (2) or more one-family, two-family or multiple-family
dwellings, or boarding or lodging houses, located on one zoning lot, but not
including tourist courts or motels.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY: A building or portion thereof designed or altered
for occupancy by three (3) or more families living independently of each other.
DWELLING, ONE-FAMILY: A building designed exclusively for use and occupancy by
one family, and entirely separated from any other dwelling by space totaling at
least nine hundred (900) square feet and the structure's length does not exceed
four (4) times its width and is affixed to a permanent masonry or concrete
footing and/or foundation.
DWELLING, ROW (TOWNHOUSE): A row of two (2) to twelve (12) attached, one-
family, party-wall dwellings.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY: A building designed or altered to provide dwelling units
for occupancy by two (2) families.
DWELLING UNIT: One or more rooms which are arranged, designed or used as living
quarters for a family or for a community residence as a single housekeeping
unit. A dwelling unit includes bathroom and kitchen facilities in addition to
sleeping and living areas.
EASEMENT: A right to use a portion of another person's real property for
certain limited purposes.
EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION: Public, private, or parochial school, charitable or
non-profit junior college, college or university, other than trade or business
schools, including instructional and recreational uses, with or without living
quarters, dining rooms, restaurants, heating plants and other incidental
facilities for students, teachers and employees.
ESSENTIAL SERVICES: The erection, construction, alteration or maintenance by
public utilities or Municipal or other governmental agencies, of underground or
overhead gas, electrical, steam or water transmission or distribution systems,
collection, communication, supply or disposal systems, elevated and underground
water storage tanks, including poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes,
conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes, police call boxes, traffic signals,
hydrants, and other similar equipment and accessories in connection therewith,
reasonably necessary for the furnishing of adequate service by such public
utilities or Municipal or other governmental agencies or for the public health
or safety or general welfare but not including buildings.
FAMILY: One or more persons each related to them by blood, marriage, or
adoption (including foster children), together with such relatives of the
respective spouses who are living with the family in a single dwelling and
maintaining a common household. A family may also be composed of not to exceed
three (3) persons not so related, provided that such unrelated persons live in
a single dwelling and maintain a common household and single housekeeping unit.
A family includes any domestic servants and not more than one gratuitous guest
residing with said family; such servants or guest shall be included in the
unrelated persons attained by this definition, and shall not be in addition
thereto.
FARM: An area which is used for the growing of the usual farm products such as
vegetables, fruit, trees, flora, fauna, and grain, and their storage on the
area, as well as for the raising thereon of the usual farm poultry and farm
animals provided that the raising and feeding of such farm poultry and farm
animals shall be subject to the regulations of the State of Illinois
Environmental Protection Agency. The term "farming" includes the operating of
such an area for one or more of the above uses, including dairy farms with the
necessary accessory uses for treating and storing the produce, provided,
however, that the operation of any such accessory uses shall be secondary to
that of the normal farming activities, and provided further that farming does
not include the extraction of minerals. The term "farm" includes farm
dwellings. Does not include "confinement operations" or "concentrated animal
feeding operations" as are defined by Illinois's Environmental Protection
Agency.
FAST FOOD RESTAURANT: An establishment whose principal business is the sale of
rapidly prepared food directly to the customer in a ready-to-consume state for
consumption either within the restaurant building or off premises. The
establishment may include a drive-up or drive-through service facility or
offers curb service.
FENCE: A structure, other than a building, which is an artificially constructed
barrier of any material or combination of materials or plantings/shrubbery
planted or erected to enclose or screen areas of land. Decorative corner
treatments which do not exceed six feet (6') in length and three feet (3') in
height are not considered fences if it allows for fifty percent (50%) or more
open visibility.
FOOD TRUCK (FOOD CART, PUBLIC VENDING, OR PUBLIC VENDORS): A vehicle, usually a
van, truck, towed trailer, or pushcart, from which food and beverages are sold.
Typical locations are job sites; places of assembly, such as colleges,
industries, or sports activities; and special events.
FOSTER FAMILY HOME: A family home which provides full-time family care to
foster children unrelated to them. Foster family homes are limited to a maximum
of six (6) children, including the foster family's children, unless all of the
children unrelated to the foster family are of common parentage, or the
applicable department of the State of Illinois has waived the limit of six (6)
unrelated children to facilitate an adoptive placement.
FOSTER GROUP HOMES: A child care facility which regularly provides care for no
more than ten (10) children placed by and under the supervision of a child
welfare agency licensed by the applicable department of the State of Illinois,
with no more than six (6) children under thirty (30) months of age. Adult
supervision shall be provided on a twenty four (24) hour basis.
FRONTAGE LOTS: See definition of lots, multiple frontage.
GARAGE, BUS OR TRUCK: A building which is used or intended to be used for the
storage of motor trucks, truck trailers, tractors, commercial vehicles, and
buses exceeding one and one-half (11/2) ton capacity.
GARAGE, PRIVATE: A detached accessory building or portion of a principal
building used for storage of self-propelled passenger vehicles or trailers of
the occupants of the premises and/or not more than one truck of a rated
capacity exceeding one and one- half (11/2) tons.
HALFWAY HOUSE/GROUP HOME: A temporary residential living arrangement for up to
five (5) persons, excluding staff, who are receiving therapy, counseling and/or
care from support staff who are present at all times residents are present, for
the following purposes:
   (A)   To help them re-enter society while housed under supervision while
under constraints of alternatives to imprisonment including, but not limited
to, pre-release, work release, and probationary programs;
   (B)   To help persons with family or school adjustment problems that require
specialized attention and care in order to achieve personal independence;
   (C)   To provide temporary shelter for persons who are victims of domestic
abuse and/or neglect; or
   (D)   To provide adult congregate living arrangements without nursing care.
HAZARDOUS WASTE: Any substance or material that, by reason of its toxic,
caustic, corrosive, abrasive or otherwise injurious properties, may be
detrimental or deleterious to the health of any person handling or otherwise
coming into contact with such material or substance. The U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA) has developed a list of hazardous wastes based upon
corrosivity, reactivity, and toxicity. Hazardous substances include, but are
not limited to, inorganic mineral acids of sulfur, fluorine, chlorine,
nitrogen, chromium, phosphorous, selenium and arsenic and their common salts,
lead, nickel, and mercury and their inorganic salts, or metallo-organic
derivatives; coal, tar acids, such as phenol and cresols and their salts, and
all radioactive materials.
HEALTH/RECREATIONAL AND PHYSICAL TRAINING CLUB: An indoor facility including
uses such as game courts, exercise equipment, locker rooms, training studios,
Jacuzzi and/or sauna, and pro shop.
HEIGHT: See definition of building, height of.
HOME OCCUPATION: An occupation or profession customarily carried on by an
occupant of a dwelling unit as a secondary use, and which is clearly incidental
to the use of the dwelling unit for residential purposes. There are major and
minor home occupations which are clearly addressed under chapter 4, "General
Provisions", of this title.
HOSPITAL OR SANITARIUM: An institution in which patients or injured persons are
given medical or surgical care; or for the care of contagious diseases or
terminal patients, and may include inpatient overnight care.
HOTEL: A facility offering transient lodging accommodations on a daily rate to
the general public and providing additional services, such as restaurants,
meeting rooms, and recreational facilities and is not a bed and breakfast (also
see definition of "motel").
HOTEL, TRANSIENT: See definition of boarding house.
HOUSEHOLD HAZARDOUS WASTE: A hazardous waste that can catch fire, react, or
explode under certain circumstances, or that is corrosive or toxic. Common
household hazardous waste items, and others not included on this list, might
contain materials that are ignitable, corrosive, reactive, or toxic such as:
drain openers, oven cleaners, wood and metal cleaners and polishers, automotive
oil and fuel additives, grease and rust solvents, carburetor and fuel injection
cleaners, air conditioning refrigerants, starter fluids, paint thinners, paint
strippers and removers, adhesives, herbicides, insecticides, and fungicides/
wood preservatives.
IMPROVED SURFACE: A continuous parking surface such as concrete, asphalt, paver
bricks, or other alternative materials that are shown to be impervious yet as
durable as concrete pavement.
INDEPENDENT TRAILER COACH OR INDEPENDENT MOBILE HOME: A transportable non-
permanent single-family dwelling unit on wheels suitable for year-round
occupancy and containing the same water supply, waste disposal, heating and air
conditioning, electrical conveniences and with self-contained toilet and bath
or shower facilities as conventional housing. This definition is not intended
to include recreational vehicle types.
JUNK YARD: Open area where waste, scrap metal, paper, rags, or similar
materials are bought, sold, exchanged, stored, baled, packed, disassembled, or
handled, including auto and building wrecking yards.
KENNEL: Any structure or premises where dogs and cats over four (4) months of
age are kept, raised, bred or boarded for commercial purposes excluding animal
hospitals, clinics and pet shops.
LAND USE PLAN: The comprehensive long range plan for the desirable use of land
in the jurisdiction, as officially adopted and as amended from time to time by
the City Council, the purpose of such plan being among other things, to serve
as a guide to the zoning and prospective changes in the zoning of land to meet
changing community needs in the subdividing and use of undeveloped land.
LEGAL OBJECTOR: The owner of a lot, parcel, or tract of land, which is next to
a lot, parcel, or tract of land, for which a special use is proposed or which
is the subject of an amendment of this title. For the purposes of this title, a
lot shall be deemed to be next to another if the lots, parcels, or tracts share
a common lot boundary line in whole or in part or if a common lot boundary in
whole or in part would occur if all street, highway, or alley right-of-way
between such lots were excluded.
LIGHTING PLAN: A plan showing the location, the height above grade, the type of
illumination, the type of fixture, the source lumens, and the luminous area for
each source of light proposed.
LOADING AND UNLOADING SPACE, OFF-STREET: An open hard-surfaced area of land
other than a street or public way, the principal use of which is for the
standing, loading and unloading of motor trucks, tractors, and trailers, to
avoid undue interference with the public use of streets and alleys.
LODGING OR ROOMING HOUSE: See definition of boarding house.
LODGING ROOM: See definition of boarding house.
LOT: A tract of land intended as a unit for the purpose (whether immediate or
future) of development or transfer of ownership. A lot may or may not coincide
with a "lot of record".
LOT AREA/COVERAGE: The area of the lot covered by buildings above grade,
excluding permitted projections.
LOT, CORNER: A lot having at least two (2) adjacent sides that abut for their
full length upon streets.
LOT FRONT OR FRONTAGE: The length of any one property line of a premises, which
property line abuts a legally accessible street right-of-way, except alleys.
LOT, INTERIOR: A lot other than a corner or reversed corner lot.
LOT LINE, REAR: The lot line or lot lines most nearly parallel and most remote
from the front lot line.
LOT LINE, SIDE: A lot line which is not a front or rear lot line.
LOT, MULTIPLE FRONTAGE: A lot that fronts on two (2) or more street right-of-
ways, such as corner lots, through lots, etc.
LOT OF RECORD: An area of land designated as a lot on a plat recorded with the
Recorder of Deeds of Rock Island County, Illinois in accordance with State law.
LOT, REVERSED CORNER: A corner lot, the rear of which abuts upon the side of
another lot, whether across an alley or not.
LOT, THROUGH: A lot having a pair of approximately parallel lot lines that abut
two (2) approximately parallel streets. Both such lot lines shall be deemed
front lot lines.
LOT WIDTH: The horizontal distance between the side lot lines measured at right
angles to the side lot lines at the front building line.
LOT, ZONING: A single tract of land located within a single block, which (at
the time of filing for a building permit) is designated by its owner or
developer as a tract to be used, developed, or built upon as a unit, under
single ownership or control. Therefore, a "zoning lot" may or may not coincide
with a lot of record.
MICROBREWERY: An establishment that prepares handcrafted natural beer intended
for consumption on the premises.
MINI-WAREHOUSE (Also SELF-STORAGE FACILITY): A building or group of buildings
containing separate, individual, and private storage spaces of varying sizes
available for lease or rent for varying periods of time. The size of each mini-
warehouse or self-storage facility should be between ten feet (10') and twenty
feet (20') wide.
MOBILE HOME/MANUFACTURED HOUSING: A detached residential dwelling unit designed
for transportation after fabrication on streets of highways on its own wheels
or on a flatbed or other trailers, and arriving at the site where it is to be
occupied as a dwelling, complete and ready for occupancy except for minor and
incidental unpacking and assembly operations, location on jacks or other
temporary or permanent foundations, connections to utilities, and the like. A
travel trailer, self-contained motor home or other recreational vehicle is not
to be considered a mobile home/manufactured housing.
MODULAR HOME: Factory-built housing certified to meet the current Building
Codes and amendments as adopted by Rock Island County, IL and the requirements
of the Illinois Department of Public Health, applicable to modular housing.
Once certified by the State, modular homes shall be subject to the same
standards as site built homes.
MOTEL: A building or a group of buildings, whether attached or in connected
units, used as individual sleeping units designed primarily for transient
travelers and providing for accessory off-street parking facilities. The term
"motel" includes but is not limited to buildings designated as auto courts,
tourist courts, motor hotels, motor lodges, and similar terms.
MOTOR FREIGHT TERMINAL: A building or area in which trucks, including tractor
or trailer units, are parked, stored, or serviced, including the transfer,
loading or unloading of goods. A terminal may include facilities for the
temporary storage of loads prior to transshipment.
NIGHTCLUB: A tavern or other commercial establishment where alcoholic beverages
and/or food are served for consumption on premises and a dance floor and/or
entertainment are provided. See also definition of "tavern".
NON-CONFORMING USE: A lawful use of land that does not comply with the use
regulations for its zoning district but which complied with applicable
regulations at the time the use was established.
NURSERY SCHOOL: An institution providing instructional/educational services for
at least six (6) preschool aged children.
OWNER: The word "owner" applies to the entity in which title is vested in the
building or land.
PARKING AREA, ACCESSORY: An area of one or more parking spaces located at the
same property as the building, structure or premises it is intended to serve,
or on adjoining or nearby property and of such shape and nature as to be
appropriate and usable for the parking or storage, loading and unloading of
self- propelled vehicles.
PARKING SPACE, AUTOMOBILE: Space within a public or private parking area of not
less than one hundred sixty (160) square feet (81/2 feet by 19 feet) exclusive
of access drives or aisles, ramps, columns, or office and work areas, for the
storage of one passenger automobile or commercial vehicle under one and one-
half (11/2) ton capacity.
PAVED SURFACE OR PAVEMENT: Please see definition of improved surface.
PERSON: An individual, group of individuals, corporation, association,
partnership, joint venture or other entity, and includes any trustee, estate,
receiver, assignee or personal representative.
PLAN COMMISSION: Planning and Zoning Commission of the City of East Moline. Has
the responsibility to oversee comprehensive planning and zoning matters of the
City.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT: A planned unit development is a parcel of land or
contiguous parcels of land of a size sufficient to create its own environment,
controlled by a single land-owner or by a group of landowners in common
agreement as to which is compatible with adjacent parcels, and the intent of
the zoning district or districts in which it is located. The developer or
developers of a planned unit development may be granted relief from specific
land-use regulations and design standards and may be awarded certain premiums
in return for assurances of an overall quality of development, including any
specific features which will be of exceptional benefit to the community as a
whole.
PORCH: Is a roofed structure (either enclosed or unenclosed), attached to one
or two (2) permanent exterior walls of a dwelling building, whose floor is at
or just below the level of the dwelling first floor adjacent to the porch.
PORTABLE ON-DEMAND STORAGE UNIT (PODS): A purpose-built, fully- enclosed
container placed outdoors which is designed and intended to temporarily serve
as a storage or containment unit for household or commercial goods or
equipment. Please see chapter 24, "Off-Street Parking And Loading", of this
title for provisions and regulations.
PRINCIPAL BUILDING: A building in which the primary use of the lot on which the
building is located is conducted.
PRISON: A public or privately operated facility housing persons awaiting trial
or persons serving a sentence after being found guilty of a criminal offense.
PROPERTY OWNER: Any individual, group of individuals, association, corporation,
joint stock association, joint venture, or any other entity in whose name the
legal title to the real estate is recorded.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A general term for a vehicular unit bearing current
license and/or registration, not exceeding thirty six feet (36') in overall
length, eight feet (8') in width or twelve feet (12') in overall height, which
includes but is not limited to the following specific vehicle types:
Boat Trailer: A vehicular structure without its own motive power designed to
transport a boat for recreation and vacation use and which is licensed and
registered for highway use.
Camper Trailer: A folding or collapsible vehicular structure without its own
motive power designed as temporary living quarters for travel, camping,
recreation and vacation uses; and (to) be licensed and registered for highway
use.
Horse Trailer: A vehicular structure without its own motive power designed
primarily for the transportation of horses and which, in combination with the
towing vehicle, is licensed and registered for highway use.
Motor Home: A vehicular unit built on or as a part of a self- propelled motor
vehicle chassis, primarily designed to provide temporary dwelling for travel,
camping, recreation and vacation use; and to be licensed and registered for
highway use. This category shall include converted bus campers.
Recreational Boat: A vessel, whether impelled by wind, oars or mechanical
devices, and which is designed primarily for recreation or vacation use. A
recreation vessel when mounted upon a boat trailer shall be considered one
unit. If the recreational vehicle is equipped with liquefied gas containers,
they shall meet the standards of the Interstate Commerce Commission or the
Federal Department of Transportation standards in existence at the passage of
this title.
Travel Trailer: A rigid structure without its own motive power designed as a
temporary dwelling for travel, camping, recreation and vacation use; to be
licensed and registered for highway use; and which, when equipped for the road,
has a body width of not more than eight feet, six inches (8'6").
Truck Camper: A portable structure without its own motive power designed to be
transported on a power vehicle as a temporary dwelling for travel, camping,
recreation and vacation use; and which, in combination with the carrying
vehicle shall be licensed and registered for highway use.
Utility Trailer: A vehicular structure without its own motive power designed
and/or used for the transportation of all manner of motor vehicles, goods or
materials and licensed and registered for highway use.
REFUSE EQUIPMENT OPERATION: The storage, repair, maintenance, sale or lease of
equipment used in the collection, storage or transportation of refuse,
including but not limited to vehicles, containers and any repair, parts,
accessories and appurtenances thereof.
RESIDENTIAL SOLID WASTE: Waste that normally originates in a residential
environment.
RESTAURANT: A food establishment serving full course meals prepared on the
premises and which may serve alcoholic beverages.
RIGHT-OF-WAY: A strip of land dedicated to the City or other unit of government
for streets, alleys, public utilities, drainage facilities, and other public
improvements.
SELF-STORAGE FACILITY: See definition of mini-warehouse.
SET-BACK: The minimum horizontal distance between the lot or property line and
the nearest front, side or rear line of the building, including terraces or any
covered projection thereof, including steps.
SIGN: Any object, device, display, or structure, or part thereof, situated
outdoors or indoors, that is used to advertise, identify, display, or direct or
attract attention to an object, person, institution, organization, business,
product, service, event, or location by means of words, letters, figures,
design, symbols, fixtures, colors, illumination, or projected images.
Sign, Digital: Changeable electronic variable message signs (CEVMS) that have
changeable messages or displays and meet requirements related to duration of
messages, transition times, lighting, and brightness.
SMALL HOUSE OR TINY HOUSE: A structure intended as a household that includes
basic functional areas that support normal daily routes, such as cooking,
sleeping, and toiletry, but is also smaller than traditional single-family
homes, i.e., less than one thousand (1,000) square feet. They are designed and
built to look like a conventional building structure, and meet all aspects of
Building Code. Small houses differ from mobile homes in that they are not
designed to be transported with automotive power, and have a permanent
foundation.
SOLAR COLLECTOR: A device or combination of devices, structure, or part of a
device or structure that transforms direct solar energy into thermal, chemical,
or electrical energy. The location of a solar collector must comply with local
building and setback regulations, and is to be set back not less than five feet
(5') from the property line, and not less than ten feet (10') above the ground.
SPECIAL USE: A special use is an additional use which the controlling Zoning
Ordinance states will be allowed in a given zone unless there is a showing that
the use would have unique adverse effects on the neighboring properties.
Special uses do not "run with the land" but only remain with the existing
property owner for the duration of their residency.
STABLE, RIDING: A stable shall mean a building/buildings including other
structures and grounds used for the boarding or housing of horses used for
riding sessions or pleasure riding on the premises.
STORY: That portion of a building included between the upper surface of any
floor and the upper surface of the floor next above, except that the topmost
story shall be that portion of a building included between the upper surface of
the topmost floor and the ceiling or roof above. If the finished floor level
directly above a usable or unused under-floor space is more than six feet (6')
above grade as defined herein for more than fifty percent (50%) of the total
perimeter or is more than twelve feet (12') above grade as defined herein at
any point, such usable or unused under-floor space shall be considered as a
story.
STORY, HALF: A partial story under a gable, hip or gambrel roof, the wall
plates of which on at least two (2) opposite exterior walls are not more than
four feet (4') above the floor of such story.
STREET: A public or private way for motor vehicle travel. The term "street"
includes a highway, thoroughfare, parkway, throughway, road, pike, avenue,
boulevard, lane, place, drive, court and similar designations, but excludes an
alley or way for pedestrian use only.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATION: Any changes in the supporting members of a building
including but not limited to bearing walls, load-bearing walls, load-bearing
partitions, columns, beams or girders or any substantial change in the roof or
the exterior walls.
STRUCTURE: Is that which is built or constructed, an edifice or building of any
kind, or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts joined
together in some definite manner.
TAVERN: Any premises wherein alcoholic beverages are sold at retail for
consumption on the premises as the principal uses; and where sandwiches, snacks
and other food products are available for purchase. "Tavern" does not include
"restaurants", where the principal business is serving food (includes "bar" and
"cocktail lounge"). (See definition of nightclub.)
TERRACE/PATIO: Is an unroofed paved area located outside at ground grade, which
is paved as concrete, stone, brick or wood paver blocks (also known as patio
blocks).
THEATER: An establishment used to observe films and other visual material which
is not an adult motion picture theater.
TOURIST COURTS: A group of attached or detached buildings containing individual
sleeping or living units, designed for or used temporarily by automobile,
tourists or transients, with garage attached or parking space conveniently
located to each unit, including auto courts, motels, motor lodges or other
similar type uses.
TOURIST HOME: A dwelling in which accommodations are provided or offered for
transient guests.
TOXIC WASTE: Any combination of pollutants, including disease- carrying agents,
that, after discharge and upon exposure, ingestion, inhalation or assimilation
into any organism, can cause death or disease, mutations, deformities or
malfunctions in such organisms or their offspring and that adversely affect the
environment, which are being discarded by being disposed, incinerated or
recycled.
TRAILER PARK OR MOBILE HOME PARK: An area of land upon which two (2) or more
occupied trailer coaches or mobile homes are harbored either free of charge or
for revenue purposes, and shall include any building, structure, tent,
vehicles, or enclosure used or intended for as, a part of the equipment of such
trailer coach park.
TRUCK PARKING AREA OR YARD: Any land used or intended to be used for the
storage or parking of trucks, tractors, truck trailers, and including
commercial vehicles, while not loading or unloading. Does not include Class B
trucks.
UNRELATED GROUP FAMILY: A group of no more than five (5) unrelated adults
living together as a common household by doing their own cooking and living
together, as distinguished from a group occupying a boarding house, lodging
house, club, fraternity, sorority, or hotel. Unrelated group families are
permitted with administrative approval, provided that they comply with the
standards and conditions specified in chapter 4 of this title.
VARIANCE: A relaxation of the terms of this title which will not be contrary to
the public interest, and where owing to conditions peculiar to the property and
not the result of actions of the applicant a literal enforcement of this title
would result in unnecessary and undue hardship. Permission to depart from the
literal requirements of a Zoning Ordinance, such as setbacks, side yards,
frontage requirements, and lot size that, if applied to a specific lot, would
present practical difficulties in the use of the property.
WIND-POWERED TURBINE: A device that converts kinetic energy from wind into
electrical power. The land area around the turbine may be used for agricultural
or other low-intensity use purposes assuming the accessory uses in the
immediate area are not incongruous to the turbine's purpose.
YARD: The space adjacent to lot lines which is required to be open and
unobstructed from its lowest level upward except as otherwise permitted. The
minimum depth of width of a yard shall consist of the horizontal distance
between the lot line and nearest point of the foundation or exterior wall of a
building.
YARD, FRONT: An open space extending the full width of the lot between a
principal building and the street right-of-way except for an alley, unoccupied
and unobstructed from the ground upward, except as hereinafter specified.
YARD, REAR: An open space extending the full width of a lot between a building
and the rear lot line, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward,
except as hereinafter specified.
YARD, SIDE: An open space extending from the front yard to the rear yard
between a building and the side lot line, unoccupied and unobstructed from the
ground upward, except as hereinafter specified.
ZONING MAPS: The map or maps incorporated into this title as a part hereof.
ZONING OFFICIAL: Designated zoning official appointed by the City Administrator
of East Moline whose responsibilities include: the processing of applications
for zoning appeals, zoning amendments, zoning application forms, and other
various and sundry zoning documents, as well as providing the necessary zoning
information as requested by the general public. (Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019; amd.
Ord. 19-28, 10-21-2019)
CHAPTER 4
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
10-4-1: Zoning Affects Every Structure And Use
10-4-2: Continued Existing Uses
10-4-3: Non-Conforming Uses
10-4-4: Street Frontage Required
10-4-5: Lot Of Record
10-4-6: Number Of Uses On One Lot
10-4-7: Accessory Buildings In Residence Districts
10-4-8: Required Yard Cannot Be Reduced Or Used By Another Building
10-4-9: Conversion Of Dwellings
10-4-10: Minimum Ground Floor Area For Dwellings
10-4-11: Traffic Visibility Across Corner Lots
10-4-12: Essential Services
10-4-13: Home Occupations
10-4-14: Garages, Motor Fuel Stations, Car Washes
10-4-15: Motels
10-4-16: Pending Applications For Building Permits
10-4-17: Principal Building
10-4-18: Adult Regulated Uses
10-4-19: House Numbering
10-4-20: Solar Energy Systems
10-4-21: Adult-Use Cannabis
10-4-1: ZONING AFFECTS EVERY STRUCTURE AND USE:
Except as hereinafter provided, no building, structure or land shall hereafter
be used and no building or part thereof of structure shall be erected,
constructed, reconstructed, occupied, moved, altered or repaired, except in
conformity with the regulations herein specified for the class of district in
which it is located. (Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-4-2: CONTINUED EXISTING USES:
Any building, structure or use lawfully existing at the time of enactment of
this title may be continued, except certain non- conforming uses as provided in
section
10-4-3 of this chapter. Nothing in this title shall prevent the strengthening
or restoring to a safe condition any part of any building or structure declared
unsafe by the building inspector. (Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-4-3: NON-CONFORMING USES:
Any lawfully established use of a building or land, at the effective date of
this title, or of amendments thereto, that does not conform to the use
regulations for the district in which it is located shall be deemed to be a
legal non-conforming use and may be continued, except as otherwise provided
herein.
   (A)   Any legal non-conforming building or structure may be continued in use
provided there is no physical change other than necessary maintenance and
repair, except as otherwise permitted herein.
   (B)   Any building for which a permit has been lawfully granted prior to the
effective date of this title, or of amendments thereto, may be completed in
accordance with the approved plans; provided construction is started within six
(6) months and diligently proceeds to completion. Such building shall
thereafter be deemed a lawfully established building.
   (C)   Any non-conforming building or structure which has been or may be
damaged by fire, flood, explosion, earthquake, war, riot or other act of
nature, may be reconstructed and used as before if it be done within twelve
(12) months of such calamity unless damaged more than fifty percent (50%) of
its fair market value, as determined by the Board of Appeals, at the time of
such damage, in which case, reconstruction shall be in accordance with the
provisions of this title except as modified for single family uses as specified
below:
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this title, a single-family use, a
single-family dwelling and accessory structures or a lot on which a single-
family dwelling is located, that was conforming prior to the effective date,
hereof, shall generally be treated as conforming for as long as the dwelling is
used for a single-family use. Accordingly, the following rights shall be
granted under this title:
      1.   Structures for a nonconforming single-family use may be restored for
a single-family use if destroyed or damaged by fire, explosion, act of nature
or by public enemy, reconstructed or repaired provided all other requirements
of this title are met.
      2.   Nonconforming single-family dwellings or nonconforming accessory
structures to a single-family use may be restored to the same degree of
nonconformity or less if destroyed or damaged by fire, explosion, act of
nature, or by public enemy, repaired and structurally altered, provided such
construction does not increase or extend the degree of nonconformity.
Nonconforming structures shall not be reconstructed except in compliance with
the provisions of this title.
      3.   A nonconforming single-family use and a nonconforming single- family
dwelling and accessory structures on a nonconforming lot shall be granted the
same rights as above and any other rights as if the lot were conforming.
      4.   A nonconforming single-family use and a nonconforming single- family
dwelling and accessory structures shall also be granted the same rights as for
other nonconforming uses and structures.
   (D)   No building, structure or premises where a non-conforming building or
structure which has been or may be discontinued for more than one year, or has
been or may be changed to a use permitted in the district in which it is
located, shall again be devoted to a nonconforming use.
   (E)   Any building or structure devoted to a non-conforming use with a fair
market value of less than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), as determined by
the Board of Appeals, may be continued for a period not to exceed three (3)
years after enactment of this title, where upon such non-conforming use shall
be removed or changed to a conforming use.
   (F)   Any legal, non-conforming use shall be enclosed on all sides by a
solid wall or tight board fence not less than eight feet (8') high if said use
includes storage, repair or maintenance of vehicles, equipment or materials on
the premises and not within the building. Said wall or fence shall be
maintained to the satisfaction of the building official. Any use so described
that is in existence at the time this title is adopted shall comply with said
fencing requirement within one hundred eighty (180) days of the adoption of
this title.
   (G)   No building partially occupied by a non-conforming use shall be
altered in such a way as to permit the enlargement or expansion of the space
occupied by such non-conforming use.
   (H)   No non-conforming building in any Residential District shall be so
altered as to increase the number of dwelling units therein.
   (I)   No non-conforming use may be enlarged or extended in such a way as to
occupy any required usable open space, or any land beyond the boundaries of the
zoning lot as it existed at the effective date of this title, or to displace
any conforming use in the same building or the same parcel. (Ord. 18-08, 6-3-
2019)
10-4-4: STREET FRONTAGE REQUIRED:
No lot created after the adoption of this title shall contain any building used
as a dwelling unless it abuts at least thirty feet (30') on a street or has a
permanent exclusive non-obstructed easement of access not less than thirty feet
(30') wide to a street. (Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-4-5: LOT OF RECORD:
   (A)   Lots Of Record: In any Residential or Agricultural District where
dwellings are permitted, a one family detached dwelling may be constructed on
any lot of official record at the time of enactment of this title, the owner of
which does not own any adjoining property, provided that proposed yard spaces
satisfy requirements stipulated for the district in which said lot is located,
or requirements as may be modified by the Board of Zoning Appeals. No action of
the Board shall prevent the erection of a one family detached dwelling twenty
four feet (24') wide on such lot of record.
   (B)   Lots Unserved By Sewer And Water: In any district where neither public
water supply nor public sanitary sewer is accessible, the otherwise specified
lot area and width requirement shall be twenty thousand (20,000) square feet
and one hundred feet (100') respectively; provided, however, that where a
public water supply system is accessible and will be installed, these
requirements shall be ten thousand (10,000) square feet and seventy five feet
(75') respectively; provided further that the Health Officer has certified that
the said areas will be large enough to satisfy all applicable requirements
concerning water supply and the disposal of sanitary wastes. (Ord. 18-08, 6-3-
2019)
10-4-6: NUMBER OF USES ON ONE LOT:
No lot shall contain more than one principal use. (Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-4-7: ACCESSORY BUILDINGS IN RESIDENCE DISTRICTS:
   (A)   No accessory building or buildings shall be erected in any required
court, or front yard. Except for carports and garages, no accessory building
shall be erected in a side yard. If a carport or garage is erected in a side
yard, then the accessory building shall meet the setback requirements of the
principal structure. When erected in a rear yard it or they cumulatively shall
not occupy more than thirty percent (30%) of a required rear yard and/or it or
they shall not exceed the total ground floor footage of the primary structure
except for swimming pools and shall be a distance at least three feet (3') from
all lot lines of adjoining lots which are in any R District, and at least six
feet (6') from alley lines and from any other building or structure on the same
lot. Accessory buildings shall not exceed fifteen feet (15') in height.
   (B)   Where the natural grade of a lot at the front wall of the principal
building is more than eight feet (8') above the average established curb grade
in front of the lot, a private garage may be erected within any yard or court,
but not within ten feet (10') of any street line, provided that at least one-
half (1/2) of the height of such private garage shall be below the level of the
yard or court. (Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-4-8: REQUIRED YARD CANNOT BE REDUCED OR USED BY ANOTHER BUILDING:
   (A)   No lot, yard, court, parking area or other open space shall be so
reduced in area or dimension as to make any such area or dimension less than
the minimum requirement. No required open space provided about any building or
structure shall be included as part of any open space required for another
building or structure.
   (B)   The space occupied by a required private garage or parking area shall
be considered the same as any required open space provided about a principal
building, and such space shall not be reduced or included as any part of any
required open space for another building or structure. (Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-4-9: CONVERSION OF DWELLINGS:
The conversion of any building into a dwelling, or the conversion of any
dwelling so as to accommodate an increased number of dwelling units or
families, shall be permitted only within a district in which a new building for
similar occupancy would be permitted under this title, and only when the
resulting occupancy will comply with the requirements governing new
construction in such a district, with respect to minimum lot size, lot area per
dwelling unit, dimensions of yards and other open spaces and off- street
parking. Each conversion shall be subject to such further requirements as may
be specified hereinafter with the chapter applying to such district. (Ord. 18-
08, 6-3-2019)
10-4-10: MINIMUM GROUND FLOOR AREA FOR DWELLINGS:
A one story dwelling or a story and a half, or two story dwelling shall meet
the minimum floor area standards in the International Building Code and be at
least nine hundred (900) square feet with the length being no more than four
(4) times the width. (Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-4-11: TRAFFIC VISIBILITY ACROSS CORNER LOTS:
In any district, except B-2, on any lot, no fence structure, planting, or other
obstruction to visibility, shall be erected or maintained within twenty feet
(20'), measured horizontally from the property line where they intersect on a
street corner, unless it is less than three feet (3') high. Please see the
diagram in this section.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/f4ad9eca2d4148857eadc5eb589d10ae51e55e08/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3025.gif]
(Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-4-12: ESSENTIAL SERVICES:
Essential services shall be permitted as authorized and regulated by law and
other ordinances of the City, it being the intention hereof to exempt such
essential services from the application of this title. (Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-4-13: HOME OCCUPATIONS:
   (A)   Home Occupation, Major: Major home occupations are those home
occupations where either non-resident customers and/or employees come to the
property for the purpose of furthering the business enterprise of the home
occupation, and where the occupation:
      1.   Shall be conducted entirely within a dwelling unit and carried on by
the inhabitants thereof and their employees or customers.
      2.   Shall be clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling
for dwelling purposes, and the appearance of the structure shall not be altered
or the occupation within the residence be conducted in a manner that would
cause the premises to differ from its residential character either by the use
of colors, materials, construction, lighting, signs, or the emission of sounds
or vibrations that carry beyond the premises.
      3.   Shall have no more than two hundred (200) square feet of floor area
used for the home occupation.
      4.   Shall have no signs present on the property except one sign, not
exceeding fifteen (15) square feet.
      5.   Shall not be conducted on the premises the business of selling
stocks of merchandise, supplies or products, provided that incidental retail
sales may be made in connection with other permitted home occupations, for
example, a single-chair beauty parlor would be allowed to sell combs, hair
spray, and other miscellaneous items to customers. However, a dressmaker would
be required to do only custom work for specific clients and would not be
allowed to develop stocks of dresses for sale to the general public on-site.
      6.   Shall have no storage or display of goods visible from outside the
structure.
      7.   Shall have no highly explosive or combustible material used or
stored on the premises unless approved by the fire inspector. Firearm
manufacture, importation, sales, and any other Federal firearm license (FFL)
related business, shall be subject to the regulations of the Federal Bureau of
Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives (ATF), as well as the Illinois State
Police. No activity shall be allowed that would interfere with radio or
television reception in the area, nor shall there be any offensive noise,
vibration, smoke, dust, odors, heat, or glare noticeable at or beyond the
property line.
      8.   Shall have adequate off street parking spaces available to
compensate for additional parking needs generated.
      9.   Deliveries from commercial suppliers may be made more than once a
week, and the deliveries shall not be made from semi- tractor trailer trucks.
      10.   Shall include, but are not necessarily limited to, the following:
         (a)   Single-chair beauty parlors and barbershops;
         (b)   Photo developing and printing;
         (c)   Organized classes with up to six (6) students at a time;
         (d)   Television and other electric or electronic repair, excluding
major appliances such as refrigerators or storage;
         (e)   Upholstering;
         (f)   Dressmaking and millinery;
         (g)   Woodworking excluding cabinet making;
         (h)   Federal firearm license related business.
      11.   Major home occupations require a special use permit for approval.
(See chapter 23 of this title.)
   (B)   Home Occupation, Minor: Minor home occupations are those where neither
non-resident customers nor non-resident employees come to the property for
purposes of furthering the business enterprise of the home occupation, and
where the occupation:
      1.   Shall be conducted entirely within a dwelling and carried on by the
inhabitants thereof and no other.
      2.   Shall be clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling
for dwelling purposes, and the appearance of the structure shall not be altered
or the occupation within the residence be conducted in a manner that would
cause the premises to differ from its residential character either by the use
of colors, materials, construction, lighting, signs, or other emission of
sounds or vibrations that carry beyond the premises.
      3.   Shall have no more than two hundred (200) square feet of floor area
used for the home occupation.
      4.   Shall be no advertising, display, or other indications of a home
occupation on the premises.
      5.   Shall not be conducted on the premises the business of selling
stocks of merchandise, supplies or products, provided that orders previously
made by telephone or at a sales party may be filled on the premises. That is,
direct sales of products off display shelves, racks or from inventory is not
allowed, but a person may pick up an order placed earlier as described above.
      6.   Shall have no storage or display of goods visible from outside the
structure.
      7.   Shall have no highly explosive or combustible material used or
stored on the premises unless approved by the fire inspector. No activity shall
be allowed that would interfere with radio or television reception in the area,
nor shall there be any offensive noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odors, heat or
glare noticeable at or beyond the property line.
      8.   Shall not create greater vehicle or pedestrian traffic than normal
for the district in which it is located, including commercial and general
delivery services.
      9.   Shall have no use of material or equipment not recognized as being
part of the normal practices of owning and maintaining a residence allowed.
      10.   Notwithstanding any provision contained herein to the contrary,
garage, basement, yard or other similar sales shall not be allowed more than
twice a year, and each sale shall not last more than seventy two (72)
consecutive hours, and only goods which have been generated from within the
household and not purchased elsewhere for resale. Sales shall be conducted on
the owner's property except that multiple family sales are permitted if they
are held on the property of one of the participants and any such sale shall be
considered to be a sale for all participants.
      11.   Shall have no deliveries from commercial suppliers made more than
once a week, and the deliveries shall not be made from semi- tractor trailer
trucks.
      12.   Shall include, but are not necessarily limited to, the following:
         (a)   Artists and sculptors;
         (b)   Authors, desktop publishers and composers;
         (c)   Home crafts for sale off-site;
         (d)   Office facility of clergy;
         (e)   Office facility of a salesman, sales representative or
manufacturer's representative provided that no transactions are made in person
on the premises;
         (f)   Address of convenience used solely for receiving and making
telephone calls including computer usage, mail, keeping business records in
connection with a profession or occupation;
         (g)   Individual tutoring;
         (h)   Preserving and home cooking for sale off-site;
         (i)   Individual instrument and vocal instruction provided that no
instrument may be amplified;
         (j)   Telephone solicitation work;
         (k)   No professional offices in minor home occupations;
         (l)   Any other similar uses deemed to be consistent by the
appropriate authority.
      13.   Minor home occupations do not require a special use permit. (Ord.
18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-4-14: GARAGES, MOTOR FUEL STATIONS, CAR WASHES:
   (A)   No building, structure or premises shall be used, erected or altered
which is intended or designed to be used as a public garage, automobile repair
shop, motor fuel station or car wash having an entrance or exit for vehicles in
the same block front and within two hundred feet (200') of any school, public
playground, church, hospital, public library or institution for dependents or
for children, and no such entrances or exits shall be located within the same
block front and within twenty feet (20') of any R District; nor shall any part
of such public garage, automobile repair shop, motor fuel station, or car wash
be located within one hundred feet (100') of any building or grounds of any of
the aforesaid public or institutional uses.
   (B)   All activities incidental to the sale of gasoline or oil such as
battery and tire repair, car washing and greasing shall be conducted within the
building and there shall be no storage or accumulation of miscellaneous
equipment, machinery or motor vehicles disabled or otherwise, outside of the
principal structure. (Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-4-15: MOTELS:
   (A)   No vehicular entrance to or exit from any motel or motor hotel
wherever such may be located shall be within two hundred feet (200') along
streets from any school, public playground, church, hospital, library or
institution for dependents or for children, except where such property is in
another block or on another street, which the premises in question do not abut.
   (B)   The following regulations shall be complied with:
      1.   Any lot to be used for a motel or motor hotel shall not be less than
fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet in area and shall contain not less than
one thousand (1,000) square feet of lot area per sleeping unit. All buildings
and structures on the lot shall occupy in the aggregate not more than twenty
five percent (25%) of the area of the lot.
      2.   All areas used for automobile access, parking shall comply with the
provisions of chapter 24 of this title.
      3.   All areas not used for access, parking, circulation, buildings and
services shall be completely landscaped and the entire site maintained in good
condition.
      4.   No enlargements or extensions to any motel or motor hotel shall be
permitted unless the existing one is made to conform substantially with all the
requirements for new construction for such an establishment. (Ord. 18-08, 6-3-
2019)
10-4-16: PENDING APPLICATIONS FOR BUILDING PERMITS:
Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the overall layout, plans,
construction, size or designated use of any development, building, structure or
part thereof, for which official approvals and required building permits have
been granted before the enactment of this title as amended, the construction of
which, conforming with such plans shall have been started prior to the
effective date of this title, as amended, and completion thereof carried on in
a normal manner within the subsequent six (6) month period, and not
discontinued until completion, except for reasons beyond the builder's control.
(Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-4-17: PRINCIPAL BUILDING:
Every building hereafter erected or structurally altered shall be located on a
lot as herein defined and in no case shall there be more than one principal
building on one lot unless otherwise provided in this title. (Ord. 18-08, 6-3-
2019)
10-4-18: ADULT REGULATED USES:
   (A)   Regulated Uses: The Supreme Court of the State of Illinois has
judicially confirmed that the purpose of these amendments as hereinafter stated
serves a valid government interest. In the development and execution of this
title, it is recognized that there are some uses which because of their very
nature, are recognized as having serious objectionable operational
characteristics, particularly when several of them are concentrated under
certain circumstances, thereby having a deleterious effect upon the adjacent
areas, particularly adjacent and nearby residential and business areas where
nurseries, schools, nursing homes, churches and similar uses are located.
Proper and realistic zoning and special regulations of these uses are necessary
to insure that these adverse effects will not contribute to the blighting or
downgrading of the surrounding neighborhood or discouraging normal development
of undeveloped areas. These special regulations are itemized in this section. A
primary control or regulation is for the purpose of preventing a concentration
of these uses in any one area. To prevent concentration of such uses from
having an adverse effect upon the adjacent and nearby residential and business
areas above referred to, such uses are hereby established as permitted uses in
I-2 Districts. To prevent such uses from having an adverse effect upon nearby
or residential and business areas, they are prohibited within one thousand feet
(1,000') of the following specified uses or zones:
      1.   From any Residential, Business and/or Conservation Zone.
      2.   From any public or private school or licensed day care center.
      3.   From any church or religious center.
      4.   From any public park or a City designated pedestrian/bike path.
   (B)   Additional Controls: To prevent such uses from having an adverse
effect upon the adjacent areas in an I-2 District, not more than two (2) such
uses shall be established within one thousand feet (1,000') of each other,
within said I-2 District. Uses subject to these controls hereafter referred to
as "adult regulated uses" are as follows:
      Adult bookstore.
      Adult mini-motion picture theater.
      Adult modeling.
      Adult motion picture theater.
      Entertainment facility.
      Such adult regulated uses as set forth above are hereby prohibited from
all I-2 Districts.
   (C)   Prohibition Of Graphic Materials: Any building or structure within
which an adult regulated use is lawfully operated, shall not use or display
graphic sexual material, photos, or drawings on the exterior of said business,
but shall designate said business to be an adult business and admission granted
to adults only. (Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-4-19: HOUSE NUMBERING:
   (A)   Numbers Required: All lots, buildings and structures in the City shall
be numbered in accordance with the chart on file in the office of the zoning
official.
   (B)   Chart: The zoning official shall keep a chart, showing the proper
street number of every lot in the City, which shall be open to inspection by
any interested person. It shall be the duty of the owner and occupant of every
building, structure, and mobile home in the City to have placed thereon, in a
place visible from the street, figures at least two and one-half inches (21/2")
high, showing the proper number assigned thereto.
   (C)   Violation: Any person failing to so number any structure or residence
owned or occupied by him, after receiving notice to do so from the zoning
official, shall be subject to penalty as provided by section
1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-4-20: SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS:
   (A)   Small Solar Energy System: An on-site solar energy system that is
incidental and subordinate to a principal use and/or structure serving the
needs of all Residential, Suburban Estate, Agricultural, Conservation, and
Neighborhood Business Zoning Districts.
      1.   Small systems shall be allowed as a permitted use in above
identified zoning districts if it meets conditions in this title.
      2.   Only one freestanding unit shall be allowed per property and shall
only be allowed in a rear yard location and shall meet all rear yard setback
requirements as an accessory structure and shall have a maximum array size of
two hundred forty (240) square feet.
      3.   Maximum height for freestanding unit shall be fifteen feet (15').
      4.   Attached systems can be attached to principal or accessory
structures and shall not project into minimum yard setback requirement.
      5.   Roof mounted system panels (other than flat solar panels) shall only
be located on the rear side of a roof facing and shall be no more in height
than five feet (5') above the peak of the roof and/or shall not exceed total
height of subject zoning district in which property is located.
      6.   Flat roof system panels shall be allowed on a front and/or side roof
facing only if they are mounted flat against the roof surface or incorporated
into roofing surface material.
      7.   System shall be secured from climbing or unauthorized access.
      8.   If system is nonfunctional or inoperative for a continuous one-year
time period it shall be deemed abandoned and shall be required to be removed
within ninety (90) days.
      9.   System shall have non-reflective and neutral color with no
advertising or logos on system panels and/or supporting structure other than a
small identification of the manufacturer.
      10.   All electric circuits shall be underground or in conduits attached
to structures.
      11.   System shall comply with adopted Building and Fire Codes and all
other applicable State and Federal regulations.
   (B)   Large Solar Energy System: An on-site multiple unit solar energy
system that is incidental and subordinate to a principal use and/or structure
serving the needs of AG, SE, B-2, B-3, B-4, I-1, and I-2 Zoning Districts.
      1.   Large multiple unit systems shall be allowed as permitted uses in
the above identified zoning districts if it meets conditions in this title.
      2.   Large multiple unit freestanding systems shall only be allowed in a
rear yard location and shall meet all rear yard setback requirements as an
accessory structure.
      3.   Maximum height for freestanding units shall be fifteen feet (15').
      4.   Attached systems can be attached to principal or accessory
structures and shall not project into minimum yard setback requirement.
      5.   Roof mounted system panels (other than flat solar panels) shall only
be located on the rear side of a roof facing and shall be no more in height
than five feet (5') above the peak of the roof and/or shall not exceed total
height of subject zoning district in which property is located.
      6.   Flat roof system panels shall be allowed on a front and/or side roof
facing only if they are mounted flat against the roof surface or incorporated
into roofing surface material.
      7.   System shall be secured from climbing or unauthorized access.
      8.   If system is nonfunctional or inoperative for a continuous one-year
time period it shall be deemed abandoned and shall be required to be removed
within ninety (90) days.
      9.   System shall have non-reflective and neutral color with no
advertising or logos on system panels and/or supporting structure other than a
small identification of the manufacturer.
      10.   All electric circuits shall be underground or in conduits attached
to structures.
      11.   System shall comply with adopted Building and Fire Codes and all
other applicable State and Federal regulations.
   (C)   Solar Farm: An on-site multiple unit solar energy system, independent
of a principal use and/or structure, serving the needs of AG, I-1, and I-
2 Zoning Districts.
      1.   Large multiple unit systems shall be allowed as permitted uses in
the above identified zoning districts if it meets conditions in this title.
      2.   Maximum height for freestanding units shall be fifteen feet (15').
      3.   System shall be secured from climbing or unauthorized access.
      4.   If system is nonfunctional or inoperative for a continuous one-year
time period it shall be deemed abandoned and shall be required to be removed
within ninety (90) days.
      5.   System shall have non-reflective and neutral color with no
advertising or logos on system panels and/or supporting structure other than a
small identification of the manufacturer.
      6.   All electric circuits shall be underground or in conduits attached
to structures.
      7.   System shall comply with adopted Building and Fire Codes and all
other applicable State and Federal regulations.
   (D)   Small Wind Energy System: An assembly of components which converts the
kinetic energy in wind into usable electrical, mechanical, or thermal energy,
consisting of a single wind turbine and associated control equipment. May be
installed on a principal or accessory structure (building-mounted) on all
Suburban Estate, Agricultural, Conservation, B-2, B-3, B-4, I-1, and I-2 Zoning
Districts.
      1.   Shall incorporate a low-profile design with a maximum operating
width or rotor diameter of twelve feet (12') for any turbine.
      2.   A building-mounted system may extend twenty feet (20') above the
highest point of the roof structure.
      3.   Building-mounted systems shall be set back 1.5 times the minimum
principal structure setback or ten feet (10'), whichever is greater.
      4.   Shall have a minimum clearance of twenty feet (20') from grade to
any moving component.
      5.   Shall be secured from climbing and unauthorized access.
      6.   Lattice or guyed towers shall not be utilized. Tower and exposed
system components shall be non-reflective white, gray, or a similar neutral
color as approved by the Zoning Administrator.
      7.   Shall display no unlawful signs.
      8.   Applicant shall provide notice to the local electric utility company
and submit a copy of an approved net metering agreement to the City prior to
obtaining a building permit.
      9.   Each lot shall be allowed one system with a single operating
turbine, regardless of mounting or installation type. Multiple turbine systems
may be allowed with approval of a special use permit where an applicant
demonstrates that the installations will integrate into the architectural
design of the building or site and will minimize visual and nuisance impacts to
adjoining properties.
      10.   Shall not exceed noise standards of sixty (60) dBA, measured at the
property line.
      11.   A special use permit shall be required. Application documents shall
include elevation drawings and also facade renderings which accurately depict
the proposed installation as viewed from street level from all directions.
      12.   Any wind energy system which is inoperable or abandoned for a
period of twelve (12) consecutive months must be repaired or removed within
ninety (90) days following notice from the Zoning Administrator.
   (E)   Geothermal Energy: Renewable energy generated from the interior of the
earth and used to produce energy for heating buildings or serving building
commercial or industrial processes. Ground source heat pump systems shall be
deemed an accessory structure, permissible in all zoning districts.
Ground Source Heat Pump System refers to a system that uses the relatively
constant temperature of the earth or a body of water to provide heating in the
winter and cooling in the summer. System components include closed loops of
pipe, coils or plates; a fluid that absorbs and transfers heat; and a heat pump
unit that processes heat for use or disperses heat for cooling; and an air
distribution system. The energy must be used on-site. Closed Loop Ground Source
Heat Pump System refers to a system that circulates a heat transfer fluid,
typically food-grade antifreeze, through pipes or coils buried beneath the land
surface or anchored to the bottom in a body of water.
      1.   All components of Ground Source Heat Pump System including pumps,
borings and loops shall be set back at least five feet (5') from interior and
rear lot lines.
      2.   All components of Ground Source Heat Pump System shall not encroach
on easements.
      3.   Ground Source Heat Pump System are prohibited in surface waters,
except for stormwater ponds where they are permitted.
      4.   Only Closed Loop Ground Source Heat Pump System utilizing Illinois
Department of Public Health approved heat transfer fluids are permitted.
      5.   Ground source heat pumps are considered mechanical equipment and
subject to the requirements of this title.
      6.   The energy produced by a Ground Source Heat Pump System must be used
on-site.
      7.   A Ground Source Heat Pump System that is allowed to remain in a
nonfunctional or inoperative state for a period of twelve (12) consecutive
months, and which is not brought in operation within the time specified by the
City after notification to the owner or operator of the Ground Source Heat Pump
System, shall be presumed abandoned and may be declared a public nuisance
subject to removal at the expense of the operator. (Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-4-21: ADULT-USE CANNABIS:
   (A)   Purpose and Applicability: It is the intent and purpose of this
Section to provide regulations regarding the cultivation, processing and
dispensing of adult-use cannabis occurring within the corporate limits of the
City of East Moline. Such facilities shall comply with all regulations provided
in the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act (P.A. 101-0027) (Act), as it may be
amended from time-to-time. and regulations promulgated thereunder, and the
regulations provided below. In the event that the Act is amended, the more
restrictive of the state or local regulations shall apply.
   (B)   Special Use: Adult-Use Cannabis Business Establishment facilities, as
defined herein, requiring approval of a special use in the respective districts
in which they are requested shall be processed in accordance with Chapter 23
(Special Uses) of this Title and division (C) (Adult-Use Cannabis Facility
Components) as provided herein.
   (C)   Adult-Use Cannabis Facility Components: In determining compliance with
Chapter 23 (Special Uses) of this Title, the following components of the Adult-
Use Cannabis Facility shall be evaluated based on the entirety of the
circumstances affecting the particular property in the context of the existing
and intended future use of the properties:
      1.   Impact of the proposed facility on existing or planned uses located
within the vicinity of the subject property.
      2.   Proposed structure in which the facility will be located, including
co-tenancy (if in a multi-tenant building), total square footage, security
installations/security plan and building code compliance.
      3.   Hours of operation and anticipated number of customers/employees,
      4.   Anticipated parking demand based on Chapter 24 and available private
parking supply.
      5.   Anticipated traffic generation in the context of adjacent roadway
capacity and access to such roadways.
      6.   Site design, including access points and internal site circulation.
      7.   Proposed signage plan.
      8.   Compliance with all requirements provided in division (D) (Adult-Use
Cannabis Craft Grower); division (E) (Adult-Use Cannabis Cultivation Center);
division (F) (Adult-Use Cannabis Dispensing Organization); division (G) (Adult-
Use Cannabis Infuser Organization); division (H) (Adult-Use Cannabis Processing
Organization); or division (I) (Adult-Use Cannabis Transporting Organization),
as applicable.
      9.   Other criteria determined to be necessary to assess compliance with
Chapter 23 (Conditional Uses) of this Title.
   (D)   Adult-Use Cannabis Craft Grower: In those zoning districts in which an
Adult-Use Cannabis Craft Grower may be located, the proposed facility must
comply with the following:
      1   Facility may not be located within 750 feet of the property line of a
pre-existing public or private nursery school, preschool, primary or secondary
school, day care center, day care home or residential care home. Learning
centers and vocational/trade centers shall not be classified as a public or
private school for purposes of this Section.
      2.   Facility may not be located within 250 feet of the property line of
a pre-existing property zoned for residential purposes.
      3.   Facility may not conduct any sales or distribution of cannabis other
than as authorized by the Act.
      4.   For purposes of determining required parking, Adult-Use Cannabis
Craft Grower shall be classified as “wholesale or warehouse” per Section
10-24-4 (Schedule of Off-Street Parking Requirements), provided, however, that
the City may require that additional parking be provided as a result of the
analysis completed through the Special Use process.
      5.   Petitioner shall file an affidavit with the City affirming
compliance with division (D) as provided herein and all other requirements of
the Act.
   (E)   Adult-Use Cannabis Cultivation Center: In those zoning districts in
which an Adult-Use Cannabis Cultivation Center maybe located, the proposed
facility must comply with the following:
      1.   Facility may not be located within 750 feet of the property line of
a pre-existing public or private nursery school, preschool, primary or
secondary school, day care center, day care home or residential care home.
Learning centers and vocational/trade centers shall not be classified as a
public or private school for purposes of this Section.
      2.   Facility may not be located within 250 feet of the property line of
a pre-existing property zoned for residential purposes.
      3.   Facility may not conduct any sales or distribution of cannabis other
than as authorized by the Act.
      4.   For purposes of determining required parking, Adult-Use Cannabis
Cultivation Centers shall be classified as “wholesale or warehouse” per Section
10-24-4 (Schedule of Off- Street Parking Requirements), provided, however, that
the City may require that additional parking be provided as a result of the
analysis completed through the Special Use process.
      5.   Petitioner shall file an affidavit with the City/Village affirming
compliance with division (E) as provided herein and all other requirements of
the Act.
   (F)   Adult-Use Cannabis Dispensing Organization: In those zoning districts
in which an Adult-Use Cannabis Dispensing Organization may be located, the
proposed facility must comply with the following:
      1.   Facility may not be located within 750 feet of the property line of
a pre-existing public or private nursery school, preschool, primary or
secondary school, day care center, day care home or residential care home.
Learning centers and vocational/trade centers shall not be classified as a
public or private school for purposes of this Section.
      2.   Facility may not be located in a dwelling unit or within 250 feet of
the property line of a pre-existing property zoned for residential purposes.
      3.   At least 75% of the floor area of any tenant space occupied by a
dispensing organization shall be devoted to the activities of the dispensing
organization as authorized by the Act. and no dispensing organization shall
also sell food for consumption on the premises other than as authorized in
division (F)5. below in the same tenant space
      4.   Facility may not conduct any sales or distribution of cannabis other
than as authorized by the Act.
      5.   Facility may be issued a permit to host on-site consumption of
cannabis if located in a freestanding structure occupied solely by the
dispensing organization and smoke from the facility does not migrate into an
enclosed area where smoking is prohibited. The security plan for the facility
required by division (J) (Additional Requirements’) shall also reflect adequate
provisions to respond to disruptive conduct and over-consumption. The on-site
consumption permit shall be reviewed annually and may be suspended or revoked
following notice and hearing as provided in the City of East Moline Municipal
Code.
      6.   For purposes of determining required parking, said facilities shall
be classified as “retail, freestanding and shopping centers” per Section
10-24-4 (Schedule of Off-Street Parking Requirements) of the City of East
Moline Municipal Code, provided, however, that the City may require that
additional parking be provided as a result of the analysis completed through
the Special Use process.
      7.   Petitioner shall file an affidavit with the City affirming
compliance with division (F) as provided herein and all other requirements of
the Act.
   (G)   Adult-Use Cannabis Infuser Organization: In those zoning districts in
which an Adult-Use Cannabis Infuser Organization may be located, the proposed
facility must comply with the following:
      1.   Facility may not be located within 750 feet of the property line of
a pre-existing public or private nursery school, preschool, primary or
secondary school, day care center, day care home or residential care home.
Learning centers and vocational/trade centers shall not be classified as a
public or private school for purposes of this Section.
      2.   Facility may not be located in a dwelling unit or within 250 feet of
the property line of a pre-existing property zoned for residential purposes.
      3.   At least 75% of the floor area of any tenant space occupied by an
infusing organization shall be devoted to the activities of the infusing
organization as authorized by the Act. Facility may not conduct any sales or
distribution of cannabis other than as authorized by the Act.
      4.   For purposes of determining required parking, said facilities shall
be classified as “wholesale or warehouse” per Section
10-24-4 (Schedule of Off-Street Parking Requirements) of the City of East
Moline Municipal Code, provided, however, that the City may require that
additional parking be provided as a result of the analysis completed through
the Special Use process.
      5.   Petitioner shall file an affidavit with the City affirming
compliance with division (G) as provided herein and all other requirements of
the Act.
   (H)   Adult-Use Cannabis Processing Organization: In those zoning districts
in which an Adult-Use Cannabis Processing Organization may be located, the
proposed facility must comply with the following:
      1.   Facility may not be located within 750 feet of the property line of
a pre-existing public or private nursery school, preschool, primary or
secondary school, day care center, day care home or residential care home.
Learning centers and vocational/trade centers shall not be classified as a
public or private school for purposes of this Section.
      2.   Facility may not be located in a dwelling unit or within 250 feet of
the property line of a pre-existing property zoned for residential purposes.
      3.   At least 75% of the floor area of any tenant space occupied by a
processing organization shall be devoted to die activities of the processing
organization as authorized by the Act. Facility may not conduct any sales or
distribution of cannabis other than as authorized by the Act.
      4.   For purposes of determining required parking, said facilities shall
be classified as “wholesale or warehouse” per Section
10-24-4 (Schedule of Off-Street Parking Requirements) of the City of East
Moline Municipal Code, provided, however, that the City may require that
additional parking be provided as a result of the Special Use process.
      5.   Petitioner shall file an affidavit with the City affirming
compliance with division (H) as provided herein and all other requirements of
the Act.
   (I)   Adult-Use Cannabis Transporting Organization: In those zoning
districts in which an Adult-Use Transporting Organization may be located, the
proposed facility must comply with the following:
      1.   Facility may not be located within 750 feet of the property line of
a pre-existing public or private nursery school, preschool, primary or
secondary school, day care center, day care home or residential care home.
Learning centers and vocational/trade centers shall not be classified as a
public or private school for purposes of this Section.
      2.   Facility may not be located in a dwelling unit or within 250 feet of
the property line of a pre-existing property zoned for residential purposes.
      3.   The transporting organization shall be the sole use of the tenant
space in which it is located. Facility may not conduct any sales or
distribution of cannabis other than as authorized by the Act.
      4.   For purposes of determining required parking, said facilities shall
be classified as “wholesale or warehouse” per Section
10-24-4 (Schedule of Off-Street Parking Requirements’) of the City of East
Moline Municipal Code, provided, however, that the City may require that
additional parking be provided as a result of the Special Use process.
      5.   Petitioner shall file an affidavit with the City affirming
compliance with division (I) as provided herein and all other requirements of
the Act.
   (J)   Additional Requirements: Petitioner shall install building
enhancements, such as security cameras, lighting or other improvements, as set
forth in the special use permit, to ensure the safety of employees and
customers of the adult-use cannabis business establishments, as well as its
environs. Said improvements shall be determined based on the specific
characteristics of the floor plan for an Adult-Use Cannabis Business
Establishment and the site on which it is located, consistent with the
requirements of the Act.
   (K)   Co-Location of Cannabis Business Establishments. The City may approve
the co-location of an Adult-Use Cannabis Dispensing Organization with an Adult-
Use Cannabis Craft Grower Center or an Adult-Use Cannabis Infuser Organization,
or both, subject to the provisions of the Act and the Special Use criteria
within the City of East Moline Municipal Code. In a co-location, the floor
space requirements of divisions (F)3. and (G)3. shall not apply, but the co-
located establishments shall be the sole use of the tenant space. (Ord. 19-28,
10-21-2019)
CHAPTER 5
AG AGRICULTURAL PRESERVATION DISTRICT
SECTION:
10-5-1: General Description
10-5-2: Permitted Principal Uses
10-5-3: Permitted Accessory Uses
10-5-4: When Authorized By Board Of Zoning Appeals
10-5-5: Height Regulations
10-5-6: Lot Area And Yard Requirements
10-5-1: GENERAL DESCRIPTION:
This district is intended to provide regulations for those areas situated on
the fringe of the urban area that are used for agricultural purposes, but which
will be undergoing urban development between existing agricultural uses and
planned residential, commercial, or industrial uses. (Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-5-2: PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES:
Cemeteries.
Churches.
Farm.
Farm dwelling unit.
Gardening.
Governmental uses.
Greenhouses, commercial and not commercial.
Home occupation (minor).
Indoor kennels.
Livestock not less than one hundred feet (100') from Residentially zoned
private property.
Nurseries, commercial.
One-family detached dwelling.
Private stable.
Public parks and forest preserves.
Roadside stand offering for sale only products grown on the premises.
Schools.
Solar farm.
Transmission and distribution lines, and pipelines of public utility companies
within existing public rights-of-way.
Uses customarily accessory to farm operations.
Any other similar uses deemed to be consistent. (Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-5-3: PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES:
Other uses incidental to a permitted use. (Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-5-4: WHEN AUTHORIZED BY BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS:
Agribusiness.
Aircraft hangars/tie downs.
Airstrips/runways and heliports.
Auction barns.
Bulk storage of fuel and fertilizers.
Child care facilities.
Commercial excavation of natural materials and improvements of a stream, lake
or river channel and removal of dirt and/or topsoil, quarry, borrow pits.
Density increase for residential dwellings.
Grain elevator.
Home occupation (major).
Landscape contractors.
Mobile home dwelling for a period of one year with the right of renewal for
additional periods of one year for those instances where a unique and
substantial hardship is found to be in existence for the protection of property
or for the shelter of an immediate blood relative with a severe physical
condition, with appropriate documentation.
Outdoor kennels, animal hospitals, veterinary clinics.
Private recreational use on land that is located along a body of water.
Public or private recreational facilities, (i.e., golf course, marina, boat
dock).
Recreational camps.
Recreational vehicle parks.
Residential care homes.
Riding stable.
Temporary uses.
Any other similar uses deemed to be consistent by the Board of Zoning Appeals.
(Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-5-5: HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
No structure shall exceed three (3) stories or thirty five feet (35') for the
principal structure. (Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-5-6: LOT AREA AND YARD REQUIREMENTS:
The following minimum requirements shall be observed for both primary and
accessory buildings. No accessory building shall be located in a front yard.
 
Lot Area Lot Width Front Yard Depth Least Side Yard Side Yard Sum Rear Yard
                                    Width
15 acre  165 ft.   40 ft.           15 ft.          30 ft.        40 ft.
 
(Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
CHAPTER 6
C CONSERVATION DISTRICT
SECTION:
10-6-1: General Description
10-6-2: Permitted Principal Uses
10-6-3: When Authorized By Board Of Zoning Appeals
10-6-1: GENERAL DESCRIPTION:
The C District is intended for environmental protection and preservation. Land
parcels within this district will include wetland, marshes, swamps, scenic
areas, hillsides of excessive slopes, watercourses, aquifer recharge areas,
watershed protection areas, wildlife habitat, rough terrain, and areas subject
to siltation and erosion. (Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-6-2: PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES:
Open space.
Any other similar uses deemed to be consistent. (Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-6-3: WHEN AUTHORIZED BY BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS:
Agriculture and commercial summer gardens including agricultural buildings but
not permanent dwellings not to exceed seven hundred fifty (750) square feet and
no more than one building per five (5) acre tract but not the raising of
livestock.
Campgrounds, wilderness.
Forestry activities and nurseries.
Golf courses.
Nature Center, inns, dining, parking amenities, or other uses if incidental to
the Conservation District, as permitted by the conservation covenants, on and
within five hundred feet (500') of a highway or primary thoroughfare and with
any structure at least four hundred feet (400') from any Residentially zoned
private property, church, school, or human care institution.
Outdoor rifle, trap or skeet shooting range at least six hundred feet (600')
from any Residentially zoned private property, church, school or human care
institution subject to other State and Federal guidelines.
Public parks.
Recreation vehicle parks on and within five hundred feet (500') of a highway or
primary thoroughfare and with any structure at least four hundred feet (400')
from Residentially zoned private property, church, school, or human care
institution.
Any other use deemed to be consistent by the Board of Zoning Appeals. (Ord. 18-
08, 6-3-2019)
CHAPTER 7
SE SUBURBAN ESTATES DISTRICT
SECTION:
10-7-1: General Description
10-7-2: Permitted Principal Uses
10-7-3: Permitted Accessory Uses
10-7-4: When Authorized By Board Of Zoning Appeals
10-7-5: Height Regulations
10-7-6: Lot Area And Yard Requirements
10-7-1: GENERAL DESCRIPTION:
The SE Suburban Estates District is established to provide for single-family
detached housing opportunities in a rural setting at a low density and to
preserve open space and natural features. This district is intended to provide
a natural buffer between the strictly urban characteristics of the R-
1 Residence District or R-2 Residence District. The primary difference between
the SE and the AG Districts is lot size and the allowance of livestock in the
AG District. (Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-7-2: PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES:
Essential services and Municipal administrative or public service buildings not
less than twenty feet (20') from any lot.
Gardening.
Nursery or greenhouse.
One-family detached dwelling.
Public libraries.
Public parks, playgrounds, and community center.
Accessory uses and buildings incidental to the above uses. (Ord. 18-08, 6-3-
2019)
10-7-3: PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES:
Living quarters for persons employed on the premises.
Minor home occupation as defined.
Private garages or parking areas.
Other uses incidental to a permitted use. (Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-7-4: WHEN AUTHORIZED BY BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS:
Cemetery.
Community center.
Major home occupation as defined.
Municipal buildings.
Off street parking facilities.
Outdoor recreational facilities such as golf courses, country clubs, and tennis
courts.
Public and parochial schools, churches, and centers not less than twenty feet
(20') from any lot in an R District.
Public or private recreational facilities, (i.e., golf course, marina, boat
dock).
Roadside stand selling products grown on premises.
Utility stations without service yards or storage.
Any other similar uses deemed to be consistent by the Board of Zoning Appeals.
(Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-7-5: HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
   (A)   No principal structure shall exceed three (3) stories or thirty five
feet (35').
   (B)   Farm buildings such as barns, silos, windmills and places of public
assembly such as schools and other permitted public and semi-public buildings
not to exceed six (6) stories or seventy five feet (75'), provided that for
each foot by which the height of such building exceeds the maximum height
otherwise permitted in the district, its side and rear yards shall be increased
in width or depth by an additional foot over the side and rear yards required
for the highest building otherwise permitted in the district. (Ord. 18-08, 6-3-
2019)
10-7-6: LOT AREA AND YARD REQUIREMENTS:
The following minimum requirements shall be observed for both primary and
accessory buildings. No accessory building shall be located in a front yard.
 
Lot Area Lot Width Front Yard Depth Least Side Yard Side Yard Sum Rear Yard
                                    Width
1 acre   75 ft.    30 ft.           10 ft.          20 ft.        35 ft.
 
(Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
CHAPTER 8
R-1 ONE-FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT
SECTION:
10-8-1: General Description
10-8-2: Permitted Principal Uses
10-8-3: Permitted Accessory Uses
10-8-4: When Authorized By Board Of Zoning Appeals
10-8-5: Height Regulations
10-8-6: Lot Area And Yard Requirements
10-8-1: GENERAL DESCRIPTION:
Residential Districts are established in order to protect public health, and
promote public safety, convenience, comfort, morals, prosperity, and welfare.
These general goals include, but are not limited to, the following specific
purposes:
   (A)   To protect residential areas against fire, explosion, noxious fumes,
offensive noise, smoke, vibrations, dust, odors, heat, glare, and other
objectionable factors.
   (B)   To protect residential areas to the greatest extent possible and
appropriate in each area against unduly heavy motor vehicle traffic, especially
through-traffic, and to alleviate congestion by promoting off-street parking.
   (C)   To protect residential areas against undue congestion of public
streets and other public facilities by controlling the density of population
through regulations of the bulk of buildings.
   (D)   To protect and promote the public health and comfort by providing for
ample light and air to buildings and the windows thereof.
   (E)   To promote public comfort and welfare by providing for usable open
space on the same zoning lot with residential development.
   (F)   To provide sufficient space in appropriate locations to meet the
probable need for future residential expansion and to meet the need for
necessary and desirable services in the vicinity of residences, which increase
safety and amenity for residents and which do not exert objectionable
influences.
   (G)   To promote the best use and development of residential land in
accordance with a comprehensive land use plan, to promote stability of
residential development and protect the character of desirable development, and
to protect the value of land and improvements and so strengthen the economic
base of the City. (Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-8-2: PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES:
Essential services and Municipal administrative or public service buildings not
less than eighty feet (80') from any lot line.
Existing railroad right-of-way, but not switching storage or freight yards of
sidings.
Foster family homes.
Gardening.
Municipal fire and police station.
One-family detached dwellings.
Public parks and playgrounds.
Any other similar uses deemed to be consistent. (Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-8-3: PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES:
Day care home licensed by the State of Illinois and with occupancy permit.
Living quarters for persons employed on the premises.
Minor home occupations, as defined.
Private garages or parking areas.
Private office of lawyer, architect, physician, dentist, or engineer within
their own dwelling, provided such is not operated as the principal office.
Other uses incidental to a permitted use. (Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-8-4: WHEN AUTHORIZED BY BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS:
Cemetery.
Community center.
Major home occupations as defined.
Off street parking facilities for permitted uses and/or uses permitted upon
review of appropriate authority in this zoning district.
Outdoor recreational facilities such as golf courses, country clubs, and tennis
courts.
Public and parochial schools and churches not less than twenty feet (20') from
any lot in an R District.
Utility stations without service yards or storage.
Any other similar uses deemed to be consistent by the Board of Zoning Appeals.
(Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-8-5: HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
No principal structure shall exceed three (3) stories or thirty five feet (35')
in height. No accessory structure shall exceed one story or fifteen feet (15')
in height, except as described in chapter 28, "Additional Requirements,
Exceptions And Modifications", of this title. (Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-8-6: LOT AREA AND YARD REQUIREMENTS:
The following minimum requirements shall be observed.
 
Number Of Lot Area      Lot Width Front Yard Least Side Side Yard Sum Rear Yard
Stories                           Depth      Yard Width Width         Depth
1 to 3    7,500 sq. ft. 75 ft.    25 ft.     6 ft.      12 ft.        35 ft.
 
(Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
CHAPTER 9
R-2 ONE-FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT
SECTION:
10-9-1: Permitted Principal Uses
10-9-2: Permitted Accessory Uses
10-9-3: When Authorized By Board Of Zoning Appeals
10-9-4: Height Regulations
10-9-5: Lot Area, Frontage, And Yard Requirements
10-9-1: PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES:
Any permitted use in an R-1 District.
Any other similar uses deemed to be consistent by the appropriate authority.
(Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-9-2: PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES:
Any permitted accessory use in an R-1 District.
Other uses incidental to a permitted use. (Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-9-3: WHEN AUTHORIZED BY BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS:
Any use authorized by appropriate authority in an R-1 District.
Dwelling groups.
Any other similar uses deemed consistent by the Board of Zoning Appeals. (Ord.
18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-9-4: HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
No principal structure shall exceed three (3) stories or thirty five feet (35')
in height. No accessory structure shall exceed one story or fifteen feet (15')
in height, except as provided in chapter 28, "Additional Requirements,
Exceptions And Modifications", of this title. (Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-9-5: LOT AREA, FRONTAGE, AND YARD REQUIREMENTS:
The following minimum requirements shall be observed.
 
Number Of Lot Area      Lot Width Front Yard Least Side Side Yard Sum Rear Yard
Stories                           Depth      Yard Width Width         Depth
1 to 11/2 6,000 sq. ft. 60 ft.    25 ft.     6 ft.      15 ft.        30 ft.
2 to 21/2 6,000 sq. ft. 60 ft.    25 ft.     8 ft.      20 ft.        30 ft.
 
(Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
CHAPTER 10
R-3 ONE AND TWO FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT
SECTION:
10-10-1: Permitted Principal Uses
10-10-2: Permitted Accessory Uses
10-10-3: When Authorized By Board Of Zoning Appeals
10-10-4: Height Regulations
10-10-5: Lot Area And Yard Requirements
10-10-1: PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES:
All permitted uses in an R-2 District.
Two-family dwellings.
Any other similar uses deemed to be consistent. (Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-10-2: PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES:
Any permitted accessory use in an R-2 District. (Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-10-3: WHEN AUTHORIZED BY BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS:
Bed and breakfast inns.
Boarding and lodging houses.
Any other similar uses deemed to be consistent by the Board of Zoning Appeals.
(Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-10-4: HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
No principal structure shall exceed three (3) stories or thirty five feet (35')
in height and no accessory structure shall exceed one story, or fifteen feet
(15') in height, except as provided in chapter 28, "Additional Requirements,
Exceptions And Modifications", of this title. (Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-10-5: LOT AREA AND YARD REQUIREMENTS:
The following minimum requirements shall be observed.
 
Number Of           Lot Area  Front Lot Front  Least Side Side Yard Rear Yard
Stories   Lot Area  Per       Width     Yard   Yard Width Sum       Depth
                    Family              Depth
          5,000 sq.
          ft. -
1 to 11/2 single    3,000 sq. 50 ft.    25 ft. 6 ft.      15 ft.    30 ft.
          6,000 sq. ft.
          ft. -
          duplex
          5,000 sq.
          ft. -
2 to 21/2 single    3,000 sq. 50 ft.    25 ft. 8 ft.      20 ft.    30 ft.
          6,000 sq. ft.
          ft. -
          duplex
 
(Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
CHAPTER 11
R-4 ONE TO SIX FAMILY DWELLING DISTRICT
SECTION:
10-11-1: Permitted Principal Uses
10-11-2: Permitted Accessory Uses
10-11-3: When Authorized By Board Of Zoning Appeals
10-11-4: Height Regulations
10-11-5: Lot Area And Yard Requirements
10-11-1: PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES:
All permitted uses allowed in an R-3 District.
Boarding and lodging houses.
Public and parochial schools and churches not less than twenty feet (20') from
any lot in an R District.
Any other similar uses deemed to be consistent. (Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-11-2: PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES:
All permitted accessory uses in an R-3 District.
Other uses incidental to a permitted use. (Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-11-3: WHEN AUTHORIZED BY BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS:
Any use authorized by appropriate authority in an R-3 District.
Care home, large residential at least one thousand feet (1,000') from an
existing similar use.
Day care centers licensed by the State of Illinois.
Halfway house/group home at least one thousand feet (1,000') from an existing
similar use.
Nursing homes at least fifty feet (50') from any lot line.
Parking lots accessory to use in an adjoining or less restrictive district when
abutting or directly across an alley.
Private clubs, lodges, union halls.
Any other similar uses deemed to be consistent by the Board of Zoning Appeals.
(Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-11-4: HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
No principal structure shall exceed three (3) stories or thirty five feet (35')
in height, and no accessory structure shall exceed one story or fifteen feet
(15') in height, except as provided in chapter 28, "Additional Requirements,
Exceptions And Modifications", of this title. (Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-11-5: LOT AREA AND YARD REQUIREMENTS:
The following minimum requirements shall be observed along with bufferyard
requirements as described in chapter 28, "Additional Requirements, Exceptions
And Modifications", of this title.
 
Number Of Minimum   Lot Area  Front Lot Front  Side Yard Side Yard Rear Yard
Stories   Lot Area  Per       Width     Yard   Width     Sum       Depth
                    Family              Depth
1 to 11/2 5,000 sq. 2,000 sq. 50 ft.    25 ft. 6 ft.     15 ft.    30 ft.
          ft.       ft.
2 to 21/2 5,000 sq. 2,000 sq. 50 ft.    25 ft. 8 ft.     20 ft.    30 ft.
          ft.       ft.
 
(Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
CHAPTER 12
R-5 MULTIPLE FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT
SECTION:
10-12-1: Permitted Principal Uses
10-12-2: Permitted Accessory Uses
10-12-3: When Authorized By Board Of Zoning Appeals
10-12-4: Height Regulations
10-12-5: Lot Area And Yard Requirements
10-12-1: PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES:
All permitted uses in an R-4 District.
Dwellings, multiple family.
Any other similar uses deemed to be consistent. (Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-12-2: PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES:
Any permitted accessory use in an R-4 District.
Other uses incidental to a permitted use. (Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-12-3: WHEN AUTHORIZED BY BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS:
Any use authorized by appropriate authority in an R-4 District.
Any other similar use deemed to be consistent by the Board of Zoning Appeals.
(Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-12-4: HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
No principal structure shall exceed six (6) stories or seventy five feet (75')
in height at the required front, side and rear yard lines, and no accessory
building shall exceed one story or fifteen feet (15') in height, except as
provided in chapter 28, "Additional Requirements, Exceptions And
Modifications", of this title. (Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-12-5: LOT AREA AND YARD REQUIREMENTS:
The following minimum requirements shall be observed along with bufferyard
requirements as described in chapter 28, "Additional Requirements, Exceptions
And Modifications", of this title.
 
                   Required
                   Lot Area             Front
Number Of Minimum  Per Family Front Lot Yard   Least Side Side Yard Rear Yard
Stories   Lot Area For Multi- Width     Depth  Yard Width Sum       Depth
                   Family
                   Structures
1         n/a      2,000 sq.  50 ft.    30 ft. 6 ft.      12 ft.    30 ft.
                   ft.
2         n/a      2,000 sq.  50 ft.    30 ft. 6 ft.      15 ft.    30 ft.
                   ft.
3         n/a      2,000 sq.  50 ft.    30 ft. 8 ft.      20 ft.    35 ft.
                   ft.
4         n/a      2,000 sq.  50 ft.    30 ft. 10 ft.     25 ft.    40 ft.
                   ft.
5         n/a      2,000 sq.  50 ft.    30 ft. 12 ft.     30 ft.    45 ft.
                   ft.
6         n/a      2,000 sq.  50 ft.    30 ft. 14 ft.     35 ft.    50 ft.
                   ft.
 
(Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
CHAPTER 13
R-6 MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT
SECTION:
10-13-1: Permitted Principal Uses
10-13-2: Permitted Accessory Uses
10-13-3: When Authorized By Board Of Zoning Appeals
10-13-4: Height Regulations
10-13-5: Lot Area, Frontage, And Yard Requirements
10-13-1: PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES:
Any permitted use in an R-5 District.
Housing designed for the elderly.
Any other similar uses deemed to be consistent by the appropriate authority.
(Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-13-2: PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES:
Any permitted accessory use in an R-5 District.
Other uses incidental to a permitted use. (Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-13-3: WHEN AUTHORIZED BY BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS:
Any use authorized by appropriate authority in an R-5 District.
Any other similar use deemed to be consistent by the Board of Zoning Appeals.
(Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-13-4: HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
No principal structure shall exceed twelve (12) stories or one hundred fifty
feet (150') in height at the required front, side and rear yard lines, and no
accessory building shall exceed one story or fifteen feet (15') in height
except as provided in chapter 28, "Additional Requirements, Exceptions And
Modifications", of this title. (Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-13-5: LOT AREA, FRONTAGE, AND YARD REQUIREMENTS:
The following minimum requirements shall be observed along with bufferyard
requirements as described in chapter 28, "Additional Requirements, Exceptions
And Modifications", of this title.
                   Required
                   Lot Area             Front
Number Of Minimum  Per Family Front Lot Yard  Least Side Side Yard Rear Yard
Stories   Lot Area For Multi- Width     Depth Yard Width Sum       Depth
                   Family
                   Structures
                   Required
                   Lot Area             Front
Number Of Minimum  Per Family Front Lot Yard   Least Side Side Yard Rear Yard
Stories   Lot Area For Multi- Width     Depth  Yard Width Sum       Depth
                   Family
                   Structures
1         n/a      2,000 sq.  50 ft.    30 ft. 6 ft.      12 ft.    30 ft.
                   ft.
2         n/a      2,000 sq.  52 ft.    30 ft. 6 ft.      12 ft.    30 ft.
                   ft.
3         n/a      2,000 sq.  55 ft.    30 ft. 8 ft.      16 ft.    35 ft.
                   ft.
4         n/a      2,000 sq.  65 ft.    30 ft. 10 ft.     22 ft.    40 ft.
                   ft.
5         n/a      2,000 sq.  75 ft.    30 ft. 12 ft.     27 ft.    45 ft.
                   ft.
6         n/a      2,000 sq.  85 ft.    30 ft. 14 ft.     33 ft.    50 ft.
                   ft.
7         n/a      2,000 sq.  95 ft.    30 ft. 18 ft.     42 ft.    55 ft.
                   ft.
8         n/a      2,000 sq.  105 ft.   30 ft. 22 ft.     51 ft.    60 ft.
                   ft.
9         n/a      2,000 sq.  115 ft.   30 ft. 26 ft.     60 ft.    65 ft.
                   ft.
10        n/a      2,000 sq.  125 ft.   30 ft. 30 ft.     69 ft.    70 ft.
                   ft.
11        n/a      2,000 sq.  135 ft.   30 ft. 34 ft.     78 ft.    75 ft.
                   ft.
12        n/a      2,000 sq.  150 ft.   30 ft. 38 ft.     87 ft.    80 ft.
                   ft.
 
(Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
CHAPTER 14
R-7 MOBILE HOME/MANUFACTURED HOUSING DISTRICT
SECTION:
10-14-1: Permitted Principal Uses
10-14-1: PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES:
Foster family homes.
Mobile home parks.
Unrelated group family uses.
Any other similar uses deemed to be consistent. (Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
CHAPTER 15
O NEIGHBORHOOD OFFICE DISTRICT
SECTION:
10-15-1: General Description
10-15-2: Permitted Principal Uses
10-15-3: Permitted Accessory Uses
10-15-4: When Authorized By Board Of Zoning Appeals
10-15-5: Height Regulations
10-15-6: Lot Area And Yard Requirements
10-15-1: GENERAL DESCRIPTION:
The Office (O-1) District set forth herein is established to promote public
welfare, convenience, comfort, and orderly growth of the community. These
objectives include, but are not limited to the following:
   (A)   To provide means of transitional use of land between commercial and
residential uses.
   (B)   To promote, enhance, and conserve quality of the manmade environment.
   (C)   To protect the worth of property.
   (D)   To promote the most desirable use of land.
   (E)   To provide an appropriate district for functions separate from those
dealing in sales, repair, recreation, storage, processing, assembly, lodging,
and eating.
   (F)   To separate those functions which are obtrusive, quiet, do not
generate large quantities of waste, noise, odor or traffic, use heavy
machinery, require docking facilities or separate service entrances and which
do not make use of large illuminated displays or signs, from those which do.
   (G)   To provide a district of less intense use and to encourage lower
density use and retention of open space.
   (H)   To make use of areas which are not appropriate for other uses.
   (I)   To control the growth of other districts.
   (J)   To make less valuable land available for use other than residential.
(Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-15-2: PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES:
Church.
Community service offices.
Consultant offices.
Offices providing clerical administration.
Professional offices.
Schools and facilities for academic instruction.
Any other similar uses deemed to be consistent. (Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-15-3: PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES:
Accessory uses incidental to a permitted principal use other than a permanent
residence. (Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-15-4: WHEN AUTHORIZED BY BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS:
Any use or structure permitted and as regulated in chapters 8 and 9 of this
title, except as hereinafter modified, except that all dwellings shall be
located above the ground floor.
Any other similar uses deemed to be consistent by the Board of Zoning Appeals.
(Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-15-5: HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
No principal structure shall exceed three (3) stories or thirty five feet (35')
in height, and no accessory structure shall exceed one story or fifteen feet
(15') in height, except as provided in chapter 28, "Additional Requirements,
Exceptions And Modifications", of this title. (Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-15-6: LOT AREA AND YARD REQUIREMENTS:
The following minimum requirements shall be observed for both primary and
accessory buildings along with bufferyard requirements as described in chapter
28, "Additional Requirements, Exceptions And Modifications", of this title. No
accessory building shall be located in a front yard.
 
Number Of   Lot Area    Lot Width Front Yard  Side Yard Side Yard    Rear Yard
Stories                           Depth       Width     Sum Width    Depth
                                  25 ft. or
            10,000 sq.            same as
            ft. duplex            adj. R                None or same
            (E Moline             District    5 ft. or  as adj. R
All stories requires    50 ft.    (all R      same as   District     35 ft.
            5,000 sq.             Districts   adj. R    10 ft. or
            ft. per               have front  District  same as adj.
            family)               yard depth            R District
                                  of at least
                                  25 ft.)
 
(Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
CHAPTER 16
B-1 NEIGHBORHOOD BUSINESS DISTRICT
SECTION:
10-16-1: General Description
10-16-2: Permitted Principal Uses
10-16-3: Permitted Accessory Uses
10-16-4: When Authorized By Board Of Zoning Appeals
10-16-5: Height Regulations
10-16-6: Yard Requirements
10-16-7: Prohibited Uses
10-16-1: GENERAL DESCRIPTION:
The Neighborhood Business District is intended to permit the development of
retail sales and personal services required to meet the day-to-day needs of a
fully developed neighborhood. Stores, businesses and offices in this zone
should be convenient and useful to the majority of the neighborhood residents.
(Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-16-2: PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES:
Antique or custom furniture shop with incidental upholstery.
Appliance store.
Art gallery.
Bakery with baking limited to goods for retail sales on the premises.
Bank or other financial enterprise (without drive-through).
Barber or beauty shop.
Bicycle sales and service.
Book or stationery store.
Business or professional office.
Cafe or restaurant.
Camera or photographic supply shop.
Candy or ice cream store.
Catering within a building.
Consignment shop.
Costume rental.
Day care center meeting State and local permits with fenced play area.
Delicatessen.
Dress-making or millinery.
Drugstore.
Dwelling, above ground floor.
Fabric shop.
Floor covering store.
Florist shop.
Furniture store including incidental upholstering.
Gift shop.
Grocery store.
Hardware or paint store.
Health/recreational and physical training club.
Hobby shop.
Interior decorating shop including upholstery and drape making.
Jewelry store.
Locksmith.
Picture-making shop.
Private clinics for human care.
Public parks.
Restaurant, not drive-in or drive-thru.
Shoe store.
Travel agent office.
Variety store.
Women's ready to wear shop. (Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-16-3: PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES:
Other accessory uses customarily incidental to a permitted principal use,
including signs as regulated by City ordinance and State Statutes, whichever is
more restrictive. (Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-16-4: WHEN AUTHORIZED BY BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS:
Dwellings.
Public parking lot, public parking garage, customer and other accessory parking
area, subject to applicable provisions in this title.
Self-service laundry. (Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-16-5: HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
   (A)   No structure shall exceed three (3) stories or forty five feet (45')
in height, except as provided in the applicable provisions of this title. (Ord.
18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-16-6: YARD REQUIREMENTS:
The following minimum requirements shall be observed, subject to the additional
requirements, exceptions and modifications in the applicable provisions of this
title:
 
Minimum Front Yard Minimum Side Yard   Minimum Rear Yard    Other
Depth              Widths              Depth
                                       10' except where
                                       adjoining an R
                                       District, the same
                                       as R Districts. No
                                       rear yard depth
                                       requirement will be
                   None, except where  necessary where
                   adjoining an R      there is an existing
                   District, then same alley at the rear of In accordance with
None               as the least width  the lot or an alley  performance
                   required in that R  is to be constructed standards
                   District            providing said
                                       existing alley
                                       together with any
                                       addition thereto, or
                                       any newly
                                       constructed alley
                                       will have a width of
                                       not less than 22'
 
(Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-16-7: PROHIBITED USES:
Boarding and lodging houses.
Major auto repair, auto salvage and wrecking operations, and industrial metal
and waste salvage operations and junkyards.
Outdoor storage. (Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
CHAPTER 17
B-2 MEDIUM-DENSITY BUSINESS DISTRICT
SECTION:
10-17-1: General Description
10-17-2: Permitted Principal Uses
10-17-3: Permitted Accessory Uses
10-17-4: When Authorized By Board Of Zoning Appeals
10-17-5: Lot Requirements
10-17-6: Prohibited Uses
10-17-1: GENERAL DESCRIPTION:
The B-2 Business District is intended to provide for a more intensive variety
of retail goods and services compared to the B-1 District. (Ord. 18-08, 6-3-
2019)
10-17-2: PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES:
Any use or structure permitted and as regulated in the B-1 District, of this
title, except as hereinafter modified.
Bank (drive-through).
Bar.
Bus terminal.
Business or trade school.
Ceramic manufacturing (for sale on premises).
Church.
Commercial parking lot.
Custom rental.
Department store.
Drapery manufacturing (for sale on premises).
Dry cleaning shop.
Employment agency.
Funeral home.
Furniture upholstering shop only when operated in conjunction with a retail
business on the premises.
Greenhouses with no outdoor storage.
Hotel.
Meat market.
Medical and dental laboratories.
Meeting hall, club and fraternal organization.
Microbrewery.
Mirror and glazing shop, glass cutting.
Motel.
Motor fuel stations subject to the conditions stipulated in chapter 4, "General
Provisions", of this title.
Music and dancing studio.
Nursing home.
Pawn shop.
Pet shops.
Plumbing, electrical, heating, and air conditioning supply stores or show rooms
without outdoor sales or storage of materials and without repairs or
fabrication.
Printing, blue-printing, publishing, engraving or lithographing shop.
Public parking lot, public parking garage, customer and other accessory parking
area, subject to applicable provisions in this title.
Radio, television and CATV stations, not transmitting towers, subject to
applicable provisions in this title.
Restaurant (drive-through).
Self-service laundry.
Theater.
Veterinarian clinics (without indoor or outdoor kennels).
Any other use determined by the Board of Zoning Appeals to be of the same
general character as the foregoing permitted uses. (Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-17-3: PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES:
Assembly of small electrical appliances, instruments, small computers and other
electronic devices.
B-1 Neighborhood Business District accessory uses.
Other accessory uses customarily incidental to a B-2 permitted principal use,
including signs as regulated by City ordinance and State Statutes, whichever is
more restrictive. (Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-17-4: WHEN AUTHORIZED BY BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS:
Any use permitted on review in a B-1 District.
Dance hall, bar or cocktail lounge, nightclub and similar enterprises.
Transmission and receiving equipment for radio, television, cable, and
telephone.
Any other similar uses deemed to be consistent by the Board of Zoning Appeals.
(Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-17-5: LOT REQUIREMENTS:
The following minimum requirements shall be observed, subject to chapter 28,
"Additional Requirements, Exceptions And Modifications", of this title.
 
                   Minimum  Minimum Minimum   Minimum    Minimum
          Minimum  Lot Area Yard    Rear Yard Front Yard Side Yard Other
          Lot Area Per Lot  Width   Depth     Depth      Widths
                   Family
                                                         None,
                                                         except
                                    10 ft.               where
                                    except               adjoining
                                    where                an R      In
Other                               adjoining            District, accordance
permitted None     None     50 ft.  an R      30 ft      then same with
uses                                District,            as the    performance
                                    then same            least     standards
                                    as R                 width
                                    Districts            required
                                                         in that
                                                         district
 
(Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-17-6: PROHIBITED USES:
Major auto repair, auto salvage and wrecking operations, and industrial metal
and waste salvage operations and junkyards.
Outdoor storage. (Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
CHAPTER 18
B-3 GENERAL BUSINESS DISTRICT
SECTION:
10-18-1: General Description
10-18-2: Permitted Principal Uses
10-18-3: Permitted Accessory Uses
10-18-4: When Authorized By Board Of Zoning Appeals
10-18-5: Lot Requirements
10-18-6: Prohibited Uses
10-18-7: Special Uses
10-18-1: GENERAL DESCRIPTION:
The General Business District is intended to be a diverse and intensive
business, office, service and entertainment area. This district is one of high
traffic generation and is thus located where there can be a concentration of a
variety of commercial activities. (Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-18-2: PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES:
Any use or structure permitted and as regulated in the B-2 District of this
title, except as hereinafter modified.
Animal hospitals, veterinary clinics with kennels (both indoor and outdoor),
provided that buildings or enclosures in which animals are kept shall be at
least one hundred feet (100') from any lot in any R District.
Commercial baseball field, bath house or boat house, golf driving range,
skating rink, swimming pool or similar open air recreational uses and
facilities, but not within two hundred feet (200') of any R District.
Tourist homes.
Wholesale businesses.
The following uses provided no part of a building where any activity is
conducted shall have any openings other than stationary windows or required
fire exits within one hundred feet (100') of any R District:
Auto accessory stores with indoor storage.
Bottling of soft drinks or milk, or distribution stations.
Bowling alley, pool hall or billiard parlor, and similar enterprises.
Carpenter shop, sign painting shop, and similar establishments.
Any other use that is determined by the Board of Zoning Appeals to be of the
same general character as the foregoing permitted uses, but not including any
use which may become noxious or offensive in a B-3 District. (Ord. 18-08, 6-3-
2019)
10-18-3: PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES:
B-2 Business District accessory uses.
Other accessory uses customarily incidental to a B-3 permitted principal use,
including signs as regulated by City ordinance and State Statutes, whichever is
more restrictive. (Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-18-4: WHEN AUTHORIZED BY BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS:
Any use permitted on review in a B-2 District.
Auto repair, minor, when outdoor operations are enclosed by a solid eight foot
(8') fence.
Automobile display, hire, sales, including sales lot at least one hundred feet
(100') from Residentially zoned private property.
Commercial equipment storage facility (large storage units, recreational
vehicle storage, mobile agricultural vehicle or equipment storage) with
structures at least one hundred feet (100') from Residentially zoned private
property.
Any other similar uses deemed to be consistent by the Board of Zoning Appeals.
(Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-18-5: LOT REQUIREMENTS:
The following minimum requirements shall be observed, subject to chapter 28,
"Additional Requirements, Exceptions And Modifications", of this title.
 
                   Minimum            Minimum Minimum   Minimum
          Minimum  Lot Area Minimum   Front   Side Yard Rear Yard Other
          Lot Area Per      Lot Width Yard    Width     Depth
                   Family             Depth
                                              None,
                                              except    10 ft.
                                              adjoining except
                                              an R      where     In
Other                                         District  adjoining accordance
permitted None     None     50 ft.    None    then same an R      with
uses                                          as the    District, performance
                                              least     then same standards
                                              required  as R
                                              in that R District
                                              District
 
(Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-18-6: PROHIBITED USES:
Major auto repair, auto salvage and wrecking operations, and industrial metal
and waste salvage operations and junkyards.
Outdoor storage. (Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-18-7: SPECIAL USES:
   (A)   A Special Use as designated in Chapter 23 may be permitted only after
a public hearing before the Plan Commission, and only upon presentation of
evidence by the applicant that the proposed use:
      1.   Will be located in an area which will have minimum impact upon
neighboring properties; and
      2.   Will be located in an area without the creation of nuisances or
hazards to the public health or safety; and
      3.   Such operation complies with all other existing laws, ordinances,
and rules properly promulgated by any Federal, State or local governmental
entity having jurisdiction over the subject premises.
   (B)   Additionally, all special uses must be approved by ordinance and
adopted by the City Council that are property brought before the Corporate
Authorities pursuant to formal application and duly approved.
   (C)   Proposed uses requiring a special use permit include:
Adult Use Cannabis Craft Grower.
Adult Use Cannabis Cultivation Center.
Adult Use Cannabis Dispensing Organization.
Adult Use Cannabis Infuser Organization.
Adult Use Transporting Organization.
Adult Use Processing Organization. (Ord. 19-28, 10-212019)
CHAPTER 19
B-4 HIGHWAY/INTENSIVE BUSINESS DISTRICT
SECTION:
10-19-1: Permitted Principal Uses
10-19-2: Permitted Accessory Uses
10-19-3: When Authorized By Board Of Zoning Appeals
10-19-4: Lot Area And Yard Requirements
10-19-5: Special Uses
10-19-1: PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES:
Any use permitted in a B-3 District, but not dwellings.
Agricultural implement sales and services with building(s) and outdoor storage
at least one hundred feet (100') from Residentially zoned private property.
Auto repair, major, with building(s) and outdoor storage at least one hundred
feet (100') from Residentially zoned private property.
Boat sales with building(s) and outdoor storage at least one hundred feet
(100') from Residentially zoned private property.
Building material sales yards, if enclosed on all sides by an eight foot (8')
high fence and at least one hundred feet (100') from Residentially zoned
private property.
Car wash.
Contractors offices and shops within building.
Feed and seed store, wholesale.
Greenhouses (with outside storage).
Truck, trailer, travel trailer, and garden implement establishments for
display, hire, sales, including sales lot at least one hundred feet (100') from
Residentially zoned private property.
Any other similar uses deemed to be consistent. (Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-19-2: PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES:
B-3 General Business District accessory uses.
Other accessory uses customarily incidental to a B-4 permitted principal use,
including signs as regulated by City ordinance and State Statutes, whichever is
more restrictive. (Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-19-3: WHEN AUTHORIZED BY BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS:
Any uses permitted on review in a B-3 District.
Auditorium.
Commercial equipment storage facility (large storage units, recreational
vehicle storage, mobile agricultural vehicle or equipment storage) with
structures at least one hundred feet (100') from Residentially zoned private
property.
Mini-warehousing with structures at least one hundred feet (100') from
Residentially zoned private property. (Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-19-4: LOT AREA AND YARD REQUIREMENTS:
The following minimum requirements shall be observed for both primary and
accessory buildings along with bufferyard requirements subject to chapter 28,
"Additional Requirements, Exceptions And Modifications", of this title. No
accessory building shall be located in a front yard.
 
Height Front Yard        Side Yard        Rear Yard         Other
       20 ft. or same as None except same 10 ft. or same as In accordance with
45 ft. adjacent R        as adjacent R    adjacent R        performance
       District          District         District          standards
 
(Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-19-5: SPECIAL USES:
   (A)   A Special Use as designated in Chapter 23 may be permitted only after
a public hearing before the Plan Commission, and only upon presentation of
evidence by the applicant that the proposed use:
      1.   Will be located in an area which will have minimum impact upon
neighboring properties: and
      2.   Will be located in an area without the creation of nuisances or
hazards to the public health or safety; and
      3.   Such operation complies with all other existing laws, ordinances,
and rules properly promulgated by any Federal. State or local governmental
entity having jurisdiction over the subject premises.
   (B)   Additionally, all special uses must be approved by ordinance and
adopted by the City Council that are property brought before the Corporate
Authorities pursuant to formal application and duly approved.
   (C)   Proposed uses requiring a special use permit include:
Adult Use Cannabis Craft Grower.
Adult Use Cannabis Cultivation Center.
Adult Use Cannabis Dispensing Organization.
Adult Use Cannabis Infuser Organization.
Adult Use Transporting Organization.
Adult Use Processing Organization. (Ord. 19-28, 10-21-2019)
CHAPTER 20
I-1 LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
10-20-1: General Description
10-20-2: Permitted Principal Uses
10-20-3: Permitted Accessory Uses
10-20-4: Prohibited Uses
10-20-5: Yard Requirements
10-20-6: Special Uses
10-20-1: GENERAL DESCRIPTION:
The Light Industrial District is intended to provide for the development of
most types of industry with regulations designed to protect adjacent
properties. (Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-20-2: PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES:
Any use or structure permitted outright or when authorized by the Board of
Zoning Appeals in the B-3 and B-4 Districts, but not in the B-1 or B-
2 District, except as hereinafter modified.
The following uses if located not less than one hundred feet (100') from any R
District provided that any such operations are enclosed by fence not less than
six feet (6') in height:
Builder's or contractor's plant or storage yard.
Building material sales and storage yard, including concrete mixing.
Lumber yard, including millwork.
Open yard for storage and sale of feed or fuel.
The following uses provided not part of a building occupied by such uses shall
have any openings other than stationary windows or required fire exits within
one hundred feet (100') of any R District:
Automobile repair, major.
Blacksmith, welding or other metalworking or machine shop.
Laboratory: experimental, film or testing.
Machine repair.
Machinery manufacturing.
Perfume manufacturing.
Railroad freight stations, trucking or motor freight terminals.
The manufacture, compounding, processing, assembling, packaging or treatment of
such merchandise, products, articles, devices, or raw materials as:
Apparel.
Bakery goods.
Brewery.
Candy.
Canvas.
Cellophane.
Cloth.
Cosmetics.
Electric and neon signs.
Fiber.
Food products.
Fur.
Glass.
Leather.
Paper.
Pharmaceuticals.
Phonographs.
Plastics.
Precious or semiprecious metals or stone.
Public parks.
Radio and television sets.
Refrigerators and stoves.
Rubber.
Textiles.
Toiletries.
Wool.
Yarn.
Any other use that is determined by the Board of Zoning Appeals to be of the
same general character as the foregoing permitted uses, but not including any
use which may become noxious or offensive in an I-1 District.
Shall be permitted without exception:
Solar farms. (Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-20-3: PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES:
B-4 Business District accessory uses.
Offices.
Other accessory uses customarily incidental to a permitted principal use,
including signs as regulated by City ordinance and State Statutes, whichever is
more restrictive. (Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-20-4: PROHIBITED USES:
Auto salvage and wrecking operations, industrial metal and waste salvage
operations and junkyards.
Disposal or storage of toxic waste.
Dwellings, except for watchman or caretaker on the premises.
Schools, hospitals, clinics and other institutions for human care except when
incidental to a permitted principal use. (Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-20-5: YARD REQUIREMENTS:
The following minimum requirements shall be observed, subject to the additional
requirements, exceptions and modifications in chapter 28, "Additional
Requirements, Exceptions And Modifications", of this title:
 
Height Of       Minimum Front Minimum Side    Minimum Rear     Other
Permitted Uses  Yard Depth    Yard Width      Yard Depth
3 stories or 50               Equal to        Height of        In accordance
ft. in height   20 ft.        building height building but not with performance
                                              less than 20 ft. standards
 
(Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-20-6: SPECIAL USES:
   (A)   A special use as designated above may be permitted only after a public
hearing before the Plan Commission, and only upon the presentation of evidence
by the applicant that the proposed use:
      1.   Will be located in an area which will have minimum impact upon
neighboring properties; and
      2.   Will be located in an area without the creation of nuisances or
hazards to the public health or safety; and
      3.   Such operation complies with all other existing laws, ordinances and
rules properly promulgated by any Federal, State or local governmental entity
having jurisdiction over the subject premises.
   (B)   Additionally, all special uses must be approved by ordinance and
adopted by the City Council that are properly brought before the Corporate
Authorities pursuant to formal application and duly approved.
   (C)   Proposed uses requiring a special use permit include:
Adult Use Cannabis Craft Grower.
Adult Use Cannabis Cultivation Center.
Adult Use Cannabis Dispensing Organization.
Adult Use Cannabis Infuser Organization.
Adult Use Transporting Organization.
Adult Use Processing Organization.
Excavation and extraction of sand, gravel, dirt, topsoil and other resources.
Landfill, recycling and activities directly related thereto.
Prison or correctional center. (Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019; amd. Ord. 19-28, 10-21-
2019)
CHAPTER 21
I-2 GENERAL INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
10-21-1: General Description
10-21-2: Permitted Principal Uses
10-21-3: Permitted Accessory Uses
10-21-4: Prohibited Uses
10-21-5: Yard Requirements
10-21-6: Special Uses
10-21-7: When Authorized By Board Of Zoning Appeals
10-21-1: GENERAL DESCRIPTION:
The General Industrial District is intended to permit uses for large scale
facilities not otherwise permitted which have potential significant external
impacts to adjacent properties. (Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-21-2: PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES:
Any use or structure permitted and as regulated in the I-1 District, except as
hereinafter modified.
Railroad yards.
   (A)   The following uses if located not less than four hundred feet (400')
from any R District and not less than two hundred feet (200') from any other
district except an I-1 District, and provided that any such operations are one
thousand feet (1,000') from any State or Federal highway, and provided all
operations are conducted within an area enclosed on all sides with a solid
masonry wall not less than twelve feet (12') high, and which wall shall be
maintained to the satisfaction of the building inspector. No pile of salvage,
scrap or other material shall be higher than twelve feet (12').
      Automobile salvage and wrecking operations.
      Industrial metal and waste salvage operations and junkyards.
   (B)   The following uses if located not less than four hundred feet (400')
from any R District and not less than two hundred feet (200') from any other
district except an I-1 District, and provided no part of a building occupied by
such uses shall have any openings, other than stationary windows or required
fire exits.
      Foundry, casting lightweight nonferrous metals of electric foundry not
causing noxious fumes or odors.
      Planing mill and veneer manufacturing.
   (C)   The following uses if located not less than four hundred feet (400')
from any R District and not less than two hundred feet (200') from any other
district except an I-1 District:
      Acetylene manufacturing in excess of fifteen (15) pounds pressure per
square inch.
      Acid manufacture.
      Aircraft, assembly and testing.
      Ammonia, chlorine or bleaching powder manufacture.
      Animal black, lampblack, boneblack or graphite manufacture.
      Asbestos manufacturing.
      Asphalt or asphalt products manufacture.
      Asphaltic concrete, and similar construction debris.
      Automobile, tractor, trailer, farm implement assembly or manufacturing.
      Blast furnaces, steel works or rolling mills.
      Bleaching, cleaning and dyeing plant.
      Boiler shops, machine shops, structural steel fabricating shops, railway
car or locomotive.
      Box, crate, and pallet manufacture.
      Cans and other types of containers.
      Celluloid or pyroxyline manufacturing, or explosive or inflammable
celluloid or pyroxyline products manufacturing or storage.
      Cement, lime, gypsum or plaster of Paris manufacture.
      Concrete products, including manufacture and sale of the following:
concrete block, ready mix.
      Copperage works.
      Creosote manufacture or treatment.
      Dextrine, starch of glucose manufacturing.
      Disinfectant, insecticide or poison manufacturing.
      Distillation of coal, petroleum, grain, wood or bones, except in the
manufacture of gas.
      Dye and dyestuff manufacture.
      Emery cloth or sandpaper manufacturing.
      Enamelling, lacquering or japanning.
      Explosives manufacture or storage except for small arms ammunition.
      Felt manufacturing.
      Fertilizer, compost manufacture or storage.
      Fish oil manufacture or refining.
      Flammable liquids storage not to exceed a total of twenty five thousand
(25,000) gallons.
      Flour or grain mill.
      Forge or foundry works.
      Gas generation or storage for illumination or heating.
      Gelatin, vegetable and animal manufacture.
      Grain drying or poultry feed manufacturing, from refuse, mash or grain.
      Grain elevators.
      Hair or hair products manufacturing.
      Hemp products manufacture.
      Lime or lime products manufacturing.
      Linoleum, oil cloth or oiled goods manufacturing.
      Match manufacturing.
      Meatpacking and processing including storage for wholesale, but not open
air stockyards.
      Metal stamping and extrusion.
      Mixed concrete, precast concrete and other products made from the same
materials.
      Oil, paint, shellac, turpentine, varnish or enamel manufacturing.
      Paper and pulp manufacturing.
      Petroleum or flammable liquids production, refining and storage
aboveground.
      Pickle, sauerkraut and sausage manufacturing.
      Pipe and tube manufacturing.
      Plaster manufacturing.
      Poultry slaughterhouse, including packing and storage for wholesale.
      Printing ink manufacturing.
      Railroad yards.
      Recycling drop off station.
      Recycling of aggregate materials including the recycling of Portland
cement concrete.
      Rock crushing.
      Rubber, caoutchouc or guttapercha manufacturing and treatment from crude
or scrap material or the manufacture of balata.
      Sandblasting or cutting.
      Sawmill, the manufacture of excelsior, wood fiber or sawdust products.
      Screw or bolt manufacturing.
      Sewer disposal plant or incinerator or sanitary landfill operation except
by the Municipality.
      Shoe polish or stove polish manufacturing.
      Shops, including repair, metalworking shops.
      Smelting of ferrous or nonferrous ores.
      Soap manufacturing.
      Steam power plant, except where accessory to a permitted principal use.
      Stone and monument works employing power drive tools.
      Storage, curing or tanning of raw, green or salted hides or skins when
refrigerated storage is provided.
      Structural steel fabrication.
      Sugar refining.
      Sulphurous, sulfuric, nitric, picric, carbolic or hydrochloric or other
corrosive acid manufacture.
      Tar distillation or manufacturing.
      Tar or asphalt or waterproofing manufacturing.
      Tool manufacturing and repair.
      Vinegar manufacturing.
      Wire or rod drawing nut.
      Yeast manufacturing.
      Any other use which, in the opinion of the Board of Zoning Appeals is of
similar character to those specified above.
   (D)   The following uses if located not less than one thousand feet (1,000')
of the following specified uses or zones:
      1.   From any Residential, Commercial and/or Conservation Zone.
      2.   From any public or private school or licensed day care center.
      3.   From any church or religious center.
      4.   From any public park or a City designated pedestrian/bike path.
   To prevent such uses from having an adverse effect upon the adjacent areas
in an I-2 District, not more than two (2) such uses shall be established within
one thousand feet (1,000') of each other, within said I-2 District.
   Adult regulated uses (see chapter 4, "General Provisions", of this title).
   (E)   Shall be permitted without exception:
      Solar farm. (Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-21-3: PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES:
Permitted accessory uses in an I-1 District.
Other necessary uses customarily incidental to a permitted principal use,
including signs as regulated by City ordinance and State Statutes, whichever is
more restrictive. (Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-21-4: PROHIBITED USES:
Disposal or storage of toxic waste.
Dwellings, except for watchman or caretaker on the premises.
Schools, hospitals, clinics and other institutions for human care except when
incidental to a permitted principal use. (Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-21-5: YARD REQUIREMENTS:
The following minimum requirements shall be observed, subject to chapter 28,
"Additional Requirements, Exceptions And Modifications", of this title:
 
Height Of      Minimum Front Minimum Side    Minimum Rear Yard Other
Permitted Uses Yard Depth    Yard Widths     Depth
1 to 3 stories               Equal to        Height of         In accordance
or 50 ft.      20 ft.        building height building but not  with performance
                                             less than 30 ft.  standards
Greater than 3               Equal to        Height of         In accordance
stories or 50  30 ft.        building height building but not  with performance
ft.                                          less than 30 ft.  standards
 
(Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-21-6: SPECIAL USES:
   (A)   A special use may be permitted only after a public hearing before the
Plan Commission, and only upon the presentation of evidence by the applicant
that the proposed use:
      1.   Will be located in an area which will have minimum impact upon
neighboring properties; and
      2.   Will be located in an area without the creation of nuisances or
hazards to the public health or safety; and
      3.   Such operation complies with all other existing laws, ordinances and
rules properly promulgated by any Federal, State or local governmental entity
having jurisdiction over the subject premises.
   (B)   Proposed uses requiring a special use permit include:
A limestone quarry that would consist of land that would be quarried for the
extraction of limestone and other related and similar stone products, and all
other normal and routine activities associated with such a quarry.
   (C)   Such other special uses as approved by ordinance and adopted by the
City Council that are properly brought before the Corporate Authorities
pursuant to formal application and duly approved. Such other special uses
include:
Adult Use Cannabis Craft Grower.
Adult Use Cannabis Cultivation Center.
Adult Use Cannabis Dispensing Organization.
Adult Use Cannabis Infuser Organization.
Adult Use Transporting Organization.
Adult Use Processing Organization.
Excavation and extraction of sand, gravel, dirt, topsoil and other resources.
Landfill, recycling and activities directly related thereto.
Mineral extraction.
Prison or correctional center. (Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019; amd. Ord. 19-28, 10-21-
2019)
10-21-7: WHEN AUTHORIZED BY BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS:
An establishment which has the potential to be dangerous or extremely
obnoxious. Included are those in which explosives are stored, petroleum is
refined, natural and liquid gas and other petroleum derivatives are stored and/
or distributed in bulk, radioactive materials are compounded, pesticides and
certain acids are manufactured, and hazardous waste is treated or stored as the
establishment's principal activity.
Aviation facilities, private and public.
Shooting range.
Any other similar uses deemed to be consistent by the Board of Zoning Appeals.
(Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
CHAPTER 22
U-1 UNIVERSITY/COLLEGE DISTRICT
SECTION:
10-22-1: General Description
10-22-2: Permitted Principal Uses
10-22-3: Permitted Accessory Uses
10-22-4: When Authorized By Board Of Zoning Appeals
10-22-5: Restrictions
10-22-6: Height Regulations
10-22-1: GENERAL DESCRIPTION:
This district is established to provide an area for colleges, universities,
seminaries and other such institutions of higher education. The intent of the
district is to establish an area in which institutions of higher education may
operate compatibly with surrounding residential and business areas. (Ord. 18-
08, 6-3-2019)
10-22-2: PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES:
Colleges, universities, seminaries and other such institutions of higher
education consisting of any number of educational, residential (apartment/
dormitories, dormitories), cultural and recreational buildings and parking
areas with all associated buildings located not less than thirty feet (30')
from any Residentially zoned private property or one or two family used lot.
Community residence with appropriate permits and at least one thousand feet
(1,000') from any other community residence.
Dwellings, one and two family.
Essential services and Municipal, administrative or public services, buildings
or properties excluding warehouses, storage yards and garages with all
associated buildings at least twenty feet (20') from Residentially zoned
private property.
Foster family homes.
Parochial buildings such as schools, churches, and parish buildings, public
libraries and public safety and Municipal government buildings located not less
than twenty feet (20') from any Residentially zoned private property.
Unrelated group homes.
Any other similar uses deemed to be consistent. (Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-22-3: PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES:
Accessory uses permitted in an R-1 District.
Other uses incidental to a permitted use. (Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-22-4: WHEN AUTHORIZED BY BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS:
Boarding and lodging house.
Fraternities and sororities.
Hospitals, sanitariums and nursing homes with any associated building at least
fifty feet (50') from any Residentially zoned private property.
Any other similar use deemed to be consistent by the Board of Zoning Appeals.
(Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-22-5: RESTRICTIONS:
   (A)   All buildings affiliated with institutions of higher education shall
be not less than thirty feet (30') from Residentially zoned lots or existing
one and two family used lots.
   (B)   Private school buildings and public buildings shall be not less than
twenty feet (20') from the side lot line in an R District.
   (C)   Small residential care homes shall be one thousand feet (1,000') from
any other community residence, shall be State or locally licensed and shall
have a certificate of occupancy from the building official. (Ord. 18-08, 6-3-
2019)
10-22-6: HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
   (A)   No structure shall exceed thirty five feet (35') for the principal
structure and fifteen feet (15') for an accessory structure.
   (B)   To places of public assembly such as churches, schools and other
permitted public and semi-public buildings not to exceed six (6) stories or
seventy five feet (75'), provided that for each foot by which the height of
such building exceeds the maximum height otherwise permitted in the district,
its side and rear yards shall be increased in width or depth by an additional
foot over the side and rear yards required for the highest building otherwise
permitted in the district. (Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
CHAPTER 23
SPECIAL USES
SECTION:
10-23-1: General Description
10-23-2: Application For A Special Use
10-23-1: GENERAL DESCRIPTION:
This procedure is established to provide a special use permit for those areas
of the City that are zoned, but in which unusual circumstances prevail, where
it would be in the best interest of the safety, health and welfare of the
residents of a zoned district that a special use permit be issued rather than a
change of zoning be granted.
Such "special uses" shall fall into two (2) categories:
   (A)   Uses publicly operated or traditionally affected with a public
interest; and
   (B)   Uses entirely private in character but of such an unusual nature that
their operation may give rise to unique problems with respect to their impact
upon neighboring property or public facilities. (Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-23-2: APPLICATION FOR A SPECIAL USE:
An application for a special use permit may be filed in any case where the Plan
Commission has denied rezoning, but has recommended to the applicant that he
file an application for a special use permit. In that event, the applicant
shall file an application for such a permit with the zoning official on a form
he shall prescribe. The application shall be accompanied by such plans and/or
data prescribed by the Plan Commission and shall include a statement in writing
by the applicant and adequate evidence showing that the proposed special use
will conform to the standards set forth in subsection (C) of this section. The
Plan Commission may on its own motion initiate a special use proceeding, and if
initiated, the applicant shall pay a filing fee of one hundred dollars
($100.00).
   (A)   Hearing Upon Application: Upon receipt in proper form of the
application and statement referred to above, the Plan Commission shall hold a
public hearing on the proposed special use. The hearing shall be conducted and
a record of such proceedings shall be preserved in such a manner as the Plan
Commission, by rule, prescribes.
   (B)   Notice Of Hearing: The commission shall fix a reasonable time for the
hearing. It shall give at least fifteen (15) nor more than thirty (30) days'
notice of the time and place of such hearing by insertion in a daily newspaper
published in East Moline and shall also give notice delivered personally or by
mail at least five (5) days before the time fixed for such hearing to the
applicant or appellant and to the zoning official, and to the respective owners
of record of property adjoining or adjacent to the premises in question, and to
any property owners whose property is situated within two hundred fifty feet
(250') of the subject site, and to any other persons or entities required by
law to be notified and to all persons or entities entitled to object to such
special uses. Any party may appear at such hearing in person or by agent or by
attorney. The commission shall decide the application or appeal within a
reasonable time.
   (C)   Standards: No special use shall be recommended for approval by the
Plan Commission unless such commission shall find:
      1.   That the granting of a special use will not be detrimental to or
endanger the public health, safety, or general welfare;
      2.   That the special use will not be injurious to the use and enjoyment
of other property in the immediate vicinity for the purpose already permitted,
not substantially diminish and impair property values within the neighborhood;
      3.   That the establishment of the special use will not impede the normal
and orderly development and improvement of the surrounding property for uses
permitted in the district;
      4.   That adequate utilities, access roads, drainage and/or other
necessary facilities have been or are being provided;
      5.   That adequate measures have been or will be taken to provide ingress
and egress so designed as to minimize traffic congestion in the public streets;
      6.   Restrictions for the use should be consistent with the district in
which the use would normally be located except as may be modified by the Plan
Commission; and
      7.   That the special use shall, in all other respects, conform to the
applicable regulations of the district in which it is located, except as such
regulations may in each instance be modified by the Plan Commission.
   (D)   Conditions And Safeguards: Prior to the granting of any special use,
the Plan Commission shall stipulate such conditions and restrictions upon the
establishment, location, construction, maintenance and operation of the special
use as deemed necessary for the protection of the public interest and to secure
compliance with the standards specified in the subsection above. In all cases
in which special uses are granted, the Plan Commission shall require such
evidence and guarantees as it may deem necessary as proof that the conditions
stipulated in connection therewith are being complied with.
   (E)   General Regulation: The Plan Commission shall not authorize a special
use permit unless the Plan Commission specifically finds that the condition or
situation of the special piece of property for which the special use is sought
is not of so typical or recurrent a nature as to make reasonably practicable
the formulation of a general regulation, under an amendment to this title, for
such conditions or stipulations.
   (F)   Time Frame Of Permit: Said special use permit, when granted, shall be
in full force and effect only as long as the applicant of the property affected
retains ownership of said property.
   (G)   Effect Of A Denial Of A Special Use: No application for a special use
that has been denied wholly or in part by the Plan Commission shall be
resubmitted for a period of one year from the date of said order of denial,
except on the grounds of new evidence or proof of change of conditions found to
be valid by the City Planner.
   (H)   Period During Which The Special Use Shall Commence: The permit for the
construction or operation of the special use shall be issued within one year
after the special use is granted by the Plan Commission. The property owner
shall then complete construction or otherwise commence operation of the special
use within a reasonable time thereafter. If the special use has not been
established within said period, the property owner may submit a request for
extension of the special use to the Plan Commission, which the Plan Commission
may grant upon reasonable terms. If the property owner fails to commence
operation of the special use in the manner set forth above, or obtain an
extension of the special use from the Plan Commission, the special use shall be
null and void.
      1.   Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this subsection, if the
special use applicant makes a specific request in the original application for
special use to have the "one year startup provision" set forth above modified
or waived, then the Plan Commission shall have the power when making its final
decision on the special use to lengthen, shorten, or waive the "one year
startup requirement" for the requested special use.
   (I)   Action By The City Council: If a special use permit requires City
Council approval, as is the case in certain industrial uses that involve Board
of Appeal approval, then the City Council shall not act upon a proposed special
use until the Council has received a written report and recommendation from the
Plan Commission on the proposed special use.
      1.   The concurring vote of five (5) members of the Plan Commission
consisting of nine (9) members is necessary to recommend to the City Council to
approve the petition.
      2.   The City Council may by adoption of an ordinance grant or deny an
application for a special use. The proposed special use ordinance shall not be
approved by the Corporate Authorities, except by a favorable majority vote of
all Alderman of the City Council then holding office. (Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
CHAPTER 24
OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING
SECTION:
10-24-1: Purpose
10-24-2: General Requirements
10-24-3: Units Of Measure
10-24-4: Schedule
10-24-5: Development Standards
10-24-6: Exceptions
10-24-7: Establishment Of Off-Street Parking
10-24-8: Parking, Storage Or Use Of Automobiles, Recreational Vehicle, Or
Mobile Agricultural Machinery Or Equipment
10-24-9: Portable Outdoor Storage Unit - Description
10-24-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to alleviate or prevent congestion of the public
streets and promote the safety and welfare of the public by establishing
minimum requirements for the off-street parking and loading and unloading of
motor vehicles in accordance with the use of the property. (Ord. 18-08, 6-3-
2019)
10-24-2: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
   (A)   An application for a building permit for a new or enlarged building,
structure or use shall include a plot plan, drawn to scale and fully
dimensioned showing any parking or loading facilities to be provided in
compliance with the requirements of this title.
   (B)   In all districts, in connection with every building or part thereof
hereafter erected, having a gross floor area of ten thousand (10,000) square
feet or more, which is to be occupied by uses requiring the receipt or
distribution by vehicles of materials and merchandise, there shall be provided
and maintained on the same premises with such building at least one off-street
loading space accessible from any alley, easement of access, or when there is
no such alley or easement of access from a street, plus one additional such
loading space for each two thousand (2,000) square feet or major fraction
thereof of gross floor area so used in excess of twenty thousand (20,000)
square feet. Such space may occupy all or any part of any required rear yard or
upon authorization from the appropriate board of review, any part of any other
yard or court space.
   (C)   In all districts, except B-2, an off-street parking area in the open
or in a garage, shall be provided in connection with the uses set forth herein
after and to the extent indicated therewith, in addition to the above required
loading and unloading spaces. Such areas in the case of R Districts and for
dwellings in other districts, shall be on the premises intended to be served;
and in the case of other districts, and in connection with uses other than
property within one hundred feet (100') of any part of said premises and in the
same or less restricted district.
   (D)   Off street parking facilities accessory to residential use and
developed in any Residential District in accordance with the requirements of
this section shall be used solely for the parking of passenger vehicles owned
and occupied. (Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-24-3: UNITS OF MEASURE:
   (A)   Floor area as employed in this chapter in the case of office,
merchandising or service types of use shall mean the gross floor area of a
building or structure used or intended to be used for service to the public as
customers, patrons, clients, patients, or tenants, including areas occupied by
fixtures and equipment used for display or sale of merchandise. Floor area for
the purposes of this section shall not include any area used for storage
accessory to the principal use, incidental repairs, processing or packaging of
merchandise, show windows, incidental management offices, restrooms, utilities
and dressing/fitting rooms.
   (B)   Parking spaces shall not be less than eight and one-half feet (81/2')
wide and nineteen feet (19') long or not less than one hundred sixty (160)
square feet in area exclusive of access drives or aisles.
   (C)   Loading spaces shall not be less than ten feet (10') wide, fifty feet
(50') in length and fourteen feet (14') in height, exclusive of access and
turning areas. (Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-24-4: SCHEDULE:
Parking requirements shall be as follows, reference to maximum number of
patrons shall be based on the figure provided by Fire Code for a given
facility:
Athletic field                          5 parking spaces per acre
                                        1 parking space for every 4 seats or 1
Auditorium/theater                      parking space for every 150 square feet
                                        plus 1 for every 2 employees during a
                                        maximum shift
                                        2 parking spaces per pump, plus 2 per
Auto gas and sales                      service bay plus 1 per employee during
                                        a maximum shift
Auto repair                             3 per bay, plus 1 per employee during a
                                        maximum shift
                                        4 parking spaces per 1,000 square feet,
Banks and business offices              plus drive through requirements if
                                        applicable
Barber/beauty shop styling and tanning  2 parking spaces per personal grooming
salons                                  station, plus 1 for every 2 employees
                                        during a maximum shift
Bowling alleys                          6 parking spaces per alley plus bar and
                                        restaurant requirements, if applicable
Car wash                                6 parking spaces per bay
                                        1 parking space for every 2 residents,
Care homes                              plus 1 for each employee during a
                                        maximum shift
Churches                                1 parking space for every 4 sanctuary
                                        seats
Community center                        1 parking space for every 3 maximum
                                        patrons
                                        1 parking space for every 2 employees
Day care centers                        during a maximum shift, plus 1 for
                                        every 10 children served plus 1 per
                                        institutional vehicle
                                        6 stacking spaces for each drive
Drive through facility                  through station or automatic teller
                                        machine, plus appropriate employee
                                        parking for principal use
                                        1 parking space for every 2 employees
Dry cleaning                            during a maximum shift, plus 4 for
                                        patrons
Durable goods sales (appliances,        1 parking space per 500 square feet,
furniture, etc.)                        plus 1 per employee during a maximum
                                        shift
                                        3 parking spaces for every 4 units,
Elderly housing facility                plus 1 per employee during a maximum
                                        shift
Fraternities, sororities and boarding   1 parking space per lodging resident,
houses                                  plus 1 per employee during a maximum
                                        shift
                                        1 parking space per 50 square feet of
Funeral home                            public access area, plus 1 per business
                                        vehicle
Group home/halfway house/boarding house 1 parking space per bedroom
Health recreation and physical training 5 parking spaces per 1,000 square feet,
facility                                plus additional parking for outdoor
                                        accessory use if applicable
                                        1 parking space per overnight bed, plus
                                        1 per affiliated doctor plus 1 per
Hospital                                employee during a maximum shift, plus 6
                                        per 1,000 square feet devoted to
                                        outpatient service
Laundromats                             1 parking space for every 3 washers
                                        3 parking spaces for every 4 employees
Manufacturing plants and testing labs   during a maximum shift, plus 1 per
                                        business vehicle plus 4 per 1,000
                                        square feet devoted to office space
Medical, dental or veterinary office or 2 parking spaces per treatment room,
clinic                                  plus 1 per employee during a maximum
                                        shift
Mobile home park                        1 parking space and 1 for every 4 units
                                        1 parking space per unit, plus 1 for
Motel, hotel or apartment hotel         every 2 employees during a maximum
                                        shift plus banquet, restaurant and/or
                                        bar requirements if applicable
                                        1 parking space per overnight bed, plus
Nursing home                            1 per affiliated doctor plus 1 per
                                        employee during a maximum shift
                                        5 parking spaces per acre, plus
Park, community                         requirements for major facilities as
                                        noted elsewhere in this section if
                                        applicable
Park, neighborhood                      5 parking spaces per first 2 acres,
                                        plus 1 for each additional acre
                                        2 parking spaces per unit and for six-
Residences                              plexes or greater; guest parking equal
                                        to 10 percent of the total dwelling
                                        units
                                        1 parking space for every 75 square
                                        feet of public floor area or for each 2
Restaurants, taverns, or night clubs    persons allowed by Fire Code, whichever
                                        is greater, plus drive through
                                        requirements if applicable
Retail, freestanding and shopping       5 parking spaces per 1,000 square feet
centers                                 gross floor area, and 1 for every 2
                                        employees on a maximum shift
                                        1 parking space per employee, plus 1
Schools, elementary and junior high     per classroom plus 1 per institutional
                                        vehicle
                                        1 parking space per employee, plus 1
Schools, high school                    for every 4 students plus 1 per
                                        institutional vehicle
Sports stadium, outdoor                 1 parking space for every 3 maximum
                                        patrons, plus parking for buses
Swimming pool                           1 parking space for every 3 maximum
                                        patrons
                                        2 parking spaces per 1,000 square feet
                                        for first 10,000 square feet, plus 1
Wholesale and warehouse                 per 2,000 square feet for the remaining
                                        space with office area parking
                                        calculated separately at 4 per 1,000
                                        square feet
 
(Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-24-5: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
   (A)   Off street accessory parking areas shall be of usable shape and shall
be improved in accordance with requirements of the City Engineer with asphalt
cement concrete, Portland cement concrete or alternate equivalent materials
acceptable to the City Engineer, and so graded and drained as to dispose of all
surface water accumulation within the area. Any lighting used to illuminate
such parking shall be so arranged as to reflect the light away from adjoining
premises in any R District and in accordance with illumination standards
further described in this title.
   (B)   Parking lot layout shall be designed so the maneuvering requirements
are accomplished without backing into adjacent public streets. Stack parking
shall not be allowed to meet parking requirements for uses other than one and
two family uses.
   (C)   All motor vehicles and trailers in Residential Zoning Districts must
be parked on an improved surface in accordance with requirements of the City.
Outside storage of inoperable or unlicensed vehicles and vehicle parts is
prohibited in Residential Zoning Districts. (Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-24-6: EXCEPTIONS:
   (A)   The Board of Appeals may, on appeal, authorize a modification,
reduction or waiver of the foregoing requirements. Such modification, reduction
or waiver shall be justified by the particular nature of the use, or other
exception, situation or condition. (Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-24-7: ESTABLISHMENT OF OFF-STREET PARKING:
   (A)   The City Plan Commission, in consultation with other City departments
and agencies concerned, shall make studies as found advisable of various areas
in the City for the purpose of determining the areas within which there is need
for the establishment of off-street parking facilities to be provided by the
City and to be financed wholly, or in part, by a special assessment district or
by other means. Where such need is found, the Plan Commission shall report its
recommendation for the acquisition of such off-street parking facilities to the
City Council. This report shall include recommendations on the type, size,
location and other pertinent features of the proposed off- street parking
facilities and the areas they are intended to serve.
   (B)   Wherever pursuant to this procedure, off-street parking facilities are
established by means of a special assessment district, or other district which
the City Council may have determined, they shall be exempt from the
requirements of this chapter for privately supplied off-street parking
facilities except as provided in the following: the City Council, upon
recommendation of the Plan Commission and after public hearing, may require by
resolution, that a portion, not to exceed fifty percent (50%) of the off-street
parking facilities required by this chapter shall be provided in connection
with occupancy or use of a building in an area that was included in a special
assessment district for the provision of off-street parking facilities, or in
any other district which the City Council may have determined to be served by a
public off-street parking facility in the following cases:
      1.   In such cases where the use of a building, erected after the levying
of the special assessment in such an area or after the establishment of the
public off-street parking facility, creates a need for an annual or exceptional
amount of off-street parking facilities.
      2.   In such cases where alteration, extension or change in a use of a
building, after the levying of the special assessment in such an area or
establishment of the public off-street parking facility, creates a need for
off-street parking facilities more than thirty percent (30%) in excess of the
requirements of off- street parking facilities for such building or use before
alterations, extensions or changes in use, as computed on the basis of the
requirements in this section.
      3.   In any district, spaces for off-street parking and for loading or
unloading shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of title 8,
chapter 14, "Standards For Construction Of Facilities On Rights-Of-Way", of
this Code. (Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-24-8: PARKING, STORAGE OR USE OF AUTOMOBILES, RECREATIONAL VEHICLE, OR
MOBILE AGRICULTURAL MACHINERY OR EQUIPMENT:
   (A)   No automobile, recreational vehicle, or mobile agricultural machinery
or equipment, as defined, shall be parked or stored on any lot in a Residential
District except in a required side or rear yard providing all yard setbacks are
met by the vehicle and the vehicle is parked on a concrete or asphalt pad or
alternate equivalent materials acceptable to the City Engineer, and so graded
and drained as to dispose of all surface water accumulation within the area of
proper support of the vehicle. However, such equipment may be parked anywhere
on residential premises for a period of time not to exceed 24 - 48 hours during
loading and unloading no more than twice in any consecutive period of seven (7)
days. At least thirty (30) hours must separate each occurrence. No such
equipment shall be used for living, sleeping or housekeeping purposes when
parked or stored on a residential lot, or in any location not approved for such
use.
   (B)   No automobile, recreational vehicle, or mobile agricultural machinery
or equipment intended for portable temporary housing shall be used for living,
sleeping or housekeeping purposes when parked or stored on a residential lot,
or in any other location not approved for such use, provided however, that such
equipment may be used for the housing of guests of occupants of the principal
resident if: 1) occupancy shall not exceed thirty (30) consecutive days; and 2)
no charge is made for such occupancy.
   (C)   No automobile, recreational vehicle, or mobile agricultural machinery
or equipment shall be stored out of doors on residential premises unless it is
in condition for safe and effective performance of the function for which it is
intended or can be made so at a cost not exceeding the value of the equipment
in its existing state. In no case shall any such equipment be so stored for a
period of more than six (6) months if not in condition for safe and efficient
performance of the function for which it is intended. (Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-24-9: PORTABLE OUTDOOR STORAGE UNIT - DESCRIPTION:
Includes a purpose-built, fully-enclosed container placed outdoors which is
designed and intended to temporarily serve as a storage or containment unit for
household or commercial goods or equipment.
   (A)   Temporary use regulations for Residential Zoning Districts:
      1.   Units must be accessory to a principal building or use;
      2.   There shall be no more than one portable outdoor storage unit per
property, per year;
      3.   Units shall not exceed sixteen feet (16') in length, eight feet (8')
in width, and eight feet (8') in height;
      4.   Units shall be set back a minimum of five feet (5') from all
property lines;
      5.   Units shall be separated by six feet (6') from any structure on the
subject property;
      6.   No unit shall remain on the property for more than thirty (30) days
per calendar year;
      7.   Units shall be placed on a driveway or other paved surface if
located in a front yard;
      8.   Units shall not be placed on public property, on public right- of-
way, or in a location that obstructs traffic visibility;
      9.   Units shall be maintained in a good state of repair, free from rust,
peeling paint, and other forms of visible deterioration;
      10.   Existing portable outdoor storage units must come into conformance
with regulations within one year following passage of this title.
   (B)   Temporary use regulations for all Non-Residential Zoning Districts:
      1.   Units must be accessory to a principal building or use;
      2.   There shall be no more than three (3) portable outdoor storage units
per property, per year;
      3.   Units shall not exceed forty feet (40') in length, eight feet (8')
in width, and nine feet (9') in height;
      4.   Units shall be set back a minimum of five feet (5') from all
property lines;
      5.   Units shall be separated by six feet (6') from any structure on the
subject property;
      6.   No units shall remain on the property for more than ninety (90) days
per calendar year;
      7.   Stacking of units is not permissible;
      8.   Units shall be placed on a paved surface within a side or rear yard;
      9.   Units shall not be placed on public property, on public right- of-
way, or in a location that obstructs traffic visibility;
      10.   Units shall be maintained in a good state of repair, free from
rust, peeling paint, and other forms of visible deterioration;
      11.   Existing portable outdoor storage units must come into conformance
with regulations within one year following passage of this title. (Ord. 18-08,
6-3-2019)
CHAPTER 25
PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
SECTION:
10-25-1: Compliance With Provisions
10-25-2: Certification May Be Required
10-25-3: Smoke Emissions
10-25-4: Particulate Matter
10-25-5: Toxic Matters
10-25-6: Vibration
10-25-7: Illumination Provisions
10-25-8: Sewage Waste
10-25-9: Storage
10-25-10: Automobile Sales
10-25-11: Noise
10-25-1: COMPLIANCE WITH PROVISIONS:
   (A)   New Uses: Any use established in the Business or Industrial Zones
after the effective date hereof shall comply with the minimum performance
standards contained in this chapter.
   (B)   Existing Uses: Existing business and industrial uses which are not in
compliance with the performance standards contained in this chapter are exempt,
except where a use did not comply with performance standards in effect prior to
the passage of this title.
Conditions which do not comply shall not be increased in scope or magnitude.
Such uses shall be permitted to be enlarged or altered, provided the addition
or change conforms with the applicable performance standards. (Ord. 18-08, 6-3-
2019)
10-25-2: CERTIFICATION MAY BE REQUIRED:
When necessary, the appropriate official may require of the applicant
certification by a registered professional engineer or other qualified person,
at the expense of the applicant, that the performance standards for a proposed
use can be met. (Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-25-3: SMOKE EMISSIONS:
The emission of smoke from any operation or activity shall not exceed a density
or equivalent opacity permitted by the Illinois EPA. (Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-25-4: PARTICULATE MATTER:
No person shall operate or cause to be operated any process which emits
particulate air contaminants exceeding the air quality standards of the
Illinois Environmental Protection Agency (IEPA) or its successor.
   (A)   Prior to the City issuing a certificate of occupancy, an applicant
must submit to the appropriate official documentation of the IEPA approval of
the applicant's application and permit to install or alter equipment or control
equipment if such a permit is required under the applicable IEPA standards.
   (B)   In the event the IEPA lowers its air quality standards, the IEPA
standards in effect on the adoption date of this title shall remain applicable.
Under these circumstances, prior to the City issuing a building permit, an
applicant must submit to the appropriate official documentation from a licensed
engineer demonstrating that the use complies with the IEPA standards (on the
adoption date of this title).
   (C)   In the event the IEPA raises its air quality standards, the new IEPA
standards shall apply, and the applicant must comply with the requirements of
subsection (B) of this section. (Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-25-5: TOXIC MATTERS:
The release of airborne toxic matter from any operation or activity shall not
exceed the fractional quantities permitted below of the threshold limit values
adopted by the American Conference of Governmental Industrial Hygienists. If a
toxic substance is not listed, verification that the proposed level of toxic
matter will be safe and not detrimental to the public health or injurious to
plant and animal life will be required. The measurement of toxic matter shall
be on the average of any twenty four (24) hour sampling period.
   (A)   All Business Districts: In all Business Districts, the release beyond
lot lines of airborne toxic matter shall not exceed one-eighth (1/8) of the
threshold limit values.
   (B)   I-1 And I-2 Districts: In the I-1 and I-2 Districts, the release of
airborne toxic matter shall not exceed one-eighth (1/8) of the threshold limit
values beyond zone boundary lines. (Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-25-6: VIBRATION:
Earth borne vibrations from any industrial operation or activity, and not those
originating from City permitted maintenance or construction improvements shall
not exceed the displacement values below. Vibration displacements shall be
measured with an instrument capable of simultaneously measuring in three (3)
mutually perpendicular directions. The maximum vector resultant shall be less
than the vibration displacement permitted. The maximum displacements shall be
determined by the following formula:
 
         D =  K
         f
Where
 D   Displacement in inches
 K   �A constant given in table below
 f   �The frequency of the vibration transmitted through the ground in
         cycles per second
 
 
                                  Impulsive
Zone And Place Of                 (At least 1 second    Less Than 8 Pulses Per
Measurement            Continuous rest between pulses   24 Hour Period
                                  which do not exceed 1
                                  second duration)
Business Districts:                                    
At lot line            0.003      0.006                 0.015
I-1 Zone and I-2 Zone:                                 
At zone boundary line  0.030      0.060                 0.150
At R Zone,
recreational area or   0.003      0.006                 0.015
school boundary line
 
(Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-25-7: ILLUMINATION PROVISIONS:
See chapter 26 of this title. (Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-25-8: SEWAGE WASTE:
Sewers and sewage discharge shall meet the appropriate City code and all IEPA
requirements. (Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-25-9: STORAGE:
   (A)   The open storage of materials and equipment, except for sales display,
shall be subject to the following requirements:
      1.   Storage of materials, equipment, salvage items, and vehicles being
repaired shall be completely screened from view. An eight foot (8') solid wall
fence will be required, as described in applicable Business and Industrial
Districts.
      2.   All combustible material shall be stored in such a way as to
include, where necessary, access drives to permit free access of firefighting
equipment.
   (B)   The bulk storage of flammable liquids and chemicals, when stored in
above-ground tanks, shall occur no closer than the lot line or any principal
building than the distance indicated by the following table:
Capacity Per Container Minimum Separation Distances For Above Ground Containers
(Gallons)
Capacity Per Container Minimum Separation Distances For Above Ground Containers
(Gallons)
Less than 125          None
125 to 250             10 feet
251 to 500             10 feet
501 to 2,000           25 feet
2,001 to 30,000        50 feet
30,001 to 70,000       75 feet
70,001 to 90,000       100 feet
 
   (C)   The underground bulk storage of flammable liquids shall be located in
accordance with the Fire Code regarding tank storage underground, except the
minimum distance between such underground tanks and any R Zone boundary shall
be at least ten feet (10'). (Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-25-10: AUTOMOBILE SALES:
Sites used for automobile sales are subject to the following development
standards:
   (A)   Adequate landscaping and/or fencing shall be used to screen views from
street level of dealership operations that are not located within a building.
Outdoor storage and display of operable vehicles, that are in good condition,
does not need screening. Such screening shall not be required to obscure all
visibility of interior activities but shall provide some filtering of outdoor
dealership operations. Vehicles shall have appropriate spacing for adequate
viewing and display, and shall be in operable condition for test drives.
   (B)   For the purposes of this title and design review, areas used for
outdoor vehicle storage and display are not considered parking areas.
   (C)   Appropriate site design measures shall be installed to the maximum
extent practicable to ensure clean water standards are met. Permanent
stormwater Best Management Practices and on-site stormwater treatment shall be
used for all runoff generated by new impermeable surfaces. Runoff from
automobile washing and maintenance activities shall be properly collected and
treated, consistent with the requirements of the Director of Engineering. When
new paving is proposed, pervious paving shall be used where feasible and shall
be reviewed and approved by the Director of Engineering.
   (D)   All noise-generating activities and equipment, such as vehicle repair,
shall be shielded by noise-attenuating construction or equipment. Outdoor
amplification is prohibited, except on special occasions as permitted by the
City.
   (E)   Exterior light standards and fixtures shall not be taller than twenty
feet (20'), light cutoffs shall be utilized to control light spillover onto
adjacent properties, and low energy light fixtures consistent with Berkeley's
goals for energy efficiency shall be utilized.
   (F)   The minimum required parking for such establishments shall be one
parking space for each two hundred fifty (250) square feet of gross floor area.
All other parking specifications as specified by chapter 24 of this title shall
be met as well. (Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-25-11: NOISE:
The following requirements shall apply in all districts:
   (A)   Sound Pressure Level: The sound pressure level, to be measured as
described below, shall not exceed the following decibel levels in the
designated octave bands when adjacent to the designated types of use districts:
Octave Band         Sound Level In Decibels
(Cycles Per Second) B-1, B-2, B-3 Districts All Residential Districts
Octave Band         Sound Level In Decibels
(Cycles Per Second) B-1, B-2, B-3 Districts All Residential Districts
   0 to 75       73                      58
   76 to 150     69                      54
   151 to 300    65                      50
   301 to 600    61                      46
   601 to 1,200  55                      40
   1,201 to 2,40048                      33
   2,401 to 4,80041                      26
   Over 4,800    35                      20
 
   (B)   Intermittent Sounds: Objectionable sounds of an intermittent nature
which are not easily measured shall be controlled so as not to become a
nuisance to adjacent uses.
   (C)   Method Of Measurement: Measurement is to be made at the nearest
boundary of the nearest residential area or at any other point along the
boundary where the level is higher. The sound levels shall be measured with a
sound level meter and associated octave band filter as prescribed by the
American Standards Association. (Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
CHAPTER 26
ILLUMINATION STANDARDS
SECTION:
10-26-1: Purpose
10-26-2: Lighting Plan
10-26-3: Illumination Performance Standards
10-26-4: Compliance
10-26-5: Point Of Measurements
10-26-6: PUD Modifications
10-26-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish lighting requirements for personal
safety and crime prevention while regulating any spillover of light and glare
on operators of motor vehicles, pedestrians, and land uses near a light source
to promote personal and traffic safety and to prevent the creation of public
nuisances.
In an effort to encourage the implementation and usage of green and sustainable
infrastructure and equipment, the City of East Moline encourages developers to
utilize, whenever possible, high efficiency lighting such as light emitting
diodes ("LEDs"), compact fluorescent lamps ("CFLs"), etc., in their projects.
(Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-26-2: LIGHTING PLAN:
   (A)   Except for single-family and two-family dwellings, plans for required
parking lot and security lighting shall be approved by the Director of
Engineering prior to approval and issuance of permits. Plans, at appropriate
scale, shall be based on accurate, approved final site plans and shall depict
all exterior lighting as to its location, orientation and configuration. This
must include, but not be limited to:
      1.   Luminaire height;
      2.   Luminaire and standard technical specifications;
      3.   Intensity of illumination shall be measured at the least point of
illumination and the greatest point of illumination when measured from ground
level;
      4.   Type of light source (metal halide, high pressure sodium, etc.);
      5.   Hours of illumination; and
      6.   A photometric plan superimposed on the site plan for each
classification of lighting with points no greater than thirty feet (30') apart.
(Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-26-3: ILLUMINATION PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
   (A)   The City requires adherence to the following illumination standards:
      1.   Wall Or Roof Lighting: Wall or roof lighting may be used to
illuminate the pedestrian walkways, entrance areas, and yard areas within
thirty feet (30') of the building. No wall or roof lighting shall be used to
illuminate areas for motor vehicle parking or access unless the Director of
Engineering finds the following:
         (a)   That the proposed lighting is not in conflict with the stated
purpose in this chapter;
         (b)   That the proposed lighting will not unreasonably harm or
restrict public health, safety, and welfare or create a nuisance; and
         (c)   That the proposed luminaire has a cutoff angle of less than or
equal to sixty six degrees (66°).
      2.   Freestanding Luminaries: Any open area used for motor vehicle
parking, storage, or access shall be illuminated with freestanding luminaries.
Freestanding luminaries are permitted to be a maximum of thirty feet (30') in
height with a three foot (3') support, for a maximum height from the ground of
thirty three feet (33'). When a luminaire is located within five hundred feet
(500') of a Residential Zoning District, the maximum permitted luminaire height
shall be twenty five feet (25'). All measurements shall be taken from the
average elevation of the finished grade within ten feet (10') of the structure
or fixture to the highest point of the luminaire. All luminaries must have a
total cutoff angle equal to or less than ninety degrees (90°). The use of
exterior lighting with a cutoff angle greater than ninety degrees (90°) shall
be permitted only when the Director of Engineering finds the following:
         (a)   That the lighting is not in conflict with the stated purpose in
this chapter;
         (b)   That the proposed lighting will not unreasonably harm or
restrict public health, safety, and welfare or create a nuisance; and
         (c)   That the proposed lighting will not result in an impairment of
vision creating a hazard for vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
      3.   Low Pressure Sodium Fixtures: In no instance shall low pressure
sodium fixtures be used to meet the requirements of this chapter unless the
Director of Engineering finds the following:
         (a)   That the proposed lighting is not in conflict with the stated
purpose in this section;
         (b)   That the proposed lighting will not unreasonably harm or
restrict public health, safety, and welfare or create a nuisance; and
         (c)   That the color distortion effect of low pressure sodium lighting
will not create a hindrance to crime prevention and investigation.
      4.   Intensity Of Lighting: The following shall be adhered to:
         (a)   The amount of illumination attributable to exterior lighting
from a property shall not exceed one foot-candle when measured at any boundary
line with an adjoining property. This provision may be waived by the Director
of Engineering when:
            (1)   The proposed lighting is not in conflict with the stated
purpose of this chapter.
            (2)   The proposed lighting will not unreasonably harm or restrict
public health, safety, and welfare or create a nuisance.
            (3)   The proposed lighting will not result in an impairment of
vision creating a hazard for vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
         (b)   All parking lot and parking structure lighting located within
three hundred feet (300') of a Residential Zoning District may be illuminated
not more than one hour before the start of business and shall be extinguished
within one hour after the end of business except as approved by the Director of
Engineering after finding the following:
            (1)   The property has been identified as an area where the
incidence or potential for crime warrant additional lighting.
            (2)   Additional lighting is required to increase visibility of a
property which is not readily accessible for police during routine patrol.
            (3)   The use of timers, sensors, or other devices that produce a
reduced lighting level that does not conflict with the stated purpose in this
chapter.
      5.   Glare And Illumination: In all zoning districts, any lighting shall
be arranged to reflect the light away from adjoining property. A person shall
not conduct a use that has a source of illumination that produces glare clearly
visible beyond a property line or creates a sensation of brightness within a
visual field so as to cause annoyance, discomfort, or impairment of vision. The
use of lenses, deflectors, shields, louvers, or prismatic control devices shall
be used to eliminate nuisance and hazardous lighting to facilitate compliance
with this requirement.
      6.   Parking Structures: Luminaries used for illumination of designated
pedestrian walkways in parking structures (parking areas serving more than 2
residential dwellings or any nonresidential land use within a structure with 1
or more levels) shall be of a significantly different color value than
luminaries used for illuminating vehicle parking and drive aisles. (Ord. 18-08,
6-3-2019)
10-26-4: COMPLIANCE:
   (A)   Any new lighting installed after the effective date of this title
shall be in compliance with the requirements of this title. Any lighting in
existence before the effective date of this title that does not comply with
these requirements shall be considered legally nonconforming and may remain,
subject to the following provisions:
      1.   Alterations To Existing Lighting:
         (a)   When poles and support structures are removed and replaced for
reasons other than acts of God or accidents, they must be replaced with poles
and supports that comply with this chapter.
         (b)   When luminaries are replaced, they must be replaced with
luminaries that comply with all provisions of this chapter.
      2.   Removal And Replacement Of Parking Lot Surface: A parking lot or
portion thereof shall be considered "removed and replaced" when any portion of
the existing parking surface material is removed and a new surface is
installed. When less than fifty percent (50%) of the gross area of the parking
lot surface on a particular site is removed and replaced, only the parking area
replaced must be provided with lighting in compliance with this chapter. If
greater than fifty percent (50%) of the parking area on a particular site is
removed and replaced at one time, the entire parking lot on the site where the
construction activity occurs must be in full compliance with this chapter.
      3.   New Parking Lots Or Parking Lot Additions: When a new parking lot or
addition to an existing parking lot is constructed, the new lot or lot addition
must be provided with lighting in compliance with this chapter.
      4.   Renovations: When the cost of renovation of the principal structure
reaches the thresholds detailed in this title, all existing lighting shall be
brought into compliance to the extent required in this chapter.
      5.   New Structures, Additions, Or Replacements: When a site is improved
with new structures, additions to, or replacements of existing structures, the
lighting for the new structure, addition or replacement on the site must be
upgraded with complying lighting. The parking lot lighting must be upgraded
with complying lighting over a portion of the parking area that is equivalent
to the amount of parking that would be required for the new structure, addition
or replacement. In the event that the new structure, addition or replacement is
accompanied by a new or replaced parking area, the amount of upgraded lighting
area shall be that required under this chapter.
      6.   Development Application: When a development application is made for
a site for a nonadministrative permit, the East Moline Plan Commission or East
Moline City Council, may as a condition of approval, require compliance with
any or all of the standards of this chapter; and the extent of compliance
required in such cases may be greater than that otherwise required in this
chapter, if deemed reasonably necessary to protect the public health, safety,
or welfare and to achieve the purposes of this chapter. (Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-26-5: POINT OF MEASUREMENTS:
Any light intensity measurement taken at the property line shall be measured at
the greatest point of illumination of said property line. Any measurements to
determine the minimum and maximum lighting levels internal to a site will be
measured by positioning the light meter horizontally at ground level at the
greatest and least points of artificial illumination. (Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-26-6: PUD MODIFICATIONS:
   (A)   Modifications to the requirements of this section may be approved as
part of a final development plan for a planned development, as per chapter 27
of this title, pursuant to the provisions provided:
      1.   That any deviations from lighting standards established by this
chapter are clearly delineated in the plan submission reviewed by the East
Moline Plan Commission.
      2.   That any deviations are consistent with the purposes of this
chapter.
      3.   That the minimum light level proposed provides a minimum of seventy
five percent (75%) of the illumination required in this chapter.
      4.   That the height of support poles above grade does not exceed the
maximum permitted by this chapter by more than twenty five percent (25%),
except that no development shall be allowed for increased support pole height
within five hundred feet (500') of a Residential Zoning District.
      5.   That no increase in glare occurs as a result of deviation from the
adopted standards. (Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
CHAPTER 27
PUD PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT
SECTION:
10-27-1: Minimum Requirements
10-27-2: Purpose
10-27-3: Application Procedure
10-27-4: Specific Content
10-27-5: Standards Necessary For Development Of Dwelling Groups
10-27-6: Standards Necessary For Development Of Residence Development Projects
10-27-7: Standards Necessary For Development Of Integrated Shopping Centers
10-27-8: Conditions And Guarantees
10-27-1: MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS:
The following requirements specified in this chapter shall be considered
minimum for planned developments. (Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-27-2: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the Planned Unit Development (PUD) District is to promote to the
extent possible:
   (A)   A maximum choice in the types of environment available to the public
by allowing a development that would not be possible under the strict
application of the other sections of this title.
   (B)   Permanent preservation of common open space and recreation areas and
facilities.
   (C)   A pattern of development to preserve natural vegetation, topographic,
and geologic features.
   (D)   A creative approach to the use of land and related physical facilities
that results in better development, design and the construction of aesthetic
amenities.
   (E)   An efficient use of the land resulting in more economic networks of
utilities, streets, and other facilities.
   (F)   A land use which promotes the public health, safety, comfort, morals,
and welfare.
The PUD District is intended to provide for a development incorporating a
single type or a variety of related uses which are planned and developed as a
unit but departs from the normal standards and requirements of other sections
of this title.
The planned unit development may provide amenities not otherwise required by
law and may establish facilities and open space greater than the minimums
required by law. Such development may consist of conventionally subdivided lots
or provide for development by a land use and zoning plan which establishes the
location and extent of the features of the planned unit development in keeping
with the purpose of the plan.
The foregoing purposes and principals shall not be interpreted to permit the
reduction of standards set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-27-3: APPLICATION PROCEDURE:
The owner, owners, or bona fide buyer of any tract of land may petition the
Plan Commission and zoning official for a change to the PUD Zoning District. A
planned unit development shall be authorized in accordance with the following
procedures:
   (A)   Application Procedure:
      1.   The application for a rezoning to the PUD Zoning District shall be
accompanied by an application plan meeting the requirements of this chapter and
show evidence that the proposed development will conform to the official City
plan and to the purpose of the PUD District set forth in this chapter. The Plan
Commission and City Council shall grant or deny said application pursuant to
the provisions contained in this title. Approval of the PUD Zoning District
shall constitute an expression of approval by the City Council of the
application plan as a guide to the preparation of the preliminary PUD plan. The
applications shall be accompanied by a filing fee in an amount equal to that
prescribed by this Code.
      2.   To reduce the number of steps involved in the approval of a planned
unit development, a preliminary PUD plan meeting the requirements of this
chapter may be submitted in lieu of an application plan required in subsection
(A)1 of this section to the zoning official, although the decision to
ultimately approve or deny the application must come from the Plan Commission
and the City Council.
   (B)   Approval Of The Preliminary Plan:
      1.   Supporting Data: Supporting data in accordance with the requirements
for the preliminary plan stage as outlined in section
10-27-4, "Specific Content", of this chapter.
         (a)   Copies of the preliminary PUD plan and supporting data shall be
submitted to the East Moline zoning official for certification as to conformity
with these regulations, recommendations, and suggestions regarding the overall
design, if any.
         (b)   Copies of the preliminary PUD plan shall be submitted to the
Plan Commission or the zoning official who shall hold public hearing on the
application for a preliminary PUD plan giving notice of the times and places as
required by State law by publishing a notice thereof at least once in a
publication having general circulation within the City. Following the public
hearings, a recommendation of approval or denial of the preliminary PUD plan
shall be made by the Plan Commission to the City Council. If needed, the City
Council shall review the preliminary PUD plan and grant or deny any exceptions
or variances needed.
      2.   Findings: The Plan Commission and City Council shall set forth the
reasons for the recommendation, and said recommendation shall set forth how the
proposal would be in the public interest, including but not limited to findings
of facts on the following:
         (a)   In what respects the proposed plan is consistent with the stated
purpose of the planned unit development requirements.
         (b)   The extent to which the proposed plan meets the requirements and
standards of the Planned Unit Development District.
         (c)   The extent to which the proposed plan departs from the zoning
and subdivision regulations otherwise applicable to the subject property,
including but not limited to the density, dimension, area, bulk and use, and
the reasons why such departures are deemed to be in the public interest.
         (d)   The physical design of the proposed plan and the manner in which
said design makes adequate provision for public services, provides adequate
control over vehicular traffic, provides for and protects designated common
open space, and furthers the amenities of light, air, recreation, and visual
enjoyment.
         (e)   The relationship and compatibility of the proposed plan to the
adjacent properties and neighborhood.
         (f)   The desirability of the proposed plan to physical development,
tax base, and economic well-being of the entire community.
         (g)   The conformity with the intent and spirit of the comprehensive
plan.
         (h)   Specific points noted on the plan that have impact on its
design, function, and visibility in the community.
      3.   Recommendations: Following receipt of the recommendation by the Plan
Commission and approval by the Plan Commission, the City Council shall, within
sixty (60) days, recommend approval, modification within limits of a minor
change, or disapproval of the planned unit development plan. As a condition to
the approval of the preliminary PUD plan, the City Council shall set forth
findings of fact in accord with the standards of this section on which they
base their approval and describing how the proposal meets those standards.
      4.   Conditions, Documents And Plans: All conditions, documents, and
plans required by the City Council must be delineated on the plat or agreed to
in writing prior to City Council approval.
      5.   Special Conditions: The City Council may require such special
conditions as they may deem necessary to insure conformance with the intent of
all comprehensive plan elements, the stated purpose of the Planned Development
District and established City policies.
      6.   Approval Of Preliminary PUD: Approval of a preliminary planned unit
development plan shall not constitute approval of the final plan. Rather it
shall be deemed an expression of approval to the layout submitted on the
preliminary plan as a guide to the preparation of the final plan which will be
submitted for approval of the City. The final plan shall be approved as the
final land use and zoning plan if it conforms substantially with the
preliminary land use and zoning plan.
The final plan may be considered as a preliminary and final plan and may be
submitted for preliminary and final approval, if all of the land is to be
developed at one time, and if all requirements hereof are met.
   (C)   Approval Of Final Plan: The final planned unit development plan shall
be submitted to the zoning official who shall refer same to the Plan Commission
and City Council. The final PUD plan shall conform to the preliminary PUD plan
as approved or subject to minor changes, and may be submitted in stages with
each stage reflecting the approved preliminary plan; provided, however, that
such stage conforms to all requirements of these regulations. The required
procedure for approval of a final plan shall be:
      1.   A final planned unit development plan and other supporting data
required for approval shall be in accord with the provisions of this section.
Final plans must be submitted for approval in accordance with agreed-to
scheduling, but not later than five (5) years from the approval of the
preliminary plan by the City Council. The City Council may grant an extension
in time or the developer may resubmit an application; in the event that same is
not done, the City Council shall initiate such zoning changes as it deems
necessary to preserve the public interest. If construction falls more than two
(2) years behind the schedule filed with the final plan, the plan becomes
subject to revocation. The zoning official shall monitor all pending PUD
projects and inform the City Council of those six (6) months or more behind
schedule.
      2.   After review of the final plan, the Plan Commission shall submit the
planned unit development plan to the City Council with a recommendation for
approval, disapproval, or approval with minor modifications as reviewed at the
public hearing. Any changes or modifications which arise subsequent to the
public hearing shall be specifically noted and referred to the City Council who
shall determine whether the change constitutes a major or minor change and
whether another public hearing is required.
      3.   Following Plan Commission review, the final plan and supporting data
shall be submitted to the City Council for recommendations and approval, and
then City Council for certification that the final plan is in conformity with
these regulations and in agreement with the approved preliminary plan.
      4.   The City Council shall, within sixty (60) days, approve, disapprove,
or extend the time period for another sixty (60) days in taking action on the
final plan.
      5.   All conditions, documents, and plans required by the Council must be
delineated on the plan or agreed to in writing prior to Council approval.
   (D)   Recording The Final Planned Unit Development Plan: The construction of
any public improvement in the planned unit development shall be initiated only
after recording of the final PUD plan has been recorded with the County
Recorder, and shall be issued in full conformance with this title.
   (E)   Changes In The Planned Unit Development: The planned unit development
shall be developed according to the approved and recorded final plan, recorded
approved plan and supporting data together with all recorded amendments shall
be binding on the applicants, their successors, grantees and assigns, and shall
limit and control the use of premises and location of structures in the planned
unit development project as set forth therein.
      1.   Major Changes: A change in the approved preliminary PUD plan or
final PUD plan which alters the concept or intent of the planned unit
development including a change in usage, the configuration, increase in floor
area or the height of buildings, an increase in intensity, a reduction of
proposed open space, a change in road locations or standards, a change in the
final governing agreement, provisions or covenants, or other major changes,
shall be approved only by submission of a new preliminary PUD plan in
accordance with the procedures as previously set forth for the approval of
preliminary and final PUD plans. All approved major changes in the final PUD
plan shall be recorded with the County Recorder as amendments to the final PUD
plan.
      2.   Minor Changes: The appropriate authority may approve minor changes
in the planned unit development which do not change the concept or intent of
the development, without going through the "preliminary approval" steps. Minor
changes shall be any change not defined as a major change. (Ord. 18-08, 6-3-
2019)
10-27-4: SPECIFIC CONTENT:
The planned unit development plans and supporting data shall include at least
the following information:
   (A)   Application Stage:
      1.   General Site Information: Data regarding site conditions, and
characteristics, available community facilities and utilities, existing
covenants and other related information.
      2.   Sketch Plan: A drawing in simple sketch form showing the proposed
location and extent of the land uses, streets, sidewalks, lots, and other
features.
   (B)   Preliminary Plan Stage:
      1.   Design Plan: A drawing of the planned unit development shall be
prepared at a scale of either one inch (1") equals one hundred feet (100') or
one inch (1") equals fifty feet (50'), or such other scale that may be
recommended by appropriate City authority. Any change in scale between the
preliminary and final plan shall be accompanied by a signed statement from the
developer attesting that there have been no modifications. All plans shall show
the general location of proposed streets (public and private), sidewalks, all
buildings and their use, common open space, recreation facilities, parking
areas, service areas, and other facilities to indicate the character of the
proposed development. The submission may be composed of one or more sheets and
drawings and shall include:
         (a)   Boundary Lines: Bearing and distances.
         (b)   Easements: General location, width, and purpose.
         (c)   Public And Private Streets On And Adjacent To The Tract: Street
names, right-of-way widths, existing or proposed centerline elevations,
pavement type, walks, curbs, gutters, culverts, distance to nearest
intersection, etc.
         (d)   Existing And Proposed Utilities (Public Or Private) On And
Adjacent To The Tract: Location, size and invert elevations of sanitary, storm
and combined sewers; location and size of water mains; location of gas lines,
fire hydrants, electric and telephone lines and street lights on the tract. The
direction and distance to the nearest usable water mains and sewers anticipated
to be utilized by the development and elevations of sewers. Drainage district
boundaries and appropriate design criteria necessary for storm drainage plans.
         (e)   Existing Ground Elevations On The Tract: For land that slopes
less than one-half of one (1/2 of 1) percent, show one foot (1') contours; show
spot elevations at all breaks in grades along all drainage channels or swales
and at selected points not more than one hundred feet (100') apart in all
directions; for land that slopes more than one-half of one (1/2 of 1) percent
show two foot (2') contours.
         (f)   Subsurface Conditions On The Tract, If Required By The
Commission Or Council: Location and results of tests made to generally
ascertain subsurface soil, rock, and ground water conditions; depth to ground
water unless test pits are dry at a depth of five feet (5'): The location and
results of soil percolation tests if individual sewage disposal systems are
proposed.
         (g)   Other Conditions Are On The Tract: Watercourses, floodplains,
marshes, rock outcrop, wooded areas, isolated preservable trees one foot (1')
or more in diameter, houses, barns, accessory buildings and other significant
features.
         (h)   Other Conditions On Adjacent Land: Approximate direction and
gradient of ground slopes, including any embankments or retaining walls;
character and general location of buildings, including a notation on the front
setback, railroads, power lines, towers, and other nearby nonresidential land
uses or adverse influences; owners of adjacent unplanted land; for adjacent
platted land refer to subdivision plan by name and show approximate percent
built up; typical lot size and dwelling type.
         (i)   Zoning: Zoning on and adjacent to the tract.
         (j)   Proposed Public Improvements: Highways or other major
improvements planned by public authorities for future construction on or near
the tract.
         (k)   Open Space: All parcels of land intended to be dedicated for
public use of all property owners with the purpose indicated.
         (l)   Buildings: General location, purpose, and height, in feet or
stories of each building other than single-family residences on individually
platted lots.
         (m)   Map Data: Name of development, north point and scale, date of
preparation, acreage of site and name and address of developer, designer, and
engineer.
         (n)   Miscellaneous: Such additional information as may be required by
the appropriate authority or found in chapter 31, "Subdivision Regulations", of
this title.
      2.   Character: Explanation of the character of the planned unit
development and the reasons why it has been planned to take advantage of the
flexibility of these regulations.
      3.   Ownership: Statement of present and proposed ownership of all land
within the project, including present tract designation according to official
records in Offices of the County Recorder.
      4.   Schedule: Development schedule indicating:
         (a)   Stages in which project will be built with emphasis on area,
density, use and public facilities such as open space to be developed with each
stage shall be shown on the plan and through supporting graphic material.
         (b)   Completion date or dates of new construction for above and below
ground facilities, utilities, and buffer planting.
         (c)   If different land use types are to be included within the
planned unit development, the schedule must normally include the mix of uses to
be built in each stage.
      5.   Covenants: Proposed agreements, provisions, or covenants which will
govern the use, maintenance, and continued protection of the planned
development and any of its common open space.
      6.   Density: Provide information on the density of residential uses and
the number of dwelling units by type.
      7.   Use: Provide a list of uses planned for the ancillary and
nonresidential uses.
      8.   Service Facilities: Provide information on all service facilities
and off-street parking facilities.
      9.   Architectural Plans: Preliminary architectural plans for all primary
buildings shall be submitted in sufficient detail to permit an understanding of
the style of the development, the design of the building and the number, size,
and type of dwelling units.
      10.   Facilities Plans (Public And/Or Private): Preliminary plans for:
         (a)   Roads and sidewalks, including classification, width of right-
of-way, width of pavement, typical construction details, and plan and profile
drawings.
         (b)   Sanitary sewers.
         (c)   Storm drainage and erosion.
         (d)   Water supply system, if required by the appropriate authority.
         (e)   Lighting program, if required by the appropriate authority.
         (f)   Grading.
   (C)   Final Plan Stage:
      1.   Final Detailed Plan: A final land use and zoning plan shall be
prepared. The purpose of the land use and zoning plan is to designate the land
subdivided into conventional lots as well as the division of other land, not so
treated, into common open areas and building areas. The final land use and
zoning plan shall include, but not be limited to:
         (a)   An accurate legal metes and bounds description of the entire
area under immediate development within the planned development.
         (b)   A subdivision plat of all subdivided lands in the same form and
meeting all the requirements of a normal subdivision final plat. The plat shall
be reviewed by all affected utility companies or agencies, and any comments
from these companies or agencies shall be submitted as well.
         (c)   An accurate legal metes and bounds description of each separate
unsubdivided use area, including common open space.
         (d)   Designation of the exact location of all buildings to be
constructed in unsubdivided areas.
         (e)   Tabulations on separate subdivided use area, including land
area, number of buildings, number of dwelling units, and dwelling units per
acre.
         (f)   Architectural plans unless waived by the appropriate authority
during the preliminary stage.
      2.   Common Open Space Documents: All common open space shall be either
conveyed to a Municipal or public corporation, conveyed to nonprofit
corporation or entity established for the purpose of benefiting the owners and
residents of the planned unit development or retained by the developer with
legally binding guarantees, in a form approved by the City Attorney, that the
common open space will be permanently preserved and maintained as open area.
All land conveyed to a nonprofit corporation or like entity shall be subject to
the right of said corporation to impose a legally enforceable lien for
maintenance and improvement of the common open space.
      3.   Engineering Data: All public utilities or improvements required by
the City in the development of a planned unit development shall be constructed
only after the approval of the final plan. Supporting data to be submitted with
the final plans shall include final engineering drawings (construction plans),
as required by the appropriate authority.
      4.   Guarantee Deposit: Prior to the acceptance by the appropriate
authority of public utilities and improvements, the contractor(s) for the owner
of the land shall furnish to the City a good and sufficient bond with surety to
secure to the City the actual construction and installation of such public
utilities or improvements according to the City specifications within two (2)
years from the date of approval by the appropriate authority of the final plan
or a petition to the appropriate authority to provide the required public
facilities or improvements and to assess the cost thereof against the
subdivided property in accordance with the local requirements regarding special
assessments; provided, however, that the subdivider or property owners shall be
responsible for any differences between the cost of the public utilities or
improvements and the amount that can be legally assessed by the City against
the subdivided property, and shall furnish the necessary waivers to permit the
assessment of the entire costs of the public utilities or improvements. A
maintenance bond shall be provided for the repairs necessitated by defects in
material or workmanship not to exceed four (4) years from the date of
completion as certified by the appropriate authority.
      5.   Land Dedication: Certificates, seals, and signatures required for
the dedication of lands and recording document, as set forth in the subdivision
regulations.
      6.   Covenants: Final agreements, provisions, or covenants which will
provide for the use, maintenance, and continued protection of the planned unit
development, if applicable. (Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-27-5: STANDARDS NECESSARY FOR DEVELOPMENT OF DWELLING GROUPS:
   (A)   In the case of a project consisting of a group of two (2) or more
buildings to be constructed on a plot of ground not subdivided into the
customary streets and lots and which will not be so subdivided, or where the
existing or contemplated street and lot layout make it impracticable to apply
the requirements of this title to the individual building units in such
project, the applying of such requirements to such project shall be done in a
manner that will ensure substantially the same character of occupancy, maximum
intensity of use, and minimum standards of open spaces as permitted by this
title in the district in which the proposed project is to be located.
   (B)   In no case shall the development have a building height prohibited in
the district in which the project is to be located, or a smaller lot area per
family than the minimum required under this title in such district. Nor shall
the building coverage exceed that which would be obtained were the same area to
be developed by the customary subdivision thereof into streets and lots in
conformance with the adopted subdivision regulations, and by the type of
buildings customary in the district and in compliance with the requirements of
this title. The City shall not authorize the erection of a project on a parcel
of ground occupied by another principal structure. (Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-27-6: STANDARDS NECESSARY FOR DEVELOPMENT OF RESIDENCE DEVELOPMENT PROJECTS:
   (A)   A residence development project consisting of any number of buildings,
the contemplated arrangement of which makes it impossible to apply the
requirements of this title to the individual buildings, may be authorized in
districts in which such projects are permitted under this title:
      1.   Where the tract of land on which the project is to be erected meets
the minimum size requirements as specified in subsection (B) of this section.
      2.   Where the buildings are to be used only for residential purposes and
the customary accessory uses, such as private garages, storage spaces,
recreational and community activities.
      3.   Where the average lot area per family or dwelling unit on the site,
exclusive of the area occupied by drives or streets, will not be less than
ninety percent (90%) of the lot area per family required in the district in
which the project is to be located.
      4.   Where there is to be provided within the tract, or immediately
adjacent thereto, parking spaces in private garages or off-street parking areas
as specified in chapter 24 of this title.
      5.   Where there are to be provided, as a part of the project, adequate
recreation areas to serve the needs of the anticipated population to be housed
therein.
      6.   Where drives, accessways and parking areas are developed to standard
equal to that required for public use.
      7.   Where such drives and accessways are protected by recorded deed
covenants assuring their availability to all residents of the project.
      8.   Where the proposed project will constitute a residential environment
of a sustained desirability and stability; that it will be in harmony with the
character of the surrounding neighborhood and ensure substantially the same
type of occupancy as obtains or may be expected to obtain in said neighborhood;
that it will result in intensity of land utilization no higher, and standards
of open spaces at least as high as permitted or specified in this title in the
district in which the project is to be located.
      9.   Where the project will be consistent with the intent and purposes of
this title to promote public health, safety and general welfare.
   (B)   Height, yards and lot coverage shall be regulated by the following
schedule and in no case shall the Plan Commission or City Council authorize
standards less than:
 Detached One-Family Town House High Rise Apartment
                        Detached One-Family Town House  High Rise Apartment
Minimum size of         3 acres             5 acres     10 acres
development
Garage and parking area 600 sq. ft.         600 sq. ft. 600 sq. ft.
(per dwelling unit)
Land coverage (maximum
percent of land         20%                 20%         10%
coverage)
Height of main building 35'                 35'         120'
Setback from any                                        75% of building height,
dedicated public right- 25'                 25'         but at least 30'
of-way
Distance between
building and adjoining  10'                 15'         Height of building
property line
Distance between        80'                 120'        150% of building height
buildings face to face
Distance between
buildings face to rear  60'                 80'         150% of building height
or face to side
Distance between        20'                 30'         Height of building
buildings side to side
Distance between        80'                 50'         Height of building
buildings rear to rear
 
(Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-27-7: STANDARDS NECESSARY FOR DEVELOPMENT OF INTEGRATED SHOPPING CENTERS:
   (A)   Minimum Area: The owner of a tract of land located in any district at
or near where a proposed shopping center is shown on the adopted Land Use Plan
shall submit for review a preliminary plan for the use and development thereof
for an integrated shopping center, provided that said tract of land shall meet
the following minimum area requirements:
      1.   Neighborhood shopping center: Not less than two (2) acres;
      2.   Subcommunity or community shopping center: Not less than ten (10)
acres.
   (B)   Shopping Centers Defined: For the purposes of this section shopping
centers shall be defined as follows:
   COMMUNITY CENTER: Shall mean an area within which various facilities and
services, such as filling stations, restaurants, banks, fire or police
stations, clubs, etc., may be established.
   NEIGHBORHOOD SHOPPING CENTER: Shall mean a shopping center the principal
establishment of which is customarily a supermarket type food store.
   SUBCOMMUNITY SHOPPING CENTER: Shall mean a shopping center the principal
establishment of which is customarily a variety store.
   (C)   Compliance: The location, size and other characteristics of the site
and the proposed plan comply with the following conditions:
      1.   Need Must Be Demonstrated: That need for the proposed center at the
proposed location, to provide adequate shopping facilities to the surrounding
neighborhood, subcommunity or community or part thereof, as the case may be,
has been demonstrated by the applicant by means of market studies and such
other evidence.
      2.   Adequacy, Site: That the proposed shopping center is adequate, but
not excessive, in size to provide adequate shopping or service facilities for
the population which reasonably may be expected to be served by the proposed
center.
      3.   Traffic Congestion; Not To Be Created: That the proposed shopping
center is at a location where traffic congestion does not exist at present on
the streets to be utilized for access to the proposed center, and where such
congestion will not likely be created by the proposed center; or where such
existing or possible future congestion will be obviated by presently projected
improvement of access thoroughfares or by demonstrable provisions in the plan
for proper entrances and exits, and by internal provisions for traffic and
parking.
      4.   Thoroughfare Access Required: That any neighborhood shopping center
will abut and front a street designated on the official Transportation Plan as
an expressway or arterial thoroughfare; and any subcommunity or community
shopping center shall abut and front on a street designated on said plan as an
expressway or arterial thoroughfare.
      5.   Integrated Design: That the plan provides for a shopping center
consisting of one or more groups of establishments in buildings of integrated
and harmonious design, together with adequate and properly arranged traffic and
parking facilities and landscaping. The project shall be arranged in an
attractive and efficient manner, convenient, pleasant and safe to use, and
fitting harmoniously into, and having no adverse effects upon the adjoining or
surrounding properties.
   (D)   Uses: The uses permitted in an integrated shopping center shall be
appropriate to the specific functions thereof. In the case of all shopping
centers, the allowable uses shall be those permitted in the B-1 District;
provided, however, that no residential, heavy commercial or industrial uses
shall be permitted in any shopping center, and only those uses shall be
authorized which are necessary or desirable to supply the surrounding
neighborhood, subcommunity or community with goods or services. All uses
authorized in this manner shall be in harmony with the design of the center and
the environs thereof.
   (E)   Standards Applicable: The following regulations shall apply to an
integrated shopping center:
      1.   Building Height: No building shall exceed two and one-half (21/2)
stories or thirty five feet (35') in height.
      2.   Yards: No building shall be less than fifty feet (50') distant from
any boundary of the tract or site on which the shopping center is located. The
center shall be permanently screened from all adjoining properties located in
any R District, and except for necessary entrances and exits from all
properties located in any R District across the street and within one hundred
feet (100') from such center.
      3.   Tract Coverage: The ground area occupied by all the buildings shall
not exceed in the aggregate twenty five percent (25%) of the total area of the
tract or site.
      4.   Customer Parking Space: Notwithstanding any other requirements of
this title, there shall be provided at least two (2) square feet of off-street
parking area, including driveways, for every square foot of total floor space,
not including storage space, in an integrated neighborhood shopping center; and
three (3) square feet of off-street parking area for every square foot of total
floor space, not including storage space, in a subcommunity or community
shopping center.
      5.   Loading Space: Notwithstanding any other requirements of this title,
there shall be provided one off-street loading space for each five thousand
(5,000) square feet or fraction thereof of aggregate floor space of all
buildings in the center. At least one-third (1/3) of the space required shall
be sufficient in area and vertical clearance to accommodate trucks of the
tractor- trailer type.
      6.   Illumination Of Accessways And Parking Areas: Accessway and parking
areas shall be adequately lighted by shielding media lighting fixtures which
shall be so installed as to reflect light away from adjoining properties.
      7.   Signs: Subject to the provisions of State Statutes and in conformity
with the provisions outlined by this Code, all signs within the center shall be
controlled by written agreement between the owners and tenants of the center,
or otherwise, with the view to preventing excessive advertising and promoting a
harmonious appearance of the center as a whole. (Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-27-8: CONDITIONS AND GUARANTEES:
Prior to the granting of any planned unit development, the appropriate
authority may stipulate such conditions and restrictions upon the
establishment, location, design, layout, height, density, construction,
maintenance, aesthetics, operation and other elements of planned unit
development as deemed necessary for the protection of the public interest,
improvement of the development, protection of the adjacent area and to secure
compliance with the standards specified in this title. In all cases in which
planned unit developments are granted, the appropriate authority shall require
such evidence and guarantees as it may deem necessary as proof that the
conditions stipulated in connection therewith are being and will be complied
with. (Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
CHAPTER 28
ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS, EXCEPTIONS AND MODIFICATIONS
SECTION:
10-28-1: Additional Requirements
10-28-2: Height Limits
10-28-3: Front Yard Exceptions And Modifications
10-28-4: Side Yard Exceptions And Modifications
10-28-5: Rear Yard Exceptions And Modifications
10-28-1: ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS:
The requirements and regulations specified hereinbefore in this title shall be
subject to the additional requirements, exceptions, modifications and
interpretations in this chapter. (Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-28-2: HEIGHT LIMITS:
Height limitations stipulated elsewhere in this title shall not apply:
   (A)   To barns, silos or other farm buildings, provided these are not less
than fifty feet (50') from every lot line, to church spires, belfries, cupolas
and domes, monuments, water towers, fire and hose towers, masts and aerials; to
parapet walls extending not more than four feet (4') above the limiting height
of the building. However, if in the opinion of the building inspector, such
structures would adversely affect adjoining or adjacent properties, such
greater height shall not be authorized except by the Board of Zoning Appeals.
   (B)   To places of public assembly such as churches, schools and other
permitted public and semi-public buildings not to exceed six (6) stories or
seventy five feet (75'), provided that for each foot by which the height of
such building exceeds the maximum height otherwise permitted in the district,
its side and rear yards shall be increased in width or depth by an additional
foot over the side and rear yards required for the highest building otherwise
permitted in the district.
   (C)   To bulkheads, conveyors, derricks, elevators, penthouses, water tanks,
monitors and scenery lofts; to monuments, fire towers, hose towers, cooling
towers, grain elevators, gas holders or other structures, where the
manufacturing process requires a greater height. Where a permitted use requires
greater heights than specified, such may be authorized by the Board of Zoning
Appeals.
   (D)   To hospitals, provided that for each foot by which the height of such
building exceeds the maximum height otherwise permitted in the district, its
side and rear yards shall be increased in width and depth by an additional one-
half foot (1/2') over the side and rear yards required for the highest building
otherwise permitted in the district. (Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-28-3: FRONT YARD EXCEPTIONS AND MODIFICATIONS:
   (A)   Front Yard Requirements: Do not apply to bay windows, decks, or
balconies occupying, in the aggregate, not more than one-third (1/3) of the
front wall, provided that these projections come entirely within planes drawn
from either main corner of the front wall, making the interior angle of twenty
two and one-half degrees (221/2°) in the horizontal planes with the front wall;
to chimneys, flues, belt courses, leaders, sills, pilasters, uncovered porches
or similar features not over three feet (3') high above the average finished
grade and distant five feet (5') from every lot line.
   (B)   Front Yard Depth: In any district where the average depth of two (2)
or more existing front yards on lots within one hundred fifty feet (150') in
either direction of the lot in question and within the same block front less
than the average depth of said existing front yards or the average depth on the
two (2) lots immediately adjoining, provided, however, that the depth of a
front yard in any R District shall be at least ten feet (10') and need not
exceed thirty feet (30').
   (C)   Corner Lots: In any district where the average depth of two (2) or
more existing front yards on lots within one hundred fifty feet (150') of the
lot in question and within the same front is less than the least front yard
described, the depth of the front yard on such lot shall not be less than the
average depth of said existing front yards or depth of the front yard on the
lot immediately adjoining; provided, however, that the depth of a front yard on
a lot in any R District shall be at least ten feet (10') and need not exceed
thirty feet (30'), except when effecting traffic visibility across corner lots,
as outlined in chapter 4, "General Provisions", of this title. (Ord. 18-08, 6-
3-2019)
10-28-4: SIDE YARD EXCEPTIONS AND MODIFICATIONS:
   (A)   Along any district boundary line, any abutting side yard on a lot in
the less restricted district shall have at least width equal to that required
in the more restrictive district. Where a lot in an I District abuts a lot in
an R District, any side yard shall be increased by three feet (3') for each
story that the building proposed on such lot exceeds the height limit of the
said R District.
   (B)   Side yards shall be increased in width by two inches (2") for each
foot by which the length of the side wall of the building, adjacent to the side
yard, exceeds forty feet (40') in any AG, SE, or R-1 District, or fifty feet
(50') in any R-2 District.
   (C)   Side yards may be reduced by three inches (3") from the otherwise
required least width of each side yard for each foot by which a lot of record
at the time of enactment of this title is narrower than the lot width specified
for the district in which the lot is located, in the case of buildings not
higher than two and one-half (21/2) stories, and in case the owner of record
does not own any adjoining property; provided, however, and irrespective of the
provisions of subsection (F) of this section, that no side yard shall be
narrower at any point than three feet (3').
   (D)   Side yards may be measured to the centerline of adjoining alleys but
in no case shall a building or structure for which a side yard is required to
be erected be within three feet (3') of such alley.
   (E)   On a corner lot, the least width of a side yard along the street lot
line shall be equal to the required front yard along the side street.
   (F)   Structures or projections into side yards may be permitted as follows:
      1.   Bays, decks, and balconies not more than four feet (4') from the
building, provided these projections are entirely within planes drawn from
either main corner of the side wall, making an interior angle of twenty two and
one-half degrees (221/2°) in the horizontal plane with the side wall. The sum
of the lengths of such projection shall not exceed one-third (1/3) of the
length of the side yard.
      2.   Chimneys, flues, belt courses, leaders, sill, pilasters, lintels,
ornamental features, cornices, eaves, gutters and the like, into or over a
required side yard not more than one and one-half feet (11/2').
      3.   Fences, plantings or walls not over six feet (6') above the average
natural grade.
      4.   Fire escapes three feet (3') from a side lot line.
      5.   Terraces, steps, uncovered porches, stoops or similar features not
higher than the elevation of the ground story of the building and distant three
feet (3') from a side lot line.
   (G)   No part of any accessory building shall be nearer a side street lot
line than the least depth of any front yard required along such side street.
   (H)   Side yards may be varied: Where the side walls of a building are not
parallel with the side lot line or is broken or otherwise irregular, in which
case, the average width, or narrower than three feet (3') in any case. (Ord.
18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-28-5: REAR YARD EXCEPTIONS AND MODIFICATIONS:
   (A)   Rear yards may be reduced by three inches (3") from the required least
depth for each foot by which a lot at the time of enactment of this title is
less than one hundred feet (100') deep, in the case of a building not higher
than two and one-half (21/2) stories, and in the case the owner of record does
not own adjoining property to the rear, provided, however, that no required
rear yard shall be less than ten feet (10') deep.
   (B)   Rear yards may be measured to the centerline of adjoining alleys, but
in no case shall a building or structure be erected within ten feet (10') of
such an alley.
   (C)   Structures or projections into rear yards may be permitted as follows:
      Bay windows, not more than four feet (4'), provided these projections are
entirely within plans drawn from either main corner of the rear wall, making an
interior angle of twenty two and one-half degrees (221/2°) in the horizontal
plane with the rear wall. The sum of the lengths of such projections shall not
exceed one-half (1/2) of the width of the rear wall.
      Chimneys, flues, belt courses, leaders, sills, pilasters, lintels,
ornamental features, cornices, eaves and the like, into or over a required rear
yard not more than one and one- half feet (11/2').
      Fences, planting or walls, not over six feet (6') above the average
natural grade.
      Fire escapes, six feet (6').
      Open decks or balconies not enclosed; attached or detached off-street
parking spaces; open off-street parking spaces; accessory sheds, tool rooms,
similar buildings or structures for domestic or agricultural storage;
balconies; breeze-ways and open porches. (Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
CHAPTER 29
ENFORCEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION
SECTION:
10-29-1: Enforcement
10-29-2: Plans
10-29-3: Lot Pins
10-29-4: Certificate Of Occupancy
10-29-5: Violation
10-29-6: Remedies
10-29-7: Board Of Zoning Appeals
10-29-1: ENFORCEMENT:
It shall be the duty of the zoning official appointed by the City
Administrator, with the aid of the Police Department, to enforce this title in
accordance with the administrative provisions of the Building Code and this
title. (Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-29-2: PLANS:
Every application for a building permit shall be accompanied by plans in
duplicate and plot plan based on an actual survey by a professional Illinois
land surveyor drawn to scale in ink or blue print, showing the actual shape and
dimensions of the lot to be built upon, the exact location, size and height of
the building or structure to be erected or altered, the existing and intended
use of each building or part, the proposed number of families or housekeeping
units, and such other information with regard to the lot and neighboring lots
as may be necessary for the enforcement of this title. One copy of such plans
shall be returned to the applicant when approved by the zoning official, or
designee appointed by the City Administrator, together with such permit as may
be granted. (Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-29-3: LOT PINS:
Prior to building construction, lot pins based on actual survey by a
professional Illinois land surveyor stakes based on actual survey shall be set
and if disturbed by construction or grading shall be reset in proper location.
(Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-29-4: CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY:
Before using any building or premises or part thereof hereafter created,
erected, changed, converted or enlarged in use or structure, a certificate of
occupancy shall be obtained from the building inspector. Such certificate of
occupancy shall show that such building or premises, or part thereof, and the
proposed use thereof conform with the provisions of this title. (Ord. 18-08, 6-
3-2019)
10-29-5: VIOLATION:
Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with
any of the provisions of this title shall be subject to penalty as provided by
section
1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-29-6: REMEDIES:
In case any building or structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed,
altered, repaired, converted or maintained, or any building, structure or land
is used in violation of the provisions of this title, the City Attorney, in
addition to other remedies under the Illinois Compiled Statutes is hereby
authorized to institute an action to enjoin, or by any other appropriate action
or proceeding to prevent such erection, construction, reconstruction,
alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance or use. (Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-29-7: BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS:
The East Moline Board of Zoning Appeals has power to hear and render judgment
on the following types of appeals in accordance with the provisions of this
title. These types of appeals are: a) special exceptions, b) appeal of staff/
administrative decision(s), c) and variance appeals.
   (A)   Creation, Membership And Procedure: A Board of Appeals consisting of
seven (7) members shall be appointed by the Mayor and approved by City Council
in accordance with the provisions of the Illinois Compiled Statutes. The
appointing authority may remove any member of the Board for cause and after a
public hearing.
   (B)   Rules And Regulations: The Board shall elect its own Chairman and have
the power to adopt rules and regulations for its own government, not
inconsistent with law or with the provisions of this or any other ordinance of
the City of East Moline. Meetings shall be held at the call of the Chairman and
at such other times as the Board may determine. The Chairman, or in his
absence, the Vice Chairman, may administer oaths and compel attendance of the
witnesses.
   (C)   Meetings: Meetings of the Board shall be open to the public, minutes
shall be kept of proceedings, showing the action of the Board and the vote of
each member upon each question, or if absent, or failing to vote, indicating
that fact and records shall be made of the Board's examinations and other
official actions, all of which shall be filed immediately in the Office of the
Board.
   (D)   Quorum: Four (4) members of the Board shall constitute a quorum. The
Board shall act by resolution, and the concurring vote of four (4) members
shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination
of the building inspector, zoning official, or other appropriate official, or
to decide in favor of an applicant any matter upon which it is required to pass
under this title, or to effect any variation in the requirements of this title.
   (E)   Assistance: The Board may call on the City's departments for
assistance in the performance of its duties, and it shall be the duty of such
departments to render such assistance to the Board as may reasonably be
required.
   (F)   Special Exceptions: Requests or applications for special exceptions or
of interpretation of the Zoning Map or for decisions upon other special
questions upon which the Board is authorized to pass.
   (G)   Appeal Of Staff/Administrative Decision(s): Hear and decide appeals
where it is alleged by the applicant that there is error in any order,
requirement, decision, grant or refusal made by the building inspector or
zoning official in the enforcement of the provisions of this title.
   (H)   Variance: The Board may authorize on appeal in specific cases such
variance from the terms of this title as will not be contrary to the public
interest, where owing to a special condition, a literal enforcement of the
provisions of this title will result in unnecessary hardship, and so that the
spirit of this title shall be observed and substantial justice done. (Ord. 18-
08, 6-3-2019)
CHAPTER 30
DISTRICT CHANGES AND ORDINANCE AMENDMENTS
SECTION:
10-30-1: Ordinance Amendments
10-30-2: Public Hearing
10-30-3: Application For Change
10-30-4: Public Examination
10-30-5: Protests
10-30-6: Failure To Notify
10-30-7: Refiling Of Denied Requests
10-30-1: ORDINANCE AMENDMENTS:
In accordance with the provisions of 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-13-1 et
seq., the City Council may, from time to time, amend or change by ordinance,
the number, shape or area of districts established on the Zoning Map or the
regulations set forth in this title; but no such amendment or change shall
become effective unless the ordinance proposing such amendment or change shall
first be submitted to the Plan Commission for approval, disapproval or
suggestions, and said commission shall have been allowed a reasonable time, not
less than thirty (30) days, for consideration and report. (Ord. 18-08, 6-3-
2019)
10-30-2: PUBLIC HEARING:
Before submitting its recommendations and report to the Council, the Plan
Commission shall hold a public hearing on the proposed amendment, supplement or
change. It shall give not less than fifteen (15) nor more than thirty (30)
days' notice of the time and place of such hearing by publication in a
newspaper published in the community and by mailing notices to all property
owners directly involved, contiguous to, directly across a street or alley
from, the area proposed to be altered. (Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-30-3: APPLICATION FOR CHANGE:
Any person desiring a change in zoning of property may make application
therefor, in so doing shall accompany the petition for such change in zoning,
or the ordinance introduced for the purpose of changing such zoning, with a
statement giving the names and addresses of the owners of all properties lying
within the block where the proposed change is to be. Such petition or ordinance
seeking a change in zoning shall be accompanied with a fee in the amount of one
hundred dollars ($100.00) toward the cost of processing the application. Should
the application be withdrawn prior to publication of legal notice thereon, such
fee will be returned upon written request of the applicant. (Ord. 18-08, 6-3-
2019)
10-30-4: PUBLIC EXAMINATION:
During the fifteen (15) days prior to the public hearing the text or copy of
the text of such ordinance or petition, together with the maps or plans or
copies thereof shall be on file, for public examination, in the Office of the
Secretary of the Plan Commission. No ordinance which differs from the
recommendation made by the Plan Commission shall be adopted unless passed by
not less than three-fourths (3/4) of all members of the Council. (Ord. 18-08,
6-3-2019)
10-30-5: PROTESTS:
In case of a written protest against a proposed change in the boundaries of a
district signed and acknowledged by twenty percent (20%) or more of the owners
of the frontage immediately adjoining or across an alley therefrom, or directly
opposite the frontage proposed to be altered, is filed with the City Clerk,
such amendment shall not be passed or become effective except by the favorable
vote of two-thirds (2/3) of all members of the Council. (Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-30-6: FAILURE TO NOTIFY:
The failure to notify, as provided by this chapter, shall not invalidate an
ordinance, provided such failure was not intentional, and the omission of the
name of any owner or occupant of property who may, in the opinion of the City
Plan Commission, be affected by such amendment, supplement or change, unless
such omission is intentional, and shall not invalidate any ordinance passed
hereunder, it being the intention of this chapter to provide forenotice of an
ordinance change to the persons substantially interested in or affected by the
proposed change. (Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-30-7: REFILING OF DENIED REQUESTS:
Upon denial by the City Council of an application to change the zoning of a
particular property, a second zoning request which is not substantially or
materially different from the denied request shall not be accepted from the
same or a different person, for a public hearing to be held within six (6)
months from the date of City Council denial. Subsequent requests which are also
not substantially or materially different shall not be accepted for a public
hearing to be held within one year from the last date of City Council denial.
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall determine whether a request is substantially
or materially different and submittable, although the City Council may, by
majority vote, reverse a decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals to not accept
a rezoning request for public hearing. (Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
CHAPTER 31
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
SECTION:
10-31-1: General Provisions
10-31-1.1: Purpose
10-31-1.2: Jurisdiction
10-31-1.3: Interpretation
10-31-1.4: Disclaimer Of Liability
10-31-1.5: Variances
10-31-2: Definitions
10-31-2.1: Construction Of Terms
10-31-2.2: Selected Definitions
10-31-3: Design And Improvement Standards
10-31-3.1: Applicability Of Article
10-31-3.2: Suitability For Subdivision Generally
10-31-3.3: Lot Requirements; Access And Relationship To Streets
10-31-3.4: Permanent Reference Monuments
10-31-3.5: Street Design Standards
10-31-3.6: Street Improvements Standards
10-31-3.7: Blocks
10-31-3.8: Sidewalks
10-31-3.9: Utilities
10-31-3.10: Water Facilities
10-31-3.11: Sanitary Sewers
10-31-3.12: Easements
10-31-3.13: Drainage And Storm Sewers
10-31-3.14: Soil Erosion And Sedimentation Control
10-31-3.15: Dedications For Public Use
10-31-4: Plats And Plans
10-31-4.1: Pre-Filing Conference
10-31-4.2: Preliminary Plats
10-31-4.3: Improvement Plans
10-31-4.4: Assurance For Completion Of Required Improvements
10-31-4.5: Final Plats
10-31-4.6: Maintenance Of Improvements
10-31-5: Other Administrative Matters
10-31-5.1: Enforcement Officer, Duties
10-31-5.2: Amendments
10-31-5.3: Penalties
10-31-5.4: Repeal
10-31-5.5: Separability
10-31-5.6: Publication
10-31-5.7: When Effective
10-31-1: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
10-31-1.1: PURPOSE:
In accordance with State law 1  this chapter regulates the subdivision and
development of land in order to implement the City of East Moline comprehensive
plan and Official Map. Thus this chapter assists in achieving the following
specific objectives:
   (A)   To preserve, protect, and promote the public health, safety, and
welfare;
   (B)   To provide a pleasant living environment by furthering the orderly
layout and use of land; and to create an environment conducive to the
productive development of the City;
   (C)   To avoid legal and other problems by requiring that subdivided land be
properly monumented and recorded;
   (D)   To conserve and increase the value of land, improvements, and
buildings;
   (E)   To preserve the natural beauty and topography to the maximum feasible
extent;
   (F)   To provide adequate light, air, and privacy for all residents of new
developments by preventing undue concentration of population;
   (G)   To protect against injury or damage caused by fire, pollution,
flooding, stormwater runoff, or erosion and sedimentation;
   (H)   To provide safe and convenient access to new developments and to avoid
traffic congestion by requiring the proper location, design, and construction
of streets and sidewalks;
   (I)   To reduce the cost of installing and maintaining adequate water mains,
sanitary sewers, stormwater sewers, and other utilities and services; and
   (J)   To ensure that adequate parks, schools and similar facilities can be
made available to serve the residents of new developments.
   (K)   Provide for the acceptance of lands of public rights-of-way. (Ord. 91-
2, 1-21-1991; amd. Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/11-12-8 through 5/11-12-12; 765 ILCS 205/1 et seq.
10-31-1.2: JURISDICTION:
This chapter shall be applicable within the corporate limits of the City of
East Moline and within all unincorporated territory located within one and one-
half (11/2) miles of said limits, provided such territory is not located within
the subdivision jurisdiction for another municipality 1 . (Ord. 91-2, 1-21-
1991; amd. Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
 
Notes
1 1. See 65 ILCS 5/11-12-11 for State requirements concerning jurisdictional
  boundary lines.
10-31-1.3: INTERPRETATION:
Every provision of this chapter shall be construed liberally to achieve the
purposes outlined in section
10-31-1.1 of this section
10-31-1.
   (A)   More Restrictive Requirements Apply: Whenever the requirements of this
chapter differ from those of any statute, lawfully adopted ordinance or
regulation, easement, covenant, or deed restriction, the more stringent
requirement shall prevail. Thus, in accordance with State law 1 , whenever this
chapter imposes higher standards than the County Subdivision Ordinance, said
higher standards shall supersede the County regulations in the unincorporated
territory located within the City of East Moline's subdivision jurisdiction.
This chapter is not intended to abrogate any easement, covenant, deed
restriction, or any other private agreement or restriction; provided, that,
where the provisions of this chapter are more restrictive or impose higher
standards or regulations than such easement, covenant, deed restriction, or
other private agreement or restriction, the provisions of this chapter shall
govern. Where the provisions of the easement, covenant, deed restriction, or
private agreement or restriction impose duties and obligations more
restrictive, or higher standards than the requirements of this chapter or the
determinations of the City in approving a subdivision or in enforcing this
chapter, and such private provisions are not inconsistent with this chapter or
determinations thereunder, then such private provisions shall be operative and
supplemental to this chapter and determinations made thereunder. The City does
not purport to enforce any such private provisions not reflected on the plat
and its supporting documents and unless there is expressed in the nature of the
document and the approval process an intent to give the City enforcement rights
over same. (Ord. 91-2, 1-21-1991; amd. Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
 
Notes
1 2. 65 ILCS 5/11-12-11.
10-31-1.4: DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY:
   (A)   Except as may be provided otherwise by statute or ordinance, no
officer, board member, agent, or employee of the City of East Moline shall
render himself personally liable for any damage that may accrue to persons or
property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his
duties under this chapter 1 .
   (B)   Any suit brought against any officer, board member, agent, or employee
of the City of East Moline, as a result of any act required or permitted in the
discharge of his duties under this chapter, shall be defended by the City
Attorney until the final determination of the legal proceedings. (Ord. 91-2, 1-
21-1991; amd. Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
 
Notes
1 1. Local Governmental and Governmental Employees Tort Immunity Act, 745 ILCS
  10/1-101.
10-31-1.5: VARIANCES:
When the subdivider can show that a provision of this chapter, if strictly
adhered to, would cause the unnecessary hardship and when, in the opinion of
the City Plan Commission, because of topographical or other conditions peculiar
to the site, a departure may be made without destroying the intent of such
provision, the City Plan Commission may recommend a variance or modification to
the Council. The subdivider shall apply in writing for such variance or
modification of the action. Any variance or modification thus authorized, shall
be attached to and made a part of the final plat. (Ord. 91-2, 1-21-1991; amd.
Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-31-2: DEFINITIONS:
10-31-2.1: CONSTRUCTION OF TERMS:
In construing the intended meaning of terminology used in this chapter, the
following rules shall be observed:
   (A)   Unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, words and phrases
shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in section
10-31-2.2 of this section
10-31-2; terms not defined in section
10-31-2.2 of this section
10-31-2 shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in chapter 3 of
this title; if any term is not defined either in section
10-31-2.2 of this section
10-31-2 or in chapter 3 of this title, said term shall have its standard
English dictionary meaning.
   (B)   Words denoting the masculine gender shall be deemed to include the
feminine and neuter genders.
   (C)   Words used in the present tense shall include the future tense.
   (D)   Words used in the singular number shall include the plural number, and
the plural the singular.
   (E)   The word "shall" is mandatory; the word "may" is discretionary.
   (F)   Captions (i.e., titles of sections, subsections, etc.) are intended
merely to facilitate general reference and in no way limit the substantive
application of the provisions set forth thereunder.
   (G)   References to sections shall be deemed to include all subsections
within that section; but a reference to a particular subsection designates only
that subsection.
   (H)   A general term that follows or is followed by enumerations of specific
terms shall not be limited to the enumerated class unless expressly limited.
(Ord. 91-2, 1-21-1991; amd. Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-31-2.2: SELECTED DEFINITIONS:
ADMINISTRATOR: The official appointed to administer this chapter, or his duly
authorized representative.
ALLEY: A public right-of-way which affords a secondary means of vehicular
access to the side or rear of premises that front on a nearby street.
AMENDMENT: A change in the provisions of this chapter, properly effected in
accordance with State law and the procedures set forth herein.
AREA, GROSS: The entire area within the lot lines of the property proposed for
subdivision/development, including any areas to be dedicated/reserved for
street and alley rights-of-way and for public uses.
BLOCK: An area of land entirely bounded by streets, highways, barriers, or ways
(except alleys, pedestrian ways, or exterior boundaries of a subdivision unless
exterior boundary is a street, highway, or way) or bounded by a combination of
streets, public parks, cemeteries, railroad rights-of-way, waterways, or
corporate boundary lines.
CENTERLINE OFFSET: The distance between the centerlines of two (2) roughly
parallel streets, measured along the third street with which both said
"parallel" streets intersect.
COLLECTOR STREET: A street used primarily to collect limited amounts of
residential traffic and for access to abutting properties, and on which the
speed limit is low and traffic volume is minimal.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN: The plan or any portion thereof adopted by the City Council
to guide and coordinate the physical and economic development of the City of
East Moline. The Comprehensive Plan includes, but is not limited to, plans and
programs regarding the location, character, and extent of highways, bridges,
public buildings or uses, utilities, schools, residential, commercial or
industrial land uses, parks, drainage facilities, etc.
CROSS-SLOPE: The degree of inclination measured across a right- of-way rather
than in the direction traffic moves on said right- of-way.
CUL-DE-SAC: A street having only one outlet for vehicular traffic and having
the other end permanently terminated by a turn-around for vehicles, the term
may also be used to refer solely to said turn-around.
CURB AND GUTTER INTEGRAL: The rim forming the edge of a street plus the channel
for leading off surface water, constructed of poured concrete as a single
facility.
DEDICATE: To transfer the ownership of a right-of-way, parcel of land, or
improvement to the City of East Moline or other public entity without
compensation.
DEVELOP: To erect any structure or to install any improvements on a tract of
land, or to undertake any activity (such as grading) in preparation therefor.
DISTRICT ZONING: A portion of the territory of the City of East Moline wherein
certain uniform requirements or various combinations thereof apply to
structures, lots, and uses under the terms of this title.
EASEMENT: A right to use a portion of another person's real property for
certain limited purposes.
EROSION: The wearing away of the land surface by the action of wind, water or
gravity.
ESCROW DEPOSIT: A deposit in cash or other approved securities to assure the
completion of improvements within a subdivision.
FRONTAGE: The boundary of a lot along a public street.
FRONTAGE ROAD: A minor street fronting on an arterial street or highway
(usually a limited access highway), used for access to abutting lots.
GRADE: The degree of inclination of the site or right-of-way, expressed as a
percentage. Synonym for "slope".
IMPROVEMENT PLANS: The engineering plans showing types of materials and
construction details for the structures and facilities to be installed in, or
in conjunction with, a subdivision.
IMPROVEMENTS: Any street, curb and gutter, sidewalk, drainage ditch, sewer,
catch basin, newly-planted tree, off-street parking area, or other facility
necessary for the general use of property owners in a subdivision.
INTERSECTION: The point at which two (2) or more public right-of- ways
(generally streets) meet.
LOCAL STREET: A street serving limited amounts of residential traffic, and used
for access to abutting property.
LOT: A tract of land intended as a unit for the purpose (whether immediate or
future) of development or transfer of ownership. A "lot" may or may not
coincide with a "lot of record".
LOT AREA: The area of a horizontal plan bounded by the front, side, and rear
lines of a lot.
LOT, CORNER: A lot having at least two (2) adjacent sides that abut for their
full length upon streets.
LOT OF RECORD: An area of land designated as a lot on a plat of subdivision
recorded with the Recorder of Deeds of Rock Island County, Illinois, in
accordance with State law.
LOT, THROUGH: A lot having a pair of approximately parallel lot lines that abut
two (2) approximately parallel streets. Both such lot lines shall be deemed
front lot lines.
MAINTENANCE BOND: A surety bond, posted by the developer and approved by the
City of East Moline, guaranteeing the satisfactory condition of installed
improvements for the two-year period following their dedication.
MARGINAL ACCESS STREET: A local dead-end street providing access to ten (10) or
fewer dwelling units.
MINOR ARTERIAL STREET: A street which carries or is proposed to carry
intermediate volumes of traffic from local streets to arterial streets and
which may or may not be continuous.
OFFICIAL MAP: The Official Map may show indication of sites for planned public
facilities. Public facility sites which may be indicated on the Official Map
may include but are not limited to: sites for new trafficways or widening of
existing trafficways; school sites; public building sites; and sites for future
storm drainage, electrical or other public service or utility easements.
PERFORMANCE BOND: A surety bond posted by the developer and approved by the
City of East Moline, guaranteeing the installation of required improvements
within, or in conjunction with, a subdivision.
PLAT, DEDICATION: A plat required for the dedication to the City of all right-
of-way easements, and public improvements outside of a subdivision plat or
within a special use classification.
PLAT, FINAL: The subdivider's plan and supporting documentation of the
subdivision which, if approved, may be filed with the Rock Island County
Recorder of Deeds.
PLAT, PRELIMINARY: Preliminary engineering maps, drawings, and supportive
material indicating the proposed layout of a subdivision.
PRE-FILING CONFERENCE: A conference held between the developer and appropriate
City staff prior to submission of a preliminary or final plat.
PRINCIPAL ARTERIAL STREET: A street designed or utilized primarily for high
vehicular speeds or for heavy volumes of traffic on a continuous route with
intersections at grade, and on which traffic control devices are used to
expedite the safe movement of through traffic.
RESERVE: To set aside a parcel of land in anticipation of its acquisition by
the City of East Moline (or other government entity) for public purposes.
RIGHT-OF-WAY, PUBLIC: A strip of land which the owner/subdivider has dedicated
to the City of East Moline or other unit of government for streets, alleys, and
other public improvements.
SEDIMENT: Solid material, both mineral and organic, that is in suspension, is
being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water, or
gravity as a product of erosion.
SETBACK, FRONT: The horizontal distance between the street right- of-way line
and the building line. Minimum setback requirements are set forth in this
title.
SEWERAGE SYSTEM, PRIVATE: A sewer system including collection and treatment
facilities established by the developer to serve a new subdivision in an
outlying area.
SIDEWALK: A pedestrian way constructed in compliance with the standards of this
chapter.
SOIL: All unconsolidated mineral and organic material of whatever origin that
overlies bedrock which can be readily excavated.
STOP ORDER: An order used by the Administrator to halt work-in- progress that
is in violation of this chapter.
STREET: A public or private way for motor vehicle travel. The term "street"
includes a highway, thoroughfare, parkway, through way, road, pike, avenue,
boulevard, lane, place, drive, court and similar designations, but excludes an
alley or way for pedestrian use only.
STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected on the ground, or attached to
something having a fixed location on the ground. All buildings are structures
but not all structures are buildings.
STUB STREET: A street that is temporarily terminated, but that is planned for
future continuation.
SUBDIVIDER: Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, estate or
other group or combination acting as a unit, dividing or proposing to divide
land in a manner that constitutes a "subdivision" as defined in this section.
SUBDIVISION: Any division of land into two (2) or more lots, any of which is
less than five (5) acres, or any transfer involving an easement of ingress or
egress, except as set forth in the Plat Act, 765 Illinois Compiled Statutes
205/1.
SUBDIVISION, MINOR: A division of land into two (2) but not more than five (5)
lots, all of which front upon an existing street, and not involving any new
streets, other rights-of-way, easements, improvements, or other provisions for
public areas and facilities.
TOPOGRAPHY: The relief features or surface configuration of an area of land.
UTILITY: A business or service which is engaged in regularly supplying the
public with some commodity or service which is of consequence and need and
which has a duty to serve without discrimination all within its service area. A
utility can be publicly or privately owned and includes, without limitation,
the following services or commodities:
   (A)   Electricity.
   (B)   Gas, oil, or steam.
   (C)   Water.
   (D)   Sanitary sewerage.
   (E)   Storm sewerage.
   (F)   Telephone or telegraph.
   (G)   Cable television and other communication lines.
   (H)   Transportation lines, such as fixed rail, but only if expressly
stated.
VACATE: To terminate the legal existence of right-of-way or subdivision or
portion thereof, and to so note on the final plat recorded with the Rock Island
County Recorder of Deeds (chap. 109, pp. 6-8).
VARIANCE, SUBDIVISION: A relaxation in the strict application of the design and
improvement standards set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 91-2, 1-21-1991; amd.
Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-31-3: DESIGN AND IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS:
10-31-3.1: APPLICABILITY OF ARTICLE:
No land within the subdivision jurisdiction of the City of East Moline - other
than land that is specifically exempted from the requirements of the Illinois
Plats Act 1  - shall be subdivided or developed except in compliance with the
regulations of this chapter and the applicable provisions of State law 2 . No
lot in any subdivision shall be conveyed until:
   (A)   The final plat of said subdivision has been approved by the City
Council and recorded in the Office of the Rock Island County Recorder of Deeds;
and
   (B)   The portion of said subdivision in which the lot is located has been
improved in accordance with the requirements of this chapter or until a
performance bond or other security has been posted to assure the completion of
such improvements.
A building permit shall not be issued for any lot conveyed in violation of this
section. (Ord. 91-2, 1-21-1991; amd. Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
 
Notes
1 1. 765 ILCS 205/1(b).
2 2. 65 ILCS 5/11-12-8; 765 ILCS 205/1 et seq.
10-31-3.2: SUITABILITY FOR SUBDIVISION GENERALLY:
Land that is unsuitable for development due to flooding, poor drainage, rough
topography, adverse soil conditions, or other features which will be harmful to
the health, safety, and general welfare of the inhabitants of the subdivision
and/or its surrounding areas shall not be subdivided or developed unless the
subdivider/developer formulates adequate plans/methods to solve the problems
caused by the adverse land conditions. (Ord. 91-2, 1-21-1991; amd. Ord. 18-08,
6-3-2019)
10-31-3.3: LOT REQUIREMENTS; ACCESS AND RELATIONSHIP TO STREETS:
   (A)   Lot Requirements: All lots in a subdivision shall conform to the
minimum lot area and dimensions requirements of the zoning district in which
said subdivision is located; land that is under water or proposed for street
improvements shall not be counted to satisfy these minimum requirements. Every
corner and through lot shall be large enough to permit compliance with the
district's front setback requirements on every side of the lot that faces a
street. All lot remnants shall be added to adjacent lots to avoid the creation
of unbuildable parcels.
   (B)   Access And Relationship To Streets: Land shall be subdivided in such a
way that each lot abuts a street meeting the requirements of section
10-31-3.5 of this section
10-31-3. All side lot lines shall be at right angles to straight street right-
of-way lines or radial to curved street right-of-way lines except where a
deviation from this rule will provide a better street and lot design. (Ord. 91-
2, 1-21-1991; amd. Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-31-3.4: PERMANENT REFERENCE MONUMENTS:
   (A)   Materials, Size, And Location:
      1.   Concrete cylinders or rectangular prisms, not less than four inches
(4") in diameter or square and forty two inches (42") long, shall be set at the
extreme corners of subdivisions.
      2.   Steel pins, not less than one-half (1/2) of an inch in diameter and
thirty inches (30") long, with a survey marker cap showing the land surveyor's
registration number, shall be set at locations in accordance with the Plat Act.
   (B)   Resetting Monuments: Any monuments disturbed by construction or
grading shall be reset. (Ord. 91-2, 1-21-1991; amd. Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-31-3.5: STREET DESIGN STANDARDS:
All streets shall be properly integrated with the existing and proposed street
system indicated in the Municipal comprehensive plan and Official Map, and
shall meet the specifications set forth in tabular form below. For divided
boulevards, the developer shall submit an acceptable plan for maintenance to
the City Planning Commission.
TABLE OF STREET DESIGN SPECIFICATIONS
               Permitted On-  Required Right- Required        Maximum/ Minimum
Type Of Street Street Parking Of-Way          Pavement Width  Grades
                                              (B-B)
                Permitted On-  Required Right- Required        Maximum/ Minimum
Type Of Street  Street Parking Of-Way          Pavement Width  Grades
                                               (B-B)
Alley           None           20'             18'             Maximum: 10%
                                                               Minimum: 0.5%
Marginal access None           50'             20'             Maximum: 10%
                                                               Minimum: 0.5%
Local street    1 side         50'             27'             Maximum: 10%
                2 sides        50'             31'             Minimum: 0.5%
Collectors      Both sides     60'             40'             Maximum: 10%
                                                               Minimum: 0.5%
Minor arterials None           80'             11' lanes       Maximum: 5%
                                                               Minimum: 0.5%
Principal       None           100'            12' lanes       Maximum: 5%
arterials                                                      Minimum: 0.5%
Divided         None           70'             14'             Maximum: 10%
boulevard                                                      Minimum: 0.5%
 
   (A)   Horizontal Curvatures: All changes in horizontal alignment shall be
conducted with a horizontal curve with the following minimum centerline radius,
designated "R":
      1.   For principal, minor and collector streets (design speed = 35 mph),
R shall equal five hundred feet (500');
      2.   For local streets (design speed - 30 mph), R shall equal one hundred
twenty five feet (125'); and
      3.   For alleys, R shall equal one hundred feet (100').
   (B)   Through Traffic Discouraged: Marginal access and local streets shall
be laid out so as to discourage use by through traffic. The rigid rectangular
gridiron street pattern should be avoided, and the use of curvilinear streets,
cul-de-sacs, or U-shaped streets shall be encouraged to effect a more desirable
street layout.
   (C)   Limited Access To Arterials: Where a subdivision abuts or contains an
existing or proposed arterial street, the Planning Commission may recommend to
the City Council that access to said arterial may be limited by one of the
following means:
      1.   The subdivision of lots so that they back onto the arterial street
and front onto a parallel local street (double frontage lots), coupled with the
installation of screening in a reserve (access-restricting) strip along the
rear lot lines of such lots;
      2.   A series of cul-de-sacs, U-shaped streets, or short loops entered
from and generally at right angles to the arterial street; or
      3.   A frontage road separated from the arterial street by a planting
strip, but having access thereto at suitable points.
   (D)   Dead-End Streets:
      1.   Temporary Stub Streets: Streets shall be so arranged to provide for
the continuation of streets between adjacent properties when such continuation
is necessary for convenient movement of traffic, effective fire and police
protection, and efficient provision of utilities, and where such continuation
comports with the Municipal comprehensive plan. If the adjacent property is
owned by the developer (under the same ownership) and undeveloped and the
street must dead-end temporarily, the right- of-way shall be extended to the
property line, and no strip that would prevent connections with future streets
shall be reserved. A temporary turnaround shall be provided at the terminus of
any temporary dead-end street. If the adjacent property is under another
ownership there should be a permanent dead-end.
      2.   Permanent Dead-End Streets: Cul-de-sacs shall have a maximum length
of seven hundred fifty feet (750'). A cul-de-sac turn- around, having a minimum
right-of-way diameter of ninety eight feet (98'), a minimum pavement return
radius twenty five feet (25'), and a pavement diameter of seventy five feet
(75'), shall be provided at the end of every permanent dead-end street.
   (E)   Alleys: Alleys shall be prohibited in Single-Family Residence
Districts. Alleys may be required in Multiple-Family Districts and in
Commercial/Industrial Districts unless other adequate provisions for service
access are made. Adequate vehicular turnaround space shall be provided at the
terminus of any dead- end alley.
   (F)   Intersections:
      1.   Only Two Streets: Not more than two (2) streets shall intersect at
any point.
      2.   Right Angles: Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly
as possible at right angles; in no case shall two (2) streets intersect at an
angle of less than eighty degrees (80°) or more than one hundred degrees
(100°). An oblique street shall be curved approaching an intersection and shall
be approximately at right angles with said intersection for at least one
hundred feet (100') therefrom.
      3.   Alignment: Proposed new intersections along one side of an existing
street shall, wherever practicable, coincide with any existing intersections on
the opposite side of such street. Street jogs with centerline offsets of less
than one hundred twenty five feet (125') shall not be permitted, except where
the intersected street has divided lanes without median breaks at either
intersection. Intersections involving collector or arterial streets shall be at
least eight hundred feet (800') apart.
      4.   Curb Radii: To permit safe vehicular movement at corners, the
minimum curb radius at the intersection of two (2) streets shall be fifteen
feet (15') where both streets are marginal access or local and at other
intersections, not less than twenty five feet (25').
      5.   Grade: Intersections shall be designed with a minimum grade of five-
tenths of one percent (0.5%). In hilly terrain, an area having not greater than
a two percent (2%) slope for a distance of sixty feet (60') from the nearest
right-of-way line of the intersecting street shall be provided at the approach
to an intersection.
      6.   Cross-Slope: The cross-slopes of all streets, including
intersections, shall not exceed three percent (3%).
      7.   Adequate Sight Lines: Where any street intersection will involve
earth banks or existing vegetation, the developer shall cut such ground and/or
vegetation (including trees) in connection with the grading of the public
right-of-way to the extent necessary to provide adequate sight distance in
accordance with the following chart:
 
30 mph 130 ft. each way from intersection
35 mph 155 ft. each way from intersection
 
For design speeds exceeding thirty five (35) miles per hour (35 mph), sight
distance will be determined based upon AASHTO criteria.
   (G)   Reverse Curves: A tangent at least fifty feet (50') long shall be
introduced between reverse curves on local streets and one hundred feet (100')
long on collector streets.
   (H)   Road Dedications And Reservations And Improvements To Existing
Streets:
      1.   New Perimeter Streets: Street systems in new subdivisions shall be
laid out so as to eliminate or avoid new perimeter half- streets. Where an
existing half-street is adjacent to a new subdivision, the other half of the
street shall be improved and dedicated by the subdivider. The Planning
Commission may authorize a new perimeter street where the subdivider improves
and dedicates the entire required street right-of-way width within his own
subdivision boundaries.
      2.   Existing Roads: Where a subdivision borders an existing narrow road
or when the Comprehensive Plan, Official Map, or zoning setback regulations
indicate plans for realignment or widening a road that would require use of
some of the land in the subdivision, the applicant shall be required to improve
and dedicate at his expense such areas for widening or realignment of such
roads as are specifically and uniquely attributable to his subdivision and to
reserve for public use any portion of the right-of-way determined not to be
specifically and uniquely attributable to his subdivision.
      3.   Excess Right-Of-Way: Right-of-way in excess of the standards set
forth in the Table of Street Design Specifications shall be required to be
dedicated when:
         (a)   Due to topography, additional width is necessary to provide
adequate earth slopes; or
         (b)   Due to the location of railroad tracks, additional width is
needed to construct overpasses, underpasses, and approaches thereto.
      4.   "Specifically And Uniquely Attributable" Defined: For purposes of
this section, the phrase "specifically and uniquely attributable" shall mean as
a minimum that areas currently zoned or to be zoned Single-Family for
residential uses in the Comprehensive Plan shall require marginal access,
local, or collector streets, depending on density; that areas currently zoned
or to be zoned for multi-family residential uses in the Comprehensive Plan
shall require local, boulevard, collector, minor arterial, or principal
arterial streets, depending on density; that areas currently zoned or to be
zoned for commercial uses in the Comprehensive Plan shall require local,
collector, minor arterial, or principal arterial streets, depending on whether
same is a neighborhood, community, or regional area; and that areas currently
zoned or to be zoned for industrial uses in the Comprehensive Plan shall
require collector, minor arterial, or principal arterial streets, depending on
the size of the industrial area. (Ord. 91-2, 1-21-1991; amd. Ord. 18-08, 6-3-
2019)
10-31-3.6: STREET IMPROVEMENTS STANDARDS:
All new streets shall be graded, curbed, and surfaced in accordance with the
standards of Illinois Department of Transportation and the provisions of the
subsections below.
   (A)   Curb And Gutter: All streets shall be bounded by concrete curbs and
gutters.
   (B)   Pavement: All streets and alleys shall be paved in accordance with the
minimum standards as indicated below:
      1.   Alleys: Six inch (6") thick non-reinforced concrete.
      2.   Marginal Access, Local:
         (a)   Six inch (6") thick reinforced Portland cement concrete
pavement; or
         (b)   Seven inch (7") thick non-reinforced Portland cement concrete;
or
         (c)   Asphaltic concrete construction meeting Department of
Transportation specifications and satisfactorily meeting Director of
Engineering Services' specifications.
      3.   Collector, Minor Arterial:
         (a)   Seven inch (7") thick reinforced Portland cement concrete; or
         (b)   Eight inch (8") thick non-reinforced Portland cement concrete;
or
         (c)   Asphaltic concrete construction meeting Department of
Transportation specifications and satisfactorily meeting Director of
Engineering Services' specifications.
      4.   Principal Arterial:
         (a)   Eight inch (8") thick reinforced Portland cement concrete; or
         (b)   Nine inch (9") thick non-reinforced Portland cement concrete; or
         (c)   Asphaltic concrete construction meeting Department of
Transportation specifications and satisfactorily meeting Director of
Engineering Services' specifications.
The above thickness requirements shall be increased if traffic volume, subgrade
or other conditions show justifications for increased thickness. A subbase or
base shall be constructed in accordance with the appropriate articles of the
standard specifications when required by the Director of Engineering Services.
A subbase or base with an underdrain system may be required in areas where a
combination or proposed street grade and soil type may lead to subgrade erosion
and pavement undermining. The City may require additional engineering
documentation to establish that the above standards are appropriate for the
reasons stated in this paragraph.
Pavements shall be constructed in accordance with these standard specifications
and in conformity with the lines, dimensions and grades shown on the plans and
to the form and dimensions shown on the detail drawings included with and being
part of these specifications. (Ord. 91-2, 1-21-1991; amd. Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-31-3.7: BLOCKS:
   (A)   Block Width: Blocks shall be sufficiently wide to accommodate two (2)
tiers of lots having the minimum depth required by the zoning district
regulations; provided, that this requirement may be waived in blocks adjacent
to local collector or collector streets, railroads, or water courses.
   (B)   Block Length: No block shall be longer than one thousand feet (1,000')
nor shorter than three hundred feet (300'). (Ord. 91-2, 1-21-1991; amd. Ord.
18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-31-3.8: SIDEWALKS:
Sidewalks shall be installed on both sides of all streets. Sidewalks shall be
installed at the time the lot is developed or prior to issuance of the
occupancy permit.
   (A)   Sidewalk Construction Standards:
      1.   Relationship To Curb: Sidewalks shall be located one foot (1')
inside the right-of-way line or on a line to be given by the City Engineer when
it is impossible or not feasible to build or construct the same as aforesaid.
      2.   Width: Sidewalks shall be at least four feet (4') wide.
      3.   Thickness Of Concrete: All sidewalks shall be constructed of
concrete at least four inches (4") thick, except that across driveways the
thickness shall be increased to six inches (6").
      4.   Grade: No sidewalk shall be constructed at a grade steeper than ten
percent (10%).
      5.   Ramps At Intersections: Curbs shall be cut and sidewalks shall be
ramped at all intersections so as to enhance the mobility of handicapped
individuals. Ramps shall equal or exceed the standards of the Illinois Capital
Development Board. (Ord. 91-2, 1-21-1991; amd. Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-31-3.9: UTILITIES:
All utilities provided as new installations within a subdivision shall be
placed in the right-of-way or in easements, and shall be provided under ground,
unless an exception or exemption has been granted.
   (A)   Responsibility: For all major subdivisions, the subdivider shall make
the necessary arrangements with the appropriate utility companies for the
proper installation of utilities to assure that all lots have adequate gas,
electrical, and communications service.
   (B)   Requirements: All underground electric distribution circuits installed
by the utility company within the City shall be installed in accordance with
the Safety Rules for the Installation and Maintenance of Electric Supply and
Communication Lines, U.S. Department of Commerce, National Bureau of Standards,
and General Order No. 160, Rules for Construction of Electric Power and
Communication Lines, Illinois Commerce Commission.
   (C)   Enforcement: The building inspector shall not issue any occupancy
permits until all utilities have been installed in the subdivision.
   (D)   Exceptions: The requirements for underground utilities shall not apply
in the following instances:
      1.   Principal electric distribution feeder circuits and electric
transmission circuits shall not be required to be installed under ground.
      2.   Any service which is considered by the utility company to be
unfeasible for undergrounding, due to high voltage or inordinately high and
unjustified cost, may be provided overhead when authorized by the City Council.
      3.   When topographic or soil conditions cause the cost of undergrounding
to be extremely and unjustifiably high, services may be provided overhead when
authorized by the City Council.
      4.   When a subdivision is developed adjacent to or abutting an existing
development in which the primary feeder lines have been installed overhead, the
new subdivision may use the overhead lines with the following provisions:
         (a)   The service lines to the buildings in the new subdivision shall
be installed under ground.
         (b)   All additional necessary feeder lines shall be installed under
ground.
      5.   When a building is constructed on a single unoccupied lot in an area
which is fully developed with overhead electric and communication service, the
building may use the overhead service line if it completes the development of
the area.
      6.   Utilities provided as new installations to lots for industrial
purposes may be provided overhead.
   (E)   Exemptions: The following specific facilities shall be exempt from the
requirements of this chapter:
      1.   Poles used exclusively for street lighting.
      2.   Poles, overhead lines, and associated overhead structures,
authorized by the City Council, crossing or entering any portion of a district
from which overhead wires have been prohibited, and originating in an area in
which overhead wires are allowed.
      3.   Overhead lines attached to the exterior of a building by means of a
bracket or similar device, and extending from one location on the building to
another on the same building, or to an adjacent building without crossing any
public street or right-of- way.
      4.   Radio antenna and associated structures and equipment used for
furnishing communication service.
      5.   Service terminals and necessary pad-mounted electric equipment
installed above ground, used to distribute communication and electric service
in underground systems. (Ord. 91-2, 1-21-1991; amd. Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-31-3.10: WATER FACILITIES:
   (A)   Water Distribution System: Every subdivision shall be provided with a
complete water distribution system adequate to serve all lots within the
subdivision. The water distribution system shall be designed according to
standard specifications and shall be approved by the Director of Engineering
Services and the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency. Whenever a water
main is extended it shall be extended across the entire frontage of the
property being subdivided and it shall be connected to any other mains which
front on or are adjacent to the subdivision to provide for looping of the water
system.
   (B)   Fire Flow Requirements: The engineer for the subdivider shall
calculate the expected fire flow requirements within the subdivision based upon
the intended zoning and expected land use in accordance with the Fire Code,
latest adopted edition. Also taken into consideration when determining the size
of pipe to be installed shall be the anticipated demand for water by downstream
properties based on anticipated development of such properties based on the
Comprehensive Plan for such expansion areas.
   (C)   Individual Service Connections: Individual service connections within
single-family residential subdivisions shall be extended from the main to
within one foot (1') of the lot line of each lot with an approved corporation
and curb box and clearly marked with a fence post or similar material to
facilitate their locations.
   (D)   Fire Flow Tests: Upon written request to the Director of Engineering
Services, the City will perform fire flow tests on the existing water mains to
be extended and provide the data to the subdivider's engineer.
   (E)   Fire Hydrants: Fire hydrants of the type approved by the Director of
Engineering Services shall be installed according to standard engineering
practices and shall be placed at intervals of not more than three hundred feet
(300'). (Ord. 91-2, 1-21-1991; amd. Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-31-3.11: SANITARY SEWERS:
All proposed sanitary sewer facilities shall comply with the regulations of the
Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, and must be approved by the ACO.
   (A)   When Public System Available:
      1.   Whenever the subdivision any point of which is within three hundred
feet (300') of an existing publicly owned sewer main or other collection system
and who have the right to extend public sewer mains or private sewer laterals
from said property to said existing publicly owned sewer main or other
collection system either by way of street, alley, public way, public easement,
or private easement the subdivider shall construct sewer mains, where
technically feasible, which shall be connected to such public sewer and shall
provide sewer to all lots within the subdivision.
      2.   All sewer main construction shall be done according to standard
engineering practices.
      3.   Whenever a sanitary sewer system is extended it shall be extended
across the entire frontage or frontages of the property to be improved by the
extension unless the City has determined, because of land contours or the
presence of other mains, that no other property can be technically or needs to
be served by such an extension.
   (B)   Interim Disposal Systems: Where a sanitary sewer cannot be extended as
required by subsection (A) of this section, the developer shall construct a
sanitary sewer system to serve all lots within the subdivision and shall
provide sewage treatment by means of an approved sewage treatment plant which
shall be operated and maintained by the developer until such time as the system
can be connected to the publicly owned system. Said system shall be temporarily
capped. Where the land covered by the preliminary plat contains not more than
ten (10) lots, individual sewage disposal systems may be used and must be
installed according to applicable laws and regulations of the appropriate
approving agency. (Ord. 91-2, 1-21-1991; amd. Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-31-3.12: EASEMENTS:
   (A)   Utility Easements: Easements at least ten feet (10') wide shall be
provided for public and private utilities along the front right-of-way lines of
the public streets. Easements located elsewhere shall be at least twenty feet
(20') wide and if along lot lines, they shall be centered on the lot lines.
   (B)   Drainage Easements: Adequate easements for stormwater drainage shall
be established along any natural drainage channel and in any other locations
where necessary to provide satisfactory disposal of stormwater from streets,
alleys, and all other portions of the subdivision. The precise location and
minimum widths of said easements shall be determined by the Municipal Engineer.
(Ord. 91-2, 1-21-1991; amd. Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-31-3.13: DRAINAGE AND STORM SEWERS:
   (A)   Design Criteria: The Planning Commission shall not recommend the
approval of plat unless, the Services Director of Engineering Services and
Director of Development Services determine that the proposed provisions for
stormwater drainage are adequate within boundaries of the subdivision. Drainage
improvements in the subdivision shall be coordinated with existing and planned
drainage improvements elsewhere so as to form an integrated City system. The
stormwater drainage system shall be separate and independent of the sanitary
sewer system and shall meet the following design criteria:
      1.   Principal and minor arterial streets:
         (a)   Flow from a "10-year storm" shall not inundate the center twenty
feet (20') of the pavement.
         (b)   Flow from a "50-year storm" shall be carried without damage to
any building.
      2.   Collector streets:
         (a)   Flow from a "10-year storm" shall not inundate the center ten
feet (10') of the pavement.
         (b)   Flow from a "50-year storm" shall be carried without damage to
any building.
      3.   Local streets:
         (a)   Flow from a "10-year storm" shall not top the curb.
         (b)   Flow from a "50-year storm" shall be carried without damage to
any building.
   (B)   Catch Basins Or Inlets: Catch basins or inlets, if required, shall be
constructed so that the majority of surface water shall be intercepted before
reaching the intersection, and not carried for a distance of more than four
hundred feet (400') of the pavement.
   (C)   Accommodation Of Upstream Drainage Areas: A culvert or other drainage
facility large enough to accommodate potential runoff from the entire drainage
area upstream from the proposed subdivision shall be provided in accordance
with the City's standard specifications. Potential runoff shall be determined
on the basis of the maximum development of the upstream area that is permitted
or to be permitted under the Comprehensive Plan.
   (D)   Areas Subject To Flooding: Whenever a plat is submitted for an area
that is subject to flooding, the City Council may require appropriate
protective measures, including the filling of the flood prone area to a level
equal to the regulatory flood elevation, if any. (Ord. 91-2, 1-21-1991; amd.
Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-31-3.14: SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL:
In the development of any subdivision, the following erosion and sedimentation
control regulation shall be observed:
   (A)   The developer shall protect the development site from soil erosion and
shall protect downstream property from sedimentation deposits during the
construction of the subdivision. Practices contained in "Procedures and
Standards for Urban Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control in Illinois" shall
be employed in the preparation of an erosion and sedimentation control plan
which shall be approved by the City Engineer prior to any earth disturbing
activity taking place. (Ord. 91-2, 1-21-1991; amd. Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-31-3.15: DEDICATIONS FOR PUBLIC USE:
The City Council may require the developer to dedicate (i.e., to transfer
without compensation) to the City of East Moline or other appropriate
governmental entity suitable parcel(s) of land within the subdivision for
public purposes provided such facilities are otherwise required by this
chapter. Any such dedicated area shall be shown on the final plat.
   (A)   Reservations For Public Use: Besides requiring the developer to
dedicate parcels for public purposes, the City Council may require that he
reserve land for parks, playgrounds, schools, or other public purposes in
locations designated in the City's comprehensive plan. Since public acquisition
of reserved land requires compensation, it is not essential that the need for
such land be uniquely and specifically attributable to the subdivision 1 .
      1.   Adopted: There is hereby adopted an Official Map dated July 18,
1966, which shall be applicable to all land situated within the City, and shall
also be applicable to contiguous territory within one and one-half (11/2) miles
from the corporate limits of the City and not included within the corporate
limits of any other municipality. The Official Map shall be filed in the Office
of the City Clerk and is made part of this chapter by reference.
      2.   Planned Public Improvements To Be Shown On Map: The Official Map may
show indication of sites for planned public facilities. Public facility sites
which may be indicated on the Official Map may include but are not limited to:
sites for new trafficways or widening of existing trafficways; school sites;
recreational sites; public building sites; and sites for future storm drainage,
electrical or other public service or utility easements.
      3.   Availability Of Sites For Planned Public Improvements:
         (a)   Whenever the Official Map indicates the necessity for providing
a site for a planned public facility, the Council may require that the site for
the public use be designated on the subdivision plat before granting approval
to such plat; and, furthermore, that the site be held for that specific public
use for a period of one year from the date of approval of the final plat. When
such designation has been required, the Council shall notify the responsible
public agency in writing of the designation within ten (10) days.
         (b)   Whenever a site for public use, shown on the Official Map, has
been required to be indicated on a subdivision plat, the responsible agency
having jurisdiction of such use shall acquire the land so designated by
purchase or commence proceedings to acquire the land by condemnation within one
year from date of final approval of the plat; and, if it does not do so within
such period of one year, the land so designated may then be used by the owners
in any other manner consistent with this chapter, this title, or any other
provision of this Code or other ordinance of the City.
      4.   Amendments Or Additions To The Official Map: Amendments to the
Official Map, including the indication of additional public sites to be shown
on the map, shall be considered amendments to this chapter and therefore shall
be as specified in this chapter for amendments to this chapter. Any public
agency requesting the establishment of the Official Map of a future public site
or easement which is not included in the Comprehensive Plan, shall indicate to
the Plan Commission the need for the site in the particular location specified.
The Plan Commission, before making a favorable recommendation for the inclusion
on the Official Map of such site by the Council, shall find that this public
site location is determined to be necessary to provide public service
consistent with the Comprehensive Plan of the community and shall so indicate
in its minutes. (Ord. 91-2, 1-21-1991; amd. Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/11-12-8.
10-31-4: PLATS AND PLANS:
10-31-4.1: PRE-FILING CONFERENCE:
Prior to the submission of the initial plat, a pre-filing conference may be
held between the developer and appropriate City staff. The developer shall
present a concept sketch of the proposed development. City staff shall use a
standardized checklist to review the proposed development for conformance to
this chapter. (Ord. 91-2, 1-21-1991; amd. Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-31-4.2: PRELIMINARY PLATS:
Except as specifically provided below, every person who proposes to subdivide
any land located within the subdivision jurisdiction of the City of East Moline
shall file six (6) copies of the preliminary plat of said subdivision with the
Director of Development Services at least three (3) weeks prior to a regularly
scheduled meeting of the Planning Commission.
He shall also file one copy of the preliminary plat and supporting data with
the appropriate Soil and Water Conservation District. Said district shall have
not more than thirty (30) days to submit any comments it might wish to make to
the Planning Commission 1 .
Whenever a large tract is to be developed in stages and only a portion of that
tract is to be submitted for final plat approval, a preliminary plat of the
entire tract shall be submitted.
All preliminary plats shall be reviewed and acted upon in accordance with 65
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-12-8 and the provisions of the subsections
below.
Exception: A preliminary plat shall not be required for minor subdivisions, or
land that is specifically exempted from the Illinois Plats Act as now or
hereafter amended 2 .
   (A)   Information Required: Every preliminary plat shall be prepared by a
land surveyor registered in Illinois at a scale of one hundred feet (100') or
less to the inch provided the resultant drawing does not exceed thirty six
inches by twenty four inches (36" x 24"). Said preliminary plat, together with
the supporting data, shall provide all of the following information:
      1.   Names and addresses of the owner, subdivider (if not owner), and
registered land surveyor;
      2.   Proposed name of the subdivision and all adjoining subdivisions;
      3.   Zoning district classification of the tract to be subdivided and
proposed setbacks;
      4.   North arrow, graphic scale, and date of map;
      5.   Dimensions of the tract, and its gross area;
      6.   Topography of the tract to be subdivided as indicated by two foot
(2') contour data for land having slopes of zero percent to four percent (0% to
4%), five foot (5') contour data for land having slopes between four percent
and twelve percent (4% and 12%), and ten foot (10') contour data for land
having slopes of twelve percent (12%) or more;
      7.   Locations of such features as bodies of water, ponding areas,
natural drainageways, railroads, cemeteries, bridges, parks, schools,
buildings, areas subject to flooding, etc.;
      8.   Locations and right-of-way widths of all existing and proposed
streets and alleys;
      9.   Locations, widths, and purposes of all existing and proposed
easements;
      10.   All proposed deed restrictions and covenants;
      11.   Location and size of existing and proposed sanitary and storm
sewers, water mains, and any appurtenances thereto;
      12.   Locations, types, and approximate sizes of all other existing and
proposed utilities;
      13.   Locations, dimensions, and areas of all parcels to be reserved or
dedicated for schools, parks/playgrounds, and other public purposes;
      14.   Locations, dimensions, and areas of all proposed or existing lots
within the subdivision numbered sequentially;
      15.   For all contiguous holdings of the owner; including land owned by
the same person, corporation, firm, entity, partnership, or unincorporated
association or owned by different corporations, firms, partnerships, entities,
or unincorporated associations in which a stockholder, partner, or associate,
or a member of his family owns an interest in each corporation, firm,
partnership, entity, or unincorporated association; with an indication of the
portion proposed for subdivision: an affidavit of ownership, which shall
include the dates the respective holdings of land were acquired, together with
the book and page of each conveyance to the present owner as recorded in the
County Recorder of Deeds' Office or other official records; the name and
address and telephone number of the legal owner of the property, the
subdivider, if different from the legal owner, the land surveyor and engineer,
and the agents of any of these persons; the name, address and telephone number
of the contract owner, if any, of the property and the date the contract of
sale was executed; and, if any corporations are involved, a complete list of
all directors, officers, and stockholders owning more than five percent (5%) of
any class of stock of each corporation; and, if a trust is involved, a complete
list of the names of the trustees, and the names and addresses and telephone
numbers of all beneficiaries of the trust.
      16.   The location by township, range, section, or by other legal
description;
      17.   A list of requested variances and justifications.
   (B)   Utility Company Notification: It is the subdivider's responsibility to
notify the appropriate public utilities. Proof of notification shall be
submitted with the preliminary plat to the City for City approval.
   (C)   Planning Commission Action: The Planning Commission shall either
recommend approval, conditional approval, or disapproval of the application for
the preliminary plat within ninety (90) days from the date of said application
or the filing of the last item of required supporting data, whichever date is
later, unless the Planning Commission and the subdivider mutually agree to
extend this time limit 3 . If the Planning Commission recommends disapproval of
the preliminary plat, they shall furnish to the applicant within the ninety
(90) day period a written statement specifying the aspects in which the
proposed plat fails to conform to this chapter and/or the Official Map. If the
Planning Commission recommends approval of the preliminary plat, it shall
promptly so inform the City Council.
   (D)   Appeals Process: If the preliminary plat is not approved, the Director
of Development Services shall write "Not Approved" and the date of the Planning
Commission's action on the prints, and shall transmit to the subdivider one
print with a letter stating the reasons for the disapproval. The subdivider may
transmit an amended plat to the Planning Commission for consideration.
If the subdivider is not satisfied with the decision of the Planning Commission
on the preliminary plat, then the subdivider may appeal the decision to the
City Council. An appeal must be made by letter addressed to the Mayor and City
Council, stating the reasons for the appeal. Said letter must be received by
the Director of Development Services no less than ten (10) days following the
date of the Planning Commission's decision. The letter of appeal shall be
placed on the next regular City Council meeting agenda after it is received by
the Director of Development Services. The Director of Development Services
shall also provide to the City Council the preliminary plat, the Planning
Commission's meeting minutes pertaining to the plat, and the reports and
recommendations made to the Planning Commission by the Director of Development
Services. The City Council shall have thirty (30) days from the time the appeal
is first placed on its agenda either to: reaffirm the Planning Commission's
decision on the preliminary plat; to approve the preliminary plat as submitted
by the subdivider; or to approve the preliminary plat with modifications.
   (E)   Action By The City Council: If the Planning Commission has recommended
approval of a preliminary plat, the City Council, by resolution, shall either
accept or reject said plat within thirty (30) days after their next regularly
scheduled meeting following the Planning Commission's action. If the City
Council rejects the preliminary plat, their resolution shall specify the
aspects in which the plat fails to comply with this chapter. The City Clerk
shall attach a certified copy of the Council's resolution of approval or
disapproval to the preliminary plat. One copy of the resolution and plat shall
be retained by the Clerk, one copy shall be filed with the Director of
Development Services and one copy shall be given to the subdivider. City
Council approval shall not qualify a preliminary plat for recording. (Ord. 91-
2, 1-21-1991; amd. Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
 
Notes
1 1. 70 ILCS 405/22.02a.
2 2. 765 ILCS 205/1(b).
3 1. 65 ILCS 5/11-12-8.
10-31-4.3: IMPROVEMENT PLANS:
After the City Council has approved the preliminary plat, but prior to
submission of the final plat, the subdivider shall furnish four (4) copies of
the plans and specifications for all improvements to be installed within or in
conjunction with the proposed subdivision to the Director of Engineering
Services review. These plans and specifications shall be signed and sealed by
the registered professional engineer responsible for their preparation. Until
the Director of Engineering Services certifies in writing that the proposed
improvements conform to generally accepted engineering practices and to the
standards imposed in this chapter: the building inspector shall not issue any
permit to allow construction of said improvements; and the City Council shall
not act upon the application for final plat approval.
   (A)   Information Required: Improvement plans shall consist of black or blue
line prints not larger than thirty six inches by twenty four inches (36" x
24"). These plans and the related specifications shall provide all of the
following information:
      1.   Topography of the tract, both before and after development at the
same scale as required in the preliminary plat;
      2.   Existing and proposed elevations along the centerlines of all
streets;
      3.   Radii of all curves and lengths of tangents on all streets;
      4.   Locations and typical cross-section of street pavements including
curbs/gutters and catch basins;
      5.   Locations and typical cross-section of sidewalks and driveway
aprons;
      6.   Locations, sizes, and invert elevations of all existing and proposed
sanitary sewers, storm sewers, and fire hydrants, showing connections to any
existing or proposed utility systems;
      7.   Locations and sizes of all water, gas, electric, and other
utilities;
      8.   Locate area(s) for removal of trees six inches (6") or larger;
      9.   All proposed measures to control erosion and sedimentation;
      10.   High water elevations of all lakes/streams adjoining or within the
tract;
      11.   Such other information as the Director of Development Services or
Director of Engineering Services may reasonably require to perform their duties
under this section.
   (B)   Inspections Required: The subdivider/developer shall notify the
Director of Engineering Services of both the start and completion of
construction of approved improvements.
      1.   The Director of Engineering Services shall inspect said improvements
while they are under construction. If he determines that they are being built
in violation of this chapter, he shall promptly notify the Administrator who,
in turn, shall issue a stop order. All public improvements proposed to be made
under the provisions of this chapter shall be inspected during the course of
construction by the Director of Engineering Services or a duly designated
deputy selected and retained by the subdivider and approved by the City. All
fees and costs connected with such inspection and in reviewing the plan and
specifications for such improvements shall be paid by the subdivider. The fees
and cost shall be set at the prevailing rate.
      2.   In addition to the detailed requirements listed below, the inspector
shall maintain a daily diary in a standard format acceptable to the Director of
Engineering Services. Copies of the daily diary entries shall be provided to
the Director of Engineering Services on a weekly basis during construction.
         (a)   Content: The daily entries shall include at least the following
information:
            (1)   Weather conditions.
            (2)   Site conditions.
            (3)   Contractor's working hours.
            (4)   Inspector's hours on the site.
            (5)   An explanation of the actual work performed by the contractor
that day.
            (6)   Specific information about material tests taken.
            (7)   Description of any problems.
         (b)   Purpose: The purpose of the diary is to provide backup
information for the developer's engineer and the Director of Engineering
Services to recommend acceptance of the improvements by the City Council and
provide actual construction records of any problems that may develop.
         (c)   Format: The general format of the diary must be approved by the
Director of Engineering Services before construction begins.
      3.   The inspector shall make and document the following inspections:
         (a)   Storm And Sanitary Sewer And Water And Main Improvements:
            (1)   Inspect all materials and document pertinent items such as
pipe manufacturer, class and size.
            (2)   Reject any defective material and insure that it is not used
on the job.
            (3)   Observe the actual pipe laying operation to insure that all
joints are properly made, the pipes are true to line and grade, and the bedding
and backfill are done according to the specifications.
            (4)   Document the depth and type of bedding, trench conditions,
location of all service laterals, backfilling, and location of all utilities
installed and encountered. Location measurements shall be of the accuracy and
type required by the Director of Engineering Services.
            (5)   Observe and document all final acceptance testing required by
the specifications.
         (b)   Street Improvements:
            (1)   Perform and document subgrade, subbase, base and embankment
compaction tests.
            (2)   Inspect the alignment and condition of the paving forms.
               A. Check and document subgrade depth checks.
               B. Check and document the paving machine adjustments.
            (3)   Furnish the asphalt or PC concrete mix design to the Director
of Engineering Services for approval prior to connecting paving operations.
            (4)   Inspect all concrete pours.
               A. Perform and document an appropriate number of air content and
slump measurements.
               B. Cast compression cylinders or beams and document the results
of the tests.
            (5)   Inspect the placement of all asphalts.
               A. Perform and record asphalt compaction tests.
               B. Perform at least one asphalt extraction test and one sieve
analysis from an asphalt sample taken on the job site.
      4.   The Director of Engineering Services shall also inspect required
improvements upon their completion. The City of East Moline shall not accept
any improvement until the Municipal Engineer has certified that it complies
with this chapter.
   (C)   Filing "As Built" Records: The improvements will not be recommended
for acceptance until the following is provided for the Director of Engineering
Services:
      1.   Copies of all daily diary entries.
      2.   Copies of all material test results.
      3.   Detailed reproducible cloth or polyester reproducible "as- built"
improvements construction plans of all public improvements.
      4.   Certification by the developer's engineer that all construction was
accomplished within reasonably close conformance to the plans and
specifications, and that the "as-built" plans accurately reflect actual field
conditions.
      5.   A labor and material payment and maintenance bond posted prior to
construction by the contractor of a subdivider for the installation of all
public improvements, using forms provided by the Director of Engineering
Services.
      6.   Permanent easements or agreements granted to the City for all public
improvements that are not constructed in dedicated right- of-way, using forms
provided by the Director of Engineering Services.
      7.   Accurate triangular measurements for sewer and water laterals to
permanent items, e.g., fire hydrants or manholes. The sewer and water services
shall be marked with a four inch by four inch (4" x 4") marking, that stands
five feet (5') or six feet (6') tall including a curb notch.
   (D)   Privately Developed And Operated Facilities: Where the subdivision is
to contain sewers, sewage treatment plants, water supply systems, park areas,
or other physical facilities which will not be maintained by existing public
agencies, provision should be made by trust agreement, which is a part of the
deed restrictions and which is acceptable to the proper public agencies, for
jurisdiction over the continuous maintenance, supervision, operation and
reconstruction of such facilities by the lot owners in the subdivision. (Ord.
91-2, 1-21-1991; amd. Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-31-4.4: ASSURANCE FOR COMPLETION OF REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS:
   (A)   Final Plat Approval: The City Council shall not approve any final plat
(and, hence, said final plat shall not be entitled to recording) until:
      1.   All improvements required in the approved improvements plan have
been completed by the subdivider/developer at his expense, inspected by the
Director of Engineering Services and dedicated to the City of East Moline or
other appropriate entity; or,
      2.   In accordance with the subsections below, the subdivider/developer
has provided the City of East Moline with legal assurance to guarantee the
satisfactory completion and dedication of all required improvements; or
      3.   Necessary title assurances have been given.
   (B)   Forms Of Assurance: The required legal assurance may be a performance
bond, an escrow deposit or a letter of credit. Every performance bond shall be
approved as to form by the City Attorney, and posted with the City Clerk. Any
funds held in escrow shall be deposited with an approved escrow agent.
   (C)   Amount Of Bond Or Deposit: The amount of the legal assurance shall be
equal to the Director of Engineering Services' estimate of the costs of
constructing the uncompleted portion of the required improvements plus all
required inspections fees. Any escrow deposit may be in the form of:
      1.   An irrevocable letter of credit or commitment from a lending
institution guaranteeing to the City of East Moline the availability of the
escrow funds from time to time upon demand; or
      2.   Interest bearing accounts with a financial institution authorized to
serve as an escrow agent.
   (D)   Eligible Sureties: No person shall be eligible to act as surety unless
he has been approved by the State of Illinois to act as a surety on public
works improvements.
   (E)   Term Of Assurance, Extension: The initial term of any performance bond
or escrow agreement shall not exceed two (2) years. If all the required
improvements have not been completed by the end of the two-year period, the
City Clerk, with the advice and consent of the City Council may extend said
bond/escrow agreement for one year only.
   (F)   Release Of Bond/Escrow Deposit:
      1.   The City Clerk may release up to ninety percent (90%) of the amount
of the performance bond/escrow deposit upon receipt of written authorization
from the Municipal Engineer. The amount which the Municipal Engineer authorizes
to be released shall be equal to the value of improvements actually completed
in accordance with approved plans.
      2.   The balance of the amount of the performance bond/escrow deposit
shall not be released until:
         (a)   The Municipal Engineer has certified to the City Clerk in
writing that all required improvements have been satisfactorily completed; and
         (b)   Said improvements and corresponding right-of-way have been
accepted by and dedicated to the City of East Moline or other appropriate
entity.
   (G)   Failure To Complete Improvements: If all the required improvements
have not been completed by the end of the two-year period (or three-year
period, in the case of an extension), the Director of Development Services,
with the assistance of the City Attorney, may:
      1.   Require the surety to perform on the bond, and to pay to the City of
East Moline an equal amount to the cost of completing the required improvements
(as estimated by the Director of Engineering Services) or the amount of the
bond not theretofore released, whichever is less; or
      2.   Order the escrow agent to retain all escrowed funds needed to
complete the required improvements, and to return the balance (if any) of such
funds to the subdivider/developer. (Ord. 91-2, 1-21-1991; amd. Ord. 18-08, 6-3-
2019)
10-31-4.5: FINAL PLATS:
The Rock Island County Recorder of Deeds shall not record any final plat of a
subdivision located within the subdivision jurisdiction of the City of East
Moline until said final plat has been approved by the City Council. The City
Council shall not approve any final plat unless they determine that it is in
compliance with all pertinent requirements of this chapter including those set
forth in the subsections below.
   (A)   Filing, Time Limits: The subdivider of every subdivision, who desires
final plat approval shall file six (6) black or blue line prints of the final
plat and supporting data with the Director of Development Services not later
than one year after preliminary plat approval has been granted.
   (B)   Information Required: Every final plat shall be prepared by a land
surveyor authorized to practice land surveying in the State of Illinois on new
linen tracing cloth- or polyester-based film with waterproof black ink at a
scale not greater than one hundred feet equals one inch (100' = 1"), provided
that the resultant drawing shall not be less than eight and one-half inch by
fourteen inches (81/2" x 14") and shall not exceed twenty four inches by thirty
six inches (24" x 36") square. The final plat and supporting data shall
portray/provide all of the following information:
      1.   North arrow, graphic scale, and data;
      2.   Name of subdivider and subdivision;
      3.   Accurate metes and bounds or other adequate legal description of the
tract tied to section or one-fourth (1/4) section corner;
      4.   Accurate boundary lines, with dimensions and bearings or angles
which provide a survey of the tract, closing with an error of closure of not
more than one foot in fifteen thousand feet (1' in 15,000') and provide a copy
of the closure calculations;
      5.   Reference to recorded plats of adjoining platted land by record
name, plat book and page number;
      6.   Accurate locations of all existing streets intersecting the
boundaries of the subdivision;
      7.   Right-of-way lines of all streets, other rights-of-way, easements,
areas to be reserved, and lot lines with accurate dimensions, angles, or
bearings and curve data, including radii, arcs or chords, points of tangency,
central angles and accompanying legal descriptions;
      8.   Name and right-of-way width of every proposed street;
      9.   Location, width and purpose of any existing or proposed easement;
      10.   Number of each lot, lot dimensions and (in a separate list) lot
areas;
      11.   Purpose(s) for which sites, other than private lots, are reserved;
      12.   Building or setback lines with accurate dimensions;
      13.   Restrictions of all types which will run with the land and become
covenants in the deeds of lots;
      14.   The names of all legal owners and other parties with an interest,
whether recorded or not, in the property being subdivided, together with formal
irrevocable offers of dedication to the public of all streets, local government
uses, utilities, parks, and easements, signed by all parties of interest or
their authorized agents, in a form approved by the City Attorney, if the plat
is proposed for final approval without improvements in place and accepted with
a deed of dedication to the public in fee simple absolute unless otherwise
called for on the plat of such lands; and with a commitment for title insurance
policy or title opinion from a licensed attorney showing that those signing the
plat are necessary and sufficient to create the subdivision and, prior to
signing the plat, a title policy for the local government in the sum of ten
thousand dollars ($10,000.00) for any lands or interests to be dedicated to the
public; and
      15.   Monument identification.
   (C)   Modifications And Exceptions: If the final plat is under one ownership
and is no more than five (5) lots, no formal commission approval is needed and
the plans can go directly to the City Council unless there are new streets,
other public improvements, or easements of egress or ingress.
   (D)   Certificates Required: As required by State law 1 , the following
certificates shall be executed on the final plat:
      1.   Owner's Certificate: The following is an example of the owner's
certificate:
State of Illinois    )
Rock Island County    ) SS.
City of East Moline   )
Know all men by these presents, that we/I, (name(s) of owner(s), owner(s) and
proprietor(s)) of the land shown on the accompanying plat and described in the
accompanying certificate of the surveyor do hereby certify that I/we have
caused said survey to be made and acknowledge the said plat as correct, and do
hereby adopt and accept the same and cause it to be known as (name of
subdivision).
Easements are hereby dedicated for the use of the City of East Moline, Illinois
and public facilities franchise to do business within the City of East Moline,
Illinois as indicated on the plat and marked drainage and utility easement to
install, lay, construct, renew, operate and maintain drainage ways, drainage
structures, gas, water, sewer pipes, conduits, cable, poles and wires, overhead
and under ground, with all necessary braces, guys, anchors and other appliances
for the purpose of serving the subdivision and other property with gas, water,
sewer, electric and telephone service and to overhang all lots with aerial
service wires to serve adjacent lots, together with the right to enter upon
lots at all times to install, lay, construct, renew, operate and maintain said
gas, water and sewer pipes, conduits, cables, poles, wires, braces, guys,
anchors and other appliances, and to trim and keep trimmed any trees, shrubs or
saplings that interfere or threaten to interfere with said public utility
equipment, but same may be used for gardens, shrubs, landscaping and other
purposes that do not interfere with the use of said easement for public utility
purposes.
(Additional dedications and protective covenants, or private restrictions would
be inserted here upon the subdivider's initiative or the recommendation of the
City Plan Commission or the Council; important provisions are those specifying
the use to be made of the property and, in the case of residential use, the
minimum habitable floor area.)
Sidewalks shall be constructed at the time the structure is constructed or at
the direction of the Board of Local Improvements recommended to the City
Council the City of East Moline.
All streets, alleys, and public open spaces shown and not heretofore dedicated,
are hereby dedicated to the public.
Building setback lines are hereby established as shown on this plat, between
which lines and the property lines of the streets there shall be erected or
maintained no building structure.
The foregoing covenants (or restrictions), are to run with the land and shall
be binding on all parties and all persons claiming under them until (25 year
period is suggested), at which time said covenants (or restrictions) shall be
automatically extended for successive periods of ten (10) years unless by vote
of a majority of the then owners of the building sites covered by these
covenants (or restrictions), in whole or in part. Invalidation of any one of
the foregoing covenants (or restrictions), by judgement or court order, shall
in no way affect any of the other covenants (or restrictions), which shall
remain in full force and effect.
In witness whereof, we hereunto affix our hands and seals this            day
of                 , A.D. 19        .
             (Seal)
             (Seal)
      2.   Irrevocable Offers Of Dedication Forms:
         (a)   The following form shall be placed upon a final plat of a
subdivision whenever said plat is approved upon submission of a subdivider's
bond or escrow agreement as provided for in section
10-31-4.4 of this section
10-31-4:
The owner, or his representative, hereby irrevocably offers for dedication to
the City of East Moline, in fee simple absolute unless otherwise called for on
the plat all the streets, local government uses, easements, parks, and required
utilities shown within the subdivision plat and construction plans in
accordance with an irrevocable offer of dedication dated                       
and recorded in the Office of the Recorder of Deeds of Rock Island County,
Illinois.
         By      
         Date      
         (b)   The following form shall accompany any final plat set forth in
subsection (D)1 of this section and shall be presented for recording
simultaneously with any such plat, but shall be recorded immediately prior to
the recording of the plat.
           OFFER OF IRREVOCABLE DEDICATION
Agreement made this         day of               19      , by and between
                         ,                         , having                  
office and place of business at                   , hereinafter referred to as
"Developer", and the City of East Moline a municipal corporation having its
principal office at                                              , hereinafter
designated as "City;"
WHEREAS, the City is in the process of approving a subdivision plat entitled
                    , dated              , and made by                     ;
and
WHEREAS, said plat and the construction plans associated therewith designated
certain property interests and public improvements consisting of    
to be dedicated to the City free and clear of all encumbrances and liens,
pursuant to the provisions of Chapter          of the                      Code
of Ordinances; and
WHEREAS, the Developer, simultaneously with final plat approval or before,
shall post a subdivider's bond with the City for the construction and payment
therefor, maintenance, and dedication of said interests and improvements; and
WHEREAS, the Developer is desirous of offering for dedication the said
improvements and interests in land to the City as more particularly described
in Schedule                       attached hereto; and
WHEREAS, the Developer has delivered deed of dedication to the City to be held
in trust by it for the said improvements and interests inland as described
herein;
NOW, THEREFORE, in consideration of the City's approval of said subdivision
plat, it is mutually agreed as follows:
(1) The Developer herewith delivers to the City deed of dedication in fee
simple absolute unless otherwise called for on the plat for the premises and
improvements described in Schedule                attached hereto, said
delivery being a formal offer of dedication to the City to be held by the City
in trust until the acceptance or rejection of such offer of dedication by the
City Council.
(2) The Developer agrees that said formal offer of dedication is irrevocable
and can be accepted by the local government at any time.
(3) The Developer agrees to complete the construction and maintenance of the
land and improvements pursuant to the Subdivider's Bond and the provisions of
Chapter 10-31 of the Code of Ordinances and any conditions of approval of said
subdivision and upon acceptance by the City of the offer of dedication shall
furnish, within thirty (30) days after written notice from the City of said
acceptance of the offer of dedication, to the City a title insurance policy
issued by a licensed title insurance company authorized to do business in the
State of Illinois in the amount of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00),
certifying that the premises are free and clear of all liens and encumbrances
and that fee simple title or other specific interest reposes in the City and
shall furnish to the City a check for all necessary fees and taxes to record
the deed(s) heretofore delivered.
(4) That this irrevocable offer of dedication shall run with the land and shall
be binding on all assigns, grantees, successors, or heirs of the Developer.
         CITY OF    
      (Seal)
            Mayor
      Attest:       
         City Clerk
      Approved as to Form:
         City Attorney       DEVELOPER
      Attest:             
         (Seal)         
      3.   Notary Public's Certificate:
   State of Illinois    )
            ) SS
   County of        )
I,                          , a Notary Public in and for the County aforesaid,
do hereby certify that  (owners)  are personally known to me to be the same
persons whose names are subscribed to the foregoing instrument, and that they
appear before me this day in person and acknowledge that they signed and sealed
the same as their free and voluntary act for the uses and purposes therein set
forth, including the release waiver of the right of homestead.
   Given under my hand and Notarial Seal this          day of                ,
19        .
                  Notary Public
      4.   Surveyor's Certificate: The following surveyor's certificate shall
accompany or be placed on the final plat:
   State of Illinois    )
         ) SS
   Rock Island County   )
I,                           an Illinois Registered Land Surveyor, hereby
certify that the annexed plat is a true and correct representation of a survey
made by me or under my direction according to the surveying laws of the State
of Illinois and the                    Subdivision Ordinance, or the following
described property to wit:
Monuments as shown on the plat are set or will be set within 30 days after the
completion of the required improvements and their acceptance by the City, and
such monuments are or will be sufficient to enable the survey to be retraced
and will occupy the positions shown thereon.
(1)   (No) part of the property covered by this plat of subdivision is located
within a special flood hazard area as identified by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency.
In witness I hereunto set by hand and seal this          day of              ,
A.D. 19        .
      5.   County Clerk's Certificate:
I,                          , County Clerk of Rock Island County, Illinois, do
hereby certify that I find no unpaid or forfeited taxes against any of the real
estate included within this plat.
            County Clerk
            Date
      6.   Certificate Of City Council:
I,                          , Mayor of the City of East Moline, do hereby
certify that the plat shown hereon was duly presented to the City Council and
approved at a meeting of same held on  date
            Mayor
         Attest:      
            City Clerk
      7.   City Clerk's Certificate: The following form shall be used for
certification by the City Clerk:
I,                          , City Clerk in and for the said City of East
Moline, do hereby certify that all due assessments have been paid upon the real
estate described on the accompanying plat.
In witness whereof, I hereunto set by hand and official seal this
                    day of                , A.D. 19         .
            City Clerk
      8.   Certificate To Approve Subdivisions Of Five Lots Or Less: The
following form shall be used for the approval of subdivisions of five (5) lots
or less by the ACO's                        in accordance with subsection (C)
of this section.
We, the undersigned Director of Development Services and Director of
Engineering Services, do hereby certify that the accompanying plat has been
examined and found to be in compliance with the requirements of the Subdivision
Ordinance and recommend approval of this plat by the City of
                                   .
            ACO
            ACO
      9.   Roadway Access And Sewage Disposal Systems:
         (a)   The following form shall be required on the face of the plat
where roadway access is to a highway under the jurisdiction of the Illinois
Department of Transportation or another relevant local highway authority.
This plat approved with respect to roadway access under provisions of 765
Illinois Compiled Statutes 205/2.
   Agency
   Title
   Date
         (b)   The following form shall be required on the face of the plat
where any part of the platted land will not be served by a public sewer system.
This plat is approved with respect to sewage disposal systems under provisions
of 765 Illinois Compiled Statutes 205/2.
   Agency
   Title
   Date
      10.   Required Disclosures To Be On Face Of Final Plat: The following
disclosures are to be placed on the face of the final plat:
         (a)   Either of the following, depending upon which is the most
appropriate, shall be placed upon the face of the final plat by a registered
professional engineer and the owner or his duly authorized attorney:
To the best of our knowledge and belief the drainage of surface waters both
within and around this subdivision will not be changed be the construction of
same or any part thereof.
   (seal)
         Registered Professional Engineer
         Registration No.    
         Owner or Attorney
To the best of our knowledge and belief the drainage of surface waters either
within or around this subdivision will be changed by the construction of same
or parts thereof but adequate provision has been made to collect and divert
said surface waters to public drains or private drains to which the owner has
legal access and said provisions are such that the capacity of no natural or
man-made drain will be exceeded and no damage to adjoining properties will
incur because of said provisions.
   (seal)
         Registered Professional Engineer
         Registration    
         Owner or Attorney
         (b)   In addition to one of the above, the owner or subdivider shall
disclose on the face of said subdivision final plat the following if a bond or
escrow agreement is provided:
I hereby disclose and give notice to all that this subdivision has been
approved by the City upon the condition that I post bond or enter into an
escrow agreement to secure installation of all improvements required by said
City. The terms of same allow me a period of two (2) years to install said
improvements or provide the City the right to install same to the extent of
funds provided by such security. City ordinances do not permit, however,
occupancy of any premises until adequate provision for access for water and
sanitary sewerage are made.
            Owner or Subdivider
         (c)   Also, any disclosure required by State or Federal Statute shall
be displayed upon said plat.
   (E)   Action By City Council: The City Council shall either approve or
disapprove the application for final plat approval by resolution within sixty
(60) days from the date of said application or the filing of the last item of
required supporting data, whichever date is later, unless the City Council and
the subdivider mutually agree to extend this time limit 2 . The City Council
shall not approve any final plat unless:
      1.   The final plat substantially conforms to the approved preliminary
plat if required; and
      2.   The final plat manifests substantial compliance with the design and
improvements standards of this chapter and the Official Map; and
      3.   To the City Council's knowledge and belief, the final plat complies
with all pertinent statutory requirements; and
      4.   Either of the following has been met:
         (a)   All required improvements have been completed, inspected,
accepted, and dedicated; or
         (b)   The subdivider/developer has posted an acceptable form of
assurance as stated in subsection
10-31-4.4(A) of this section
10-31-4.
If the City Council disapproves the final plat, their resolution shall specify
the aspects in which the plat fails to meet the above conditions for approval.
(Ord. 91-2, 1-21-1991; amd. Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
 
Notes
1 1. 765 ILCS 205/2; 65 ILCS 5/11-12-8.
2 1. 65 ILCS 5/11-12-8.
10-31-4.6: MAINTENANCE OF IMPROVEMENTS:
The subdivider/developer shall provide all the improvements in the subdivision
for a period of one year and provide a one year maintenance bond prior to
acceptance and dedication to the City of East Moline or other appropriate
entity. Said bond shall be in the amount determined by the ACO to be sufficient
to guarantee the satisfactory condition of the required improvements for a
period of one year from the date of their acceptance and dedication. If at any
time during the one-year period the improvements are found to be defective,
they shall be repaired/replaced at the subdivider/developer's expense. If the
subdivider/developer refuses to pay such costs within ninety (90) days after
demand is made upon him by the ACO, the City of East Moline shall use the
maintenance bond to make the necessary repairs/replacement. If the cost of
repairs/replacement exceeds the bond amount, the subdivider/developer shall be
liable for the excess. At the end of the one-year period, the maintenance bond
shall be released. (Ord. 91-2, 1-21-1991; amd. Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-31-5: OTHER ADMINISTRATIVE MATTERS:
10-31-5.1: ENFORCEMENT OFFICER, DUTIES:
The Director of Development Services, referred to herein as the Administrator,
is hereby authorized and directed to administer and enforce the provisions of
this chapter. (Ord. 91-2, 1-21-1991; amd. Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-31-5.2: AMENDMENTS:
Amendments to this chapter may be proposed by any member of the City Council,
any Planning Commission member, or any party in interest. Every amendment
proposal shall be filed on a prescribed form in the Administrator's Office. The
Director of Development Services shall promptly transmit each proposal,
together with any comments or recommendations he may wish to make, to the City
Planning Commission for a public hearing.
   (A)   Public Hearing, Notice: The Planning Commission shall hold a public
hearing on every amendment proposal within a reasonable time after said
proposal is submitted to them. At the hearing any interested party may appear
and testify, either in person or by duly authorized agent or attorney. Notice
indicating the time, date, and place of the hearing, and the nature of the
proposed amendment shall be given not more than thirty (30) nor less than
fifteen (15) days before the hearing by publication in a newspaper of general
circulation within the City of East Moline.
   (B)   Advisory Report, Action By City Council: Within a reasonable time
after the public hearing, the Planning Commission shall submit an advisory
report to the City Council. The City Council shall act on the proposed
amendment at a regularly scheduled meeting following submission of this report.
Without another public hearing, the City Council may either pass, modify or
reject the proposed amendment or may refer it back to the Planning Commission
for further consideration. (Ord. 91-2, 1-21-1991; amd. Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-31-5.3: PENALTIES:
   (A)   Any person who is convicted of a violation of this chapter shall be
guilty of a petty offense and shall be fined not more than five hundred dollars
($500.00). Each day that a violation continues shall be considered a separate
offense.
   (B)   Nothing contained in this section shall prevent this Municipality from
taking any other lawful action that may be necessary to secure compliance with
this chapter. (Ord. 91-2, 1-21-1991; amd. Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-31-5.4: REPEAL:
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith, are to the extent
of such conflict hereby repealed. (Ord. 91-2, 1-21-1991; amd. Ord. 18-08, 6-3-
2019)
10-31-5.5: SEPARABILITY:
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or word of this chapter
is for any reason held to be invalid, such decision shall not affect the
validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. The City Council hereby
declares that it would have adopted the chapter and each section, subsection,
sentence, clause, phrase, or word thereof without incorporation in this chapter
of any such invalid section, subsection, clause, phrase or word. (Ord. 91-2, 1-
21-1991; amd. Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-31-5.6: PUBLICATION:
This chapter shall be in full force and effect from and after passage,
approval, and, if required by law, publication in the manner provided by law.
(Ord. 91-2, 1-21-1991; amd. Ord. 18-08, 6-3-2019)
10-31-5.7: WHEN EFFECTIVE:
This chapter shall take effect ten (10) days after its final passage, approval,
and publication as provided by law 1 . (Ord. 91-2, 1-21-1991; amd. Ord. 18-08,
6-3-2019)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/1-2-4.
SPECIAL ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Title; Contents
Ord. No.     Title; Contents
62-1         Rezone Property
62-2         Rezone Property
63-1         Declaring Election
63-7         Parking Revenue Bonds
63-8          
(Resolution) Authority to Cancel Outstanding Checks
63-11        Vacation
63-14        Rezone Property
63-15        Telephone Company Franchise
63-17        Appropriatio n, 1963-1964
63-19        Parking Revenue Bonds
63-21        Annexation
63-22        Annexation
63-23        Tax Levy, 1963-1964
63-24         
(Resolution) Street and Bridge Fund
63-25         
(Resolution) Street Improvement Bonds
63-26        Public Benefits Tax Levy
63-27         
(Resolution) Street Improvement Bond Issue
63-28         
(Resolution) Street Improvement s
63-29        Annexation
63-30        Annexation
63-33        Annexation
63-35        Local Improvement s
(Resolution)  
64-3         Vacation
64-4         Renaming Street
64-6         Water Connection Fee, Certain Area
64-7         Transfer of Special Assessment Funds
(Resolution)  
64-8         Sale of Public Benefit Funding Bonds
64-9         Connection to Storm Sewer, Certain Area
64-10        Annexation
64-12        Annexation
64-13        Parking Revenue Bonds
64-15        Public Benefit Funding Bonds
64-17        Tax Anticipation Warrant
(Resolution)  
64-18         
(Resolution) Tax Anticipation Warrant
64-19        Rezone Property
64-24        Appropriatio n, 1964-1965
64-25        Tax Levy, 1964-1965
64-26        Public Benefit Tax Levy
64-27         
(Resolution) Street and Bridge Fund Created
64-28         
(Resolution) Street Improvement Bonds
64-29         
(Resolution) Street Improvement Bond Issue
64-30         
(Resolution) Street Improvement s
64-32        Rezone Property
64-33        Annexations
64-37        Annexation
64-38        Declaring Primary Election
64-39         
(Resolution) Transfer Funds
65-1         Rezone Property
65-2         Annexation
65-3         Rezone Property
65-4         Rezone Property
65-5         Rezone Property
65-18        Appropriatio n, 1965-1966
65-22        Appoint Board of Local Improvement Members
65-23        Provide for Census in Certain Area
65-24        Rezone Property
65-25        Tax Levy, 1965-1966
65-26        Public Benefit Tax Levy
65-27         
(Resolution) Street and Bridge Fund Levy
65-28         
(Resolution) Motor Fuel Tax, Street Improvement s
65-29         
(Resolution) Street Improvement s
65-30         
(Resolution) Street Improvement s
65-34        Rezone Property
65-36        Rezone Property
65-37        Waterworks and Sewer Improvement Bonds
65-40        Waterworks and Sewer Bonds Amendment
65-41         
(Resolution) Agreement Re Waterworks and Sewer Bond Issue
65-42         
(Resolution) Deposit Funds, Waterworks and Sewer Revenues
65-43         
(Resolution) Waterworks and Sewer Revenue Bond Transactions
65-46         
(Resolution) Waterworks and Sewer Revenue Bond Agreement
65-47        Annexation
65-48        Annexation
65-53        Vacating Street
65-54        Vacating Street
65-55        Annexation
65-59         
(Resolution) Transfer Funds to Public Benefit Fund
65-60         
(Resolution) Local Improvement s
65-61         
(Resolution) Local Improvement s
65-62        Annexation
65-65        Garbage Fund Tax Increase
66-9         Extend Combined Waterworks and Sewerage System
66-10        Appropriatio n, 1966-1967
66-11        Waterworks and Sewerage Extension Amendment
66-14        Annexation
66-15        Annexation
66-21        Tax Levy, 1966-1967
66-22        Public Benefit Tax Levy
66-24         
(Resolution) Transfer Funds to Public Benefit Fund
66-26        Rezone Property
66-28        Annexation
66-29        Annexation
66-30        Annexation
67-3         Rezone Property
67-4          
(Resolution) Parking Meter Revenue Warrant
67-12        Declaring Primary Election
66-16        Appropriatio n, 1967-1968
67-21         
(Resolution) Planning Document Approved
67-22         
(Resolution) City Planning Assistance
67-23        Annexation
67-25        Tax Levy, 1967-1968
67-26        Public Benefit Tax Levy
67-27         
(Resolution) Street and Bridge Fund Tax
67-28         
(Resolution) Street Improvement Bonds
67-29         
(Resolution) Street Improvement Bonds
67-30         
(Resolution) Motor Fuel Tax Funds
67-31        Vacation
67-33        Annexation
67-39         
(Resolution) Loan on Fire Truck
67-40         
(Resolution) Authority to Borrow Money
67-44        Rezone Property
67-48        Rezone Property
68-2         Rezone Property
68-3          
(Resolution) Land Acquisition Policy
68-12        Rezone Property
68-13        Appropriatio n, 1968-1969
68-14        Rezone Property
68-15        Improvement Complex Revenue Bonds
68-16        Tax Levy, 1968-1969
68-17        Public Benefit Tax Levy
68-18         
(Resolution) Street and Bridge Fund Tax Levy
68-19         
(Resolution) Street Improvement Tax
68-20         
(Resolution) Street Improvement Bonds
68-22        Rezone Property
68-23        Rezone Property
68-24        Rezone Property
68-25        Rezone Property
68-26        Rezone Property
68-27        Rezone Property
68-28        Rezone Property
68-29        Rezone Property
68-30        Rezone Property
68-31        Rezone Property
68-32        Rezone Property
68-33        Rezone Property
68-34        Rezone Property
68-35        Rezone Property
68-36        Rezone Property
68-38        Special Bond Election
68-39         
(Resolution) Abate Taxes
68-41        Declaring Primary Election
69-1         Public Improvement Bond Issue
69-2         Bond Issue, Method of Payment
69-3         Transfer Funds to Public Improvement Fund
69-4         Rezone Property
69-6         Rezone Property
69-8         Rezone Property
69-9         Disconnect Certain Territory
69-10        Rezone Property
69-11        Rezone Property
69-12        Rezone Property
69-13        Rezone Property
69-17        Annexation
69-18        Annexation
69-19         
(Resolution) Borrow Money
69-20         
(Resolution) Tax Anticipation Warrant
69-21         
(Resolution) Tax Anticipation Warrant
69-22        Rezone Property
69-23        Rezone Property
69-24        Annexation
69-27        Creating Working Cash Fund
69-28        Appropriatio n, 1969-1970
69-29        Annexation
69-31        Rezone Property
69-32        Annexation
69-33        Rezone Property
69-34         
(Resolution) Land Purchase Agreement
69-35         
(Resolution) Street Improvement s
69-36        Rezone Property
69-37        Tax Levy, 1969-1970
69-38        Tax Levy for Public Benefits
69-39         
(Resolution) Street and Bridge Fund
69-40         
(Resolution) Street Improvement Bond Issue
69-42         
(Resolution) Borrow Money, Street Bond Issue
69-46         
(Resolution) Waterworks and Sewer Improvement Bonds
69-48        Annexation
69-49        Rezone Property
69-50        Annexation
69-53        Rezone Property
69-54        Rezone Property
69-55        Rezone Property
69-57        Annexation
69-58        Street and House Numbering System
69-60        CATV Franchise
70-1         Street and House Numbering
70-2         Rezone Property
70-4          
(Resolution) Transfer Special Assessment Funds
70-5          
(Resolution) Community Improvement Program
70-6         Annexation
70-7          
(Resolution) Approve Public Management Study
70-14        Street Paving
70-15        Rezone Property
70-17        Street and Bridge Tax Increase
70-18        Appropriatio n, 1970-1971
70-19        Tax Levy, 1970-1971
70-20        Public Benefit Tax Levy
70-21         
(Resolution) Street and Bridge Fund Tax
70-22         
(Resolution) Street Improvement Bond Issue
70-23         
(Resolution) Street Improvement Bonds
70-29        Annexation
70-30        Vacation
70-31        Vacation
70-32        Rezone Property
70-33        Waterworks and Sewerage Rates
70-34        Extend Waterworks and Sewerage Bonds
70-36        Waterworks and Sewer Bond Issue
70-38        Annexation
70-39        Rezone Property
70-41        Rezone Property
70-42         
(Resolution) Extend Sewer, Certain Area
70-43        Declaring Primary Election
70-44        Purchase Real Estate
70-45        Additional Public Benefit Tax Levy
71-1         Purchase Real Estate
71-3          
(Resolution) Street Improvement s
71-4         Construct Pavement, Storm Sewer
71-6         Encroachmen t, Public Right of Way
71-9         Street and House Numbering
71-11        Purchase of Real Estate
71-12         
(Resolution) Street Improvement
71-13        Bond Issue
71-14        Sale of Public Benefits Bonds
71-15        Method of Payment of Bonds
71-16        Purchase Real Estate
71-18        Rezone Property
71-20        Purchase Real Estate
71-21        Purchase Right of Way
71-22        Purchase Easements
71-23        Condemn Real Estate
71-27        Vacation
71-29        Purchase Real Estate
71-30        Appropriatio n, 1971-1972
71-31        Sale of Property
71-32        Purchase Real Estate
71-33        Tax Levy, 1971-1972
71-34        Public Benefit Tax Levy
71-35         
(Resolution) Street and Bridge Fund Tax
71-36         
(Resolution) Street Improvement Bonds
71-37         
(Resolution) Public Improvement Bond Issue
73-39         
(Resolution) Bond Issue, Street Improvement s
71-40        Purchase Real Estate
71-41        Purchase Real Estate
71-42        Purchase Real Estate
71-43        Purchase Real Estate
71-44        Purchase Real Estate Amendment
71-45        Purchase Real Estate
71-46        Purchase Real Estate
71-47        Purchase Real Estate
71-49        Street and Bridge Tax Increase
71-50        Purchase Real Estate
71-51        Purchase Real Estate
71-52        Purchase Real Estate
71-53        Purchase Real Estate
71-54        Street and House Numbering
71-55        Purchase Real Estate
71-56        Purchase Real Estate
71-59        Rezone Property
71-60        Vacation
71-61        Vacation
71-62        Vacation
71-63        Purchase Real Estate
71-64        Purchase Real Estate
71-65        Rezone Property
71-66        Vacation
71-67        Vacation
71-69        Purchase Real Estate
71-70        Annexation
71-71        Rezone Property
71-72        Annexation
71-73        Purchase Real Estate
71-75        Purchase Real Estate
71-76        Purchase Real Estate
71-77        Purchase Real Estate
72-2          
(Resolution) Transfer Special Assessment Funds
72-3         Purchase Real Estate
72-4         Calling Bonds
72-5         Rezone Property
72-6         Purchase Real Estate
72-12        Vacation
72-13         
(Resolution) Local Improvement s
72-17        Construction of Water Main
72-18        Civil Defense Mutual Aid Pact
72-19        Civil Defense Mutual Aid Pact Established
72-20        Annexation
72-21        Rezone Property
72-22        Approve Water Poll Control Grant
72-23        Demolish Unsafe Buildings
72-24        Indebtedness, Rural Fire Protection
72-26        Purchase Real Estate
72-27        Purchase Real Estate
72-28        Rezone Property
72-29        Purchase Real Estate
72-31        Purchase Real Estate
72-32        Purchase Real Estate
72-33        Purchase Real Estate
72-34        Vacation
72-35        Appropriatio n, 1972-1973
72-36        Purchase Real Estate
72-37        Purchase Real Estate
72-38        Purchase Real Estate
72-39        Tax Levy, 1972-1973
72-40        Public Benefit Tax Levy
72-41         
(Resolution) Street and Bridge Fund
72-42        Increase Street and Bridge Fund Tax
72-43         
(Resolution) Street Improvement Bond Issue
72-44         
(Resolution) Street Improvement Bonds
72-45         
(Resolution) Borrow on Public Improvement
72-47        Mutual Aid Pact
72-48        Mutual Aid Pact Agreement
72-49        Purchase Real Estate
72-52        Purchase Real Estate
72-53        Sale of Real Estate
72-54        Purchase Real Estate
72-55        Purchase Real Estate
72-56        Sale of Real Estate
72-57        Purchase Real Estate
72-58        Annexation
72-59        Rezone Property
72-61        Purchase Real Estate
72-62        Declare Primary Election
73-8         Calling of Bonds
73-10        Purchase Real Estate
73-11        Purchase Real Estate
73-12        Purchase Real Estate
73-13        Purchase Real Estate
73-14        Purchase Real Estate
73-15        Rezone Property
73-16        Rezone Property
73-18        Encroachmen ts on Public Right of Way
73-21        Condemn Property
73-23        Purchase Real Estate
73-26        Purchase Real Estate
73-27        Purchase Real Estate
73-28        Transfer Funds
73-29        Purchase Condemned Property
73-30        Rezone Property
73-36        Encroachment on Public Right of Way
74-3         Specific Encroachmen ts
74-4         Sale of Real Estate
74-7         Wage Scale, Police and Fire Employees
74-9         Maintenance of Service Pipes
74-10        Zoning Map Change
74-12        Taxicab Rates
74-15        Water Department Amendment
74-16        Building Code Amendments
74-17        Special Primary Election
74-18        Zoning Map Change
74-20        Zoning Map Change
74-21        Wage Scale Amendment for Police and Fire Departments
74-24        Sale of City Property
74-25        Vacation of Right-of-Way
74-26        Sale of Property
74-30        Zoning Map Change
74-31        Zoning Map Change
74-35        Appropriatio ns
74-36        Zoning Map Change
74-37        Zoning Map Change
74-43        Tax Levy
74-44        Special Assessments
74-55        Liquor Hours Established
74-59        Annexations
74-61        Sale of Property
74-66        Nominating and Electing Officers
75-4         Sale of Real Estate
75-8         Annexation
75-9         Annual Period for Honor to the American Flag
75-11        Uniform Minimum Plumbing Standards Code Amendment
75-16        Zoning Map Change
75-17        Annexation
75-25        Annexation
75-26        Annexation
75-27        Appropriatio ns
75-31        Rates for Licensed Taxicabs
75-35        Tax Levy, 1976
75-37        Zoning Map Change
75-48        Sanitary Sewer Improvement
75-49        Sanitary Sewer Improvement
75-50        Annexation
75-51        Annexation
75-52        Annexation
75-54        Public and Private Sewers and Drains
75-55        Sewer Rate System, Internal Customers
75-56        Sewer Rate System, Customer Municipalities
75-57        Industrial Cost Recovery, Regional Treatment Plant
76-1         Sale of Real Estate
76-2         Zoning Map Change
76-4         Sale of Real Estate
76-9         Racing on Sundays
76-10        Wage Scale
76-11        Zoning Map Change
76-13        Street Name Change
76-14        Annexation
76-16        Water Department Amendment
76-17        Annexation
76-21        Wage Scale, Police and Fire Department
76-22        Transfer of Funds
76-28        Wage Scale
76-29        Department of Transportation (Census)
76-31        Appropriatio ns
76-32        Zoning Map Change
76-33        Zoning Map Change
76-34        Revenue Bond Issues
76-36        Zoning Map Change
76-37        Street Names, House Numbers Redesignated
76-40        Revenue Bond Sale
76-42        Wage Scale for Police, Fire Departments
76-44        Sewer, Water Main Installation
76-46        Annexation
76-47        Redemption of Outstanding Bonds
76-48        Redemption of Outstanding Bonds
76-49        Tax Levy, 1977
76-50        City Clerk to Attend Tax Sale of Delinquent Special Assessments
76-51        Vacation (vacating sidewalk)
76-52        Salary of the Animal Control Officer
76-53        Vacation-8th Street
76-55        Annexation
76-56        Annexation
76-57        Annexation
76-59        Construction of a Sanitary and Storm Sewer Project
76-60        Connection Charge for Connection to Waterworks Extension Project
76-61        Construction of a Sanitary and Storm Sewer Project
76-62        Construction of a Sanitary and Storm Sewer Project
76-64        Wage Scale for the Police and Fire Departments
76-66        Appointing Special City Prosecutor
76-67        Adopting Official Plan
76-68        Zoning Map Change
76-69        Zoning Map Change
76-72        Primary Election Declared
77-4         Supplemental Ordinance Making Appropriatio ns
77-5         Zoning Map Change
77-6         Zoning Map Change
77-7         Amendment to Ordinance Creating Water Department
77-8         Zoning Map Change
77-9         Zoning Map Change
77-11        Zoning Map Change
77-14        Connection Charge for Connection to Sewerworks Extension Project
77-17        Zoning Map Change
77-20        Zoning Map Change
77-21        Transfer of Funds
77-22        Street Improvement
77-23        Street Improvement
77-24        Street Improvement
77-26        Street Improvement
77-27        Street Improvement
77-28        Appropriatio ns
77-30        Zoning Map Change
77-31        Vacating Alley
77-32        Issuance of Bonds
77-33        Annexation
77-34        Annexation
77-36        Illinois Bell Telephone
77-37        Tax Levy
77-39        Special Assessments, Clerk's Duties
77-40        Zoning Map Change
77-43        Amendment to Ordinance Creating Water Department
77-53        Zoning Map Change
77-54        Sale of Real Estate
77-55        Sewer Rate System
77-56        Sewer Rate System
77-59        Issuance of Bond
78-1         Street System Addition
78-3         Transfer of Funds to General Fund
78-4         Zoning Ordinance Change
78-9         Rate Schedule Change-Licensing, Heating, Air Conditioning and
             Ventilation Code
78-11        Plumbing Code Fee Schedule
78-16        Connection Charge for Connection to Sewerworks
78-17        Zoning Map Change
78-19        Appropriatio n Supplement for Fiscal Year Ending 4-30-78
78-20        Transfer of Funds to General Fund
78-24        Zoning Map Change
78-25        Vacating Right of Way to Chicago, Milwaukee, St. Paul Railroad
78-26        Tax Anticipation Warrants
78-28        Sale of Real Estate
78-29        Amendment to Ordinance Creating Water Department
78-30        Appropriatio ns
78-31        Tax Levy
78-32        Zoning Map Change
78-33        Zoning Map Change
78-34        Zoning Map Change
78-35        Sale of Real Estate
78-44        Annexation
78-45        Annexation
78-46        Zoning Map Change
78-48        Zoning Map Change
78-49        Tax Anticipation Warrants
78-50        Sale of Real Estate
78-52        Declaring Primary Election
79-2         CATV Franchise
79-3         Declaring Primary and General Election
79-5         Issuance of General Obligation Bonds
79-6         Licensing and Regulation of Mobile Homes and Mobile Home Parks
79-7         Providing that Exclusion in State Senate Bill 376 Doesn't Apply to
             East Moline
79-8         Transfer of Funds
79-9         Rates for Licensed Taxicabs
79-10        Improvement of Certain Tract
79-16        Issuance of Tax Anticipation Warrants
79-22        Supplemental Appropriation, April 30, 1979
79-23        Transfer of Funds to General Fund
79-25        Transfer of Funds to General Fund
79-26        Sewerworks Connection Charge, Extension Projects
79-27        Tax Anticipation Warrants
79-28        Improvement of Certain Tract
79-29        Zoning Map Change
79-31        Annexation
79-32        Amendment; Use of Public and Private Sewers
79-33        Zoning Map Change
79-45        Zoning Map Change
79-47        Appropriations, Year Ending April 30, 1980
79-49        Waterworks Extension Projects, Connection Charge
79-51        City Advisory Committee Established for Neighborhood Community
             Center
79-52        Waterworks Extension Projects, Connection Charge
79-53        Waterworks Extension Projects, Connection Charge
79-54        Waterworks Extension Projects, Connection Charge
79-55        Waterworks Extension Projects, Connection Charge
79-56        Tax Sale of Delinquent Special Assessments
79-62        Vacation
79-64        Sale of Real Estate
79-66        Zoning Map Change
79-67        Zoning Map Change
79-68        Transfer of Funds to General Fund
79-69        Demolition of Building
79-70        Zoning Map Change
79-74        Establishing Rates for Taxicabs
79-75        Tax Levy
80-3         Transfer of Funds
80-4         Transfer of Funds
80-5         Purchase of Certain Tract
80-6         Transfer of Funds
80-7         Zoning Map Change
80-10        Zoning Map Change
80-11        Zoning Map Change
80-12        Transfer of Funds
80-13        Sewerworks Extension Projects, Connection Charge
80-14        Annexation
80-16        Transfer Funds to General Fund
80-17        Tax Anticipation Warrants
80-18        Tax Anticipation Warrants
80-19        Zoning Map Change
80-23        Zoning Map Change
80-24        Tax Anticipation Warrants
80-25        Appropriatio ns Supplement for Fiscal Year Ending April 30, 1980
80-26        Transfer of Funds from Working Cash Fund
80-27        Appropriatio ns for Corporate Purposes, Fiscal Year Ending April
             30, 1981
80-30        Plumbing Code Amendment
80-31        Transfer of Funds
80-32        Condemn Real Estate
80-36        Demolition of Building
80-37        City Clerk to attend Tax Sale of Delinquent Special Assessments
80-38        Amending Zoning Ordinance Section XVI
80-43        Partial Vacation of Plat Babcok Eighth Addition
80-44        Zoning Map Change
80-45        Sale of Surplus Property
80-46        Annexation
80-47        Adopting and Ratifying Agreements
80-48        Vacation of McAtee Estates
80-49        Transfer of Funds to General Fund
80-53        Amending the Ordinance relating to the Mayor, City Clerk, City
             Treasurer and Aldermen
80-54        Tax Levy for Fiscal Year Ending April 30, 1981
81-2         Zoning Map
81-3         Zoning Map
81-4         Annexation
81-5         Annexation
81-6         Transfer of Funds to General Fund
81-8         Zoning Map
81-9         Zoning Map
81-10        Submission of Advisory Referendum
81-11        Sale of Real Estate
81-13        Tax Anticipation Warrants
81-14        Tax Anticipation Warrants
81-15        Tax Anticipation Warrants
81-16        Flood Protection Bond
81-17        Establish Salary, Parking Control Officer
81-18        Establish Salary, Animal Control Officer
81-19        Transfer of Funds to General Fund
81-20        Sewer Rate System
81-21        Sewer Rate System
81-22        Create Water Department
81-26        Amending Title 1, Administrative
81-27        Vacation of 15th St., south of 18th Ave.
81-28        Partial vacation of Babcock Fourth Addition
81-29        Approve partial vacation, Babcock Fifth Addition
81-30        Industrial Cost Recovery
81-36        Tax Anticipation Warrants
81-37        Sale of Real Estate
81-38        Extension of Sanitary Sewer
81-41        Tax Anticipation Warrants
81-42        Establish salary for Animal Control Officer
81-43        Transfer of Funds
81-44        Tax Anticipation Warrants
81-45        Application for Water Service Meter Deposit
81-47        Annexation
81-48        Zone Map Change
81-49        Amending Zoning Ordinance Sec. XVIII
81-50        Leasing of City Property
81-51        Demolition of Building
81-53        Appropriations for Fiscal Year Ending April 30, 1982
             Authorizing Initiation of Condemnatio n Proceedings for the
81-54        Acquisition of Certain Real Estate Required for Mississippi River
             Flood Protection Project
             Authorizing Initiation of Condemnation Proceedings for the
81-55        Acquisition of Certain Real Estate Required for Demolition of
             Blighted Buildings and the Construction of a Parking Lot
81-56        Zoning Map Change
81-58        Amending Ordinance Relating to Mayor, City Clerk, City Treasurer
             and Aldermen Salaries
81-59        Ratifying the Filing of Application for Demolition of Building
             Located at 615 13th Street
81-60        Ratifying the Filing of Application for Demolition of Building
             Located at 127 21st Street
81-61        Zone Map Change
81-62        Zone Map Change
81-63        Tax Levy for Fiscal Year Ending April 20, 1982
81-64        Directing City Clerk to Attend Tax Sale of Delinquent Special
             Assessments
81-67        Establishing Connection Charge for Certain Property Owners
             Connecting to Waterworks Extension Project
81-68        Transfer of Funds to General Fund
81-74        Sanitary Sewer Easement
82-1         Automobile Renting Use Tax Act
82-2         Municipal Automobile Renting Occupation Tax Act
82-7         Amending Rates of Quint-Cities Cablevision, Inc.
82-9         Zoning Map Change
82-10        Authorizing Issuance of Tax Anticipation Warrants in the Sum of
             $120,000.00
82-13        Swimming Pool Bonds
82-14        Wage Scale, Police and Fire Department
82-15        Tax Anticipation Warrants
82-17        Zoning Ordinance
82-18        Zoning Ordinance
82-19        Zoning Map Change
82-20        Tax Anticipation Warrants
82-24        Tax Anticipation Warrants
82-25        Tax Anticipation Warrants
82-29        Appropriatio ns
82-30        Vacating a Public Alley in Riverview Heights
82-31        Regulating Development in Flood Hazard Areas
82-34        Sale of Personal Property
82-35        Clerk to Attend Tax Sale
82-38        Tax Levy, 1983
82-41        Issuance of Tax Anticipation Warrants
82-43        Annexation
83-1         Transfer of Funds
83-2         Transfer of Funds
83-3         Tax Anticipation Warrants
83-6         Tax Anticipation Warrants
83-7         Tax Anticipation Warrants
83-10        Amending Sewer Rate Ordinance
83-11        Amending Sewer Rate Ordinance
83-12        Amending Ordinance Creating Water Department
83-13        Sale of Real Estate
83-14        Tax Anticipation Warrants
83-15        Tax Anticipation Warrants
83-16        Street Improvement
83-17        Sale of Real Estate
83-18        Sale of Fire Equipment
83-20        Appropriatio ns for Corporate Purposes
             Election of officers of the Fire Department, and providing further
83-21        for the procedure for the payment of funds received by the City
             pursuant to chapter 24, section 11-10-1, Illinois Revised Statutes
             Expenditure of funds received from the traffic and criminal
83-22        conviction surcharge fund for the training of officers of the
             Police Department
83-23        Street Improvement
83-24        Zoning Map Change
83-25        Tax Levy, 1984
83-26        Basic Rate Charges
83-27        Zoning Map Change
83-28        Zoning Map Change
83-29        Clerk to Attend Tax Sale
83-30        Zoning Map Change
83-31        Sale of Real Estate
83-32        Sale of Real Estate
83-33        Transfer of Funds
84-3         Improvement s of 11th Street
84-4         Transfer of Funds
84-6         Sale of Real Estate
84-7         Zoning Map Change
84-8         Tax Anticipation Warrants
84-9         Sale of Real Estate
84-10        Zoning Map Change
84-11        Tax Anticipation Warrants
84-12        General Obligation Judgment Funding Bonds, Series 1984
84-14        Sale of Real Estate
84-15        Sale of Real Estate
84-16        Tax Anticipation Warrants
84-17        Sale of Personal Property
84-20        Tax Anticipation Warrants
84-21        Appropriations
84-22        Freedom Information Act
84-23        Freedom Information Act
84-25        Sale of Real Estate
84-26        Vacation
84-28        Sale of Real Estate
84-29        Sale of Real Estate
84-30        Tax Levy, 1985
84-31        Firefighters Certified by State Fire Marshall
84-35        Transfer of Funds From Working Cash Bond Fund to General Fund
84-39        Sewerworks Connection Charge
84-40        Lease Agreement-City/Public School District 37
84-41        Encroachment on Public Right of Way
84-42        Sewerworks, Waterworks Connection Charge
84-43        Zoning Map Change
84-44        Sale of Real Estate
84-45        Street Improvement
84-46        Demolition of Building
84-47        Demolition of Building
84-48        Tax Sale of Delinquent Special Assessments
84-49        Special Flood Hazard Areas
85-2         Sub-Lease Agreement
85-4         Salaries of Officials
85-5         Tax Anticipation Warrants
85-8         Firefighters and Police Pension Contributions
85-9         Tax Anticipation Warrants
85-10        Conveyance of Certain Real Estate
85-11        Sale of Certain Real Estate
85-12        Purchase of Certain Real Estate
85-13        Tax Anticipation Warrants
85-14        Improvement Bonds
85-15        Tax Anticipation Warrants
85-18        Revised Ordinance Improving 11th Street
85-19        Revised Ordinance Improving 5th Street
85-22        Tax Anticipation Warrant (Repealing)
85-23        Sewer Rate System (Internal Customers)
85-24        Sewer Rate System Amendment
85-25        Creating Water Department (Section 19)
85-26        Sale of Real Estate
85-28        Appropriations
85-29        Sewer Ordinance approved March 6, 1972
85-30        Sale of Real Estate
85-31        Zoning Map
85-32        Demolition of Building
85-33        Tax Levy, April 30, 1986
85-34        Amending Ordinance 77-36, Granting Illinois Bell Telephone
             Company, its Lessees, Successors and Assigns certain rights
85-37        Transfer of Funds From Working Cash Bond Fund to General Fund
85-38        Tax Anticipation Warrants
85-39        City Clerk to Attend Tax Sale of Delinquent Special Assessments
86-3         Nonexclusive Franchise, Cable Television System
86-4         Tax Anticipation Warrants
86-5         Zoning Map
86-6         Zoning Map
86-7         Tax Anticipation Warrants
86-8         Demolition of Buildings
86-11        Annexation Agreement
86-12        Annexing Certain Territory
86-13        Zoning Certain Property
86-14        Sale of Surplus Personal Property
86-15        Sale of Real Estate
86-16        Sale of Real Estate
86-17        Appropriations for Corporate Purposes
86-18        Tax Levy for the Current Fiscal Year
86-21        Tax Anticipation Warrants
86-22        Tax Sale of Delinquent Special Assessments
86-24        Zoning Map
86-25        Transfer of Funds From Working Cash Bond Fund to General Fund
86-26        Franchise Grant to CATV System
87-3         Tax Anticipation Warrants
87-4         Conveyance of Title to Certain Real Estate
87-8         Authorizing Filing Suit for Recovery of Funds Spent by the City
             for Decontamina tion of Premises Located at 722-15th Avenue
87-9         Tax Anticipation Warrants
87-10        Sale of Personal Property
87-11        Tax Anticipation Warrants
87-12        Zoning Map
             Adopting the Budget for all Corporate Purposes, in Lieu of the
87-13        Appropriatio n Ordinance for the Fiscal Year Commencing May 1,
             1987
87-15        Auction Sale of Surplus Personal Property
87-16        Tax Anticipation Warrant
87-17        Sale of Real Estate
87-19        Amending Sewage Ordinance
87-20        Amending the First Amended Restrictions and Covenants for East
             Moline Industrial Park First Addition and Second Addition
87-22        Sale of Real Estate
87-23        Waterworks Extension Project Connection
87-25        Sale of Real Estate
87-26        Tax Levy for the Current Fiscal Year
87-29        Transfer of Funds from Working Cash Bond Fund to General Fund
87-31        Zoning Map
87-33        Delinquent Special Assessments, Sell or Withdraw Assessments in
             Lieu of Bidders
87-34        Sale of Real Estate
87-35        Issue of Motor Fuel Tax Fund Tax Anticipation Warrants
87-36        Establish Enterprise Zone
88-6         Sale of Real Estate
88-13        Allocating the Receipt of Funds Upon Sale of Real Estate
88-19        Water Department Ordinance, Regulation of Cross-Connections
88-22        Establishing an Enterprise Zone
88-25        Sale of Real Estate
88-26        Authorizing the Issuance of Tax Anticipation Warrants
88-27        Budget, 1988-1989
88-30        Regulating Encroachment on Public Right of Way
88-32        Installation of Handicapped Parking Signs in Front of St. Anne
             Rectory, 555 18th Avenue
88-36        Zoning Map
             Connection Charge for Certain Property Owners Connecting to the
88-40        Waterworks Extension Project Extending Easterly From 3rd Street on
             25th Avenue
88-41        Tax Levy for the Current Fiscal Year Ending April 30, 1989
88-42        Vacating the Public Alley Immediately North of Lots 3 through 17
             of Glendale Addition to East Moline, Illinois
88-43        Authorizing Filing of an Application for Demolition of the
             Building Located at 1235/1239 - 18th Avenue, East Moline, Illinois
88-46        Zoning Map
88-49        Sale of Real Estate
88-52        Clerk to Attend Tax Sale of Delinquent Special Assessments
89-1         Authorizing the Issuance of General Obligation Judgment Funding
             Bonds
89-3         Regulating Encroachment on Public Right of Way in the City of East
             Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois
             Providing for the Transfer of Funds from the Working Cash Bond
89-5         Fund to the General Fund Pursuant to the Provisions of Chapter 24,
             Section 8-7-1 and Section 8-7-4
             Providing for the Permanent Transfer of Funds from the Working
89-6         Cash Bond Fund to the General Fund Pursuant to the Provisions of
             Chapter 24, Section 8-7-4
             Adopting the Budget for all Corporate Purposes for the City of
89-7         East Moline, Illinois in Lieu of the Appropriation Ordinance for
             the Fiscal Year Commencing on the First Day of May, 1989, and
             Ending on the Thirtieth Day of April, 1990
             Consenting to the Creation of a Special Services Area by Rock
89-8         Island County Within the Designated Area Included Within the
             Municipal Boundaries of the City of East Moline, Illinois
             Authorizing the Issuance of General Obligation Bonds (Motor Fuel
             Tax Alternate Revenue Source) of the City of East Moline, Rock
89-9         Island County, Illinois, in an Aggregate Principal Amount not to
             Exceed $400,000.00 for the Purpose of Defraying the Cost of
             Constructing a Street Extension of 12th Avenue from First Street
             to Seventh Street
89-10        Authorizing the Auction Sale of Surplus Personal Property by the
             City of East Moline, Illinois
89-11        Authorizing the Sale of Surplus Equipment Formerly Used at the
             City Landfill by the City of East Moline, Illinois
89-12        Annexing Certain Territory to the City
89-13        Annexing Certain Territory to the City
89-14        Authorizing Filing of Application for Demolition of Porch on
             Building
89-17        Zoning Map
89-20        Sale of Real Estate
89-21        Zoning Map
89-23        Authorizing Sale of Dictaphone Transport Control Recording System
89-28        Zoning Map
89-29        Authorizing Filing of Application for Demolition of Building at
             1106 - 15th Avenue, East Moline, Illinois
89-31        Zoning Map
89-32        Directing City Clerk to Attend Tax Sale
89-33        Authorization for Sale of Vehicles
89-34        Authorization for Sale of Radios
89-35        Providing for the Tax Levy for the Current Fiscal Year Ending
             April 30, 1990
90-1         Annexing Certain Territory to the City
90-3         Authorizing the Filing of Application for Demolition of the
             Residence Located at 337 12th Street, East Moline, Illinois
90-8         Amending an Ordinance Entitled "Sewer Rate System Ordinance for
             Internal Customers of the City"
             Amending Section 19 of an Ordinance Creating a Water Department of
90-9         the City of East Moline and Providing for the Supervision and
             Management of Any and All Properties and Matters Pertaining
             Thereto
90-10        Designating a Business District Redevelopment Area and Adopting a
             Business District Redevelopment Plan
90-13        Authorizing the Filing of a Petition for Demolition of the
             Building Located at 1338 18th Street
90-14        Authorizing the Filing of a Petition for Demolition of the
             Building Located at 1322 18th Avenue
90-15        Authorizing the Filing of a Petition for Demolition of the
             Building Located at 1321 19th Street
90-16        Authorizing the Filing of a Petition for Demolition of the
             Building Located at 1327 19th Street
90-17        Changing the Zoning and Amendment of the Zoning Map of the City
90-20        Authorizing an Agreement for the Lease Purchase of a Triple
             Combination Pumping Engine
90-21        Authorizing the Sale of Surplus Equipment Formerly Used in the
             Fire Department
90-22        Annexing Certain Territory to the City
90-23        Authorizing the Submission to a Vote November 6, 1990, of the
             Public as to Whether the Annual Library Tax shall be Increased
90-24        Annexing Certain Territory to the City
90-25        Annexing Certain Territory to the City
90-26        Annexing Certain Territory to the City
90-27        Zoning Map
90-28        Authorizing the Sale of Surplus Equipment Formerly Used in the
             Fire Department
90-29        Changing the Zoning and Amendment of the Zoning Map of the City
90-30        Changing the Zoning and Amendment of the Zoning Map of the City
90-34        Vacating a Portion of North 19th Street in the City
90-35        Authorizing the Sale of Certain Real Estate Located in the City
90-36        Authorizing the Filing of a Petition for Demolition of the
             Building Located at 1320 18th Avenue, East Moline, Illinois
90-37        Vacating Old River Road in the City of East Moline, Illinois
             An Ordinance Amending an Ordinance Entitled "Sewer Rate System
90-38        Ordinance for Customer Municipalities of the City of East Moline,
             Illinois"
             An Ordinance Amending an Ordinance Entitled "Sewer Rate System
90-39        Ordinance for Customer Municipalities of the City of East Moline,
             Illinois"
90-40        Authorizing the Sale of Surplus Equipment formerly used in the
             Police Department by the City of East Moline, Illinois
             An Ordinance Amending Ordinance 70-36, Providing for the Issuance
90-44        of Waterworks and Sewerage System Improvement Revenue Bonds,
             Series 1970, of the City of East Moline, Rock Island County,
             Illinois
90-45        An Ordinance Amending the Sewer Usage and Publicly Owned Treatment
             Works Ordinance of the City of East Moline, Illinois
             An Ordinance Providing for the Tax Levy for the Current Fiscal
90-46        Year Ending April 30, 1991, of the City of East Moline, in the
             County of Rock Island, and in the State of Illinois
             An Ordinance Directing the City Clerk of the City of East Moline,
             Illinois, to Attend the Tax Sale of Delinquent Special Assessments
90-47        as Shown on the Judgment Record Book Filed with the County Clerk
             and Authorizing Said City Clerk to Sell or Withdraw Assessments in
             Lieu of Bidders at Said Tax Sale
90-48        An Ordinance Authorizing the Sale of Damaged Equipment Formerly
             Used in the Police Department by the City of East Moline, Illinois
             An Ordinance Adopting the Budget for all Corporate Purposes of the
90-49        City of East Moline, Illinois, in lieu of the Appropriation
             Ordinance for the Fiscal Year Commencing on May 1, 1990, and
             Ending on April 30, 1991.
91-1         An Ordinance Amending Section 7-2-5.1 of the City Code of the City
             of East Moline, Illinois
91-2         An Ordinance Amending Chapter 21 of Title 10, Zoning, of the City
             Code of the City of East Moline, Illinois
             An Ordinance Authorizing the Sale of Lots 24 and 34 in V.P. Martel
91-3         Incorporated First Addition Located in the City of East Moline,
             County of Rock Island and State of Illinois by the City of East
             Moline, Illinois
             An Ordinance Authorizing the Purchase of Certain Real Estate
91-4         Located in the City of East Moline, Illinois, to be Used for
             Development of Phase II of the East Moline Bicycle Path
91-5         An Ordinance Amending Section 4-3-2 of the City Code of the City
             of East Moline, Illinois
             An Ordinance Ascertaining the Prevailing Rate of Wages for
91-6         Laborers, Mechanics and other workers in the City of East Moline
             Employed in the Construction of Public Works for said City
             An Ordinance Amending an Ordinance Entitled "Sewer Rate System
91-7         Ordinance for Customer Municipalities of the City of East Moline,
             Illinois"
91-8         An Ordinance Authorizing the Sale of Damaged Equipment Formerly
             used in the Water Department by the City of East Moline, Illinois
             An Ordinance Amending Chapter 4 Entitled "Plants and Weeds" of
91-9         Title 7 entitled "Health and Sanitation" of the City Code of the
             City of East Moline, Illinois, as amended
             An Ordinance Authorizing the Sale of Lots 25, 26, 27, and 28 in
91-10        V.P. Martel Incorporated First Addition Located in the City of
             East Moline, County of Rock Island and State of Illinois by the
             City of East Moline, Illinois
             An Ordinance Authorizing the Filing of a Complaint to Foreclose
91-11        Demolition Lien on the premises located at 1235/1239 18th Avenue,
             East Moline, Illinois
             An Ordinance of the City Council of the City of East Moline,
91-12        Illinois, Accepting the Results of Referendum for Annual Library
             Tax for Maintenance and Operation in East Moline, as passed by the
             Voters on November 6, 1990
             An Ordinance Adopting the Budget for all Corporate Purposes of the
91-13        City of East Moline, Illinois, in Lieu of the Appropriatio n
             Ordinance for the Fiscal Year Commencing on May 1, 1991, and
             Ending on April 30, 1992
91-14        An Ordinance Amending Section 9-5-3 of the City Code of the City
             of East Moline, Illinois
91-15        An Ordinance Authorizing the Sale of Surplus Equipment Formerly
             Used in the Police Department by the City of East Moline, Illinois
91-16        An Ordinance Authorizing the Filing of a Petition for Demolition
             of the Building Located at 1319 6th Avenue, East Moline, Illinois
91-17        An Ordinance Amending Section 9-5-3 of the City Code of the City
             of East Moline, Illinois
             An Ordinance Authorizing the Sale of Lot 57 in V.P. Martel
91-18        Incorporated First Addition Located in the City of East Moline,
             County of Rock Island and State of Illinois by the City of East
             Moline, Illinois
             An Ordinance Authorizing the Sale of Lots 55 and 56 in V.P. Martel
91-21        Incorporated First Addition located in the City of East Moline,
             County of Rock Island and State of Illinois by the City of East
             Moline, Illinois
             An Ordinance Changing the Zoning Map of the City of East Moline,
91-22        Illinois, Attached to and Made a Part of the Zoning Ordinance of
             the City of East Moline, Illinois, of July 24, 1967, as Amended
             An Ordinance Changing the Zoning and Amendment of the Zoning Map
91-23        of the City of East Moline, Illinois, Attached to and Made a Part
             of the Zoning Ordinance of the City of East Moline, Illinois of
             July 24, 1967, and as Amended
91-24        An Ordinance Annexing Certain Territory to the City of East
             Moline, Rock Island, Illinois
91-25        An Ordinance Authorizing the Sale of Surplus Equipment Formerly
             Used in the Police Department by the City of East Moline, Illinois
             An Ordinance authorizing execution of an agreement between
91-26        Illinois Bell Telephone Company and the City of East Moline,
             Illinois
91-27        An Ordinance authorizing the sale of surplus equipment formerly
             used in the Fire Department by the City of East Moline, Illinois
             An Ordinance authorizing the sale of surplus equipment formerly
91-28        used in the Water and Sewer Department by the City of East Moline,
             Illinois
             An Ordinance authorizing the sale of Lots 40 and 41 in V.P. Martel
91-29        Incorporated First Addition located in the City of East Moline,
             County of Rock Island and State of Illinois by the City of East
             Moline, Illinois
91-31        An Ordinance annexing certain territory to the City of East
             Moline, Rock Island, Illinois
             An Ordinance establishing a connection charge for certain property
91-32        owners connecting to the waterworks extension project in Babcock/
             Meersman addition, located in the City of East Moline, Illinois
             An Ordinance amending an ordinance entitled "1/4 Sewer Rate System
91-33        Ordinance for Internal Customers of the City of East Moline,
             Illinois"
             An Ordinance amending an ordinance entitled "Sewer Rate System
91-34        Ordinance for Customer Municipalities of the City of East Moline,
             Illinois"
             An Ordinance annexing certain territory to the City of East
91-35        Moline, by the City of East Moline, County of Rock Island in the
             State of Illinois
             An Ordinance providing for the tax levy for the current fiscal
91-36        year ending April 30, 1992, of the City of East Moline, in the
             County of Rock Island, and the State of Illinois
             An Ordinance annexing certain territory to the City of East
91-39        Moline, by the City of East Moline, County of Rock Island in the
             State of Illinois
             An Ordinance authorizing execution of an Intergovernm ental
92-2         Agreement between the County and Municipalities of Rock Island
             County establishing the Rock Island County Area Solid Waste
             Management Joint Action Agency
             An Ordinance authorizing the sale of Lot 7 in V.P. Martel
92-4         Incorporated first addition located in the City of East Moline,
             County of Rock Island and State of Illinois
             An Ordinance authorizing the sale of Lot 54 in V.P. Martel
92-5         Incorporated first addition located in the City of East Moline,
             County of Rock Island and State of Illinois
92-6         An Ordinance authorizing the sale of surplus equipment formerly
             used in the Police Department by the City of East Moline, Illinois
             An Ordinance adopting the budget for all corporate purposes of the
92-8         City of East Moline, Illinois, in lieu of the Appropriation
             Ordinance for the fiscal year commencing on the first day of May,
             1992, and ending on the thirtieth day of April, 1993
92-9         An Ordinance authorizing a handicapped parking space at City Hall,
             East Moline, Illinois
             An Ordinance authorizing the filing of a complaint for order
92-12        requiring the owner to repair or demolish an unsafe building
             located at 2801 4th Street A, East Moline, Illinois.
             An Ordinance authorizing the execution of an agreement between the
92-13        City of East Moline, Illinois, and East Moline Youth Baseball
             League.
92-14        An Ordinance authorizing the execution of an agreement between the
             City of East Moline, Illinois, and East Moline Silvis Soccer Club.
             An Ordinance authorizing the issuance of Waterworks Revenue Bonds
             of the City of East Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois, in an
92-15        aggregate principal amount not to exceed $430,000.00 for the
             purpose of defraying the cost of improving and extending the
             waterworks system of said City in 15th Avenue from 6th Street to
             13th St.
             An Ordinance authorizing the issuance of Sewerage Revenue Bonds of
             the City of East Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois, in an
92-16        aggregate principal amount not to exceed $70,000.00 for the
             purpose of defraying the cost of improving and extending the
             sewerage system of said City in 15th Avenue from 6th Street to
             13th Street.
             An Ordinance authorizing the issuance of General Obligation Bonds
             (Waterworks System Alternate Revenue Source) of the City of East
92-17        Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois, in an aggregate principal
             amount not to exceed $430,000.00, for the purpose of defraying the
             cost of improving and extending the waterworks system of the City
             in 15th Avenue from 6th Street to 13th Street.
             An Ordinance authorizing the issuance of General Obligation Bonds
             (Sewerage System Alternate Revenue Source) of the City of East
92-18        Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois, in an aggregate principal
             amount not to exceed $70,000.00, for the purpose of defraying the
             cost of improving and extending the sewerage system of the City in
             15th Avenue from 6th Street to 13th Street.
             An Ordinance authorizing the issuance of General Obligation Bonds
             (Motor Vehicle Fuel Taxes Alternate Revenue Source) of the City of
92-19        East Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois, in an aggregate
             principal amount not to exceed $1,500,000.00 for the purpose of
             defraying the costs of construction improvements to and
             rehabilitating 15th Avenue from 6th Street to 13th Street.
             An Ordinance authorizing the issuance of Waterworks Revenue Bonds
             of the City of East Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois, in an
92-20        aggregate principal amount not to exceed $300,000.00 for the
             purpose of defraying the cost of improving and extending the
             waterworks system of said City in 7th Street from 18th Avenue to
             26th Avenue.
             An Ordinance authorizing the issuance of Sewerage Revenue Bonds of
             the City of East Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois, in an
92-21        aggregate principal amount not to exceed $450,000.00 for the
             purpose of defraying the cost of improving and extending the
             sewerage system of said City in 7th Street from 18th Avenue to
             26th Avenue.
             An Ordinance authorizing the issuance of General Obligation Bonds
             (Waterworks System Alternate Revenue Source) of the City of East
92-22        Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois, in an aggregate principal
             amount not to exceed $300,000.00, for the purpose of defraying the
             cost of improving and extending the waterworks system of the City
             in 7th Street from 18th Avenue to 26th Avenue.
             An Ordinance authorizing the issuance of General Obligation Bonds
             (Sewerage System Alternate Revenue Source) of the City of East
92-23        Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois, in an aggregate principal
             amount not to exceed $450,000.00, for the purpose of defraying the
             cost of improving and extending the sewerage system of the City in
             7th Street from 18th Avenue to 20th Avenue.
             An Ordinance authorizing the issuance of General Obligation Bonds
             (Motor Vehicle Fuel Taxes Alternate Revenue Source) of the City of
92-24        East Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois, in an aggregate
             principal amount not to exceed $1,250,000.0 0 for the purpose of
             defraying the costs of constructing improvements to and
             rehabilitating 7th Street from 18th Avenue to 26th Avenue.
             An Ordinance authorizing the filing of a complaint for a permanent
92-25        injunction against Gene Meyers and Phyllis Meyers for the removal
             of an antenna structure located in the side yard at their
             residence located at 4700 4th Street Court, East Moline, Illinois.
             An Ordinance amending Ordinance 70-36, providing for the issuance
92-34        of Waterworks and Sewerage System Improvement Revenue Bonds,
             series 1970, of the City of East Moline, Rock Island County,
             Illinois.
             An Ordinance providing for the issuance of $250,000 General
             Obligation Bonds, Series 1992A, of the City of East Moline, Rock
92-35        Island County, Illinois, and providing for the levy and collection
             of a direct annual tax for the payment of the principal of and
             interest on said bonds.
             An Ordinance authorizing and providing for the issue of $1,500,000
             General Obligation Bonds, Series 1992B, of the City of East
             Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois, consisting of $500,000 for
             the purpose of defraying the cost of improving and extending the
92-36        waterworks and sewerage system of said City and $1,000,000 for the
             purpose of constructing improvement to and rehabilitating 15th
             Avenue from 6th Street to 13th Street, prescribing the details of
             said bonds and providing for collection, segregation and
             application of the waterworks and sewerage system revenues and of
             certain motor fuel tax receipts to pay said bonds.
             An Ordinance authorizing the sale of lots 9, 10, and the West 10
             feet (10') of lot 11 in block one hundred thirty-one (131) of the
92-46        New Shops addition to the Town, now City of East Moline, County of
             Rock Island and State of Illinois by the City of East Moline,
             Illinois.
             An Ordinance authorizing the establishment of a fee and procedures
92-47        for the approval of pollution control facility sitting in the City
             of East Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois.
             An Ordinance authorizing the establishment of procedural rules for
92-49        public hearing for the approval of pollution control facility
             sitting in the City of East Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois.
92-51        An Ordinance annexing certain territory to the City of East
             Moline, County of Rock Island, State of Illinois.
             An Ordinance providing for the tax levy for the current fiscal
92-52        year ending April 30, 1993, of the City of East Moline, in the
             County of Rock Island, and in the State of Illinois.
             An Ordinance authorizing the sale of surplus equipment formerly
93-11        used in the Police Department by the City of East Moline,
             Illinois.
             An Ordinance authorizing the sale of surplus equipment formerly
93-12        used in the Police Department by the City of East Moline,
             Illinois.
93-15        An Ordinance amending an ordinance creating a Water Department of
             the City of East Moline, dated August 6, 1973.
             An Ordinance authorizing the issuance of General Obligation
             Alternative Bonds (Waterworks and Sewerage System Alternative
             Revenue Source) of the City of East Moline, Rock Island County,
93-16        Illinois, in an aggregate principal amount not to exceed $230,000,
             for the purpose of paying the costs of improving and extending the
             waterworks and sewerage system of the City in the "new shops"
             addition area in the City.
             An Ordinance authorizing the issuance of Waterworks and Sewerage
             Revenue Bonds of the City of East Moline, Rock Island County,
93-17        Illinois, in an aggregate principal amount not to exceed $230,000
             for the purpose of defraying the costs of improving and extending
             the waterworks and sewerage system of said City in the "new shops"
             addition area of the City.
             An Ordinance amending an ordinance entitled "Sewer Rate System
93-18        Ordinance for Internal Customers of the City of East Moline,
             Illinois" dated January 5, 1976.
             An Ordinance amending an ordinance entitled "Sewer Rate System
93-19        Ordinance for Customer Municipalities of the City of East Moline,
             Illinois" dated November 17, 1975.
             An Ordinance changing the zoning and amendment of the zoning map
93-21        of the City of East Moline, Illinois, attached to and made a part
             of the zoning ordinance of the City of East Moline, Illinois, of
             July 24, 1964, and as amended.
             An Ordinance authorizing the filing of a complaint for demolition
93-22        of the building located at 1002/1004 15th Avenue, East Moline,
             Illinois.
93-24        An Ordinance authorizing the sale of surplus equipment formerly
             used in the Fire Department by the City of East Moline, Illinois.
93-27        An Ordinance authorizing the sale of surplus equipment formerly
             used in the Fire Department by the City of East Moline, Illinois.
             An Ordinance authorizing and providing for the issuance and sale
             of $230,000 of General Obligation Alternate Bonds, series 1993, of
             the City of East Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois, for the
93-28        purpose of paying costs of improving and extending the Waterworks
             and Sewerage System of the City, and providing for the collection,
             segregation and application of the revenues of the Waterworks and
             Sewerage System.
             An Ordinance pledging certain revenues to or on behalf of the
93-29        Illinois Rural Bond Bank to secure the payment of certain local
             governmental securities.
             An Ordinance amending and supplementing Ordinance 93-28 of the
             City of East Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois, by establishing
             interest rates to be borne by the $230,000 of General Obligation
93-30        Alternate Bonds, series 1993, of said City; providing for the levy
             of a direct annual tax for the payment of principal of and
             interest on those bonds; amending and supplementing certain
             provisions of Ordinance 93-28 and concerning related matters.
             An Ordinance adopting the budget for all corporate purposes of the
93-34        City of East Moline, Illinois, in lieu of the Appropriatio n
             Ordinance for the fiscal year commencing on the first day of May,
             1993, and ending on the thirtieth day of April, 1994.
             An Ordinance authorizing the sale of the East eighteen (18) feet
             of lot number five (5) and the West twenty two (22) feet of lot
93-35        number four (4) in block one hundred fifty seven (157) in the
             Town, now City, of East Moline, Illinois, situated in the County
             of Rock Island and State of Illinois.
             An Ordinance authorizing the sale of surplus equipment formerly
93-36        used in the Police Department by the City of East Moline,
             Illinois.
93-38        An Ordinance approving the North Hill District Tax Increment
             Redevelopment Plan and Redevelopment Project.
93-39        An Ordinance designating the North Hill Tax Increment Project
             Area.
93-40        An Ordinance adopting Tax Increment Financing.
             An Ordinance changing the zoning and amendment of the zoning map
93-43        of the City of East Moline, Illinois, attached to and made a part
             of the Zoning Ordinance of the City of East Moline, Illinois, of
             July 24, 1967, and as amended.
             An Ordinance authorizing the submission to a vote of the public at
93-44        the general election to be held on November 2, 1993, as to whether
             the annual tax levy to provide revenue for the purpose of police
             protection shall be increased.
             An Ordinance authorizing the issue of General Obligation Alternate
93-45        Bonds, Series 1993 for the purpose of constructing improvements on
             15th Avenue.
93-46        An Ordinance authorizing the sale of certain real estate.
93-47        An Ordinance authorizing the adoption of the 1991 Uniform Building
             Code section 1210.(a), paragraphs one through five.
93-49        An Ordinance abating general real estate taxes on certain lots.
             An Ordinance authorizing the sale of Lot Number Three (3) and the
93-53        East eighteen feet (18') of Lot Number Four (4) Block one hundred
             fifty seven (157) in the Town, now City, of East Moline, Illinois;
             situated in the County of Rock Island and State of Illinois.
             An Ordinance providing for the tax levy for the current fiscal
93-54        year ending April 30, 1994, of the City of East Moline, in the
             County of Rock Island, and in the State of Illinois.
             An Ordinance changing the zoning and amendment of the zoning map
93-55        of the City of East Moline, Illinois, attached to and made a part
             of the Zoning Ordinance of the City of East Moline, Illinois, of
             July 24, 1967, and amended.
94-3         An Ordinance annexing certain territory to the City of East
             Moline, County of Rock Island, State of Illinois.
             An Ordinance providing for the installment method for payment of
94-4         connection charges to the waterworks system in the City of East
             Moline, Illinois.
             An Ordinance adopting the budget for all corporate purposes of the
94-6         City of East Moline, in lieu of the Appropriation Ordinance for
             the fiscal year commencing on May, 1, 1994, and ending on April
             30, 1995.
             An Ordinance authorizing the sale of parts of lots five (5), six
             (6), seven (7), eight (8), and nine (9) in the part of the City of
94-10        East Moline known as and called Julius Grymonrez's addition to
             said City; situated in the County of Rock Island and State of
             Illinois.
94-11        An Ordinance establishing a service charge for the collection and
             disposal of garbage and refuse within the City of East Moline.
             An Ordinance providing for the improving of 28th Avenue between
94-13        4th Street A and Kennedy Drive in the City of East Moline,
             Illinois.
             An Ordinance changing the zoning and amendment of the Zoning Map
94-14        of the City of East Moline, Illinois, attached to and made a part
             of the Zoning Ordinance of the City of East Moline, Illinois, of
             July 24, 1967, and as amended.
             An Ordinance authorizing the sale of surplus equipment formerly
94-16        used in the Inspection, Street and Storm Sewer Departments by the
             City of East Moline, Illinois.
             An Ordinance changing the zoning and amendment of the Zoning Map
94-17        of the City of East Moline, Illinois, attached to and made a part
             of the Zoning Ordinance of the City of East Moline, Illinois, of
             July 24, 1967, and as amended.
94-18        An Ordinance annexing certain territory to the City of East
             Moline, County of Rock Island, State of Illinois.
             An Ordinance authorizing the filing of a complaint for demolition
94-20        of the building located at 1103 - 14th Avenue, East Moline,
             Illinois.
94-22        An Ordinance authorizing the filing of a complaint for demolition
             of the building located at 615 13th Street, East Moline, Illinois.
94-23        An Ordinance authorizing the filing of a complaint for demolition
             of the building located at 463 14th Street, East Moline, Illinois.
             An Ordinance authorizing the sale of a 1990 Chevrolet Suburban
94-30        4x4, VIN 1GNEV16K8 LF101902, formerly used in the Police
             Department by the City of East Moline, Illinois.
             An Ordinance to prohibit parking along the west side of 19th
95-3         Street in conjunction with project section 95-00120-00- TL in the
             City of East Moline, Illinois.
             An Ordinance authorizing the issuance of waterworks and sewerage
             revenue bonds of the City of East Moline, Rock Island County,
             Illinois, in an aggregate principal amount not to exceed
95-4         $4,000,000.0 0 for the purpose of defraying the costs of improving
             and extending the Waterworks and Sewerage System of said City by
             constructing a new water main eastward from the existing boundary
             of the City's water service area a distance of approximately
             51,000 linear feet to a point near Joslin, Illinois.
             An Ordinance authorizing the issuance of general obligation
             alternate bonds (Waterworks and Sewerage System alternate revenue
             source) of the City of East Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois,
             in an aggregate principal amount not to exceed $4,000,000 for the
95-5         purpose of paying the costs of improving and extending the
             Waterworks and Sewerage System of the City by constructing a new
             water main eastward from the existing boundaries of the City's
             water service area a distance of approximately 51,000 linear feet
             to a point near Joslin, Illinois.
95-6         An Ordinance annexing certain territory to the City of East
             Moline, County of Rock Island, State of Illinois.
             An Ordinance changing the zoning and amendment of the Zoning Map
95-9         of the City of East Moline, Illinois, attached to and made a part
             of the Zoning Ordinance of the City of East Moline, Illinois, of
             July 24, 1967, and amended.
             An Ordinance adopting the Budget for all corporate purposes of the
95-15        City of East Moline, Illinois, in lieu of the Appropriation
             Ordinance for the fiscal year commencing on May 1, 1995 and ending
             on April 30, 1995.
             An Ordinance authorizing the sale of the surplus equipment
95-17        formerly used in the Fire Department by the City of East Moline,
             Illinois.
             An Ordinance authorizing and providing for the issuance and sale
             of $3,500,000 of general obligation alternate bonds, series 1995,
             of the City of East Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois, for the
95-19        purpose of paying costs of improving and extending the Waterworks
             and Sewerage System of the City; providing for the collection,
             segregation and application of the revenues of the Waterworks and
             Sewerage System; and providing for the levy of a direct annual tax
             for the payment of principal of and interest on those bonds.
             An Ordinance authorizing the sale of surplus equipment formerly
95-21        used in the Police Department by the City of East Moline,
             Illinois.
95-22        An Ordinance authorizing the sale of surplus equipment in the
             Police Department by the City of East Moline, Illinois.
             An Ordinance authorizing the issuance of general obligation
             alternate bonds (tax increment alternate revenue source) of the
             City of East Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois, in an aggregate
             principal amount not to exceed $1,800,000 for the purpose of
95-25        paying certain "redevelopment project costs" in furtherance of the
             North Hill Redevelopment Project and Plan, including but not
             limited to the costs of demolition of buildings, clearing and
             grading of land, and constructing various public works and
             improvements.
             An Ordinance authorizing the filing of a complaint for demolition
95-29        of the building located at 1212-13th Street, East Moline,
             Illinois.
95-30        An Ordinance authorizing the sale of surplus equipment formerly
             used by the City of East Moline, Illinois.
             An Ordinance authorizing the sale of lot fifty three (53) in that
95-31        part of the City of East Moline known as and called East Moline
             Industrial Park, 2nd addition to said City; situated in the County
             of Rock Island and State of Illinois.
             An Ordinance authorizing an agreement for the lease purchase of
95-32        three side loading refuse packers by the City of East Moline,
             Illinois.
             An Ordinance authorizing and providing for the issuance and sale
             of $1,450,000 of general obligation alternate bonds, series 1995A,
             of the City of East Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois, for the
             purpose of paying certain "redevelopment project costs" in
95-33        furtherance of the North Hill Redevelopment Project and Plan;
             providing for the pledge of tax increment revenues from the North
             Hill Redevelopment Project Area to the payment of principal of and
             interest on those bonds; providing for the levy of a direct annual
             tax for the payment of principal of and interest on those bonds;
             and concerning related matters.
95-34        An Ordinance authorizing the sale of surplus equipment formerly
             used by the City of East Moline, Illinois.
95-38        An Ordinance authorizing the filing of a complaint for demolition
             of the building located at 202 19th Street, East Moline, Illinois.
             An Ordinance authorizing the sale of surplus equipment formerly
95-39        used in the Police Department by the City of East Moline,
             Illinois.
             An Ordinance authorizing the sale of lot eleven (11) in block
95-40        number one hundred seventy three (173) in the Town, now City of
             East Moline, Illinois.
95-41        An Ordinance providing for the tax levy for the current fiscal
             year ending April 30, 1996.
             An Ordinance authorizing the sale of surplus equipment formerly
96-5         used in the Police Department by the City of East Moline,
             Illinois.
             An Ordinance authorizing the filing of a complaint for demolition
96-6         of the building located at 2613 South 17th Street, East Moline,
             Illinois.
             An Ordinance authorizing the issuance of Waterworks and Sewerage
             Revenue Bonds of the City of East Moline, Rock Island County,
             Illinois, in an aggregate principal amount not to exceed
             $1,500,000, for the purpose of defraying the costs of improving
96-7         and extending the Waterworks and Sewerage System of the City by
             constructing a solids tank system and a diffuser force main system
             at the water plant, installing and repairing automated processing
             and distribution equipment at the water plant and other locations
             as deemed necessary, and purchasing scannable water meters.
             An Ordinance authorizing the issuance of General Obligation
             Alternate Bonds (Waterworks and Sewerage System Alternate Revenue
             Source) of the City of East Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois,
             in an aggregate principal amount not to exceed $1,500,000, for the
96-8         purpose of paying the costs of improving and extending the
             Waterworks and Sewerage System of the City by constructing a
             solids tank system and a diffuser force main system at the water
             plant, installing and repairing automated processing and
             distribution equipment at the water plant and other locations as
             deemed necessary, and purchasing scannable water meters.
             An Ordinance establishing the salary of the elected office of the
96-11        City Clerk of the City of East Moline, Illinois, for the four-year
             term commencing May 1, 1997.
             An Ordinance adopting the budget for all corporate purposes of the
96-12        City of East Moline, Illinois, in lieu of the appropriation
             ordinance for the fiscal year commencing May 1, 1996, and ending
             April 30, 1997.
96-16        An Ordinance authorizing an agreement for the lease purchase of
             one motor grader by the City of East Moline, Illinois.
             An Ordinance vacating a portion of 4th Street lying north of 12th
96-17        Avenue, and a portion of 11th Avenue lying east of 4th Street and
             located in the City of East Moline, Illinois.
             An Ordinance authorizing and providing for the issuance and sale
             of $1,500,000 of General Obligation Alternate Bonds, Series 1996A,
             of the City of East Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois, for the
             purpose of paying the costs of improving and extending the
96-18        waterworks and sewerage system of the City; providing for the
             collection, segregation and application of the revenues of the
             waterworks and sewerage system; providing for the levy of a direct
             annual tax for the payment of principal of and interest on those
             bonds; and concerning related matters.
             An Ordinance changing the zoning and amendment of the Zoning Map
96-19        of the City of East Moline, Illinois, attached to and made a part
             of the Zoning Ordinance of the City of East Moline, Illinois, of
             July 24, 1967, and as amended.
             An Ordinance authorizing and providing for the purchase of certain
             real property under an installment contract; authorizing the
96-21        execution and delivery, and approving the form of the installment
             contract; making certain representatio ns and certifications in
             connection therewith; and concerning related matters.
             An Ordinance authorizing the sale of surplus equipment formerly
96-27        used in the Engineering Department by the City of East Moline,
             Illinois.
             An Ordinance authorizing the sale of surplus equipment formerly
96-29        used in the Police Department by the City of East Moline,
             Illinois.
             An Ordinance providing for the tax levy for the current fiscal
96-30        year ending April 30, 1997, of the City of East Moline, in the
             County of Rock Island, and in the State of Illinois.
             An Ordinance changing the zoning and amendment of the Zoning Map
96-31        of the City of East Moline, Illinois, attached to and made a part
             of the Zoning Ordinance of the City of East Moline, Illinois, of
             July 24, 1967, and as amended.
 
GENERAL AND SPECIAL ORDINANCES, 1997 – PRESENT
Ord. No. Title; Contents
Ord. No.     Title; Contents
97-1         An Ordinance approving a redevelopment project and plan for the City of East Moline,
             Rock Island County, Illinois.
97-2         An Ordinance designating a redevelopment project area for the City of East Moline, Rock
             Island County, Illinois.
97-3         An Ordinance adopting tax increment allocation financing.
97-4         An Ordinance amending Chapter 2, entitled "Fire Code", of Title 5, entitled "Fire
             Regulations", of the City Code of the City of East Moline, of 1974 and as amended.
             An Ordinance establishing a connection charge for certain property owners connecting to
97-5         the waterworks extension project in Park addition, located in the City of East Moline,
             Illinois.
             An Ordinance providing for the improving of 8th Avenue by the addition of a water main
97-6         extension running west on 8th Avenue from 40th Street for a distance of approximately
             1,000 feet, and then running north to connect with water main on Morton Drive in the
             City of East Moline, Illinois.
             An Ordinance authorizing the issuance of General Obligation Alternate Bonds (Tax
             Increment Alternate Revenue Source) of the City of East Moline, Rock Island County,
             Illinois, in an aggregate principal amount not to exceed $2,000,000, for the purpose of
97-7         paying certain "redevelopment project costs" in furtherance of the Great River
             Industrial Park Redevelopment Project and Plan, including, but not limited to, the costs
             of demolition of building, clearing and grading of land, including environmental
             remediation, and constructing various public works and improvements.
             An Ordinance authorizing the City of East Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois, to
97-8         purchase a fire truck under an installment contract in an aggregate principal amount not
             to exceed $210,000.
             An Ordinance amending Section 6-3-50, Title 6, entitled "Sale Of Tobacco To Minors", of
97-9         Chapter 3, entitled "Misdemeanors", of Title 6, entitled "Police Regulations", of the
             City Code of the City of East Moline, Illinois, of 1974 as amended.
             An Ordinance providing for the improving of 32nd Avenue by the addition of a concrete
97-10        pavement, storm sewer improvements, and sidewalks on 32nd Avenue from Kennedy Drive east
             for a distance of 900 feet to the end of the cul-de-sac in the City of East Moline,
             Illinois.
1-1997        
(Resolution) A Resolution of the Plan Commission of the City of East Moline, Illinois, recommending
             the zoning change requested by Bruce Heitzinger, Midwest Property Group, Ltd.
             An Ordinance amending Section 3-7-6(E), entitled "License Fees", of Chapter 7, entitled
97-11        "Liquor Dealers", of Title 3, entitled "Business Regulations", of the City Code of the
             City of East Moline, Illinois, of 1974 as amended.
             An Ordinance amending Section 3-7-4(M), entitled "Restrictions On Licenses", of Chapter
97-12        7, entitled "Liquor Dealers", of Title 3 entitled "Business Regulations", of the City
             Code of the City of East Moline, Illinois, of 1974 as amended.
             An Ordinance amending Section 6-4-1, entitled "Cruelty To Animals", of Chapter 4,
97-13        entitled "Animals", of Title 6, entitled "Police Regulations", of the City Code of the
             City of East Moline, Illinois, of 1974 as amended.
             An Ordinance changing the zoning and amendment of the Zoning Map of the City of East
97-14        Moline, Illinois, attached to and made a part of the Zoning Ordinance of the City of
             East Moline, Illinois, of July, 1967, and as amended.
             An Ordinance amending Section 6-1-1, entitled "Creation Of Police Department", of
97-15        Chapter 1, entitled "Police Department", of Title 6, entitled "Police Regulations", of
             the City Code of the City of East Moline, Illinois, of 1974 as amended.
             An Ordinance authorizing and providing for the purchase of a fire truck under an
             installment purchase contract; authorizing the execution and delivery, and approving the
             form of the installment purchase contract; making certain representatio ns and
97-16        certifications in connection therewith; providing for the levy of a direct annual tax
             for the payment of amounts due under the installment purchase contract; authorizing the
             issuance and confirming the sale of debt certificates to evidence the amounts due under
             the installment purchase contract; and concerning related matters.
             An Ordinance amending Section 4-1-2, entitled "Permit And Compliance Bond Requirements",
97-17        of Chapter 1, entitled "Building Code", of Title 4, entitled "Building Regulations", of
             the City Code of the City of East Moline of 1974 and as amended.
             An Ordinance authorizing and providing for the issuance and sale of $1,400,000 of
             General Obligation Alternate Bonds, Series 1997A, of the City of East Moline, Rock
             Island County, Illinois, for the purpose of paying certain "redevelopment project costs"
97-18        in furtherance of the Great River Industrial Park Redevelopment Project and Plan;
             providing for the pledge of tax increment revenues from the Great River Industrial Park
             Redevelopment Project Area to the payment of principal of and interest on those bonds;
             providing for the levy of a direct annual tax for the payment of principal of and
             interest on those bonds; and concerning related matters.
             An Ordinance adopting the budget for all corporate purposes of the City of East Moline,
97-19        Illinois, in lieu of the appropriation ordinance for the fiscal year commencing on the
             first day of May, 1997, and ending on the thirtieth day of April, 1998.
97-20        An Ordinance amending Chapter 3, entitled "Plumbing", of Title 4, entitled "Building
             Regulations", of the City Code of the City of East Moline of 1974 and as amended.
             An Ordinance amending Chapter 11, entitled "Mechanical Code", of Title 4, entitled
97-21        "Building Regulations", of the City Code of the City of East Moline of 1974 and as
             amended.
97-22        An Ordinance authorizing the filing of a petition for demolition of the building located
             at 1316 - 13th Street, East Moline, Illinois.
97-23        An Ordinance authorizing the filing of a petition for demolition of the building located
             at 1345 - 18th Avenue, East Moline, Illinois.
97-24        An Ordinance authorizing the sale of surplus equipment formerly used in the Health
             Department by the City of East Moline, Illinois.
97-25        An Ordinance amending Chapter 4, entitled "Electrical Code", of Title 4, entitled
             "Building Regulations", of the City Code of the City of East Moline of 1974 as amended.
97-26        An Ordinance amending Chapter 1, entitled "Building Code", of Title 4, entitled
             "Building Regulations", of the City Code of the City of East Moline of 1974 as amended.
             An Ordinance changing the zoning and amendment of the Zoning Map of the City of East
97-27        Moline, Illinois, attached to and made a part of the Zoning Ordinance of the City of
             East Moline, Illinois, of July 1967, and as amended.
             An Ordinance authorizing the sale of Lots 57, 58, 59, 60, 61, 62, 63, 64 and 65 of East
97-28        Moline Industrial Park 2nd Addition, except the north 60 feet of the above mentioned
             lots, City of East Moline, Illinois; situated in the County of Rock Island and State of
             Illinois.
97-29        An Ordinance authorizing the filing of a petition for demolition of the building located
             at 137 - 15th Avenue, East Moline, Illinois.
97-30        An Ordinance authorizing the filing of a petition for demolition of the building located
             at 721 - 28th Avenue, East Moline, Illinois.
             An Ordinance amending Section 4-1-2, entitled "Permit And Compliance Bond Requirements",
97-31        of Chapter 1, entitled "Building Code", of Title 4, entitled "Building Regulations", of
             the City Code of the City of East Moline of 1974 and as amended.
             An Ordinance amending Section 9-3-1, entitled "No Parking Places", of Chapter 3,
97-32        entitled "Parking Rules", of Title 9, entitled "Traffic", of the City Code of the City
             of East Moline of 1974 and as amended.
             An Ordinance authorizing the sale of surplus equipment formerly used in the Police
97-33        Department - Unit 513 and Inspection Department - Unit 2 by the City of East Moline,
             Illinois.
             An Ordinance changing the zoning and amendment of the Zoning Map of the City of East
97-34        Moline, Illinois, attached to and made a part of the Zoning Ordinance of the City of
             East Moline, Illinois, of July 1967 and as amended.
             An Ordinance amending Section 6-3-10, entitled "Disorderly Conduct", of Chapter 3,
97-35        entitled "Misdemeanors", of Title 6, entitled "Police Regulations", of the City Code of
             the City of East Moline of 1974 and as amended.
             An Ordinance of City Council of the City of East Moline ascertaining the prevailing rate
97-36        of wages for laborers, mechanics and other workers in the City of East Moline employed
             in the construction of public works for said City.
             An Ordinance creating Chapter 11, entitled "Abatement Of Chronic Nuisance Properties",
97-37        of Title 6, entitled "Police Regulations", of the City Code of the City of East Moline
             of 1974 and as amended.
             An Ordinance amending Section 3-7-1, entitled "Definitions", of Chapter 7, entitled
97-38        "Liquor Dealers", of Title 3, entitled "Business Regulations", of the City Code of the
             City of East Moline of 1974 and as amended.
97-39        An Ordinance authorizing the sale of surplus equipment formerly used in the Fire
             Department by the City of East Moline, Illinois.
97-40        An Ordinance authorizing the sale of surplus equipment confiscated in a felony burglary
             by the Police Department of the City of East Moline, Illinois.
97-41        An Ordinance authorizing the sale of surplus equipment formerly used in the Fire
             Department by the City of East Moline, Illinois.
97-42        An Ordinance amending Chapter 4, entitled "Electrical Code", of Title 4, entitled
             "Building Regulations", of the City Code of the City of East Moline of 1974 as amended.
             An Ordinance adding Section 9-1-16, entitled "Registration Of Bicycles", of Chapter 1,
97-43        entitled "Definitions And General Provisions", of Title 9, entitled "Traffic", of the
             City Code of the City of East Moline of 1974 and as amended.
             An Ordinance creating Chapter 14, entitled "Radon Resistant Construction", of Title 7,
97-44        entitled "Health And Sanitation", of the City Code of the City of East Moline of 1974
             and as amended.
             An Ordinance adopting Section 3-8-5, entitled "Imposing A Municipal Telecommuni cations
97-45        Infrastructure Maintenance Fee", of Chapter 8, entitled "Occupation Taxes", of Title 3,
             entitled "Business Regulations", of the City Code of the City of East Moline of 1974 and
             as amended.
97-46        An Ordinance providing for the 1997 Tax Levy by the City of East Moline, Illinois.
             An Ordinance adopting Section 1-22-9, entitled "Returned Checks Fee", of Chapter 22,
98-1         entitled "Finances", of Title 1, entitled "Administrative", of the City Code of the City
             of East Moline of 1974 and as amended.
98-2         An Ordinance authorizing the defeasance of a portion of the General Obligation Alternate
             Bonds, Series 1995, of the City of East Moline, Illinois.
             An Ordinance establishing a hearing on the adoption of ordinances approving a
             redevelopment plan and a redevelopment project area, providing for the giving of public
98-3         notice of such hearing, and convening and providing for the giving of notice of a
             meeting of a joint review board to make a recommendat ion to the City concerning such
             proposed plan, project and project area, by the City of East Moline, Illinois.
1-1998        
             A Resolution of the Plan Commission recommending that the zone change requested by Tom
(Resolution) Brown be granted and this Resolution be forwarded to the City Council of East Moline,
             Illinois.
3-1998        
(Resolution) A Resolution of the East Moline Plan Commission that the request from Richard Van
             Hattem, Jr., to annex property, be granted.
5-1998        
(Resolution) A Resolution of the East Moline Plan Commission that the request from Gary D. Hodge D/B/
             A Gary Hodge, Inc. for zone change be granted.
6-1998        
             A Resolution of the East Moline Plan Commission that the request from the I.H.
(Resolution) Mississippi Valley Credit Union, Randell W. Neumann, Executive Vice President, for zone
             change be granted.
             An Ordinance amending Section 9-3-1 entitled "No Parking Places" of Chapter 3, entitled
98-4         Parking Rules, of Title 9, entitled "Traffic", of the City Code of the City of East
             Moline of 1974 and as amended.
             An Ordinance repealing the present Chapter 19 entitled "Carnivals and Circuses", of
98-5         Title 3 entitled "Business Regulations", of the City Code of the City of East Moline of
             1974 and adopting with a new Chapter 19 entitled "Carnivals and Circuses".
98-6         A Master Ordinance providing for the issuance of water and sewer revenue bonds.
             A supplemental Ordinance authorizing the issuance and sale of $1,062,000 Water and Sewer
98-7         Refunding Revenue Bonds, Series 1998, of the City of East Moline, Rock Island County,
             Illinois.
98-8         An Ordinance amending Title 8, entitled "Public Ways and Property" of the City Code of
             the City of East Moline of 1974, as amended.
98-9         An Ordinance authorizing the filing of a petition for demolition of the building located
             at 1134-1136 15th Avenue, East Moline, Illinois.
98-10        An Ordinance annexing certain territory to the City of East Moline, County of Rock
             Island, Illinois.
             An Ordinance adopting the budget for all corporate purposes of the City of East Moline,
98-11        Illinois, in lieu of the Appropriation Ordinance for the fiscal year commencing on the
             first day of May, 1998 and ending on the thirtieth day of April, 1999.
98-12        An Ordinance approving a redevelopment project and plan for the City of East Moline,
             Rock Island County, Illinois.
98-13        An Ordinance designating a redevelopment project area for the City of East Moline, Rock
             Island County, Illinois.
98-14        An Ordinance adopting tax increment allocation financing.
             An Ordinance amending Section 7 entitled "Seal" of Chapter 7 entitled "City Clerk" of
98-15        Title 1 entitled "Administrative" of the City Code of the City of East Moline of 1974,
             as amended.
             An Ordinance changing the zoning and amendment of the Zoning Map of the City of East
98-16        Moline, Illinois, attached to and made a part of the Zoning Ordinance of the City of
             East Moline, Illinois, of July 24, 1967, and as amended.
98-17        An Ordinance amending Title 10, entitled "Zoning" of the City Code of the City of East
             Moline of 1974, as amended.
98-18        An Ordinance amending Title 1, entitled "Administrative" of the City Code of the City of
             East Moline of 1974, as amended.
98-19        An Ordinance amending Title 2, entitled "Boards and Commissions" of the City Code of the
             City of East Moline of 1974, as amended.
98-20        An Ordinance amending Title 5, entitled "Fire Regulations" of the City Code of the City
             of East Moline of 1974, as amended.
98-21        An Ordinance amending Title 6, entitled "Police Regulations" of the City Code of the
             City of East Moline of 1974, as amended.
98-22        An Ordinance amending Title 7, entitled "Health and Sanitation" of the City Code of the
             City of East Moline of 1974, as amended.
             An Ordinance changing the zoning and amendment of the Zoning Map of the City of East
98-23        Moline, Illinois, attached to and made a part of the Zoning Ordinance of the City of
             East Moline, Illinois, of July 24, 1967, and as amended.
             An Ordinance authorizing the issuance of General Obligation Alternate Bonds (Police
             Protection Tax Alternate Revenue Source) of the City of East Moline, Rock Island County,
             Illinois, in an aggregate principal amount not to exceed $1,000,000, for the purpose of
98-24        paying the costs of acquiring, constructing, improving and equipping (1) the City's
             proportionate share of the costs of emergency public safety dispatch radio equipment to
             be owned and operated jointly with the City of Moline, Illinois, and (2) certain
             renovations to a police building, and related costs and expenses.
98-25        An Ordinance annexing certain territory to the City of East Moline, County of Rock
             Island, Illinois.
             An Ordinance changing the zoning and amendment of the Zoning Map of the City of East
98-26        Moline, Illinois, attached to and made a part of the Zoning Ordinance of the City of
             East Moline, Illinois, of July 24, 1967, and as amended.
             An Ordinance adding Section 8-1-24, entitled "Discharge of Water Prohibited" of Chapter
98-27        1 entitled "Streets and Sidewalks", of Title 8 entitled "Public Ways and Property", of
             the City Code of the City of East Moline, Illinois, of 1974 as amended.
98-28        An Ordinance amending Chapter 4 entitled "Plants And Weeds" of Title 7 entitled "Health
             And Sanitation" of the City Code of the City of East Moline of 1974 and as amended.
             An Ordinance authorizing and providing for the issuance and sale of $850,000 of General
             Obligation Alternate Bonds, Series 1998, of the City of East Moline, Rock Island County,
             Illinois, for the purpose of paying (1) the City's proportionate share of the costs of
             acquiring, constructing, improving and equipping emergency public safety dispatch radio
98-29        equipment to be owned and operated jointly with the City of Moline, Illinois, and (2)
             the costs of certain renovations to a police building, and related costs and expenses;
             providing for the pledge of revenues derived from the Police Protection Tax to the
             payment of principal of and interest on those bonds; providing for the levy of a direct
             annual tax for the payment of principal of and interest on those bonds; and concerning
             related matters.
             An Ordinance adding Section 1-5-11, entitled "Personnel Commission" of Chapter 5
98-30        entitled "City Council", of Title 1 entitled "Administrative", of the City Code of the
             City of East Moline, Illinois, of 1974 as amended.
98-31        An Ordinance annexing certain territory to the City of East Moline, County of Rock
             Island, Illinois.
             An Ordinance changing the zoning and amendment of the Zoning Map of the City of East
98-32        Moline, Illinois, attached to and made a part of the Zoning Ordinance of the City of
             East Moline, Illinois, of July 24, 1967, and as amended.
98-33        An Ordinance amending Chapter 7 entitled "Liquor Dealers" of Title 3, entitled "Business
             Regulations" of the City Code of the City of East Moline of 1974, as amended.
             An Ordinance authorizing the issuance of General Obligation Alternate Bonds (Motor Fuel
98-34        Tax Alternate Revenue Source) of the City of East Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois,
             in an aggregate principal amount not to exceed $2,950,000, for the purpose of paying the
             costs of constructing improvements to portions of Seventh Street within the City.
98-35        An Ordinance annexing certain territory to the City of East Moline, County of Rock
             Island, Illinois.
98-36        An Ordinance authorizing the sale of surplus equipment formerly used by the City of East
             Moline, Illinois.
             An Ordinance amending Section 3-8-3 entitled "Utility Taxes" of Chapter 8 entitled
98-37        "Occupational Taxes" of Title 3, entitled "Business Regulations" of the City Code of the
             City of East Moline of 1974, as amended.
98-38        An Ordinance authorizing the filing of a petition for demolition of a building (garage)
             located at 1243 - 18th Avenue, East Moline, Illinois.
             A corrective Ordinance amending Section 3-8-3 entitled "Utility Taxes" of Chapter 8
98-39        entitled "Occupational Taxes" of Title 3, entitled "Business Regulations" of the City
             Code of the City of East Moline of 1974, as amended.
98-40        An Ordinance authorizing the filing of a petition for demolition of the building located
             at 1920 - 2nd Avenue, East Moline, Illinois.
             An Ordinance of the City Council of the City of East Moline, Illinois, amending the
98-41        ordinance establishing the Enterprise Zone pursuant to an intergovernmental agreement
             with the cities of Moline, Illinois and Silvis, Illinois by the revision of Section 3,
             Exhibits "A" and "B" to include new territory within the City of Moline, Illinois.
             An Ordinance amending Section 9-2-37 entitled "Trucks Prohibited On Certain Streets" of
98-42        Chapter 2 entitled "Rules For Driving", of Title 9 entitled "Traffic", of the City Code
             of the City of East Moline of 1974 and as amended.
             An Ordinance authorizing and providing for the issuance and sale of $2,300,000 of
             General Obligation Alternate Bonds (Motor Fuel Tax Alternate Revenue Source), Series
             1998A, of the City of East Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois, for the purpose of
98-43        paying the costs of constructing improvements to portions of Seventh Street within the
             City, and related costs and expenses; providing for the pledge of revenues derived from
             distributions to the City of motor fuel taxes to the payment of principal of and
             interest on those bonds; providing for the levy of a direct annual tax for the payment
             of principal of and interest on those bonds; and concerning related matters.
             An Ordinance authorizing and providing for the issuance and sale of $2,390,000 General
             Obligation Refunding Alternate Bonds, Series 1998B, of the City of East Moline, Rock
             Island County, Illinois, for the purpose of refunding in advance of their maturity
             certain outstanding General Obligation Alternate Bonds, Series 1995, of the City;
             providing for the collection, segregation and application of the revenues of the
98-44        combined waterworks and sewerage system of the City and the levy of a direct annual tax
             for the payment of principal and interest on those bonds; providing for the execution
             and delivery of an escrow agreement in connection with the refunding of such Series 1995
             Bonds; providing for the execution and delivery of a continuing disclosure undertaking
             in connection with the Series 1998B Bonds; providing for the appointment of an escrow
             agent in connection with the escrow agreement; and concerning related matters.
98-45        An Ordinance annexing certain territory to the City of East Moline, County of Rock
             Island, Illinois.
             An Ordinance providing for the tax levy for the current fiscal year ending April 30,
98-46        1999, of the City of East Moline, in the County of Rock Island, and in the State of
             Illinois.
98-47        An Ordinance amending Chapter 1, entitled Building Code, of Title 4, entitled "Building
             Regulations" of the City Code of the City of East Moline of 1974 as amended.
             An Ordinance of the City Council of the City of East Moline, Illinois, evidencing the
98-48        intention of the City of East Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois, to issue Single
             Family Mortgage Revenue Bonds and related matters.
             An Ordinance establishing a connection charge for certain property owners connecting to
98-49        the waterworks extension project in Oak Heights Addition, located in the City of East
             Moline, Illinois.
             An Ordinance authorizing the sale of surplus light bars of the City of East Moline
99-1         Police Department to the East Moline Correctional Center by the City Council of the City
             of East Moline, Illinois.
99-2         An Ordinance authorizing the filing of a petition for demolition of a building located
             at 1321 - 12th Avenue, East Moline, Illinois.
1-1999        
             A Resolution of the Plan Commission of the City of East Moline, Illinois, recommending
(Resolution) the zoning change requested by Michael L. Shamsie be granted and this Resolution be
             forwarded to the City Council.
             An Ordinance changing the zoning and amendment of the Zoning Map of the City of East
99-3         Moline, Illinois, attached to and made a part of the Zoning Ordinance of the City of
             East Moline, Illinois, of July 24, 1967, and as amended.
99-4         An Ordinance amending Chapter 7 entitled "City Clerk", of Title 1, entitled
             "Administrative", of the City Code of the City of East Moline of 1974 and as amended.
99-5         An Ordinance authorizing the filing of a petition for demolition of a building
             (residence) located at 348 - 12th Street, East Moline, Illinois.
             An Ordinance prohibiting the use of groundwater as a potable water supply by the
             installation or use of potable water supply wells or by any other method, by the
99-6         addition of Section 4-3-8 entitled "Prohibition Of Wells For Potable Water Supply", of
             Chapter 3 entitled "Plumbing" of Title 4, entitled "Building Regulations" of the City
             Code of East Moline, Illinois.
             An Ordinance amending Chapter 15 entitled "Utility Services", of Title 1, entitled
99-7         "Administrative", of the City Code of the City of East Moline of 1974 and as amended, by
             the adoption of certain provisions creating the office of Director of Waste Water
             Treatment.
99-8         An Ordinance authorizing the execution and delivery of an intergovernmental cooperation
             agreement and certain documents in connection therewith; and related matters.
             An Ordinance prohibiting the use of groundwater as a potable water supply by the
             installation or use of potable water supply wells or by any other method, by the
99-9         addition of Section 4-3-8 entitled "Prohibition Of Wells For Potable Water Supply", of
             Chapter 3 entitled "Plumbing" of Title 4, entitled "Building Regulations" of the City
             Code of East Moline, Illinois.
99-10        An Ordinance amending Title 8, entitled "Public Ways And Property" of the City Code of
             the City of East Moline of 1974, as amended.
99-11        An Ordinance annexing certain territory to the City of East Moline, County of Rock
             Island, Illinois.
99-12        An Ordinance authorizing the sale of surplus equipment formerly used by the City of East
             Moline, Illinois, in the 6th annual bistate joint auction.
             An Ordinance adopting the budget for all corporate purposes of the City of East Moline,
99-13        Illinois, in lieu of the appropriation ordinance for the fiscal year commencing on the
             first day of May, 1999 and ending on the thirtieth day of April, 2000.
2-1999        
             A Resolution of the Plan Commission that the request from Richard L. King, Jim E. Gager
(Resolution) and Helen M. Gager; and, Randy D. Swanson and Leonora M. Swanson for a public hearing to
             consider annexation and zoning on property.
99-14        An Ordinance amending Chapter 29 entitled "Finance Department", of Title 1, entitled
             "Administrative", of the City Code of the City of East Moline of 1974 and as amended.
99-15        An Ordinance authorizing the sale of surplus equipment (chair lift) formerly used in
             City Hall by the City of East Moline, Illinois.
             An Ordinance of the City Council of the City of East Moline prohibiting automobiles,
             trucks and other vehicles from parking on 18th Avenue from 18th Street to 19th Street
99-16        beginning 425 feet north of the intersection of IL Routes 84 and 92 and extending
             southerly 1000 feet from the intersection, a total distance of 1,425 feet, located in
             the City of East Moline, Illinois.
             An Ordinance of the City Council of the City of East Moline, Illinois, regulating
99-17        encroachmen t on public right-of-way in the City of East Moline, Rock Island County,
             Illinois.
99-18        An Ordinance annexing certain territory to the City of East Moline, County of Rock
             Island, Illinois.
3-1999        
             A Resolution that the requests of Harry V. Arvanis and Alfreda Arvanis to annex, to the
(Resolution) City of East Moline, Illinois, and zone the described property A-R, Agricultural and One
             Family Residence District, be granted and a recommendat ion pertaining thereto, be
             forwarded to the City Council.
             An Ordinance of the City of East Moline, Illinois, prohibiting the solicitation and
99-19        acceptance of gifts and adopting the State Gift Ban Act (5 ILCS 425/1 et. seq.; P. A.
             90-737).
             An Ordinance authorizing and ratifying the sale of certain real estate located in the
99-20        City of East Moline, County of Rock Island and State of Illinois by the City of East
             Moline, Illinois.
             An Ordinance amending Sections 4-9-2 entitled "Definitions", and 4-9-7 entitled
99-21        "Freestanding Signs", of Chapter 9, entitled "Sign Ordinance", of Title 4, entitled
             "Building Regulations", of the City Code of the City of East Moline of 1974 and as
             amended.
99-22        An Ordinance creating an Internal Audit Committee as part of the Finance Department of
             the City of East Moline, Illinois.
             An Ordinance authorizing the sale of surplus equipment formerly used by City of East
99-23        Moline Police Department to the village of Carbon Cliff, Illinois, by the City Council
             of the City of East Moline, Illinois.
             An Ordinance amending Section 1-9-1 entitled "Appointment, Term", of Chapter 9, entitled
99-24        "City Attorney", of Title 1, entitled "Administrative", of the City Code of the City of
             East Moline of 1974 and as amended.
             An Ordinance amending Section 1-14-1 entitled "Office Created", of Chapter 14, entitled
99-25        "Director of Maintenance Services", of Title 1, entitled "Administrative", of the City
             Code of the City of East Moline of 1974 and as amended.
             An Ordinance amending Section 1-15-1 entitled "Office Of Director Of Water Filtration
99-26        Created", of Chapter 15, entitled "Utility Services", of Title 1, entitled
             "Administrative", of the City Code of the City of East Moline of 1974 and as amended.
             An Ordinance amending Section 1-15-5 entitled "Office Of Director Of Wastewater
99-27        Treatment", of Chapter 15, entitled "Utility Services", of Title 1, entitled
             "Administrative", of the City Code of the City of East Moline of 1974 and as amended.
             An Ordinance amending Section 1-17-1 entitled "Creation Of Position", of Chapter 17,
99-28        entitled "Budget Officer", of Title 1, entitled "Administrative", of the City Code of
             the City of East Moline of 1974 and as amended.
             An Ordinance amending Section 1-28-1 entitled "Office Created", of Chapter 28, entitled
99-29        "City Administrator", of Title 1, entitled "Administrative", of the City Code of the
             City of East Moline of 1974 and as amended.
             An Ordinance amending Section 1-20-2 entitled "Office Created", of Chapter 20, entitled
99-30        "Engineering Services Division", of Title 1, entitled "Administrative", of the City Code
             of the City of East Moline of 1974 and as amended.
             An Ordinance amending Section 1-29-2 entitled "Office Created", of Chapter 29, entitled
99-31        "Finance Department", of Title 1, entitled "Administrative", of the City Code of the
             City of East Moline of 1974 and as amended.
             An Ordinance amending Section 2-19-8 entitled "Director Of Development Services", of
99-32        Chapter 19, entitled "Economic Development Commission", of Title 2, entitled "Boards And
             Commissions", of the City Code of the City of East Moline of 1974 and as amended.
             An Ordinance amending Section 5-1-2 entitled "Fire Chief", of Chapter 1, entitled "Fire
99-33        Department", of Title 5, entitled "Fire Regulations", of the City Code of the City of
             East Moline of 1974 and as amended.
             An Ordinance amending Section 6-1-2 entitled "Office Of Chief Created", of Chapter 1,
99-34        entitled "Police Department", of Title 6, entitled "Police Regulations", of the City
             Code of the City of East Moline of 1974 and as amended.
99-35        An Ordinance of the City of East Moline, Illinois, adopting the 1999 Official
             Comprehensi ve Plan and Future Land Use Map. (65 ILCS 5/11-12-6)
             An Ordinance amending Ordinance No. 88-22 as amended by Ordinance 98-41, relating to the
             establishment of an Enterprise Zone in the City of East Moline, Illinois, pursuant to an
99-37        intergovernmental agreement with the cities of Moline, Illinois, and Silvis, Illinois,
             by adding Rock Island County to the Illinois Quad Cities Enterprise Zone and by revising
             Section 3, Exhibits "A" and "B" to include new territory within the Illinois Quad Cities
             Enterprise Zone.
             An Ordinance changing the zoning and amendment of the Zoning Map of the City of East
99-39        Moline, Illinois, attached to and made a part of the Zoning Ordinance of the City of
             East Moline, Illinois, of July 24, 1967, and as amended.
4-1999        
             A Resolution of the East Moline Plan Commission recommending that the zone change
             requests from REDEEM (Revitalize and Develop East Moline) be granted and the site plan,
(Resolution) dated August 9, 1999, for the Beacon Harbor portion of the planned unit development be
             adopted and approved and this resolution be forwarded to the City Council of East
             Moline, Illinois.
             An Ordinance proposing the establishment of a downtown special service area in the City
99-40        of East Moline and the levy of a tax to pay for special services provided to such area
             and providing for a public hearing and other procedures in connection with such
             establishment and levy.
             A Special Ordinance of the City Council of the City of East Moline, Illinois declaring
99-41        the acquisition of real property necessary for the reconstruction of Seventh Street, and
             authorizing the purchase of same or the acquisition of same by use of eminent domain.
99-42        An Ordinance annexing certain territory to the City of East Moline, County of Rock
             Island, Illinois.
5-1999        
             A Resolution that an ordinance be drafted to annex properties to the City of East
(Resolution) Moline, Illinois, and that the properties be zoned R-2, One Family Residence District,
             and a recommendation be forwarded to the City Council pertaining thereto.
99-43        An Ordinance authorizing the sale of surplus equipment formerly used by the City of East
             Moline, Illinois.
             An Ordinance amending Section 6-3-48 entitled "Truancy", of Chapter 3, entitled
99-44        "Misdemeanors", of Title 6, entitled "Police Regulations", of the City Code of the City
             of East Moline of 1974 and as amended.
             An Ordinance of the City Council of the City of East Moline, Illinois, vacating a
99-45        portion of 5th Street lying North of the 42nd Avenue Frontage Road in the City of East
             Moline, Illinois.
             An Ordinance amending Section 9-3-1 entitled "No Parking Places" of Chapter 3, entitled
99-46        Parking Rules, of Title 9, entitled "Traffic", of the City Code of the City of East
             Moline of 1974 and as amended.
             An Ordinance amending Section 1-5-7 entitled "Committee of the Whole" of Chapter 5,
99-47        entitled "City Council", of Title 1, entitled "Administrative", of the City Code of the
             City of East Moline of 1974 and as amended.
             An Ordinance authorizing the issuance of General Obligation Alternate Bonds (Waterworks
             and Sewerage System and Motor Fuel Tax Alternate Revenue Source) of the City of East
99-48        Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois, in an aggregate principal amount not to exceed
             $2,000,000 for the purpose of paying the costs of improving and extending the Waterworks
             and Sewerage System of the City and acquiring, constructing, installing and equipping
             certain traffic-control intersection improvements, and related costs and expenses.
             An Ordinance amending Section 9-5-3 entitled "Stop and Yield Streets" of Chapter 5,
99-49        entitled "Through, One-Way Streets" of Title 9, entitled "Traffic", of the City Code of
             the City of East Moline of 1974 and as amended.
             An Ordinance amending Section 9-5-3 entitled "Stop and Yield Streets" of Chapter 5,
99-50        entitled "Through, One-Way Streets" of Title 9, entitled "Traffic", of the City Code of
             the City of East Moline of 1974 and as amended.
99-51        An Ordinance authorizing the execution and delivery of an Intergovernm ental Cooperation
             Agreement and certain documents in connection therewith; and related matters.
99-52        An Ordinance of the City Council of the City of East Moline, Illinois, establishing a
             Historic Preservation Commission for the City of East Moline, Illinois.
             An Ordinance providing for the tax levy for the current fiscal year ending April 30,
99-53        2000, of the City of East Moline, in the County of Rock Island, and in the State of
             Illinois.
             An Ordinance authorizing and ratifying the sale of certain real estate located in the
99-54        City of East Moline, County of Rock Island and State of Illinois by the City of East
             Moline, Illinois.
00-01        An Ordinance annexing certain territory to the City of East Moline, County of Rock
             Island, Illinois.
             An Ordinance authorizing and providing for the issuance and sale of $1,000,000 general
             obligation alternate bonds, series 2000A, of the City of East Moline, Rock Island
             County, Illinois, for the purpose of paying the costs of improving and extending the
             combined waterworks and sewerage system of the City; providing for the collection,
00-02        segregation and application of the revenues of the combined waterworks and sewerage
             system of the City and the levy of a direct annual tax for the payment of principal and
             interest on those bonds; providing for the execution and delivery of a continuing
             disclosure undertaking in connection with the series 2000A bonds; and concerning related
             matters.
00-03        An Ordinance annexing certain territory to the City of East Moline, County of Rock
             Island, Illinois.
00-04        An Ordinance amending Chapter 1, entitled Building Code, of Title 4, entitled "Building
             Regulations" of the City Code of the City of East Moline of 1974 as amended.
00-05        An Ordinance amending Chapter 2, entitled Housing Code, of Title 4, entitled "Building
             Regulations" of the City Code of the City of East Moline of 1974 as amended.
             An Ordinance changing the zoning and amendment of the Zoning Map of the City of East
00-07        Moline, Illinois, attached to and made a part of Zoning Ordinance of the City of East
             Moline, Illinois, of July 24, 1967, and as amended.
00-08        An Ordinance authorizing the filing of a petition for repair or demolition of a building
             located at 402-15th Avenue, East Moline, Illinois.
00-09        An Ordinance authorizing the filing of a petition for demolition of a building located
             at 738 22nd Street, East Moline, Illinois.
             An Ordinance amending Section 9-3-3 entitled "Parking Prohibited During Snow Removal" of
00-10        Chapter 3, entitled "Parking Rules" of Title 9, entitled "Traffic", of the City Code of
             the City of East Moline of 1974 and as amended.
             An ordinance amending section 3-7-6, entitled "License Fees" of chapter 7 entitled
00-11        "Liquor Dealers", of title 3 entitled "Business Regulations" by adding paragraph (G),
             class G license of the city code of the city of East Moline, Illinois, of 1974 as
             amended.
             An ordinance amending ordinance 88-22 as amended by ordinance 98-41 relating to the
             establishment of an enterprise zone in the city of East Moline, Illinois, pursuant to an
00-12        intergovernmental agreement with the city of East Moline, Illinois, Silvis, Illinois and
             Rock Island County, Illinois, by revising section 3, exhibits "A" and "B" to include new
             territory within the Illinois quad cities enterprise zone.
00-13        Intergovernm ental cooperation agreement.
             An ordinance amending section 4-1-2(C), entitled "Permit and Compliance Bond
00-14        Requirements" of chapter 1, entitled "Building Code" of title 4, entitled "Building
             Regulations", of the city code of the city of East Moline of 1974 and as amended.
             An ordinance amending chapter 2 entitled "Fire Code" of title 5 entitled "Fire
00-15        Regulations" of the city code of the city of East Moline of 1974 and as amended,
             adopting the 1997 uniform fire code.
             An ordinance amending sections 4-9-3 entitled "General Regulations" of chapter 9,
00-16        entitled "Sign Ordinance", of title 4, entitled "Building Regulations", of the city code
             of the city of East Moline of 1974 and as amended.
00-17        An ordinance amending chapter 4, entitled "Animals", of title 6, entitled "Police
             Regulations", of the city code of the city of East Moline of 1974 as amended.
             An ordinance adopting the budget for all corporate purposes of the city of East Moline,
00-18        Illinois, in lieu of the appropriation ordinance for the fiscal year commencing on the
             first day of May 2000, and ending on the thirtieth day of April 2001.
             An ordinance amending section 4-1-2(C), entitled "Permit and Compliance Bond
00-19        Requirements" of chapter 1, entitled "Building Code" of title 4, entitled "Building
             Regulations", of the city code of the city of East Moline of 1974 and as amended.
             An ordinance amending section 7-9-7 entitled "Special Collection Services", of chapter
00-20        9, entitled "Solid Waste Regulations" of title 7, entitled "Health and Sanitation", of
             the city code of the city of East Moline of 1974 and as amended.
00-21        An ordinance annexing certain territory to the city of East Moline, county of Rock
             Island.
             An ordinance amending ordinance no. 88-22 as amended by ordinance 98-41 relating to the
             establishment of an enterprise zone in the city of East Moline, Illinois, pursuant to an
00-22        intergovernmental agreement with the cities of East Moline, Illinois, Silvis, Illinois
             and Rock Island County, Illinois, by revising section 3, exhibits "A" and "B" to include
             new territory within the Illinois quad cities enterprise zone.
             An ordinance amending section 9-5-3 entitled "Stop and Yield Streets" of chapter 5,
00-23        entitled "Through, One-Way Streets" of title 9, entitled "Traffic", of the city code of
             the city of East Moline of 1974 and as amended.
             An ordinance amending section 2-14-2 entitled "Organization " of chapter 14 entitled
00-24        "Park and Recreation Board", of title 2 entitled "Boards and Commissions", of the city
             code of the city of East Moline of 1974 and as amended.
             An ordinance amending section 7-4-5 entitled "Abatement ", section 7-4-6 entitled
00-25        "Lien", and section 7-4-7 entitled "Violations" of chapter 4 entitled "Plants and
             Weeds", of title 7 entitled "Health and Sanitation", of the city code of the city of
             East Moline of 1974 and as amended.
             An ordinance amending section 1-25-1 entitled "Depositories", of chapter 25, entitled
00-26        "Depositories", of title 1, entitled "Administrative", of the city code of the city of
             East Moline of 1974 and as amended.
             An ordinance adding section 8-8-30, entitled "Water Meters" of chapter 8 entitled "Water
00-27        and Sewer", of title 8 entitled "Public Ways and Property", of the city code of the city
             of East Moline, Illinois, of 1974 as amended.
             An ordinance amending chapter 1 entitled "Fire Department" of title 5 entitled "Fire
00-28        Regulations" of the city code of the city of East Moline of 1974 and as amended,
             adopting the 1997 uniform fire code.
00-29        An ordinance annexing certain territory to the city of East Moline, county of Rock
             Island, Illinois.
00-30        An ordinance annexing certain territory to the city of East Moline, county of Rock
             Island, Illinois.
00-31        An ordinance annexing certain territory to the city of East Moline, county of Rock
             Island, Illinois.
00-32        An ordinance annexing certain territory to the city of East Moline, county of Rock
             Island, Illinois.
00-33        An ordinance annexing certain territory to the city of East Moline, county of Rock
             Island, Illinois.
00-34        An ordinance annexing certain territory to the city of East Moline, county of Rock
             Island, Illinois.
             An ordinance changing the zoning and amendment of the zoning map of the city of East
00-35        Moline, Illinois, attached to and made a part of the zoning ordinance of the city of
             East Moline, Illinois, of July 24, 1967, and as amended.
00-36        An ordinance authorizing the sale of surplus equipment formerly used by the city of East
             Moline, Illinois, in the 7th annual bi-state joint auction.
             An ordinance authorizing the purchase of a 1999 lumina for the East Moline police
00-37        department and the trade in of three (3) used police vehicles of the city of East Moline
             police department.
             An ordinance amending section 9-3-1 entitled "No Parking Places" of chapter 3, entitled
00-38        parking rules, of title 9, entitled "Traffic", of the city code of the city of East
             Moline of 1974 and as amended.
             An ordinance amending ordinance no. 88-22 as amended by ordinance 98-41 relating to the
             establishment of an enterprise zone in the city of East Moline, Illinois, pursuant to an
00-39        intergovernmental agreement with the cities of East Moline, Illinois, Silvis, Illinois
             and Rock Island County, Illinois, by revising section 3, exhibits "A" and "B" to include
             new territory within the Illinois quad cities enterprise zone.
             An ordinance amending section 6-1-3, entitled "Appointments" of chapter 1 entitled
00-40        "Police Department", of title 6 entitled "Police Regulations", of the city code of the
             city of East Moline, Illinois, of 1974 and as amended.
             An ordinance amending section 5-1-4, entitled "Appointments" of chapter 1 entitled "Fire
00-41        Department", of title 5 entitled "Fire Regulations", of the city code of the city of
             East Moline, Illinois, of 1974 and as amended.
             An ordinance amending section 9-2-21 entitled "Reckless or Careless Driving" and section
00-42        9-2-30 entitled "Unlawful Riding Upon Vehicles" of chapter 2, entitled "Rules for
             Driving" of title 9, entitled "Traffic", of the city code of the city of East Moline of
             1974 and as amended.
             An ordinance changing the zoning and amendment of the zoning map of the city of East
00-43        Moline, Illinois, attached to and made a part of the zoning ordinance of the city of
             East Moline, Illinois, of July 24, 1967, and as amended.
             An ordinance authorizing the issuance of general obligation alternate bonds (tax
             increment alternate revenue source) of the city of East Moline, Rock Island County,
             Illinois, in an aggregate principal amount not to exceed $5,000,000 for the purpose of
             paying certain "Redevelopment Project Costs" in furtherance of the riverfront
00-44        redevelopment project plan, including but not limited to the costs of land assembly,
             demolition of buildings, clearing, filling and grading of land, environmental
             remediation, reimbursement of developer interest costs relating to the construction,
             renovation or rehabilitation of a redevelopment project, and constructing various public
             works and improvements.
             An ordinance of the city council of the city of East Moline, Illinois, exempting John
             Deere harvester works from additional charges added to its electric utility bill as a
00-45        pass on of the city's utility tax, to the extent such charges result from the change of
             calculating the tax as required by the state of Illinois, all as authorized by the
             Illinois enterprise zone act.
00-46        Tax levy ordinance.
             An ordinance authorizing the sale of a 1991 Ford taurus vehicle used by the maintenance
00-47        department of the city of East Moline, Illinois, for salvage, to the E & J used auto and
             truck parts of Rock Island, Illinois, by the city council of the city of East Moline,
             Illinois.
             An ordinance amending section 6-3-48 entitled "Truancy", of chapter 3, entitled
00-48        "Misdemeanors", of title 6, entitled "Police Regulations", of the city code of the city
             of East Moline of 1974 and as amended.
00-49        An ordinance in connection with rights and responsibilities related to locally imposed
             and administered taxes of the city of East Moline, Illinois.
00-50        An ordinance authorizing the filing of a petition for demolition of a building located
             at 1164 13th Avenue, East Moline, Illinois.
             An ordinance changing the future land use map of the city of East Moline, Illinois,
01-01        attached to and made a part of the comprehensive plan of the city of East Moline,
             Illinois, of July 6, 1999, and as amended.
             An ordinance amending ordinance no. 87-36 of the city of East Moline, Rock Island
             County, Illinois, in order to provide that property that is located in the enterprise
01-02        zone established by ordinance no. 87-36 and that is also located in the riverfront
             redevelopment project area or in the great river industrial park tax increment
             redevelopment project area shall not be eligible for any abatement of taxes under
             section 18-170 of the property tax code; and concerning related matters.
             An ordinance amending ordinance no. 88-22 as amended by ordinance 98-41 relating to the
             establishment of an enterprise zone in the city of East Moline, Illinois, pursuant to an
01-03        intergovernmental agreement with the cities of East Moline, Illinois, Silvis, Illinois
             and Rock Island County, Illinois, by adding the village of Milan to the Illinois quad
             cities enterprise zone as shown in exhibit "2" and by revising section 3, exhibits "A"
             and "B" to include new territory within the Illinois quad cities enterprise zone.
             An ordinance amending section 9-11-5 entitled "Derelict And Abandoned Vehicles" of
01-04        chapter 11 entitled "Abandoned Vehicles", of title 9 entitled "Traffic", of the city
             code of the city of East Moline of 1974 and as amended.
01-05        An ordinance authorizing the execution and delivery of an intergovernmental cooperation
             agreement and certain documents in connection therewith; and related matters.
             An ordinance amending ordinance no. 87-36 of the city of East Moline, Rock Island
             County, Illinois, in order to provide that property that is located in the enterprise
01-06        zone established by ordinance no. 87-36 and that is also located in the proposed quad
             city downs redevelopment project area shall not be eligible for any abatement of taxes
             under section 18-170 of the property tax code; and concerning related matters.
             An ordinance of the city of East Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois authorizing the
01-07        establishment of tax increment financing "Interested Parties" registries and adopting
             registration rules for such registries.
01-08        An ordinance annexing certain territory to the city of East Moline, county of Rock
             Island, Illinois.
             An ordinance adopting the budget for all corporate purposes of the city of East Moline,
01-09        Illinois, in lieu of the appropriation ordinance for the fiscal year commencing on the
             first day of May, 2001, and ending on the thirtieth day of April, 2002.
01-10        An ordinance amending chapter 4, entitled electrical code, of title 4, entitled
             "Building Regulations" of the city code of the city of East Moline of 1974 as amended.
01-11        An ordinance amending chapter 1, entitled building code, of title 4, entitled "Building
             Regulations" of the city code of the city of East Moline of 1974 as amended.
01-12        An amended ordinance annexing certain territory to the city of East Moline, county of
             Rock Island, Illinois.
01-13        An ordinance amending chapter 11, entitled "Mechanical Code", of title 4, entitled
             "Building Regulations" of the city code of the city of East Moline of 1974 as amended.
             An ordinance amending section 1-25-1 entitled "Depositories", of chapter 25, entitled
01-14        "Depositories", of title 1, entitled "Administrative", of the city code of the city of
             East Moline of 1974 and as amended.
01-15        An amended ordinance in connection with rights and responsibilities related to locally
             imposed and administered taxes of the city of East Moline, Illinois.
             An ordinance amending section 9-3-1 entitled "No Parking Places" of chapter 3, entitled
01-16        parking rules, of title 9, entitled "Traffic", of the city code of the city of East
             Moline of 1974 and as amended.
             An ordinance amending section 6-1-1 entitled "Creation Of Police Department" of chapter
01-17        1 entitled "Police Department" of title 6 entitled "Police Regulations", of the city
             code of the city of East Moline of 1974 and as amended.
             Ordinance of city council of the city of East Moline ascertaining the prevailing rate of
01-19        wages for laborers, mechanics, and other workers in the city of East Moline employed in
             the construction of public works for said city.
             An ordinance changing the zoning and amendment of the zoning map of the city of East
01-21        Moline, Illinois, attached to and made a part of the zoning ordinance of the city of
             East Moline, Illinois, of July 1967, and as amended.
             An ordinance authorizing the issuance of general obligation alternate bonds (tax
             increment and state revenue sharing alternate revenue source) of the city of East
             Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois, in an aggregate principal amount not to exceed
             $2,400,000 for the purpose of paying certain "Redevelopment Project Costs " in
01-22        furtherance of the Riverfront redevelopment project plan, including but not limited to
             the costs of land assembly, clearing, filling and grading of land, environmental
             remediation, reimbursement of developer interest costs relating to the construction,
             renovation or rehabilitation of a redevelopment project, and constructing various public
             works and improvements.
             An ordinance amending section 9-3-1 entitled "No Parking Places" of chapter 3, entitled
01-23        parking rules, of title 9, entitled "Traffic", of the city code of the city of East
             Moline of 1974 and as amended.
01-24        An ordinance authorizing the sale of surplus equipment formerly used in the police
             department and the water treatment department by the city of East Moline, Illinois.
             An ordinance authorizing the sale of the ESI gas station premises located at 3017
01-25        Kennedy Drive, East Moline, Illinois, by the city council of the city of East Moline,
             Illinois.
             Ordinance authorizing and providing for the issuance and sale of $2,210,000 general
             obligation alternate bonds (tax increment and state revenue sharing alternate revenue
             source), series 2001, of the city of East Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois, for the
             purpose of paying certain "Redevelopment Project Costs" in furtherance of the Riverfront
01-26        redevelopment project area project and plan; providing for the pledge of tax increment
             revenues from the Riverfront redevelopment project area and state revenue sharing
             revenues to the payment of principal of and interest on those bonds; providing for the
             levy of a direct annual tax for the payment of principal of and interest on those bonds;
             and concerning related matters.
01-27        An ordinance annexing certain territory to the city of East Moline, county of Rock
             Island, Illinois.
             An ordinance authorizing the issuance of recreational facility revenue bonds of the city
             of East Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois, in an aggregate principal amount not to
01-29        exceed $250,000 for the purpose of defraying the city's share of the costs of acquiring,
             constructing and improving the existing municipal swimming pool; and concerning related
             matters.
             An ordinance amending section 9-11-1 entitled "Definitions" of chapter 11, entitled
01-30        "Abandoned Vehicles" of title 9, entitled "Traffic", of the city code of the city of
             East Moline of 1974 and as amended.
             An ordinance amending section 9-3-1 entitled "No Parking Places" of chapter 3, entitled
01-31        parking rules, of title 9, entitled "Traffic", of the city code of the city of East
             Moline of 1974 and as amended.
             An ordinance amending section 9-2-38 entitled "Limited Load Streets" of chapter 2
01-32        entitled "Rules For Driving", of title 9 entitled "Traffic", of the city code of the
             city of East Moline of 1974 and as amended.
01-33        An ordinance authorizing the trade in of a used police vehicle of the city of East
             Moline police department.
             An ordinance amending section 9-2-38 entitled "Limited Load Streets" and section 9-2-40
01-34        entitled "Truck Route" of chapter 2, entitled "Rules For Driving" of title 9, entitled
             "Traffic", of the city code of the city of East Moline of 1974 and as amended.
01-35        Ordinance of the city council of the city of East Moline, Illinois, authorizing the
             purchase of certain property from the Rock Island County trustee.
01-36        An ordinance of the city council of the city of East Moline, Illinois, authorizing the
             purchase of real estate at 1243 18th Avenue, East Moline, Illinois.
01-37        2001 tax levy ordinance.
             An ordinance authorizing the issuance of general obligation alternate bonds (utility tax
             alternate revenue source) of the city of East Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois, in
01-38        an aggregate principal amount not to exceed $5,000,000, for the purpose of paying the
             costs of acquiring, constructing and equipping a building on land owned by the city to
             serve the city's public works and engineering departments and other city administrative
             offices, and related costs and expenses.
             An ordinance amending ordinance no. 87-36 entitled: "An Ordinance establishing an
01-39        Enterprise Zone within the City of East Moline, Illinois, said enterprise zone being a
             portion of a larger enterprise zone encompassing contiguous portions of the cities of
             Moline, Silvis, Village of Milan and County of Rock Island, Illinois ".
             An ordinance amending section 10-11-2 entitled "Permitted Accessory Uses" of chapter 11
02-01        entitled "B1 Retail Business Districts" of title 10 entitled "Zoning Regulations", of
             the city code of the city of East Moline of 1974 and as amended.
02-02        An ordinance authorizing the filing of a petition for demolition of a building located
             at 117 21st Street, East Moline, Illinois.
02-03        An ordinance authorizing the filing of a petition for demolition of a building located
             at 359 28th Avenue, East Moline, Illinois.
02-04        An ordinance authorizing the filing of a petition for demolition of a building located
             at 1502 11th Avenue, East Moline, Illinois.
             An ordinance authorizing the city administrator of the city of East Moline, Illinois, to
02-05        sell or scrap items left on the site of the Foremost Packing Equipment building prior to
             demolition of said building.
             An ordinance amending section 9-3-1 entitled "No Parking Places" of chapter 3, entitled
02-06        parking rules, of title 9, entitled "Traffic", of the city code of the city of East
             Moline of 1974 and as amended.
             An ordinance amending ordinance no. 88-22 as amended by ordinance 98-41 relating to the
             establishment of an enterprise zone in the city of East Moline, Illinois, pursuant to an
02-07        intergovernmental agreement with the cities of East Moline, Silvis and Rock Island
             County and the village of Milan, Illinois, by revising section 3, exhibits "A" and "B"
             to include new territory within the Illinois quad cities enterprise zone.
             An ordinance authorizing the issuance of general obligation alternate bonds (waterworks
             and sewerage system alternate revenue source) of the city of East Moline, Rock Island
02-08        County, Illinois, in an aggregate principal amount not to exceed $5,000,000, for the
             purpose of paying the costs of improving and extending the waterworks and sewerage
             system of the city.
             An ordinance authorizing the issuance of waterworks and sewerage revenue bonds of the
02-09        city of East Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois, in an aggregate principal amount not
             to exceed $5,000,000, for the purpose of paying the costs of improving and extending the
             combined waterworks and sewerage system of the city.
             An ordinance of the city council of the city of East Moline, Illinois, authorizing the
02-10        sale of lot number fifty four (54) in the second addition, East Moline industrial park,
             in the city of East Moline, situated in the county of Rock Island, and state of
             Illinois.
02-11        An ordinance amending chapter 4 entitled "Plants and Weeds" of title 7 entitled "Health
             and Sanitation" of the city code of the city of East Moline of 1974 and as amended.
             An ordinance amending section 2-19-8 entitled "Director of Development Services", of
02-12        chapter 19, entitled "Economic Development Commission", of title 2, entitled "Boards and
             Commissions" of the city code of the city of East Moline of 1974 and as amended.
             An ordinance adopting the budget for all corporate purposes of the city of East Moline,
02-13        Illinois, in lieu of the appropriation ordinance for the fiscal year commencing on the
             first day of May, 2002 and ending on the thirtieth day of April, 2003.
02-14        An ordinance authorizing the execution and delivery of an intergovernmental cooperation
             agreement and certain documents in connection therewith; and related matters.
             An ordinance amending section 9-3-3 entitled "Parking Prohibited During Snow Removal",
02-15        of chapter 3, entitled "Parking Rules", of title 9, entitled "Traffic", of the city code
             of the city of East Moline of 1974 and as amended.
02-16        An ordinance annexing certain territory to the city of East Moline, county of Rock
             Island, Illinois.
             An ordinance amending section 5-1-13 entitled "Fire Protection Tax" by increasing the
02-17        limitation of the tax levy for fire protection purposes for the city of East Moline,
             Rock Island County, Illinois, pursuant to section 5/11-7-3 of the Illinois municipal
             code.
             An ordinance changing the zoning and amendment of the zoning map of the city of East
02-18        Moline, Illinois, attached to and made a part of the zoning ordinance of the city of
             East Moline, Illinois, of July 24, 1967, and as amended.
             An ordinance amending section 9-3-11 entitled "Time Limit Parking" of chapter 3,
02-19        entitled "Parking Rules" and section 9-4-5 entitled "City Parking Lots Designated" of
             chapter 4, entitled "City Parking Lots", of title 9, entitled "Traffic", of the city
             code of the city of East Moline of 1974 and as amended.
             An ordinance amending section 9-3-1 entitled "No Parking Places" of chapter 3, entitled
02-20        "Parking Rules" of title 9, entitled "Traffic", of the city code of the city of East
             Moline of 1974 and as amended.
02-21        An ordinance authorizing the trade in of two (2) large dump trucks for the purchase of
             two (2) large dump trucks of the city of East Moline maintenance services department.
             An ordinance authorizing and providing for the issuance and sale of $5,000,000 general
             obligation alternate bonds (waterworks and sewerage system alternate revenue source),
             series 2002A, of the city of East Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois, for the purpose
             of paying the costs of improving and extending the combined waterworks and sewerage
02-22        system of the city; providing for the collection, segregation and application of the
             revenues of the combined waterworks and sewerage system of the city and the levy of a
             direct annual tax for the payment of principal and interest on the series 2002A bonds;
             providing for the execution and delivery of a continuing disclosure undertaking in
             connection with the series 2002A bonds; and concerning other related matters.
02-23        An ordinance authorizing the sale of surplus equipment formerly used in the park
             department by the city of East Moline, Illinois.
             An ordinance amending ordinance 88-22 as amended relating to the establishment of an
             enterprise zone in the city of East Moline, Illinois, pursuant to an intergovernmental
             agreement with the cities of East Moline, Illinois, Moline, Illinois, Silvis, Illinois,
02-24        Rock Island County, Illinois and the village of Milan, Illinois, by revising section 3,
             exhibits A and B to include new territory within the Illinois quad cities enterprise
             zone, revising the applicability of the exemption from the retailers' occupation tax and
             by extending the term of the quad cities enterprise zone in the city of East Moline,
             Illinois.
             An ordinance amending ordinance 88-22 as amended relating to the establishment of an
             enterprise zone in the city of East Moline, Illinois, pursuant to an intergovernmental
02-25        agreement with the cities of East Moline, Illinois, Moline, Illinois, Silvis, Illinois,
             Rock Island County, Illinois and the village of Milan, Illinois, by revising section 3,
             exhibits A and B to include new territory within the Illinois quad cities enterprise
             zone.
             An ordinance of the city council of the city of East Moline, Illinois, authorizing the
02-26        acceptance of an offer to purchase by Andrew and Mary Lou Wood for the empty lot located
             at 402 15th Avenue, East Moline, and to proceed with foreclosure of the demolition lien
             against Charles and Carol Isabel Elliott.
             An ordinance of the city council of the city of East Moline, Illinois, authorizing the
02-27        establishment of a handicapped parking space in front of the residence located at 347
             12th Street, East Moline, Illinois.
             An ordinance enacting section 1-5-12, entitled "Salaries Of The Mayor, City Clerk,
02-28        Treasurer, And Aldermen", of chapter 5, entitled "City Council", of title 1, entitled
             "Administrative", of the city code of the city of East Moline, Illinois.
             An ordinance authorizing and ratifying the sale of certain real estate located in the
02-29        Great River Industrial Park, city of East Moline, county of Rock Island and state of
             Illinois by the city of East Moline, Illinois.
02-30        An ordinance regulating development in floodplain areas in the city of East Moline,
             Illinois.
             An ordinance authorizing and ratifying the sale of certain real estate located in the
02-31        city of East Moline, county of Rock Island and state of Illinois by the city of East
             Moline, Illinois.
02-32        An ordinance amending the East Moline sewer use and pretreatment ordinance as passed by
             the city council of East Moline, Illinois, on November 21, 1994.
02-33        An ordinance authorizing the sale of surplus equipment formerly used in the police
             department by the city of East Moline, Illinois.
             An ordinance of the city council of the city of East Moline, Illinois, amending section
02-34        9-5-4 entitled "traffic signal intersections" "traffic signals", of title 9, entitled
             "traffic", of the city code of the city of East Moline of 1974 and as amended.
02-35        Ordinance of the city council of the city of East Moline, Illinois, authorizing the
             purchase of certain property from the Rock Island County trustee.
             An ordinance amending chapter 8, entitled "occupation taxes" of title 3, entitled
02-36        "business" of the city code of the city of East Moline of 1984 as amended, relating to
             the establishment of the hotel accommodation tax for the city of East Moline, Illinois.
02-37        An ordinance authorizing the filing of a petition for demolition of the building located
             at 731 21st Street, East Moline, Illinois.
             An ordinance approving a redevelopment project and plan for the Kennedy Drive/Avenue of
02-39        the cities (42nd Avenue) redevelopment project area in the city of East Moline, Rock
             Island County, Illinois.
02-40        An ordinance designating the Kennedy Drive/Avenue of the cities (42nd Avenue)
             redevelopment project area for the city of East Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois.
02-41        An ordinance adopting tax increment allocation financing within the Kennedy Drive/Avenue
             of the cities (42nd Avenue) redevelopment project area.
             An ordinance authorizing the issuance of general obligation alternate bonds (tax
             increment and state revenue sharing alternate revenue source) of the city of East
02-42        Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois, in an aggregate principal amount not to exceed
             $3,500,000, for the purpose of paying certain "redevelopment project costs" in
             furtherance of the Kennedy Drive - 42nd Avenue tax increment financing redevelopment
             project and plan.
             Revised budget ordinance - amendment #1 an ordinance amending the budget for all
02-44        corporate purposes of the city of East Moline, Illinois, in lieu of the appropriation
             ordinance for the fiscal year commencing on the first day of May, 2002 and ending on the
             thirtieth day of April, 2003.
             An ordinance authorizing execution of an intergovernmental agreement among the Rock
02-45        Island County waste management agency (RICWMA) and the municipalities of East Moline,
             Milan, Moline and Rock Island establishing a regional recycling drop-off collection
             system.
             Ordinance of city council of the city of East Moline ascertaining the prevailing rate of
02-46        wages for laborers, mechanics and other workers in the city of East Moline employed in
             the construction of public works for said city.
             An ordinance amending chapter 9, entitled "solid waste regulations", of title 7,
02-47        entitled "health and sanitation" of the city code of the city of East Moline of 1984 as
             amended.
             Ordinance authorizing and providing for the issuance and sale of $250,000 of general
             obligation recreation bonds, series 2002B, of the city of East Moline, Rock Island
02-48        County, Illinois for the purpose of paying a portion of the costs of renovating,
             reconstructin g and reequipping a swimming pool and related and appurtenant facilities;
             providing for the levy of a direct annual tax for the payment of principal of and
             interest on those bonds; and concerning related matters.
             An ordinance of the city council of the city of East Moline, Illinois, authorizing the
02-49        establishment of a handicapped parking space in front of the residence located at 1351
             9th Avenue, East Moline, Illinois.
02-50        An ordinance authorizing the execution of an annexation agreement between the city of
             East Moline, county of Rock Island, Illinois and Michael R. Shamsie.
02-51        An ordinance annexing certain territory to the city of East Moline, county of Rock
             Island, Illinois.
             An ordinance amending chapters 1, entitled "building code", chapter 4, entitled
02-52        "electrical code" and chapter 11, entitled "mechanical code" of title 4, entitled
             "building regulations" of the city code of the city of East Moline, Illinois of 1984 as
             amended.
             Ordinance authorizing and providing for the issuance and sale of $290,000 general
             obligation alternate bonds (tax increment and state revenue sharing alternate revenue
             source), series 2002C, and $2,555,000 general obligation alternate bonds (tax increment
             and state revenue sharing alternate revenue source), series 2002D, of the city of East
             Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois, for the purpose of paying certain "redevelopment
02-53        project costs" in furtherance of the Kennedy Drive - 42nd Avenue tax increment financing
             redevelopment project and plan; providing for the pledge of tax increment revenues from
             the Kennedy Drive-Avenue of the Cities (42nd Avenue) redevelopment project area and
             state revenue sharing revenues to the payment of principal of and interest on those
             bonds; providing for the levy of a direct annual tax for the payment of principal of and
             interest on those bonds; providing for the execution and delivery of a continuing
             disclosure undertaking in connection with those bonds; and concerning related matters.
02-54        An ordinance authorizing the filing of a petition for demolition of the building located
             at 327 22nd Street, East Moline, Illinois.
02-55        An ordinance for the levy and assessment of taxes for the fiscal year beginning May 1,
             2002 and ending April 30, 2003.
02-56        An ordinance authorizing the filing of a petition for demolition of the building located
             at 327 22nd Street, East Moline, Illinois.
             An ordinance amending section 7 entitled "fee schedules", of chapter 3, entitled
02-57        "plumbing", of title 4, entitled "building regulations", of the city code of the city of
             East Moline of 1974 and as amended.
02-58        An ordinance amending chapter 11, entitled "mechanical code", of title 4, entitled
             "building regulations" of the city code of the city of East Moline of 1984 as amended.
02-59        An ordinance amending chapter 2, entitled "housing code", of title 4, entitled "building
             regulations" of the city code of the city of East Moline, Illinois of 1984 as amended.
             An ordinance amending chapter 2 entitled "fire code" of title 5 entitled "fire
02-60        regulations" of the city code of the city of East Moline of 1974 and as amended,
             adopting the 1997 uniform fire code.
             An ordinance amending section 9-5-3 entitled "stop and yield streets" of chapter 5,
02-61        entitled "through, one-way streets" of title 9, entitled "traffic", of the city code of
             the city of East Moline of 1974 and as amended.
             An ordinance of the city council of the city of East Moline, Illinois, accepting a
02-62        contract proposal of J. Alex McGehee for the sale of surplus real estate by the city of
             East Moline.
03-01        An ordinance amending chapter 1, entitled "building code", of title 4, entitled
             "building regulations" of the city code of the city of East Moline of 1984 as amended.
             An ordinance amending ordinance no. 88-22 as amended by ordinance no.       relating to
             the establishment of an enterprise zone in the city of East Moline, Illinois, pursuant
03-02        to an intergovernmental agreement with the cities of East Moline, Illinois, Moline,
             Illinois, Silvis, Illinois, Rock Island County, Illinois and the village of Milan,
             Illinois, by revising section 3, exhibits "A" and "B" to include new territory within
             the Illinois quad cities enterprise zone.
03-03        An ordinance authorizing the execution and delivery of an intergovernmental cooperation
             agreement and certain documents in connection therewith; and related matters.
             An ordinance amending section 9-5-3 entitled "Stop And Yield Streets" of chapter 5,
03-04        entitled "Through, One-Way Streets" of title 9, entitled "Traffic", of the city code of
             the city of East Moline of 1974 and as amended.
             An ordinance repealing the present section 7-14-2 entitled "Zone One Credit" of chapter
03-05        14 entitled "Radon Resistant Construction" of title 7 entitled "Health And Sanitation",
             of the city code of the city of East Moline of 1974.
03-06        An ordinance amending chapter 18 entitled "Raffles ", of title 3, entitled "Business
             Regulations", of the city code of the city of East Moline of 1974 and as amended.
             An ordinance amending section 9-3-3, entitled "Parking Prohibited During Snow Removal "
03-07        of chapter 3, entitled "Parking Rules" of title 9, entitled "Traffic", of the city code
             of the city of East Moline of 1974 and as amended.
03-08        An ordinance authorizing the sale of surplus equipment formerly used in the police
             department by the city of East Moline, Illinois.
03-09        An ordinance annexing certain territory to the city of East Moline, county of Rock
             Island, Illinois.
             An ordinance adopting the budget for all corporate purposes of the city of East Moline,
03-10        Illinois, in lieu of the appropriation ordinance for the fiscal year commencing on the
             first day of May, 2003 and ending on the thirtieth day of April, 2004.
03-11        An ordinance annexing certain territory to the city of East Moline, county of Rock
             Island, Illinois.
             An ordinance of the city council of the city of East Moline, Illinois, amending section
03-12        8-8-23 entitled "Rates And Charges", of chapter 8 entitled "Water And Sewer", of title 8
             entitled "Public Ways And Property", of the city code of the city of East Moline of 1974
             and as amended.
             An ordinance adding a new chapter 21, entitled "Tobacco Products" to title 3, entitled
03-13        "Business Regulations", of the city code of the city of East Moline, Illinois, of 1974
             as amended.
             An ordinance authorizing the issuance of general obligation alternate bonds (tax
             increment and license and permit revenue alternate revenue source) of the city of East
             Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois, in an aggregate principal amount not to exceed
             $1,600,000, for the purpose of paying certain "redevelopment project costs" in
             furtherance of the riverfront redevelopment project plan, including but not limited to
             the costs of land assembly, demolition of buildings, clearing, filling and grading of
03-14        land, environmental remediation, reimbursement of developer interest costs relating to
             the construction, renovation or rehabilitation of a redevelopment project, and
             constructing various public works and improvements, including costs in connection with
             the acquisition, construction and equipping of a building on land owned by the city to
             serve the city's public works and engineering departments and other city administrative
             offices and related costs and expenses to the extent they constitute such "redevelopment
             project costs."
             An ordinance amending section 4-9-3, entitled "General Regulations" of chapter 9,
03-15        entitled "Sign Ordinance", of title 4, entitled "Building Regulations" of the city code
             of the city of East Moline of 1974, and as amended.
             An ordinance of the city council of the city of East Moline, Illinois, amending chapter
03-16        20 entitled "Special Events " of title 3, entitled "Business Regulations" of the city
             code of the city of East Moline of 1974 and as amended.
             An ordinance amending section 2-14-1 entitled "Board Membership", of chapter 14,
03-17        entitled "Park And Recreation Board ", of title 2, entitled "Boards And Commissions", of
             the city code of the city of East Moline of 1974 and as amended.
             An ordinance amending section 2-6-1 entitled "Creation", of chapter 6, entitled
03-18        "Citizens' Advisory Committee", of title 2, entitled "Boards And Commissions", of the
             city code of the city of East Moline of 1974, and as amended.
             An ordinance of the city council of the city of East Moline, Illinois, amending section
03-19        9, entitled "Insurance" of chapter 12, entitled "Taxicabs/Livery Vehicles" of title 3,
             entitled "Business Regulations" of the city code of the city of East Moline of 1974 and
             as amended.
             An ordinance authorizing and ratifying the sale of certain real estate located in the
03-20        city of East Moline, county of Rock Island and state of Illinois by the city of East
             Moline, Illinois.
03-21        An ordinance of the city of East Moline, Illinois, authorizing the trade in of a vehicle
             used by the water filtration department of the city of East Moline.
             Ordinance of city council of the city of East Moline ascertaining the prevailing rate of
03-22        wages for laborers, mechanics and other workers in the city of East Moline employed in
             the construction of public works for said city.
             An ordinance amending section 2-19-8 entitled "Economic Development Manager", of chapter
03-23        19, entitled "Economic Development Commission", of title 2, entitled "Boards And
             Commissions" of the city code of the city of East Moline of 1974 and as amended.
             An ordinance amending ordinance no. 88-22 as amended by ordinance 98-41, relating to the
             establishment of an enterprise zone in the city of East Moline, Illinois, pursuant to an
03-24        intergovernmental agreement with the cities of Moline, Illinois, and Silvis, Illinois,
             by the addition of approximately 2.58 acres by the city of East Moline and approximately
             43.88 acres by the city of Silvis and by revising section 3, exhibits "A" and "B" to
             include new territory within the Illinois quad cities enterprise zone.
             An ordinance of the city council of the city of East Moline, Illinois, providing for the
03-25        submission to the electors of the city of East Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois, the
             question of whether the city should impose a non-home rule municipal retailers'
             occupation tax and non-home rule municipal service occupation tax.
             Ordinance providing for the issuance and sale of $3,600,000 general obligation alternate
             bonds (utility tax alternate revenue source), series 2003A, of the city of East Moline,
             Rock Island County, Illinois, for the purpose of paying the costs of acquiring,
             constructing and equipping a building on land owned by the city to serve the city's
             public works and engineering departments and other city administrative offices, and
03-26        related costs and expenses; providing for the pledge of revenues received by the city
             from occupation or privilege taxes on certain public utility services to the payment of
             principal of and interest on those bonds; providing for the levy of a direct annual tax
             for the payment of principal and interest on those bonds; providing for the execution
             and delivery of a continuing disclosure undertaking in connection with those bonds; and
             concerning related matters.
             Ordinance authorizing and providing for the issuance and sale of $1,400,000 general
             obligation alternate bonds (tax increment and license and permit revenue alternate
             revenue source), series 2003B, of the city of East Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois,
             for the purpose of paying certain "redevelopment project costs" in furtherance of the
03-27        riverfront redevelopment project plan; providing for the pledge of tax increment
             revenues from the riverfront redevelopment project area and license and permit revenues
             to the payment of principal of and interest on those bonds; providing for the levy of a
             direct annual tax for the payment of principal of and interest on those bonds; providing
             for the execution and delivery of a continuing disclosure undertaking in connection with
             those bonds; and concerning related matters.
             An ordinance changing the zoning and amendment of the zoning map of the city of East
03-28        Moline, Illinois, attached to and made a part of the zoning ordinance of the city of
             East Moline, Illinois, of July 24th, 1967, and as amended.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
03-29        and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             1995A, of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance authorizing and providing for the issuance and sale of $1,310,000 general
             obligation refunding alternate bonds, series 2003C, of the city of East Moline, Rock
             Island County, Illinois, for the purpose of refunding $1,220,000 of the outstanding
             general obligation alternate bonds, series 1995A, of the city; providing for the pledge
             of tax increment revenues from the north hill redevelopment project area to the payment
03-30        of principal of and interest on the series 2003C bonds; providing for the levy of a
             direct annual tax for the payment of principal of and interest on the series 2003C
             bonds; providing for the execution and delivery of an escrow agreement in connection
             with the refunding of the series 1995A bonds; providing for the execution and delivery
             of a continuing disclosure undertaking in connection with the series 2003C bonds; and
             concerning related matters.
             An ordinance amending ordinance no. 88-22 as amended by ordinance 98-41, relating to the
             establishment of an enterprise zone in the city of East Moline, Illinois, pursuant to an
             intergovernmental agreement with the cities of East Moline, Illinois, Moline, Illinois,
03-31        Silvis, Illinois, village of Milan, Illinois, and Rock Island County, Illinois, by the
             addition of approximately 6.566 acres by the village of Milan, and by revising section
             3, exhibits "A" and "B" to include new territory within the Illinois quad cities
             enterprise zone.
             An ordinance of the city council of the city of East Moline, Illinois, establishing a
03-32        garbage collection fee to be imposed as a user fee upon residential customers within the
             city of East Moline, Illinois.
             An ordinance authorizing and ratifying the sale of certain real estate located in the
03-33        city of East Moline, county of Rock Island and state of Illinois by the city of East
             Moline, Illinois.
03-34        An ordinance vacating a portion of 8th Avenue lying west of 13th Street and located in
             the city of East Moline, Illinois.
             An ordinance authorizing the purchase of a 2004 Freightliner La Brie garbage truck for
03-35        the East Moline maintenance service garbage division and the trade in of a used 1995
             garbage truck of the city of East Moline maintenance service garbage division.
             An ordinance amending section 9-3-1, entitled "No Parking Places", of chapter 3,
03-36        entitled "Parking Rules", of title 9, entitled "Traffic", of the city code of the city
             of East Moline of 1974 and as amended.
03-37        An ordinance authorizing the filing of a petition for demolition of the buildings
             located at 612 2nd Avenue, East Moline, Illinois.
03-38        An ordinance authorizing the filing of a petition for demolition of the garage located
             at 535 16th Avenue, East Moline, Illinois.
03-39        An ordinance for the levy and assessment of taxes for the fiscal year beginning May 1,
             2003 and ending April 30, 2004.
03-40        An ordinance authorizing the filing of a petition for demolition of the buildings
             located at 1537-1539 9th Avenue, East Moline, Illinois.
04-01        An ordinance adopting chapter 22, entitled "Pawnbroker ", of title 3, entitled "Business
             Regulations", of the city code of the city of East Moline, of 1974 and as amended.
             An ordinance of the city council of the city of East Moline, Illinois, amending chapter
04-02        4, entitled "General Provisions ", of title 10, entitled "Zoning Regulations", of the
             East Moline city code by adding section 10-4-3.1, to be entitled "Special Uses".
             An ordinance of the East Moline city council of the city of East Moline, Illinois,
04-03        amending section 10-14-5, entitled "Special Uses", of chapter 14, entitled "I-1 Light
             Industrial Districts", of title 10, entitled "Zoning Regulations", of the East Moline
             city code of 1974 as amended.
             An ordinance authorizing and ratifying the sale of certain real estate located in the
04-04        city of East Moline, county of Rock Island and state of Illinois by the city of East
             Moline, Illinois.
04-05        An ordinance amending chapter 3, entitled "Misdemeanors", of title 6, entitled "Police
             Regulations", of the city code of the city of East Moline of 1974 and as amended.
04-06        An ordinance amending chapter 2, entitled "Fire Code", of title 5, entitled "Fire
             Regulations", of the city code of the city of East Moline of 1974, and as amended.
             An ordinance imposing a non-home rule municipal retailers' occupation tax and non-home
04-07        rule municipal service occupation tax of the city of East Moline, Rock Island County,
             Illinois.
             An ordinance amending section 9-3-1, entitled "No Parking Places", of chapter 3,
04-08        entitled "Parking Rules", of title 9, entitled "Traffic", of the city code of the city
             of East Moline of 1974 and as amended.
04-09        An ordinance amending chapter 6, entitled "Curfew ", of title 6, entitled "Police
             Regulations", of the city code of the city of East Moline of 1974, and as amended.
             An ordinance adopting the budget for all corporate purposes of the city of East Moline,
04-10        Illinois, in lieu of the appropriation ordinance for the fiscal year commencing on the
             first day of May 2004 and ending on the thirtieth day of April 2005.
             An ordinance amending section 9-3-1, entitled "No Parking Places", of chapter 3,
04-11        entitled "Parking Rules", of title 9, entitled "Traffic", of the city code of the city
             of East Moline of 1974 and as amended.
04-12        An ordinance authorizing the filing of a petition for demolition of the buildings
             located at 4113 4th Street, East Moline, Illinois.
             An ordinance proposing the establishment of the 15th Avenue special service area in the
             city of East Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois; providing for the city to levy a
04-13        special ad valorem property tax to provide special municipal services within the 15th
             Avenue special service area; calling a public hearing and providing for public notice of
             the public hearing; providing for and concerning related matters.
04-14        An ordinance authorizing the sale of surplus equipment formerly used in the police
             department by the city of East Moline, Illinois.
             An ordinance of the city council of the city of East Moline, Illinois, repealing chapter
             4, entitled "Animals", and chapter 5, entitled "Dogs And Cats", of title 6, entitled
04-15        "Police Regulations", and adopting new chapter 4, entitled "Animals" and a new chapter
             5, entitled "Dogs And Cats", of title 6, entitled "Police Regulations", of the city code
             of the city of East Moline, Illinois.
             An ordinance amending section 3-7-6, entitled "License Fees", of chapter 7, entitled
04-16        "Liquor Dealers", of title 3, entitled "Business Regulations", of the city code of the
             city of East Moline of 1974, and as amended.
             An ordinance of the city council of the city of East Moline, Illinois, setting the
04-17        official assessment fee for water hookup fees for the Babcock and Meersman additions of
             the city of East Moline, Illinois.
             An ordinance of the city council of the city of East Moline, Illinois, repealing section
04-18        1-19-17, entitled "State Gift Ban Act", of chapter 19, entitled "Officers And
             Employees", of title 1, entitled "Administrative", and by the adoption of a new section
             1-19-17, entitled "Ethics Ordinance".
04-19        An ordinance authorizing the filing of a petition for demolition of the buildings
             located at 1723 10th Avenue, East Moline, Illinois.
             An ordinance changing the zoning and amendment of the zoning map of the city of East
04-20        Moline, Illinois, attached to and made as a part of the zoning ordinance of the city of
             East Moline, Illinois, of July 24, 1967, and as amended.
             An ordinance changing the zoning and amendment of the zoning map of the city of East
04-21        Moline, Illinois, attached to and made as a part of the zoning ordinance of the city of
             East Moline, Illinois, of July 24, 1967, and as amended.
             An ordinance of the city council of the city of East Moline, Illinois, amending chapter
04-22        2, entitled "Fire Code", of title 5, entitled "Fire Regulations", of the city code of
             the city of East Moline of 1974, and as amended.
             An ordinance of the city council of the city of East Moline, Illinois, amending section
04-23        8-8-23, entitled "Rates And Charges", of chapter 8, entitled "Water And Sewer", of title
             8, entitled "Public Ways And Property", of the city code of the city of East Moline of
             1974, and as amended.
             An ordinance changing the zoning and amendment of the zoning map of the city of East
04-24        Moline, Illinois, attached to and made as a part of the zoning ordinance of the city of
             East Moline, Illinois, of July 24, 1967, and as amended.
             An ordinance changing the zoning and amendment of the zoning map of the city of East
04-25        Moline, Illinois, attached to and made as a part of the zoning ordinance of the city of
             East Moline, Illinois, of July 24, 1967, and as amended.
             An ordinance of the city council of the city of East Moline, Illinois, ascertaining the
04-26        prevailing rate of wages for laborers, mechanics and other workers in the city of East
             Moline employed in the construction of public works for said city.
             An ordinance of the city council of the city of East Moline, Illinois, amending section
04-27        8-8-23, entitled "Rates And Charges", of chapter 8, entitled "Water And Sewer", of title
             8, entitled "Public Ways And Property", of the city code of the city of East Moline of
             1974, and as amended.
             An ordinance of the city council of the city of East Moline, Illinois, amending section
04-28        9-3-1, entitled "No Parking Places", of chapter 3, entitled "Parking Rules", of title 9,
             entitled "Traffic", of the city code of the city of East Moline of 1974 and as amended.
             An ordinance of the city council of the city of East Moline, Illinois, amending section
04-29        9-3-1, entitled "No Parking Places", of chapter 3, entitled "Parking Rules", of title 9,
             entitled "Traffic", of the city code of the city of East Moline of 1974 and as amended.
04-30        An ordinance authorizing the filing of a petition for demolition of the buildings
             located at 938-940 15th Avenue, East Moline, Illinois.
             An ordinance amending ordinance no. 88-22 as amended by ordinance 98-41, relating to the
             establishment of an enterprise zone in the city of East Moline, Illinois, pursuant to an
             intergovernmental agreement with the cities of East Moline, Illinois, Moline, Illinois,
04-31        Silvis, Illinois, village of Milan, Illinois, and Rock Island County, Illinois, by the
             addition of approximately 19.58 acres by the city of East Moline, .4 acres by the city
             of Silvis and 6.3 acres by the city of Moline and by revising section 3, exhibits "A"
             and "B" to include new territory within the Illinois quad cities enterprise zone.
04-32        An ordinance establishing the East Moline 15th Avenue special service area of the city
             of East Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois.
             An ordinance of the city council of the city of East Moline, Illinois, amending section
04-33        1-22-9 entitled, "Returned Checks Fee ", of chapter 22, entitled "Finances", of title 1,
             entitled "Administrative", of the city code of the city of East Moline of 1974, and as
             amended.
04-34        An ordinance authorizing the sale of surplus equipment formerly used by the city of East
             Moline, Illinois, in the bi-state auction.
             An ordinance authorizing the sale of surplus equipment (surplus breathing air compressor
04-35        and cascade system) formerly used by the fire department of the city of East Moline,
             Illinois.
             An ordinance of the city council of the city of East Moline, Illinois, accepting a
04-36        contract proposal of East Moline Glass Co. for the sale of surplus real estate by the
             city of East Moline.
             An ordinance of the city council of the city of East Moline, Illinois, authorizing the
04-37        sale of surplus equipment formerly used in the police department by the city of East
             Moline, Illinois.
             An ordinance amending ordinance no. 88-22 as amended by ordinance 98-41, relating to the
             establishment of an enterprise zone in the city of East Moline, Illinois, pursuant to an
             intergovernmental agreement with the cities of East Moline, Illinois, Moline, Illinois,
04-38        Silvis, Illinois, village of Milan, Illinois, and Rock Island County, Illinois, by the
             addition of approximately 2.2 acres by the city of Moline and by revising section 3,
             exhibits "A" and "B" to include new territory within the Illinois quad cities enterprise
             zone.
             An ordinance of the city council of the city of East Moline, Illinois, authorizing the
04-39        city of East Moline fire department to bill non- residents of East Moline for services
             rendered by the East Moline fire and EMS departments.
04-40        An ordinance authorizing the filing of a petition for demolition of a garage located at
             712 25th Street, East Moline, Illinois.
             An ordinance adding section 7-9-1.1 entitled "Waste Hauler Registration", and amending
             sections 7-9-5 entitled "Refuse Containers Required ", 7-9-5.2 entitled "Refuse
             Containers For Three- Family Residential And Commercial Refuse Generators", and 7-9-
04-41        8 entitled "Investigation", of chapter 9, entitled "Solid Waste Regulations", of title
             7, entitled "Health & Sanitation", of the city code of the city of East Moline of 1974
             and as amended, and further amending section 7-9-4.3 entitled "Vacated Premises" of
             chapter 9, entitled "Solid Waste Regulations", of title 7, entitled "Health &
             Sanitation", of the city code of the city of East Moline of 1974 and as amended.
             An ordinance authorizing and providing for the issuance and sale of $1,315,000 general
             obligation refunding alternate bonds, series 2004, of the city of East Moline, Rock
             Island County, Illinois, for the purpose of refunding $1,240,000 of the outstanding
             general obligation alternate bonds, series 1997A, of the city; providing for the pledge
             of tax increment revenues from the great river industrial park redevelopment project
04-42        area to the payment of principal of and interest on the series 2004 bonds; providing for
             the levy of a direct annual tax for the payment of principal of and interest on the
             series 2004 bonds; providing for the execution and delivery of an escrow agreement in
             connection with the refunding of the series 1997A bonds; providing for the execution and
             delivery of a continuing disclosure undertaking in connection with the series 2004
             bonds; and concerning related matters.
             An ordinance of the city council of the city of East Moline, Illinois, providing for the
04-43        addition of SB1 3B road from the service road north of Illinois Route 5 that extends
             westerly from the intersection of Denhardt Road and Hubbard Road to the municipal street
             system of East Moline, Illinois.
             An ordinance amending section 9-5-3 entitled "Stop And Yield Streets" of chapter 5,
04-44        entitled "Through, One-Way Streets" of title 9, entitled "Traffic", of the city code of
             the city of East Moline of 1974 and as amended.
04-45        An ordinance for the levy and assessment of taxes for the fiscal year beginning May 1,
             2004 and ending April 30, 2005.
04-46        An ordinance levying a special ad valorem tax within the East Moline 15th Avenue special
             service area of the city of East Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois.
             An ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal
04-47        of and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             1997A, of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             An ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal
04-48        of and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             1998, of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             An ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal
04-49        of and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             1998A, of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             An ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal
04-50        of and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             1998B, of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             An ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal
04-51        of and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2003A, of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             An ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal
04-52        of and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2003B, of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             An ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal
04-53        of and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             1995- "AMT", of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             An ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal
04-54        of and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2002C and 2002D, of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             An ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal
04-55        of and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2001, of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             An ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal
04-56        of and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2003C, of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             An ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal
04-57        of and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             1995A-TIF, of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             An ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal
04-58        of and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             1996A, of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             An ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal
04-59        of and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2000A, of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             An ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal
04-60        of and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2002A, of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             An ordinance of the city council of the city of East Moline, Illinois, setting a
05-01        supplemental assessment fee for water hookup for the Babcock and Meersman additions of
             the city of East Moline, Illinois.
             An amended ordinance of the city council of the city of East Moline, Illinois, providing
05-02        for the addition of SB1 3B road from the service road north of Illinois Route 5 that
             extends westerly from the west edge of the Hubbard Road connection to IL Route 5 to the
             municipal street system of East Moline, Illinois.
05-03        An ordinance vacating the alley lying north of 24th Avenue and west of 3rd Street and
             located in the city of East Moline, Illinois.
             An ordinance deleting certain properties from the riverfront redevelopment project area
05-04        in the city of East Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois and amending the redevelopment
             project and plan for the riverfront redevelopment project area accordingly.
05-05        An ordinance approving a redevelopment plan and project for the downtown redevelopment
             project area in the city of East Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois.
05-06        An ordinance designating the downtown redevelopment project area for the city of East
             Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois.
05-07        An ordinance adopting tax increment allocation financing within the downtown
             redevelopment project area.
             An ordinance amending ordinance no. 88-22 as amended by ordinance 98-41, relating to the
             establishment of an enterprise zone in the city of East Moline, Illinois, pursuant to an
             intergovernmental agreement with the cities of East Moline, Illinois, Moline, Illinois,
05-08        Silvis, Illinois, village of Milan, Illinois, and Rock Island County, Illinois, by the
             addition of approximately 6.34 acres by the county of Rock Island and by revising
             section 3, exhibits "A" and "B" to include new territory within the Illinois quad cities
             enterprise zone.
             An ordinance creating chapter 12, entitled "Reducing Health Risk Exposure At Clandestine
05-09        Drug Lab Sites And Chemical Dumpsites", of title 6, entitled "Police Regulations", of
             the city code of the city of East Moline, of 1974 and as amended.
             An ordinance adopting the budget for all corporate purposes of the city of East Moline,
05-10        Illinois, in lieu of the appropriation ordinance for the fiscal year commencing on the
             first day of May, 2005 and ending on the thirtieth day of April, 2006.
             An ordinance amending section 9-5-3, entitled "Stop And Yield Streets", of chapter 5,
05-11        entitled "Through, One-Way Streets", of title 9, entitled "Traffic", of the city code of
             the city of East Moline of 1974 and as amended.
             An ordinance amending section 9-3-1, entitled "No Parking Places", of chapter 3,
05-12        entitled "Parking Rules", of title 9, entitled "Traffic", of the city code of the city
             of East Moline of 1974 and as amended.
             An ordinance amending section 7-9-6, entitled "Yard Waste Separation", of chapter 9,
05-13        entitled "Solid Waste Regulations", of title 7, entitled "Health And Sanitation", of the
             city code of the city of East Moline, Illinois, of 1974 as amended.
             An ordinance of the city council of the city of East Moline, Illinois, amending section
05-14        9-3-1, entitled "No Parking Places", of chapter 3, entitled "Parking Rules", of title 9,
             entitled "Traffic", of the city code of the city of East Moline of 1974 and as amended.
05-15        An ordinance authorizing the execution and delivery of an intergovernmental cooperation
             agreement and certain documents in connection therewith; and related matters.
05-16        An ordinance annexing certain territory to the city of East Moline, county of Rock
             Island, Illinois.
             An ordinance of the city council of the city of East Moline, Illinois, authorizing the
05-17        purchase of a mower for the East Moline water filtration plant division and the trade in
             of a used 355D John Deere mower of the city of East Moline water filtration plant
             division.
             An ordinance of the city council of the city of East Moline, Illinois, ascertaining the
05-18        prevailing rate of wages for laborers, mechanics and other workers in the city of East
             Moline employed in the construction of public works for said city.
             An ordinance amending ordinance no. 88-22 as amended by ordinance 98-41, relating to the
             establishment of an enterprise zone in the city of East Moline, Illinois, pursuant to an
             intergovernmental agreement with the cities of East Moline, Illinois, Moline, Illinois,
05-19        Silvis, Illinois, village of Milan, Illinois, and Rock Island County, Illinois, by the
             addition of approximately 13.94 acres by the city of Moline, and by revising section 3,
             exhibits "A" and "B" to include new territory within the Illinois quad cities enterprise
             zone.
             An ordinance of the city council of the city of East Moline, Illinois, amending section
05-19A       10-15-1, entitled "Permitted Principal Uses", of chapter 15, entitled "I-2 General
             Industrial Districts", of title 10, entitled "Zoning Regulations", of the East Moline
             city code by adding a general description and new and amended uses.
05-20        An ordinance of the city council of the city of East Moline, Illinois, authorizing the
             purchase of certain property from Theresa L. Walker.
             An ordinance authorizing and providing for the issuance and sale of $260,000 of general
             obligation judgment funding bonds, series 2005A, of the city of East Moline, Rock Island
05-21        County, Illinois, for the purpose of funding certain judgment debts; providing for the
             levy of a direct annual tax for the payment of principal of and interest on those bonds;
             and concerning related matters.
             An ordinance of the city council of the city of East Moline, Illinois, amending chapter
05-22        10, part 13-5 entitled "B-3 (A) General Business, Adult Use District", of title 10,
             entitled "Zoning Regulations" of the East Moline city code by deletion of areas from the
             B-3 (A) district.
05-23        An ordinance authorizing the sale of surplus equipment formerly used by the city of East
             Moline, Illinois, in the Bi-State auction.
05-24        An ordinance authorizing the trade in of used police vehicles of the city of East Moline
             police department, and the purchase of a 1999 Ford Explorer for police department use.
             An ordinance amending section 9-3-1 entitled "No Parking Places" of chapter 3 entitled
05-25        "Parking Rules", of title 9, entitled "Traffic " of the city code of the city of East
             Moline of 1974 and as amended.
05-26        An ordinance annexing certain territory to the city of East Moline, Rock Island County,
             Illinois.
05-27        An ordinance authorizing the execution of an annexation and development agreement.
             An ordinance changing the future land use map of the city of East Moline, Illinois,
05-28        attached to and made a part of the comprehensi ve plan of the city of East Moline,
             Illinois, of July 6, 1999, and as amended.
             An ordinance amending ordinance no. 88-22 as amended by ordinance 98-41, relating to the
             establishment of an enterprise zone in the city of East Moline, Illinois, pursuant to an
             intergovernmental agreement with the cities of East Moline, Illinois, Moline, Illinois,
05-29        Silvis, Illinois, village of Milan, Illinois, and Rock Island County, Illinois, by the
             addition of approximately 69.00 acres by the city of Silvis, and by revising section 3,
             exhibits "A" and "B" to include new territory within the Illinois quad cities enterprise
             zone.
             An ordinance of the city council of the city of East Moline, Illinois, amending section
05-30        9-3-1 entitled "No Parking Places" of the chapter 3, entitled "Parking Rules", of title
             9, entitled "Traffic", of the city code of the city of East Moline of 1974 and as
             amended.
             An ordinance of the city council of the city of East Moline, Illinois, amending section
05-31        2, entitled "Rules And Regulations", of chapter 7, entitled "City Parks", of title 8,
             entitled "Public Ways And Property", of the city code of the city of East Moline, of
             1974, and as amended.
05-32        An ordinance amending chapter 3 entitled "Misdemeanors" of title 6 entitled "Police
             Regulations" of the city code of the city of East Moline of 1974 and as amended.
             An ordinance amending ordinance 88-22 as amended by ordinance 98-41, relating to the
             establishment of an enterprise zone in the city of East Moline, Illinois, pursuant to an
             intergovernmental agreement with the cities of East Moline, Illinois, Moline, Illinois,
05-33        Silvis, Illinois, village of Milan, Illinois, and Rock Island County, Illinois, by the
             addition of approximately 3.393 acres by the city of Silvis, and by revising section 3,
             exhibits "A" and "B" to include new territory within the Illinois quad cities enterprise
             zone.
             An ordinance amending ordinance 88-22 as amended by ordinance 98-41, relating to the
             establishment of an enterprise zone in the city of East Moline, Illinois, pursuant to an
             intergovernmental agreement with the cities of East Moline, Illinois, Moline, Illinois,
05-34        Silvis, Illinois, village of Milan, Illinois, and Rock Island County, Illinois, by the
             addition of approximately 5.05 acres by Rock Island County, and by revising section 3,
             exhibits "A" and "B" to include new territory within the Illinois quad cities enterprise
             zone.
05-35        An ordinance for the levy and assessment of taxes for the fiscal year beginning May 1,
             2005, and ending April 30, 2006.
05-36        An ordinance levying a special ad valorem tax within the East Moline 15th Avenue special
             service area of the city of East Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois.
             An ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal
05-37        of and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2002A, of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             An ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal
05-38        of and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             1998A, of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             An ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal
05-39        of and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2000A, of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             An ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal
05-40        of and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             1998, of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             An ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal
05-41        of and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2003A, of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             An ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal
05-42        of and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2003B, of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             An ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal
05-43        of and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2004, of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             An ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal
05-44        of and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             1995- "AMT", of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             An ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal
05-45        of and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             1998B, of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             An ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal
05-46        of and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2002C and 2002D, of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             An ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal
05-47        of and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2003C, of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             An ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal
05-48        of and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2001, of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             An ordinance changing the zoning and amendment of the zoning map of the city of East
05-49        Moline, Illinois, attached to and made a part of the zoning ordinance of the city of
             East Moline, Illinois, of July 24, 1967, and as amended.
05-50        An ordinance authorizing the trade in of two trucks for the purchase of two trucks on
             behalf of the city of East Moline maintenance services department.
             An ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal
06-01        of and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2005A, of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             An ordinance authorizing and ratifying the sale of certain surplus real estate known as
06-02        the former city maintenance garage in the city of East Moline, county of Rock Island and
             state of Illinois by the city of East Moline, Illinois.
             An ordinance of the city council of the city of East Moline, Illinois, amending section
06-03        9-3-1 entitled "No Parking Places" of chapter 3, entitled "Parking Rules", of title 9,
             entitled "Traffic", of the city code of the city of East Moline of 1974 and as amended.
             An ordinance of the city council of the city of East Moline, Illinois, which amended
             ordinance 88-22 as amended by ordinance 98-41, relating to the establishment of an
             enterprise zone in the city of East Moline, Illinois, pursuant to an intergovernmental
06-04        agreement with the cities of East Moline, Illinois, Moline, Illinois, Silvis, Illinois,
             village of Milan, Illinois, and Rock Island County, Illinois, by the addition of 5.05
             acres (Matcon project) East Moline city council ordinance no. 05-34, as requested by
             Rock Island County, Illinois, be declared null and void.
             An ordinance amending ordinance no. 88-22 as amended by ordinance 98-41, relating to the
             establishment of an enterprise zone in the city of East Moline, Illinois, pursuant to an
             intergovernmental agreement with the cities of East Moline, Illinois, Moline, Illinois,
06-05        Silvis, Illinois, village of Milan, Illinois, and Rock Island County, Illinois, by the
             addition of approximately 260 acres by the city of East Moline, and by revising section
             3, exhibits "A" and "B" to include new territory within the Illinois quad cities
             enterprise zone.
             An ordinance amending section 6-1-1 entitled "Creation Of Police Department" of chapter
06-06        1 entitled "Police Department" of title 6 entitled "Police Regulations", of the city
             code of the city of East Moline of 1974 and as amended.
06-07        An ordinance authorizing the filing of a petition for demolition of the buildings
             located at 734 20th Street, East Moline, Illinois.
             An ordinance of the city council of the city of East Moline, Illinois, approving the
06-08        petition of Riverstone Group, Inc. for the disconnection of hampton parcel 814 from the
             city of East Moline, Illinois.
             An ordinance amending ordinance no. 88-22 as amended by ordinance 98-41, relating to the
             establishment of an enterprise zone in the city of East Moline, Illinois, pursuant to an
             intergovernmental agreement with the cities of East Moline, Illinois, Moline, Illinois,
06-09        Silvis, Illinois, village of Milan, Illinois, and Rock Island County, Illinois, by the
             addition of approximately 52.96585 acres by the county of Rock Island, and by revising
             section 3, exhibits "A" and "B" to include new territory within the Illinois quad cities
             enterprise zone.
             An ordinance adopting the budget for all corporate purposes of the city of East Moline,
06-10        Illinois, in lieu of the appropriation ordinance for the fiscal year commencing on the
             first day of May, 2006 and ending on the thirtieth day of April, 2007.
             An ordinance amending section 1-25-1 entitled "Depositories", of chapter 25, entitled
06-11        "Depositories", of title 1, entitled "Administrative", of the city code of the city of
             East Moline of 1974 and as amended.
             An ordinance of the city council of the city of East Moline, Illinois, authorizing
06-12        execution and delivery of a deed to Great River Holdings, Inc. for the purchase of lot
             2C of the replat of lot 2 of outlot A of the Great River industrial park, in the city of
             East Moline, situated in the county of Rock Island, and state of Illinois.
06-13        An ordinance amending chapter 2, entitled "Housing Code", of title 4, entitled "Building
             Regulations" of the city code of the city of East Moline, Illinois, of 1984 as amended.
             An ordinance amending chapter 1, entitled "Building Code", chapter 4, entitled
06-14        "Electrical Code " and chapter 11, entitled "Mechanical Code " of title 4, entitled
             "Building Regulations" of the city code of the city of East Moline, Illinois, of 1984 as
             amended.
             An ordinance changing the zoning and amendment of the zoning map of the city of East
06-15        Moline, Illinois, attached to and made a part of the zoning ordinance of the city of
             East Moline, Illinois, of July 24th, 1967, and as amended.
             An ordinance of the city council of the city of East Moline, Illinois, ascertaining the
06-16        prevailing rate of wages for laborers, mechanics and other workers in the city of East
             Moline employed in the construction of public works for said city.
             An ordinance authorizing the issuance of waterworks and sewerage revenue bonds of the
06-17        city of East Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois, in an aggregate principal amount not
             to exceed $40,000,000, for the purpose of paying the costs of improving and extending
             the combined waterworks and sewerage system of the city.
             An ordinance authorizing the issuance of general obligation alternate bonds (waterworks
             and sewerage system alternate revenue source) of the city of East Moline, Rock Island
06-18        County, Illinois, in an aggregate principal amount not to exceed $40,000,000, for the
             purpose of paying the costs of improving and extending the waterworks and sewerage
             system of the city.
             An ordinance adopting a revised future land use map of the city of East Moline,
06-19        Illinois, attached to and made a part of the comprehensi ve plan of the city of East
             Moline, Illinois, of July 6, 1999, and as amended.
             An ordinance amending section 1-25-1 entitled "Depositories", of chapter 25, entitled
06-20        "Depositories", of title 1, entitled "Administrative", of the city code of the city of
             East Moline of 1974 and as amended.
             An ordinance amending section 6-4-2, entitled "Dangerous Animals ", of chapter 4,
06-21        entitled "Animals", of title 6, entitled "Police Regulations", of the city code of the
             city of East Moline of 1974 as amended.
             An ordinance of the city council of the city of East Moline, Illinois, amending chapter
06-22        5, entitled "Dogs And Cats", of title 6, entitled "Police Regulations", of the city code
             of the city of East Moline of 1974 as amended.
             An ordinance authorizing the issuance of waterworks and sewerage revenue bonds of the
             city of East Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois, in an aggregate principal amount not
06-23        to exceed $39,500,000, for the purpose of paying the costs of improving and extending
             the combined waterworks and sewerage system of the city; providing for the publication
             of public notice of intent to issue such bonds; repealing ordinance no. 06-17; and
             concerning related matters.
             An ordinance authorizing the issuance of general obligation alternate bonds (waterworks
             and sewerage system alternate revenue source) of the city of East Moline, Rock Island
             County, Illinois, in an aggregate principal amount not to exceed $39,500,000, for the
06-24        purpose of paying the costs of improving and extending the waterworks and sewerage
             system of the city; providing for the publication of public notice of intent to issue
             such bonds; calling a public hearing with respect to such bonds and providing for public
             notice of the hearing; repealing ordinance no. 06-18; and concerning related matters.
             An ordinance of the city council of the city of East Moline, Illinois, defining meeting
06-25        and adopting procedures for remote participation for the city council meeting of the
             city of East Moline, Illinois.
06-26        An ordinance authorizing the city attorney to file a petition for demolition of the
             buildings located at 1444 15th Avenue, East Moline, Illinois.
06-27        An ordinance authorizing the city attorney to file a petition for demolition of the
             buildings located at 516 16th Avenue, East Moline, Illinois.
             An ordinance changing the zoning and amendment of the zoning map of the city of East
06-28        Moline, Illinois, attached to and made as a part of the zoning ordinance of the city of
             East Moline, Illinois, of July 24, 1967, and as amended.
             An ordinance of the city of East Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois, approving a
06-29        redevelopment plan and project for the Gateway industrial park redevelopment project
             area in the city.
06-30        An ordinance of the city of East Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois, designating the
             Gateway industrial park redevelopment project area for the city.
             An ordinance of the city of East Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois, adopting tax
06-31        increment allocation financing within the Gateway industrial park redevelopment project
             area.
             An ordinance of the city of East Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois, authorizing and
             providing for (a) the execution and delivery of an installment purchase contract for the
             purpose of paying the costs of acquiring, constructing and installing various capital
             improvements and extensions to the municipal waterworks and sewerage system including,
             in connection with those improvements and extensions, all mechanical, electrical and
06-32        other facilities and services necessary, useful or advisable to the program of
             improvements and extensions, and (b) the issuance, sale and delivery of $7,000,000
             general obligation debt certificates, series 2006, of the city evidencing the rights to
             payment under the installment purchase contract, approving the form and terms of the
             installment purchase contract, prescribing the form and terms of the debt certificates,
             providing for the security for and sources of payment of the installment contract and
             the debt certificates, and concerning related matters.
06-33        An ordinance for the levy and assessment of taxes for the fiscal year beginning May 1,
             2006 and ending April 30, 2007.
             An ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal
06-34        of and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2002A, of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             An ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal
06-35        of and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             1998A, of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             An ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal
06-36        of and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2000A, of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
06-37        An ordinance levying a special ad valorem tax within the East Moline 15th Avenue special
             service area of the city of East Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois.
             An ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal
06-38        of and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             1998, of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             An ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal
06-39        of and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2003A, of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             An ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal
06-40        of and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2003B, of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             An ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal
06-41        of and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2004, of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             An ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal
06-42        of and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             1995- "AMT", of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             An ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal
06-43        of and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             1998B, of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             An ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal
06-44        of and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2005A, of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             An ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal
06-45        of and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2002C and 2002D, of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             An ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal
06-46        of and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2003C, of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             An ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal
06-47        of and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2001, of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             An ordinance amending section 1-25-1 entitled "Depositories", of chapter 25, entitled
06-48        "Depositories", of title 1, entitled "Administrative", of the city code of the city of
             East Moline of 1974 and as amended.
             An ordinance amending chapter 2, entitled "Fire Code " of title 5 entitled "Fire
07-01        Regulations" of the city code of the city of East Moline of 1974 and as amended,
             adopting the international fire code, 2003 edition.
             An ordinance of the city of East Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois, approving a
07-02        redevelopment plan and project for the Lucky Strike mine redevelopment project area in
             the city.
07-03        An ordinance of the city of East Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois, designating the
             Lucky Strike mine redevelopment project area for the city.
07-04        An ordinance of the city of East Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois, adopting tax
             increment allocation financing within the Lucky Strike mine redevelopment project area.
             An ordinance amending chapter 1, entitled "Building Code", chapter 3, entitled "Plumbing
07-05        Code " and chapter 11, entitled "Mechanical Code", all of title 4, entitled "Building
             Regulations" of the city code of the city of East Moline, Illinois, of 1974 as amended.
             An ordinance adopting the budget for all corporate purposes of the city of East Moline,
07-06        Illinois, in lieu of the appropriation ordinance for the fiscal year commencing on the
             first day of May, 2007 and ending on the thirtieth day of April, 2008.
             An ordinance amending title 9, chapter 3, section 9-3-3, entitled "Parking Prohibited
07-07        During Snow Removal ", of the city code of the city of East Moline, Illinois of 1974 as
             amended.
             An ordinance of the city council of the city of East Moline, Illinois, ascertaining the
07-08        prevailing rate of wages for laborers, mechanics and other workers in the city of East
             Moline employed in the construction of public works for said city.
             An ordinance of the city council of the city of East Moline, Illinois, amending section
             8-8-23 entitled "Rates And Charges", of chapter 8 entitled "Water And Sewer", of title 8
07-09        entitled "Public Ways And Property", of the city code of the city of East Moline of
             1974, and as amended, with respect to municipal customer water rates (C) and (D),
             municipal customer sewerage rates (H), commenceme nt of rates (N), and water rates
             outside the city (Q).
07-10        An ordinance amending title 5 entitled "Fire Regulations" of the city code of the city
             of East Moline of 1974, as amended.
             An ordinance adopting section 6-3-52, entitled "Public Urination ", to title 6,
07-11        entitled, "Police Regulations", chapter 3, entitled, "Misdemeanors", of the city code of
             the city of East Moline, Illinois of 1974 as amended.
             An ordinance of the city council of the city of East Moline, Illinois, amending section
             8-8-23 entitled "Rates And Charges", of chapter 8 entitled "Water And Sewer", of title 8
07-12        entitled "Public Ways And Property", subparagraph s (A) and (B), in city water rates,
             and subparagraph (G), in city sewerage rates, of the city code of the city of East
             Moline of 1974, and as amended.
07-13        An ordinance authorizing the execution of an annexation agreement.
07-14        An ordinance authorizing the execution of an annexation agreement, development agreement
             and petition for annexation and amendments.
07-15        An ordinance annexing certain territory to the city of East Moline, Rock Island County,
             Illinois.
             An ordinance amending section 9-3-1, entitled "No Parking Places", to title 9, entitled,
07-16        "Traffic", chapter 3, entitled, "Parking Rules", of the city code of the city of East
             Moline, Illinois of 1974 as amended.
07-17        An ordinance amending title 1, chapter 4, section 1-4-1, entitled "General Penalty", of
             the city code of the city of East Moline, Illinois of 1974 as amended.
             An ordinance adopting chapter 12, entitled, "City Of East Moline Storm Water Control
07-18        Ordinance", of title 8, entitled, "Public Ways And Property", of the city code of the
             city of East Moline, Illinois of 1974 as amended.
             An ordinance adopting section 1-4-5, entitled, "Judiciary", to chapter 4 entitled,
07-19        "General Penalty", of title 1 entitled, "Administrative" of the city code of the city of
             East Moline of 1974, and as amended.
             An ordinance amending section 8-8-23(E), entitled, "Minimum Water Service Charge " of
07-20        chapter 8, entitled, "Water And Sewer", of title 8, entitled "Public Ways And Property",
             of the city code of the city of East Moline, Illinois of 1974 as amended.
             An ordinance changing the zoning and amendment of the zoning map of the city of East
07-21        Moline, Illinois, attached to and made as a part of the zoning ordinance of the city of
             East Moline, Illinois, of July 24, 1967, and as amended.
             An ordinance amending title 8, entitled, "Public Ways And Property", chapter 10,
07-22        entitled, "Smoking Regulations For City Hall And Annex", sections 8-10-1 and 8-10-2,
             entitled "Smoking Prohibited ", and "Smoking Areas ", respectively, of the city code of
             the city of East Moline, Illinois of 1974 as amended.
07-23        An ordinance amending the uniform minimum plumbing standards of the city of East Moline,
             Illinois.
             Restated ordinance adopting section 1-4-5, entitled, "Judiciary", to chapter 4 entitled,
07-24        "General Penalty", of title 1 entitled, "Administrative" of the city code of the city of
             East Moline of 1974, and as amended.
             Ordinance authorizing the issuance and sale of $8,000,000 general obligation alternate
             bonds (waterworks and sewerage system alternate revenue source), series 2007, of the
             city of East Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois, for the purpose of paying the costs
             of improving and extending the combined waterworks and sewerage system of the city;
07-25        providing for the collection, segregation and application of the revenues of the system
             and the levy of a direct annual tax for the payment of principal and interest on the
             series 2007 bonds; providing procedures for the abatement of such tax based on the
             availability of such revenues; providing for the execution and delivery of a continuing
             disclosure undertaking in connection with the series 2007 bonds; providing for municipal
             bond insurance of the series 2007 bonds; and concerning related matters.
07-26        An ordinance for the levy and assessment of taxes for the fiscal year beginning May 1,
             2007 and ending April 30, 2008.
07-26A       An ordinance levying a special ad valorem tax within the East Moline 15th Avenue special
             service area of the city of East Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
07-27        and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2002A, of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
07-28        and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             1998A, of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
07-29        and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2000A, of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
07-30        and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2003A, of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
07-31        and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2003B, of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
07-32        and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2004, of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
07-33        and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             1995- "AMT", of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
07-34        and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             1998B, of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
07-35        and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2002C and 2002D, of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
07-36        and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2003C, of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
07-37        and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2001, of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             An ordinance of the city council of the city of East Moline, Illinois, amending section
             8-8-23 entitled "Rates And Charges", of chapter 8 entitled "Water And Sewer", of title 8
07-38        entitled "Public Ways And Property", subparagraph s (A) and (B), in city water rates,
             subparagraph (E), minimum water service charge, and subparagraph (G), in city sewerage
             rates, of the city code of the city of East Moline of 1974, and as amended.
             An ordinance of the city council of the city of East Moline, Illinois, amending section
             8-8-23 entitled "Rates And Charges", of chapter 8 entitled "Water And Sewer", of title 8
07-39        entitled "Public Ways And Property", of the city code of the city of East Moline of
             1974, and as amended, with respect to municipal customer water rates (C) and (D),
             municipal customer sewerage rates (H), commenceme nt of rates (N), and water rates
             outside the city (Q).
07-40        An ordinance authorizing the filing of a petition for demolition of a building
             (residence) located at 1438 15th Avenue, East Moline, Illinois.
             An ordinance changing the zoning and amendment of the zoning map of the city of East
07-41        Moline, Illinois, attached to and made a part of the zoning ordinance of the city of
             East Moline, Illinois, of July 24th, 1967, and as amended.
             An ordinance amending section 1-4-5, entitled "Judiciary", of chapter 4, entitled
08-01        "General Penalty", of title 1, entitled "Administrative", of the city code of the city
             of East Moline of 1974 as amended.
             An ordinance adopting section 6-3-53, entitled "Smoking ", to title 6, entitled, "Police
08-02        Regulations", chapter 3, entitled, "Misdemeanors", of the city code of the city of East
             Moline, Illinois, of 1974 as amended.
             An ordinance amending ordinance no. 88-22 as amended by ordinance 98-41, relating to the
             establishment of an enterprise zone in the city of East Moline, Illinois, pursuant to an
             intergovernmental agreement with the cities of East Moline, Illinois, Moline, Illinois,
08-03        Silvis, Illinois, village of Milan, Illinois, and Rock Island County, Illinois, by the
             addition of approximately 0.0233 square miles by the village of Milan, and by revising
             section 3, exhibits "A" and "B" to include new territory within the Illinois quad cities
             enterprise zone.
             An ordinance amending ordinance no. 88-22 as amended by ordinance 98-41, relating to the
             establishment of an enterprise zone in the city of East Moline, Illinois, pursuant to an
             intergovernmental agreement with the cities of East Moline, Illinois, Moline, Illinois,
08-04        Silvis, Illinois, village of Milan, Illinois, and Rock Island County, Illinois, by the
             addition of approximately 0.01978 square miles by the county of Rock Island, and by
             revising section 3, exhibits "A" and "B" to include new territory within the Illinois
             quad cities enterprise zone.
             An ordinance adopting the budget for all corporate purposes of the city of East Moline,
08-05        Illinois, in lieu of the appropriation ordinance for the fiscal year commencing on the
             first day of May, 2008 and ending on the thirtieth day of April, 2009.
             An ordinance of the city council of the city of East Moline, Illinois, ascertaining the
08-06        prevailing rate of wages for laborers, mechanics and other workers in the city of East
             Moline employed in the construction of public works for said city.
             An ordinance amending section 1-5-12, entitled "Salaries Of The Mayor, City Clerk,
08-07        Treasurer, And Aldermen", of chapter 5, entitled "City Council", of title 1, entitled
             "Administrative", of the city code of the city of East Moline, Illinois.
             An ordinance amending section 1-4-5, entitled "Judiciary", of chapter 4 entitled
08-08        "General Penalty", of title 1 entitled "Administrative", of the city code of the city of
             East Moline of 1974, as amended.
             An ordinance amending title 10, chapter 4, section 10-4-3.1, entitled "Special Uses",
08-09        and amending title 10, chapter 15, entitled, "I-2 General Industrial Districts", by
             adding section 10-15-5, entitled "Special Uses", of the city code of the city of East
             Moline, Illinois, of 1974 as amended.
             An ordinance amending section 9-3-1, entitled "No Parking Places", to title 9, entitled,
08-10        "Traffic", chapter 3, entitled, "Parking Rules", of the city code of the city of East
             Moline, Illinois of 1974 as amended.
             An ordinance amending section 7-9-7, entitled "Special Collection Services", to chapter
08-11        9, entitled, "Solid Waste Regulations", to title 7, entitled, "Health & Sanitation", of
             the city code of the city of East Moline, Illinois of 1974 as amended.
             An ordinance amending title 9, entitled, "Traffic", chapter 10, entitled, "Violation;
08-12        Arrest", section 9-10-5, entitled, "Parking Violations", of the city code of the city of
             East Moline, Illinois of 1974 as amended.
             An ordinance amending title 9, entitled, "Traffic", chapter 3, entitled, "Parking
08-13        Rules", section 9-3-15, entitled, "Handicapped Parking", of the city code of the city of
             East Moline, Illinois of 1974 as amended.
             An ordinance amending section 9-3-1, entitled "No Parking Places", of title 9, entitled,
08-14        "Traffic", of chapter 3, entitled, "Parking Rules", of the city code of the city of East
             Moline, Illinois of 1974 as amended.
08-15        An ordinance authorizing the filing of a petition for demolition of a building
             (residence) located at 1337 Morton Drive, East Moline, Illinois.
             An ordinance adding parcels of property to the North Hill redevelopment project area in
             the city of East Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois, amending the redevelopment
08-16        project and plan for the North Hill redevelopment project area in various respects;
             adopting tax increment financing within the expanded North Hill redevelopment project
             area; and concerning related matters.
             An ordinance amending section 9-3-1, entitled "No Parking Places", to title 9, entitled,
08-17        "Traffic", chapter 3, entitled, "Parking Rules", of the city code of the city of East
             Moline, Illinois of 1974 as amended.
             An ordinance authorizing the execution of a document entitled: "annexation agreement and
             development agreement and petition for annexation and application for special use permit
             " with Riverstone Group, Inc., for the annexation and development of a parcel of
08-18        approximately 2200+/- acres and for a special use permit on the easterly 431.38 acres,
             located on the south side of Interstate 88 and extending from Interstate 80 easterly to
             248th Street North and all being northerly of the Burlington Northern Railroad right-of-
             way.
08-19        An ordinance annexing certain territory to the city of East Moline, Rock Island County,
             Illinois.
             Ordinance authorizing and providing for the issuance and sale of $1,190,000 of general
             obligation bonds, series 2008A, of the city of East Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois
             for the purpose of paying a portion of the cost of purchasing playground equipment for
             recreational purposes, purchasing a new fire truck, installing new emergency equipment,
08-20        constructing improvements to city streets, including drainage, and paying the costs of
             issuing the bonds; providing for the levy of a direct annual tax for the payment of
             principal of and interest on those bonds; providing for the execution and delivery of a
             continuing disclosure undertaking in connection with the series 2008A bonds; and
             concerning related matters.
08-21        An ordinance for the levy and assessment of taxes for the fiscal year beginning May 1,
             2008 and ending April 30, 2009.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
08-22        and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2002A, of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
08-23        and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             1998A, of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
08-24        and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2000A, of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
08-25        and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2003A, of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
08-26        and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2003B, of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
08-27        and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2004, of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
08-28        and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             1995- "AMT", of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
08-29        and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             1998B, of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
08-30        and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2002C and 2002D, of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
08-31        and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2003C, of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
08-32        and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2001, of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
08-33        and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2007, of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
08-34        An ordinance levying a special ad valorem tax within the East Moline 15th Avenue special
             service area of the city of East Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois.
             An ordinance adopting sections 6-13-1 through 6-13-10, of chapter 13, entitled "Car
09-01        Owner Responsibility Assignment ", of title 6, entitled, "Police Regulations", of the
             city code of the city of East Moline, Illinois of 1974 as amended.
             An ordinance adopting section 6-3-54 of chapter 3, entitled, "Misdemeanors", of title 6,
09-02        entitled, "Police Regulations", of the city code of the city of East Moline, Illinois of
             1974, as amended.
             An ordinance adopting chapter 14, entitled, "Impoundme nt Of Fleeing Vehicles", of title
09-03        6, entitled, "Police Regulations", of the city code of the city of East Moline, Illinois
             of 1974 as amended.
             An ordinance amending section 9-11-5, entitled, "Derelict And Abandoned Vehicles", of
09-04        chapter 11, entitled, "Abandoned Vehicles", of title 9, entitled, "Traffic", of the city
             code of the city of East Moline, Illinois of 1974 as amended.
             An ordinance adopting the budget for all corporate purposes of the city of East Moline,
09-05        Illinois, in lieu of the appropriation ordinance for the fiscal year commencing on the
             first day of May, 2009 and ending on the thirtieth day of April, 2010.
             An ordinance establishing a connection charge for certain property owners connecting to
09-06        the Babcock pressure sewer extension project, located in the city of East Moline,
             Illinois.
             An ordinance changing the zoning and amendment of the zoning map of the city of East
09-07        Moline, Illinois, attached to and made as a part of the zoning ordinance of the city of
             East Moline, Illinois, of July 24, 1967, and as amended.
             An ordinance amending and restating the East Moline sewer use and pretreatment
09-08        ordinance, ordinance no. 02-32, as adopted by the city council of the city of East
             Moline, Illinois, on November 21, 1994.
             An ordinance of the city of East Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois, authorizing and
             providing for (A) the execution and delivery of an installment purchase contract for the
             purpose of paying the costs of acquiring, constructing, reconstructin g and improving
             various capital improvements relating to storm sewers, combined sanitary and storm
             sewers, storm water management, levies and drainage including, in connection with those
             improvements and extensions, all mechanical, electrical and other facilities and
09-09        services necessary, useful or advisable to the program of improvements and extensions,
             and (B) the issuance, sale and delivery of a $2,500,000 general obligation debt
             certificate, series 2009, of the city evidencing the rights to payment under the
             installment purchase contract, approving the form and terms of the installment purchase
             contract, prescribing the form and terms of the debt certificate, providing for the
             security for and sources of payment of the installment contract and the debt
             certificate, and concerning related matters.
             An ordinance authorizing the filing of a petition with the Rock Island County circuit
09-10        court, to declare a residence located at 1801 18th Avenue, East Moline, Illinois, to be
             abandoned.
09-11        An ordinance vacating a portion of 11th Street located between 16th Avenue and 18th
             Avenue, in the city of East Moline, Illinois.
             An ordinance of the city council of the city of East Moline, Illinois, ascertaining the
09-12        prevailing rate of wages for laborers, mechanics and other workers in the city of East
             Moline employed in the construction of public works for said city.
             An ordinance adopting section 6-3-55, entitled "Possession Of Weapons And Ammunition ",
09-13        to chapter 3, entitled "Misdemeanors", to title 6, entitled, "Police Regulations", of
             the city code of the city of East Moline, Illinois of 1974 as amended.
             An ordinance changing the zoning and amendment of the zoning map of the city of East
09-14        Moline, Illinois, attached to and made as a part of the zoning ordinance of the city of
             East Moline, Illinois, of July 24, 1967, and as amended.
             An ordinance amending section 9-3-1, entitled "No Parking Places", of title 9, entitled,
09-15        "Traffic", of chapter 3, entitled, "Parking Rules", of the city code of the city of East
             Moline, Illinois of 1974 as amended.
             An ordinance adopting chapter 13, entitled "Stormwater Utility, " to title 8, entitled,
09-16        "Public Ways And Property, " of the city code of the city of East Moline, Illinois of
             1974 as amended.
             An ordinance authorizing and ratifying the sale of certain real estate located in the
09-17        city of East Moline, county of Rock Island and state of Illinois by the city of East
             Moline, Illinois.
             An ordinance authorizing execution of an intergovernmental agreement among the Rock
09-18        Island County waste management agency (RICWMA) and the municipalities of East Moline,
             Milan, Moline and Rock Island establishing a regional recycling drop-off collection
             system.
             An ordinance of the city council of the city of East Moline, Illinois, authorizing the
09-19        submission to a vote of the public at the primary election to be held on February 2,
             2010, as to whether the city of East Moline shall establish, operate and fund its own
             ambulance service.
             An ordinance of the city of East Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois, authorizing the
09-20        execution and delivery of a loan agreement with the Illinois environmental protection
             agency for the purpose of paying the costs of improving and extending the combined
             waterworks and sewerage system of the city; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance of the city council of the city of East Moline, Illinois, authorizing the
09-21        purchase of parcel Hampton 06-2790 from the Rock Island County trustee and the
             advertisement of the sale of the subject parcel.
             Ordinance of the city council of the city of East Moline, Illinois, authorizing the
09-22        advertisement for the sale of lot 23 in block 127 of the new shops addition to the town,
             now the city of East Moline, county of Rock Island, state of Illinois (Hampton parcel
             06-1869).
09-23        An ordinance for the levy and assessment of taxes for the fiscal year beginning May 1,
             2009 and ending April 30, 2010.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
09-24        and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2002A, of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
09-25        and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             1998A, of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
09-26        and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2003A, of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
09-27        and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2003B, of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
09-28        and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2004, of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
09-29        and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             1995- "AMT", of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
09-30        and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             1998B, of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
09-31        and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2002C and 2002D, of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
09-32        and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2003C, of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
09-33        and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2001, of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
09-34        and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2002A, of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
09-35        An ordinance levying a special ad valorem tax within the East Moline 15th Avenue special
             service area of the city of East Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois.
             An ordinance amending section 9-3-8, entitled, "All Night Parking" of chapter 3,
09-36        entitled, "Parking Rules" of title 9, entitled "Traffic", of the city code of the city
             of East Moline, Illinois of 1974, as amended.
09-37        An ordinance authorizing the filing of a petition for demolition of a building
             (residence) located at 182 17th Avenue, East Moline, Illinois.
             An ordinance amending section 1-5-7, entitled "Committee Of The Whole," of chapter 5,
10-01        entitled "City Council," of title 1, entitled "Administrative," of the city code of the
             city of East Moline of 1974 as amended.
             An ordinance authorizing and ratifying the sale by the city of East Moline, Illinois, of
10-02        certain real estate located at 1502 11th Avenue, in the city of East Moline, county of
             Rock Island and state of Illinois.
             An ordinance authorizing and ratifying the sale by the city of East Moline, Illinois, of
10-03        certain real estate located at 905 20th Street, in the city of East Moline, county of
             Rock Island and state of Illinois.
             An ordinance authorizing the filing of a petition with the Rock Island County circuit
10-04        court, to declare a residence located at 2021 1st Avenue, East Moline, Illinois, to be
             abandoned.
10-05        An ordinance regulating development in floodplain areas in the city of East Moline,
             Illinois, as required by the federal emergency management agency ( "FEMA ").
             An ordinance amending chapter 5, entitled "City Council," of title 1, entitled
10-06        "Administrative," of the city code of the city of East Moline, Illinois, of 1974 as
             amended, by the addition of section 1-5-13, entitled, "Water Review Committee".
             An ordinance amending section 1-20-4, entitled, "Duties " of chapter 20, entitled,
10-07        "Engineering Services Division," of title 1, entitled "Administrative," of the city code
             of the city of East Moline, Illinois of 1974, as amended.
             An ordinance amending title 9, entitled, "Traffic", chapter 3, entitled, "Parking
10-08        Rules," section 9-3-15, entitled, "Handicappe d Parking, " of the city code of the city
             of East Moline, Illinois of 1974 as amended.
             An ordinance of the city of East Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois, authorizing the
10-10        execution and delivery of a loan agreement with the Illinois environmental protection
             agency for the purpose of paying the costs of improving and extending the combined
             waterworks and sewerage system of the city; and concerning related matters.
10-11        An ordinance authorizing the filing of a petition for demolition of an apartment
             building located at 1506 13th Street, East Moline, Illinois.
             An ordinance authorizing and ratifying the sale of certain real estate located at 1801
10-12        18th Avenue, in the city of East Moline, county of Rock Island and state of Illinois, by
             the city of East Moline, Illinois.
             An ordinance amending section 4-1-1, entitled, "Building Codes Adopted By Reference;
10-13        Permit Fees," of chapter 1, entitled, "Building Code," of title 4, entitled, "Building
             Regulations," of the city code of the city of East Moline, Illinois of 1974 as amended.
             An ordinance of the city council of the city of East Moline, Illinois, ascertaining the
10-19        prevailing rate of wages for laborers, mechanics and other workers in the city of East
             Moline employed in the construction of public works for said city.
             An ordinance of the city council of the city of East Moline, Illinois, establishing the
10-20        official connection charge for water system hookup fees for Babcock additions in the
             city of East Moline, Illinois.
             An ordinance amending sections 6-13-3 and 6-13-7, of chapter 13, entitled, "Car Owner
10-21        Responsibility Assignment," of title 6, entitled, "Police Regulations", of the city code
             of the city of East Moline, Illinois of 1974 as amended.
             An ordinance of the city council of the city of East Moline, Illinois, amending section
             8-8-23 entitled "Rates And Charges", of chapter 8 entitled "Water And Sewer", of title 8
10-23        entitled "Public Ways And Property", of the city code of the city of East Moline of
             1974, and as amended, with respect to municipal customer water rates (C) and (D),
             municipal customer sewerage rates (H), commenceme nt of rates (N), and water and sewer
             rates outside the city (Q).
10-25        An ordinance authorizing the filing of a petition for demolition of a residence and
             garage located at 2345 7-1/2 Street, East Moline, Illinois.
10-26        An ordinance authorizing the filing of a petition for demolition of a residence and
             garage located at 443 40th Street, East Moline, Illinois.
             An ordinance amending ordinance 10-06, as adopted by the city council on March 1, 2010,
             by the adoption of this subject ordinance amending chapter 8, entitled "Water And
10-27        Sewer," of title 8, entitled "Public Ways & Property, " of the city code of the city of
             East Moline, Illinois, of 1974 as amended, by the addition of section 8-8-46, entitled,
             "Water Review Committee".
             An ordinance amending section 9-3-1, entitled "No Parking Places", of chapter 3,
             entitled, "Parking Rules", of title 9, entitled, "Traffic", of the city code of the city
10-28        of East Moline, Illinois of 1974 as amended, to allow parking on the north side of 3rd
             Avenue from 19th Street east to 27th Street, and on either side of 4th Avenue from 27th
             Street east to the city limits.
             An ordinance authorizing the issuance and providing for the sale and delivery from time
             to time of up to $4,000,000 general obligation alternate bonds (waterworks and sewage
             system alternate revenue source) series 2010E, of the city of East Moline, Rock Island
             County, Illinois, for the purpose of paying the costs of improving and extending the
             combined waterworks and sewerage system of the city; providing for the collection,
10-29        segregation and application of the revenues of the system and the levy of a direct
             annual tax for the payment of principal on the series 2010E bonds; providing procedures
             for the abatement of such tax based on the availability of such revenues; delegating to
             authorized officers the authority to determine to issue and deliver portions of the
             series 2010E bonds from time to time and to determine certain terms of the series 2010E
             bonds within parameters established in this ordinance; and concerning related matters.
             An ordinance amending section 9-3-1, entitled "No Parking Places", to title 9, entitled,
10-30        "Traffic", chapter 3, entitled, "Parking Rules", of the city code of the city of East
             Moline, Illinois of 1974 as amended.
             An ordinance amending chapter 6, "Rights-Of- Ways And Public Property Uses, " of the
             East Moline code of ordinances by repealing article I, entitled "Reserved, " in its
10-31        entirety and enacting in lieu thereof one new article I, entitled "Standards For
             Construction Of Facilities On Rights-Of-W ay, " which regulates the construction and use
             of facilities on the rights-of-way .
10-32        An ordinance approving contract for sale of property located at 2021 1st Avenue, East
             Moline, and directing the advertising of the subject property for sale.
             An ordinance amending section 9-3-1, entitled "No Parking Places", to title 9, entitled,
10-33        "Traffic", chapter 3, entitled, "Parking Rules", of the city code of the city of East
             Moline, Illinois of 1974 as amended.
             An ordinance amending section 9-11-5, entitled, "Derelict And Abandoned Vehicles, " of
10-34        chapter 11, entitled, "Abandoned Vehicles, " of title 9, entitled, "Traffic," of the
             city code of the city of East Moline, Illinois of 1974 as amended.
             An ordinance amending section 10-2-1 of chapter 2, entitled, "Definitions," of title 10,
10-35        entitled "Zoning Regulations," of the city code of the city of East Moline, Illinois of
             1974 as amended.
             An ordinance authorizing the filing of a petition with the Rock Island County circuit
10-36        court, to declare a residence located at 2439 Morton Drive, East Moline, Illinois, to be
             abandoned.
10-37        An ordinance for the levy and assessment of taxes for the fiscal year beginning May 1,
             2010 and ending April 30, 2011.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
10-38        and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2002A, of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
10-39        and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             1998A, of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
10-40        and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2003A, of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
10-41        and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2003B, of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
10-42        and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2004, of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
10-43        and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             1995- "AMT", of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
10-44        and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             1998B, of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
10-45        and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2002C and 2002D, of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
10-46        and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2010D, of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
10-47        and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2003C, of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
10-48        and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2001, of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
10-49        and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2001, of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
10-50        and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2007, of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
10-51        and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2010B, of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
10-52        and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2010A, of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
10-53        An ordinance levying a special ad valorem tax within the East Moline 15th Avenue special
             service area of the city of the East Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois.
             An ordinance amending sections 3-7-1 entitled, "Definitions", 3-7-6 entitled, "License
             Fees", 3-7-18 entitled, "Location Restrictions", and 3-7-20, entitled, "Sale To Persons
10-54        Under Twenty One", of chapter 7, entitled, "Liquor Dealers" of title 3, entitled
             "Business Regulations" of the city code of the city of East Moline, Illinois of 1974 as
             amended.
             An ordinance amending title 2, entitled "Boards And Commissions", by the adoption of a
11-01        new chapter 21, entitled "Pathway Priorities Project Committee", of the city code of the
             city of East Moline, Illinois of 1974, as amended.
             An ordinance amending section 6-3-48, entitled "Truancy", of chapter 3, entitled,
11-02        "Misdemeanors", of title 6, entitled, "Police Regulations", of the city code of the city
             of East Moline, Illinois of 1974, as amended.
             Ordinance providing for abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of and
11-03        interest on the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds (waterworks and sewerage
             system alternate revenue source), series 2002A, of the city of East Moline, Illinois;
             and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance providing for abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of and
11-04        interest on the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds (motor fuel tax alternate
             revenue source), series 1998A, of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning
             related matters.
             Ordinance providing for abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of and
11-05        interest on the outstanding general obligation refunding alternate bonds, series 1998B,
             of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
11-06        and interest on the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds (tax increment and
             state revenue sharing alternate revenue source), series 2001, of the city of East
             Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance providing for abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of and
11-07        interest on the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds (tax increment and state
             revenue sharing alternate revenue source), series 2002D, of the city of East Moline,
             Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             An ordinance amending section 10-13-5, entitled, "B-3(A) General Business, Adult Use
11-08        District " of chapter 13, entitled, "B3 General Business Districts", of title 10,
             entitled, "Zoning Regulations", of the city code of the city of East Moline, Illinois of
             1974 as amended.
             An ordinance amending section 1-5-10, entitled "Rules Of Order", of chapter 5, entitled,
11-09        "City Council", of title 1, entitled, "Administrative", of the city code of the city of
             East Moline, Illinois of 1974, as amended.
             An ordinance amending section 3-14-2, entitled "Fee", of chapter 14, entitled,
11-10        "Solicitors And Canvassers ", of title 3, entitled, "Business Regulations", of the city
             code of the city of East Moline, Illinois of 1974, as amended.
             An ordinance repealing section 1-21-1, entitled "Court Room ", of chapter 21, entitled,
11-11        "Circuit Court ", of title 1, entitled, "Administrative", of the city code of the city
             of East Moline, Illinois of 1974, as amended.
             An ordinance amending section 3, entitled, "Permit, License Or Certificate ", of chapter
11-12        2, entitled, "Compliance Procedures ", of title 7, entitled, "Health And Sanitation", of
             the city code of the city of East Moline, Illinois of 1974, as amended.
             An ordinance amending section 5-2-1, entitled, "Adoption", of chapter 2, entitled, "Fire
11-13        Code", of title 5, entitled, "Fire Regulations", of the city code of the city of East
             Moline, Illinois of 1974, as amended.
             An ordinance of the city council of the city of East Moline, Illinois, increasing the
11-14        garbage collection fee imposed as a user fee upon residential customers within the city
             of East Moline, Illinois.
             An ordinance amending section 2, entitled, "Permit And Compliance Bond Requirements", of
11-15        chapter 1, entitled, "Building Code", of title 4, entitled, "Building Regulations", of
             the city code of the city of East Moline, Illinois of 1974, as amended.
             An ordinance amending section 7, entitled, "Special Collection Services ", of chapter 9,
11-16        entitled, "Solid Waste Regulations", of title 7, entitled, "Health And Sanitation", of
             the city code of the city of East Moline, Illinois of 1974, as amended.
             An ordinance adopting the budget for all corporate purposes of the city of East Moline,
11-17        Illinois, in lieu of the appropriation ordinance for the fiscal year commencing on the
             first day of May, 2011 and ending on the thirtieth day of April, 2012.
             A special ordinance of the city of East Moline, Illinois for the jurisdictional transfer
11-18        from the Illinois department of transportation to the city of East Moline of certain
             portions of Kennedy Drive, East Moline, Illinois.
             Ordinance authorizing the issuance and providing for the sale and delivery from time to
             time of up to $10,000,000 general obligation alternate bonds (waterworks and sewerage
             system alternate revenue source), series 2011, of the city of East Moline, Rock Island
             County, Illinois, for the purpose of paying the costs of improving and extending the
             combined waterworks and sewerage system of the city; providing for the collection,
11-19        segregation and application of the revenues of the system and the levy of a direct
             annual tax for the payment of principal of and interest on the series 2011 bonds;
             providing procedures for the abatement of such tax based on the availability of such
             revenues; delegating to authorized officers the authority to determine to issue and
             deliver portions of the series 2011 bonds from time to time and to determine certain
             terms of the series 2011 bonds within parameters established in this ordinance; and
             concerning related matters.
             An ordinance amending section 1, entitled, "No Parking Places", of chapter 3, entitled,
11-20        "Parking Rules", of title 9, entitled, "Traffic", of the city code of the city of East
             Moline, Illinois of 1974, as amended, as it relates to sub-paragrap hs #183 through #186
             and the Hillcrest Elementary School area.
             An ordinance amending section 1, entitled, "No Parking Places", of chapter 3, entitled,
11-21        "Parking Rules", of title 9, entitled, "Traffic", of the city code of the city of East
             Moline, Illinois of 1974, as amended, as it relates to sub-paragrap h #133 and the Wells
             Elementary School area.
             An ordinance readopting a special ordinance of the city of East Moline, Illinois for the
11-22        jurisdictional transfer from the Illinois department of transportation to the city of
             East Moline of certain portions of Kennedy Drive, East Moline, Illinois.
             An ordinance of the city council of the city of East Moline, Illinois, ascertaining the
11-23        prevailing rate of wages for laborers, mechanics and other workers in the city of East
             Moline employed in the construction of public works for said city.
             Ordinance of the city of East Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois, supplementing
             ordinance no. 10-29 by making a determination as to the sufficiency of revenues of the
11-24        city's combined waterworks and sewerage system required by the local government debt
             reform act as a condition to the issuance of the city's general obligation alternate
             bonds (waterworks and sewerage system alternate revenue source), series 2010E, and
             providing for appropriate variations in the form of the series 2010E bonds.
             An ordinance amending section 3, entitled, "Appointments," of chapter 1, entitled,
11-25        "Police Department," of title 6, entitled, "Police Regulations," of the city code of the
             city of East Moline, Illinois of 1974, as amended.
             An ordinance deleting certain properties from the Riverfront redevelopment project area
11-26        in the city of East Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois and amending the redevelopment
             project and plan for the Riverfront redevelopment project area accordingly.
             An ordinance amending section 1-5-10, entitled "Rules Of Order," chapter 5, entitled,
11-26A       "City Council," of title 1, entitled "Administrative," of the city code of the city of
             East Moline, Illinois of 1974, as amended.
11-27        An ordinance designating the River Eagle redevelopment project area for the city of East
             Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois.
11-28        An ordinance approving a redevelopment project and plan for the River Eagle
             redevelopment project area in the city of East Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois.
11-29        An ordinance adopting tax increment allocation financing within the River Eagle
             redevelopment project area.
             An ordinance authorizing and ratifying the sale of certain real estate to Community
11-30        Health Care, Inc., located at 708-710 15th Avenue, in the city of East Moline, county of
             Rock Island and state of Illinois, by the city council of the city of East Moline,
             Illinois.
             Ordinance authorizing and providing for the issuance and sale of not to exceed
             $6,250,000 general obligation refunding alternate bonds (waterworks and sewerage system
             alternate revenue source), series 2011A, of the city of East Moline, Rock Island County,
             Illinois, for the purpose of refunding all or a portion of the $6,205,000 outstanding
             aggregate principal amount of general obligation debt certificates, series 2006, of the
             city; providing for the collection, segregation and application of the revenues of the
             combined waterworks and sewerage system of the city and the levy of a direct annual tax
11-31        for the payment of principal of and interest on the series 2011A bonds; providing
             procedures for the abatement of such tax based on the availability of alternate
             revenues; delegating to authorized officers the authority to determine the series 2006
             certificates to be refunded and certain terms of the series 2011A bonds within
             parameters established in this ordinance; providing for the execution and delivery of an
             escrow agreement in connection with the refunding of the series 2006 certificates;
             providing for the execution and delivery of a continuing disclosure undertaking in
             connection with the series 2011A bonds; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance authorizing and providing for the issuance and sale of not to exceed
             $2,650,000 general obligation refunding alternate bonds (utility tax alternate revenue
             source), series 2011B, of the city of East Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois, for the
             purpose of refunding all or a portion of the $2,580,000 outstanding aggregate principal
             amount of general obligation alternate bonds (utility tax alternate revenue source),
             series 2003A, of the city; providing for the pledge of revenues received by the city
             from occupation or privilege taxes on certain public utility services to the payment of
11-32        principal of and interest on the series 2011B bonds; providing for the levy of a direct
             annual tax for the payment of principal of and interest on the series 2011B bonds;
             providing procedures for the abatement of such tax based on the availability of
             alternate revenues; delegating to authorized officers the authority to determine the
             series 2003A bonds to be refunded and certain terms of the series 2011B bonds within
             parameters established in this ordinance; providing for the execution and delivery of an
             escrow agreement in connection with the refunding of the series 2003A bonds; providing
             for the execution and delivery of a continuing disclosure undertaking in connection with
             the series 2011B bonds; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance authorizing and providing for the issuance and sale of not to exceed
             $1,100,000 general obligation refunding alternate bonds (tax increment and license and
             permit revenue alternate revenue source), series 2011C of the city of East Moline, Rock
             Island County, Illinois, for the purpose of refunding all or a portion of the $1,000,000
             outstanding aggregate principal amount of general obligation alternate bonds (tax
             increment and license and permit revenue alternate revenue source), series 2003B, of the
             city; providing for the pledge of tax increment revenues from the Riverfront
             redevelopment project area and license and permit revenues to the payment of principal
11-33        of and interest on the series 2011C bonds; providing for the levy of a direct annual tax
             for the payment of principal of and interest on the series 2011C bonds; providing
             procedures for the abatement of such tax based on the availability of alternate
             revenues; delegating to authorized officers the authority to determine the series 2003B
             bonds to be refunded and certain terms of the series 2011C bonds within parameters
             established in this ordinance; providing for the execution and delivery of an escrow
             agreement in connection with the refunding of the series 2003B bonds; providing for the
             execution and delivery of a continuing disclosure undertaking in connection with the
             series 2011C bonds; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance authorizing and providing for the issuance and sale of not to exceed $650,000
             general obligation refunding alternate bonds, series 2011D, of the city of East Moline,
             Rock Island County, Illinois, for the purpose of refunding all of the $515,000
             outstanding aggregate principal amount of general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2003C, of the city; providing for the pledge of tax increment revenues from the North
             Hill redevelopment project area to the payment of principal of and interest on the
             series 2011D bonds; providing for the levy of a direct annual tax for the payment of
11-34        principal of and interest on the series 2011D bonds; providing procedures for the
             abatement of such tax based on the availability of alternate revenues; delegating to
             authorized officers the authority to determine the series 2003C bonds to be refunded and
             certain terms of the series 2011D bonds within parameters established in this ordinance;
             providing for the execution and delivery of an escrow agreement in connection with the
             refunding of the series 2003C bonds; providing for the execution and delivery of a
             continuing disclosure undertaking in connection with the series 2011D bonds; and
             concerning related matters.
             Ordinance of the city of East Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois, providing for post-
11-35        issuance record- keeping and compliance in connection with issues of bonds and other
             obligations of the city.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
11-36        and interest on certain of the general obligation alternate bonds (utility tax alternate
             revenue source), series 2003A, of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning
             related matters.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
11-37        and interest on certain of the general obligation alternate bonds (tax increment and
             license and permit revenue alternate revenue source), series 2003B, of the city of East
             Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
11-38        and interest on the outstanding general obligation refunding alternate bonds, series
             2003C, of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
11-39        and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2004, of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
11-40        and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2007, of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
11-41        and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2010A, of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
11-42        and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2010B, of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
11-43        and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2010C, of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
11-44        and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2010D, of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
11-45        and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2010E, of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
11-46        and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2011A, of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
11-47        and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2011B, of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
11-48        and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2011C, of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
11-49        and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2011D, of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
11-50        An ordinance levying a special ad valorem tax within the East Moline 15th Avenue special
             service area of the city of East Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois.
11-51        An ordinance for the levy and assessment of taxes for the fiscal year beginning May 1,
             2011 and ending April 30, 2012.
             An ordinance amending section 6, entitled, "License Fees," of chapter 7, entitled,
12-01        "Liquor Dealers," of title 3, entitled, "Business Regulations," of the city code of the
             city of East Moline, Illinois of 1974, as amended.
             An ordinance adopting a special ordinance of the city of East Moline, Illinois for the
12-02        jurisdictional transfer from the Illinois department of transportation to the city of
             East Moline of a certain portion of 30th Avenue, East Moline, Illinois.
             An ordinance adopting a special ordinance of the city of East Moline, Illinois for the
12-03        jurisdictional transfer from the Illinois department of transportation to the city of
             East Moline of a certain portion of Archer Drive, East Moline, Illinois.
             An ordinance amending sub-section (M), entitled "Single Container Of Beer Or Wine," of
12-04        section 24, entitled "Operation," of chapter 7, entitled "Liquor Dealers," of title 3,
             entitled "Business Regulations," of the city code of the city of East Moline, Illinois
             of 1974, as amended.
12-05        An ordinance for the simplified municipal telecommuni cations tax rate change for the
             city of East Moline, Illinois.
12-06        An ordinance extending the expiration date of the cable television franchise agreement
             authorizing the operation of a cable television system.
             An ordinance adopting the budget for all corporate purposes of the city of East Moline,
12-07        Illinois, in lieu of the appropriation ordinance for the fiscal year commencing on the
             first day of May, 2012 and ending on the thirtieth day of April, 2013.
             An ordinance of the city council of the city of East Moline, Illinois, amending section
             9-3-1 entitled "No Parking Places," of chapter 3 entitled "Parking Rules" of title 9
12-08        entitled "Traffic," of the city code of the city of East Moline, Illinois, to prohibit
             parking on the north side of the 900 block of 22nd Avenue, in the city of East Moline,
             Illinois.
             An ordinance of the city council of the city of East Moline, Illinois, ascertaining the
12-09        prevailing rate of wages for laborers, mechanics and other workers in the city of East
             Moline employed in the construction of public works for said city.
             An ordinance of the city council of the city of East Moline, Illinois, amending
12-10        ordinance 3-7-22, and ordinance 6-3-15 of the East Moline city code, so as to allow
             video gaming in premises licensed to sell alcoholic liquor, in the city of East Moline,
             Illinois.
             An ordinance of the city council of the city of East Moline, Illinois, accepting the bid
12-12        and authorizing the sale of the city's surplus water basin property, located at 1340
             10th Street, East Moline, Illinois, to Larry Toppert and Debra Toppert, for a sale price
             of $10,001.00.
12-13        An ordinance authorizing the filing of a petition for demolition of unsafe, fire-
             damaged residential buildings located at 2439 Morton Drive, East Moline, Illinois.
             An ordinance changing the zoning and amendment of the zoning map of the city of East
12-14        Moline, Illinois, attached to and made as a part of the zoning ordinance of the city of
             East Moline, Illinois, of July 24, 1967, and as amended.
12-15        An ordinance authorizing the filing of a petition for demolition of an unsafe fire-
             damaged residence located at 1340 Morton Drive, East Moline, Illinois.
12-16        An ordinance authorizing the filing of a petition for demolition of an unsafe,
             deteriorated residence located at 1508 11th Avenue, East Moline, Illinois.
             An ordinance authorizing the filing of a petition for repair of a residence, or in lieu
12-17        of repair, then demolition or declaration of the property as abandoned, with said
             property being located at 4523 5th Street B, East Moline, Illinois.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
12-18        and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2004, of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
12-19        and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2007, of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
12-20        and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2010A, of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
12-21        and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2010B, of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
12-22        and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2010C, of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
12-23        and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2010D, of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
12-24        and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2010E, of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
12-25        and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2011A, of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
12-26        and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2011B, of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
12-27        and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2011C, of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
12-28        and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2011D, of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
12-29        An ordinance levying a special ad valorem tax within the East Moline 15th Avenue special
             service area of the city of East Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois.
12-30        An ordinance for the levy and assessment of taxes for the fiscal year beginning May 1,
             2012 and ending April 30, 2013.
Ord. dated   An ordinance creating article VI entitled "Fire Protection Tax" of chapter 26 entitled
12-17-2012   "Occupation Taxes" in the municipal code of the city of East Moline, Illinois, of 1963,
             and as amended.
Ord. dated   An ordinance creating article VI entitled "Police Protection Tax" of chapter 26 entitled
12-17-2012   "Occupation Taxes" in the municipal code of the city of East Moline, Illinois, of 1963,
             and as amended.
             An ordinance establishing section 3, entitled, "Video Gaming Terminals", of chapter 4,
13-01        entitled, "Coin Operated Devices", of title 3, entitled, "Business Regulations", of the
             city code of the city of East Moline, Illinois of 1974, as amended.
             An ordinance amending chapter 18, entitled, "Additional Requirements, Exceptions,
13-02        Modifications", of title 10, entitled, "Zoning Regulations", by the adoption of section
             6, entitled, "Illumination Standards", to the city code of the city of East Moline,
             Illinois of 1974, as amended.
             An ordinance amending ordinance no. 11-26 deleting certain properties from the
13-03        Riverfront redevelopment project area in the city of East Moline, Rock Island County,
             Illinois and amending the redevelopment project and plan for the Riverfront
             redevelopment project area accordingly.
             An ordinance amending section 2, entitled, "Admission Tax Levied", of chapter 15,
13-04        entitled, "Automobile Races", of title 3, entitled, "Business Regulations", of the city
             code of the city of East Moline, Illinois of 1974, as amended.
             An ordinance changing the zoning and amendment of the zoning map of the city of East
13-05        Moline, Illinois, attached to and made as a part of the zoning ordinance of the city of
             East Moline, Illinois, of July 24, 1967, and as amended.
             An ordinance adopting the budget for all corporate purposes of the city of East Moline,
13-06        Illinois, in lieu of the appropriation ordinance for the eight month fiscal year
             commencing on the first day of May, 2013 and ending on the thirty-first day of December,
             2013.
             An ordinance approving and granting a special use permit for property at 2012 11th
13-07        Street Place, East Moline, Illinois, for the operation of a meadery, which will produce,
             sell and distribute a product known as mead, or honey wine.
13-08        Not received by codifier.
             An ordinance amending chapter 9, entitled "City Attorney" of title 1, entitled,
13-09        "Administrative," of the city code of the city of East Moline, Illinois of 1974 as
             amended.
             An ordinance repealing certain ordinances previously adopted approving a redevelopment
13-10        project and plan for the River Eagle redevelopment project area, designing such
             redevelopment project area and adopting tax increment allocation financing within such
             redevelopment project area; and concerning related matters.
             An ordinance amending ordinance no. 88-22 as amended by ordinance 98-41, relating to the
             establishment of an enterprise zone in the city of East Moline, Illinois, pursuant to an
             intergovernmental agreement with the cities of East Moline, Illinois, Moline, Illinois,
13-11        Silvis, Illinois, village of Milan, Illinois, and Rock Island County, Illinois, by the
             addition of approximately 2.58 acres by the city of Moline and by revising section 3,
             exhibits "A" and "B" to include new territory within the Illinois Quad Cities enterprise
             zone.
             An ordinance of the city council of the city of East Moline, Illinois, amending section
             9-3-1 entitled "No Parking Places," of chapter 3 entitled "Parking Rules" of title 9
13-12        entitled "Traffic," of the city code of the city of East Moline, Illinois, to prohibit
             parking on the west side of 7th Street from the alley directly south of 2557 7th Street
             and extending north for 69', and to prohibit parking on the east side of 7th Street and
             extending north for 62', in the city of East Moline, Illinois.
13-13        An ordinance approving a redevelopment project and plan for the Port Of Call
             redevelopment project area in the city of East Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois.
13-14        An ordinance adopting tax increment allocation financing within the Port Of Call
             redevelopment project area.
13-15        An ordinance designating the Port Of Call redevelopment project area for the city of
             East Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois.
             An ordinance of the city council of the city of East Moline, Illinois, ascertaining the
13-16        prevailing rate of wages for laborers, mechanics and other workers in the city of East
             Moline employed in the construction of public works for said city.
             An ordinance amending ordinance no. 88-22 as amended by ordinance 98-41, relating to the
             establishment of an enterprise zone in the city of East Moline, Illinois, pursuant to an
             intergovernmental agreement with the cities of East Moline, Illinois, Moline, Illinois,
13-17        Silvis, Illinois, village of Milan, Illinois, and Rock Island County, Illinois, by the
             addition of approximately 2.58 acres by the city of Moline and by revising section 3,
             exhibits "A" and "B" to include new territory within the Illinois Quad Cities enterprise
             zone.
             An ordinance amending title 8, "Public Ways And Property" of the city code of the city
13-18        of East Moline of 1974, section 8-8-27 entitled "Notice Of Delinquency," of chapter 8,
             entitled, "Water And Sewer," as amended.
             An ordinance amending title 8, "Public Ways And Property" of the city code of the city
13-19        of East Moline of 1974, section 8-8-25 entitled "Discontinue d Use Of Water, " of
             chapter 8, entitled "Water And Sewer," as amended.
             An ordinance amending section 1, entitled, "No Parking Places," of chapter 3, entitled,
13-20        "Parking Rules," of title 9, entitled, "Traffic," of the city code of the city of East
             Moline, Illinois of 1974, as amended, as it relates to sub-paragrap h #133 and the Wells
             Elementary School area.
13-21        An ordinance approving unified trail use in the city of East Moline, Illinois.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
13-22        and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2004, of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
13-23        and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2007, of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
13-24        and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2010A, of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
13-25        and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2010C, of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
13-26        and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2010D, of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
13-27        and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2010E, of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
13-28        and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2011A, of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
13-29        and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2011B, of the City of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
13-30        and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2011C, of the City of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
13-31        and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2011D, of the City of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
13-32        An ordinance levying a special ad valorem tax within the East Moline 15th Avenue special
             service area of the City of East Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois.
13-33        An ordinance for the levying and assessment of taxes for the tax levy year 2013
             collectible in the year 2014.
             An ordinance adopting the budget for all corporate purposes of the City of East Moline,
13-34        Illinois, in lieu of the appropriation ordinance for the fiscal year commencing on the
             first day of January, 2014 and ending on the thirty-first day of December, 2014.
             An ordinance amending title 6, "Police Regulations" of the City Code of the City of East
14-01        Moline, section 6-3-50 entitled "Sale Of Tobacco To Minors," of chapter 3, entitled,
             "Misdemeanors," as amended.
14-02        An ordinance amending title 5 "Fire Regulations", chapter 1 "Fire Department", section
             4, entitled, "Appointments," of the City Code of the City of East Moline, Illinois.
             An ordinance amending title 6 "Police Regulations", chapter 1 "Police Department",
14-03        section 3, entitled, "Appointments," of the City Code of the City of East Moline,
             Illinois.
             Ordinance of the City of East Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois, supplementing
             Ordinance no. 11-19 by making a determination as to the sufficiency of revenues of the
14-04        City's combined waterworks and sewerage system required by the Local Government Debt
             Reform Act as a condition to the issuance of the City's general obligation alternate
             bonds (waterworks and sewerage system alternate revenue source), series 2011, and
             providing for appropriate variations in the form of the series 2011 bonds.
             An ordinance amending Ordinance no. 88-22 as amended by Ordinance 98-41, relating to the
             establishment of an enterprise zone in the City of East Moline, Illinois, pursuant to an
             intergovernmental agreement with the cities of East Moline, Illinois, Moline, Illinois,
14-05        Silvis, Illinois, Village of Milan, Illinois, and Rock Island County, Illinois, by the
             addition of approximately 423.48 acres by the County of Rock Island and by revising
             section 3, exhibits "A" and "B" to include new territory within the Illinois Quad Cities
             enterprise zone.
             An ordinance of the City Council of the City of East Moline, Illinois, ascertaining the
14-06        prevailing rate of wages for laborers, mechanics and other workers in the City of East
             Moline employed in the construction of public works for said City.
             An ordinance changing the zoning and amendment of the zoning map of the City of East
14-07        Moline, Illinois, attached to and made as a part of the Zoning Ordinance of the City of
             East Moline, Illinois.
14-08        An ordinance approving the adoption of the ICC 2012 group of codes by reference with
             certain amendments.
14-09        Not received by codifier.
14-10        Not received by codifier.
14-11        An ordinance authorizing an addendum to mutual aid box alarm system agreement.
             An ordinance amending section 1, entitled, "No Parking Places," of chapter 3, entitled,
14-12        "Parking Rules," of title 9, entitled, "Traffic," of the City Code of the City of East
             Moline, Illinois of 1974, as amended, by the addition of sub- paragraph #191.
14-13        An ordinance approving and granting a special use permit for property at 3537 Archer
             Drive, East Moline, Illinois, for the operation of a small coffee shop/cafe.
14-14        An ordinance authorizing the city of East Moline to impose a franchise fee.
14-15        An ordinance authorizing the filing of a petition for demolition of an unsafe, fire-
             damaged residence located at 334 29th Avenue, East Moline, Illinois.
             An ordinance of the city council of the city of East Moline, Illinois, amending section
             8-8-23 entitled "Rates And Charges", of chapter 8 entitled "Water And Sewer", of title
14-16        8, entitled "Public Ways And Property", subparagraph s (A) and (B), in city water rates,
             and subparagraph (G), in city sewerage rates, of the city code of the city of East
             Moline of 1974, and as amended.
             An ordinance of the city council of the city of East Moline, Illinois, amending section
             8-8-23 entitled "Rates And Charges", of chapter 8 entitled "Water And Sewer", of title 8
14-17        entitled "Public Ways And Property", of the city code of the city of East Moline of
             1974, and as amended, with respect to municipal customer water rates (D), municipal
             customer sewerage rates (H), and water and sewer rates outside the city (Q).
             An ordinance amending section 1, entitled, "No Parking Places," of chapter 3, entitled,
14-18        "Parking Rules," of title 9, entitled, "Traffic," of the city code of the city of East
             Moline, Illinois of 1974, as amended, by the addition of sub- paragraph #192.
             An ordinance adopting the budget for all corporate purposes of the city of East Moline,
14-19        Illinois, in lieu of the appropriation ordinance for the fiscal year commencing on the
             first day of January, 2015 and ending on the thirty-first day of December, 2015.
             Ordinance authorizing and providing for the issuance and sale of not to exceed
             $8,250,000 general obligation refunding alternate bonds (waterworks and sewerage system
             alternate revenue source), series 2014, of the city of East Moline, Rock Island County,
             Illinois, for the purpose of refunding all or a portion of the $7,725,000 outstanding
             aggregate principal amount of general obligation alternate bonds (waterworks and
             sewerage system alternate revenue source), series 2007, of the city; providing for the
             collection, segregation and application of the revenues of the combined waterworks and
14-20        sewerage system of the city and the levy of a direct annual tax for the payment of
             principal of and interest on the series 2014 bonds; providing procedures for the
             abatement of such tax based on the availability of alternate revenues; delegating to
             authorized officers the authority to determine the series 2007 bonds to be refunded and
             certain terms of the series 2014 bonds within parameters established in this ordinance;
             providing for the execution and delivery of an escrow agreement in connection with the
             refunding of the refunded series 2007 bonds; providing for the execution and delivery of
             a continuing disclosure undertaking in connection with the series 2014 bonds; and
             concerning related matters.
14-21        An ordinance affirming the establishment of an enterprise zone within the county of Rock
             Island, Illinois.
14-22        An ordinance for the levying and assessment of taxes for the tax levy year 2014
             collectible in the year 2015.
14-23        An ordinance levying a special ad valorem tax within the East Moline 15th Avenue special
             service area of the city of East Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
14-24        and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2010E, of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
14-25        and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2004, of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
14-26        and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2007, of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
14-27        and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2010A, of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
14-28        and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2010C, of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
14-29        and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2010D, of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
14-30        and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2011, of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
14-31        and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2011A, of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
14-32        and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2011B, of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
14-33        and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2011C, of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
14-34        and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2011D, of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
15-01        and interest on certain of the general obligation alternate bonds (waterworks and
             sewerage system alternate revenue source), series 2014, of the city of East Moline,
             Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             An ordinance of the city council of the city of East Moline, Illinois, ascertaining the
15-02        prevailing rate of wages for laborers, mechanics and other workers in the city of East
             Moline employed in the construction of public works for said city.
             An ordinance amending section 7, entitled "Fees," of chapter 1, entitled, "Licenses And
15-03        Permits," of title 3, entitled, "Business Regulations," of the city code of the city of
             East Moline, Illinois of 1974, as amended.
             An ordinance amending title 8 "Public Ways And Property", chapter 13 "Stormwater
15-04        Utility", section 6, entitled, "Collection; Lien:" of the city code of the city of East
             Moline, Illinois.
             An ordinance amending title 3 "Business Regulations", chapter 7 "Liquor Dealers",
15-05        section 4, entitled, "Restrictions On Licenses " of the city code of the city of East
             Moline, Illinois.
             An ordinance amending title 3 "Business Regulations", chapter 7 "Liquor Dealers",
15-06        section 6, entitled, "License Fees " of the city code of the city of East Moline,
             Illinois.
             An ordinance amending title 3 "Business Regulations", chapter 7 "Liquor Dealers",
15-07        section 7, entitled, "Nature Of Facilities" of the city code of the city of East Moline,
             Illinois.
             An ordinance amending section 1, entitled, "No Parking Places," of chapter 3, entitled,
15-08        "Parking Rules," of title 9, entitled, "Traffic," of the city code of the city of East
             Moline, Illinois of 1974, as amended, to add sub- paragraph #193.
             An ordinance amending the zoning designation and the zoning map of the city of East
15-09        Moline, Illinois, attached to and made as a part of the zoning ordinance of the city of
             East Moline, Illinois, of July 24, 1967, and as amended.
15-10        An ordinance levying a special ad valorem tax within the East Moline 15th Avenue special
             service area of the city of East Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois.
15-11        An ordinance for the levying and assessment of taxes for the tax levy year 2015
             collectible in the year 2016.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
15-12        and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2004, of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
15-13        and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2007, of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
15-14        and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2010A, of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
15-15        and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2010C, of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
15-16        and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2010D, of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
15-17        and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2010E, of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
15-18        and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2011, of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
15-19        and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2011A, of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
15-20        and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2011B, of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
15-21        and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2011C, of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
15-22        and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2014, of the city of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             An ordinance of the city council of the city of East Moline, Illinois, amending section
             8-8-23 entitled "Rates And Charges", of chapter 8 entitled "Water And Sewer", of title 8
15-23        entitled "Public Ways And Property", of the city code of the city of East Moline of
             1974, and as amended, with respect to municipal customer water rates (D), municipal
             customer sewerage rates (H), and water and sewer rates outside the city (Q).
             An ordinance of the city council of the city of East Moline, Illinois, amending section
             8-8-23 entitled "Rates And Charges", of chapter 8 entitled "Water And Sewer", of title
15-24        8, entitled "Public Ways And Property", subparagraph (B), in city water rates, and
             subparagraph (G), in city sewerage rates, of the city code of the city of East Moline of
             1974, and as amended.
15-25        An ordinance of the city council of the city of East Moline, Illinois, increasing the
             garbage collection fee upon residential customers for the city of East Moline, Illinois.
             An ordinance adopting the budget for all corporate purposes of the city of East Moline,
15-26        Illinois, in lieu of the appropriation ordinance for the fiscal year commencing on the
             first day of January, 2016 and ending on the thirty-first day of December, 2016.
15-27        An ordinance authorizing the filing of a petition for demolition of an unsafe, fire-
             damaged residence located at 1531 8th Avenue, East Moline, Illinois.
15-28        An ordinance to the City of East Moline declaring Northhill TIF a surplus for the year
             2015 in the amount of $1,100,000.00.
17-01        Tabled ordinance.
             An ordinance of the City of East Moline amending Title 6 "Police Regulations," Chapter 3
17-02        “Misdemeanors,” Section 6-3-55 “Possession of Weapons and Ammunition,” of the city code
             of the City of East Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois.
             An ordinance proposing the approval of a business district plan and designation of the
17-03        bend business district within the city, fixing a time and place for a public hearing on
             such proposals, providing for publication of public notice of the public hearing and
             concerning related matters.
             Ordinance of the City of East Moline, Illinois, designating the bend business district
             within the city, approving a business district plan for the bend business district,
17-04        imposing a retailers' occupation tax, a service occupation tax, and a hotel operators'
             occupation tax each at the rate of one percent (1.0%) within the boundaries of the Bend
             Business District, and concerning related matters.
             An ordinance adding parcels of property to the Downtown Redevelopment Project Area in
             the City of East Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois, amending the redevelopment plan
17-05        for the Downtown Redevelopment project area in various respects; adopting tax increment
             financing within the expanded downtown redevelopment project area; and concerning
             related matters.
17-06        Tabled ordinance.
             An ordinance amending Title 7 “Health and Sanitation,” Chapter 15 “Interments,” Section
17-07        1, entitled, “Interment of Remains” of the city code of the City of East Moline,
             Illinois.
             Ordinance of the City of East Moline, Illinois, designating the Bend Business District
             within the city, approving a business district plan for the Bend Business District,
17-08        imposing a Retailers' Occupation Tax, a Service Occupation Tax, and a Hotel Operators'
             Occupation Tax each at the rate of one percent (1.0%) within the boundaries of the Bend
             Business District, repealing Ordinance No. 17-04 adopted on February 6, 2017, and
             concerning related matters.
             An ordinance of the City of East Moline amending Title 3 "Business Regulations,” Chapter
17-09        21 "Tobacco Products" and amending Title 6 “Police Regulations” Chapter 3 “Misdemeanors”
             of the city code of the City of East Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois.
             An ordinance of the City of East Moline enacting a new section under Chapter 5 City
17-10        Council Section 1-5-1.1 entitled “Persons Ineligible to be a Member of the City Council;
             Non-Partisan Elections” dealing with the same subject matter of the city code of the
             City of East Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois.
             An ordinance of the City of East Moline amending Title 6 “Police Regulations,” Chapter
17-11        11 “Abatement of Chronic Nuisance Properties” of the city code of the City of East
             Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois.
             An ordinance authorizing a loan from TBK Bank, SSB and entry into a promissory note in
17-12        the amount of $6,500,000.00 in connection with financing infrastructure associated with
             the development of "The Bend.”
             An ordinance of the City of East Moline authorizing the Mayor and City Clerk to execute
17-13        an intergovernmental agreement to establish and operate the Illinois quad cities
             communications center (“QCOMM9 11”) between and among the City of East Moline, the City
             of Moline, the Village of Milan and the City of Silvis, Illinois.
17-14        Failed - Animal regulations.
             An ordinance of the City of East Moline amending Title 6 “Police Regulations,” Chapter 3
17-15        "Misdemeanors" by adding Section 6-3-5 "Social Host Liability for Underage Alcohol and
             Drug Use" to the city code of the City of East Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois.
             An ordinance of the City Council of the City of East Moline, Illinois, ascertaining the
17-16        prevailing rate of wages for laborers, mechanics and other workers in the City of East
             Moline employed in the construction of public works for said city.
17-17        An ordinance annexing certain territory to the City of East Moline, Rock Island County,
             Illinois.
             An ordinance of the City of East Moline amending Title 9 "Traffic,” Chapter 11
17-18        "Abandoned Vehicles" of the city code of the City of East Moline, Rock Island County,
             Illinois.
             An ordinance establishing an enterprise zone in the City of East Moline, Illinois, City
17-19        of Moline, Illinois, City of Rock Island, Illinois, City of Silvis, Illinois, Village of
             Milan, Illinois, and Rock Island County, Illinois.
17-20        An ordinance approving a redevelopment project and plan for the EMG Redevelopment
             Project Area in the City of East Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois.
17-21        An ordinance designating the EMG Redevelopment Project Area for the City of East Moline,
             Rock Island County, Illinois.
17-22        An ordinance adopting tax increment allocation financing within the EMG Redevelopment
             Project Area.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the Ad Valorem Taxes levied to pay principal of
17-23        and interest on certain of the outstanding General Obligation Alternate Bonds, Series
             2010A, of the City of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the Ad Valorem Taxes levied to pay principal of
17-24        and interest on certain of the outstanding General Obligation Alternate Bonds, Series
             2010C, of the City of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the Ad Valorem Taxes levied to pay principal of
17-25        and interest on certain of the outstanding General Obligation Alternate Bonds, Series
             2010D, of the City of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the Ad Valorem Taxes levied to pay principal of
17-26        and interest on certain of the outstanding General Obligation Alternate Bonds, Series
             2010E, of the City of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the Ad Valorem Taxes levied to pay principal of
17-27        and interest on certain of the outstanding General Obligation Alternate Bonds, Series
             2011A, of the City of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the Ad Valorem Taxes levied to pay principal of
17-28        and interest on certain of the outstanding General Obligation Alternate Bonds, Series
             2011B, of the City of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the Ad Valorem Taxes levied to pay principal of
17-29        and interest on certain of the outstanding General Obligation Alternate Bonds, Series
             2011C, of the City of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the Ad Valorem Taxes levied to pay principal of
17-30        and interest on certain of the outstanding General Obligation Alternate Bonds, Series
             2014, of the City of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
17-31        An ordinance levying a special Ad Valorem Tax within the East Moline 15th Avenue Special
             Service Area of the City of East Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois.
17-32        An ordinance for the levying and assessment of taxes for the tax levy Year 2017
             Collectible in the Year 2018.
             City of East Moline, Illinois, in lieu of the appropriation ordinance for the fiscal
17-33        year commencing on the first day of January, 2018 and ending on the thirty-first day of
             December, 2018.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the Ad Valorem Taxes levied to pay principal of
17-34        and interest on certain of the outstanding General Obligation Alternate Bonds, Series
             2011, of the City of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
18-01        An ordinance adopting a policy prohibiting sexual harassment for the city of East
             Moline, Illinois.
             An ordinance concerning the North Hill Redevelopment Project Area; directing the final
             distribution of surplus funds remaining in the special tax allocation fund for that
18-02        redevelopment project area, dissolving that special tax allocation fund and terminating
             the designation of that redevelopment project area as a redevelopment project area by
             repealing ordinance no. 93-39, all as required by the tax increment allocation
             redevelopment act; and concerning related matters.
             An ordinance repealing certain ordinances previously adopted approving a redevelopment
18-03        project and plan for the Gateway Industrial park redevelopment project area, designating
             such Redevelopment Project Area and adopting tax increment allocation financing within
             such redevelopment project area; and concerning related matters.
             An ordinance ascertaining the prevailing rate of wages for laborers, mechanics and other
18-04        workers in the City of East Moline employed in the construction of public works for said
             city.
18-05        Not received by codifier.
             An ordinance to set a date for, and to approve a public notice of a public hearing on
18-06        tax increment finance City of East Moline EMG Redevelopment Project Area redevelopment
             plan and project.
             An ordinance of the City of East Moline amending title 3 “Business Regulations”, chapter
18-07        4 “Coin Operated Devices”, section 3-4-3 “Video Gaming Terminals” of the city code of
             the City of East Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois.
18-08        An ordinance of the City of East Moline amending title 10 "Zoning Regulations", of the
             City Code of the City of East Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois.
18-09        Not received by codifier.
             An ordinance of the City of East Moline amending title 1 "Administrative", title 2
18-10        "Boards And Commissions" and title 4 "Building Regulations", of the City Code of the
             City of East Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois.
             An ordinance of the City of East Moline amending title 3 “Business Regulations”, chapter
18-11        7 “Liquor Dealers”, section 3-7-6 “License fees” of the city code of the City of East
             Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois.
             An ordinance of the City of East Moline amending title 3 “Business Regulations”, chapter
18-12        4 “Coin Operated Devices”, section 3-4-3 “Video Gaming Terminals” of the city code of
             the City of East Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois.
             An ordinance of the City of East Moline creating title 3 “Business Regulations”, chapter
18-13        23 “Waste Haulers”, section 3-23-1 “Registration And Fees” of the city code of the City
             of East Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois.
             An ordinance of the City of East Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois, terminating the
18-14        designation of the City of East Moline EMG Redevelopment Project Area and closing the
             special tax Increment allocation account.
             An ordinance of the City of East Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois, approving the tax
18-15        increment finance City of East Moline EMG Redevelopment Project Area redevelopment plan
             and project.
             An ordinance of the City of East Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois, designating the
18-16        proposed EMG Redevelopment Project Area pursuant to the tax increment allocation
             redevelopment act.
18-17        An ordinance of the City of East Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois, adopting tax
             increment allocation financing for the EMG Redevelopment Project Area.
             An ordinance of the City of East Moline amending title 6 “Police Regulations”, chapter
             13 “Car Owner Responsibility Assignment”, section 6-13-2 “Public Nuisance” and
18-18        chapeter14 “Impoundment Of Fleeing Vehicles”, section 6-14-1 “Authority To Impound
             Fleeing Vehicles”, of the city code of the City of East Moline, Rock Island County,
             Illinois.
             An ordinance of the City of East Moline creating title 2 “Boards And Commissions”,
18-19        chapter 22 “Administrative Hearings for PSEBA”, of the city code of the City of East
             Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois.
             An ordinance amending ordinances which established an enterprise zone encompassing
18-20        contiguous portions of the City of East Moline, Illinois, City of Moline, Illinois, City
             of Rock Island, Illinois, City of Silvis, Illinois, Village of Milan, Illinois, and Rock
             Island County, Illinois (and all amendatory ordinances thereto).
             An ordinance enacting a policy statement expressing a commitment to encourage the
18-21        development of business entities and the hiring of individuals defined as minorities,
             women and persons with disabilities within the quad cities enterprise zone.
18-22        An ordinance for the levying and assessment of taxes for the tax levy year 2018
             collectible in the year 2019.
             An ordinance creating Article VI entitled “Police Protection Tax” of chapter 26 entitled
- -          “Occupation Taxes” in the municipal code of the City of East Moline, Illinois, of 1963,
             and as amended.
             An ordinance creating Article VI entitled “Fire Protection tax” of chapter 26 entitled
- -          “Occupation Taxes” in the municipal code of the City of East Moline, Illinois, of 1963,
             and as amended.
18-23        An ordinance levying a special ad valorem tax within the East Moline 15th Avenue Special
             Service Area of the city of East Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
18-24        and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, Series
             2010A, of the City of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
18-25        and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, Series
             2010C, of the City of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
18-26        and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, Series
             2010D, of the City of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
18-27        and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, Series
             2010E, of the City of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
18-28        and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, Series
             2011, of the City of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
18-29        and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, Series
             2011A, of the City of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
18-30        and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2011B, of the City of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
18-31        and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, Series
             2011C, of the City of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
18-32        and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, Series
             2014, of the City of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             An ordinance Amending the new quad cities enterprise zone within the cities of East
             Moline, Moline, Rock Island and Silvis, Illinois, the Village of Milan, Illinois, and
             the County of Rock Island, Illinois, to commence January 1,2019; and Amending the
18-33        corresponding quad cities enterprise zone intergovernmental agreement between the cities
             of East Moline, Moline, Rock Island and Silvis, Illinois, the Village of Milan,
             Illinois, and the County of Rock Island, Illinois, by adding new territory to the quad
             cities enterprise zone; and Authorizing the mayor and city clerk to execute an amendment
             to the enterprise zone intergovernmental agreement between the jurisdictions.
             An ordinance of the City of East Moline amending title 8 “Public Ways And Property”,
18-34        chapter 8 “Water And Sewer”, section 8-8-27 “Notice Of Delinquency”, of the city code of
             the City of East Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois.
             An ordinance of the City of East Moline amending title 3 “Business Regulations”, chapter
18-35        7 “Liquor Dealers”, section 3-7-1 “Definitions”, of the city code of the City of East
             Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois.
             An ordinance adopting the budget for all corporate purposes of the City of East Moline,
18-36        Illinois, in lieu of the appropriation ordinance for the fiscal year commencing on the
             first day of January, 2019 and ending on the thirty-first day of December, 2019.
19-01        Tabled.
             An ordinance of the City of East Moline amending title 3 “Business Regulations”, chapter
19-02        4 “Coin Operated Devices”, section 3-4-3 “Video Gaming Terminals” of the city code of
             the City of East Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois.
             An ordinance of the City of East Moline amending title 2 “Boards And Commissions”,
19-03        chapter 19 “Economic Development”, sections 2-19-1 through 2-19-9 of the city code of
             the City of East Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois.
             An ordinance of the City of East Moline amending title 1 “Administrative”, chapter 22
19-04        “Finances”, section 1-22-9 “Returned Checks Fee” of the city code of the City of East
             Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois.
             An ordinance of the City of East Moline amending title 6 “Police Regulations”, chapter 1
19-05        “Police Department”, section 6-1-3 “Appointments” of the city code of the City of East
             Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois.
             An ordinance of the City of East Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois, approving a
19-06        redevelopment agreement by and between the City of East Moline, Rock Island County,
             Illinois and CTL Property Management, LLC.
19-07        Voided.
19-08        Voided.
             An ordinance of the City of East Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois amending the city
19-09        code of the City of East Moline to provide for an amusement tax and a places for eating
             tax.
             An ordinance of the City of East Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois amending the city
19-10        code of the City of East Moline to provide a curfew for the operation of automobile
             races within the city.
             An ordinance Of the City of East Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois authorizing the
19-11        mayor and city clerk to execute an intergovernmental agreement for the construction of
             an integrated p-25 emergency radio tower system in Rock Island County, Illinois.
19-11a       Tabled.
             An ordinance of the City of East Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois, approving a
19-12        development agreement by and between the City of East Moline, Rock Island County,
             Illinois And TBKBank, SSB, an Illinois limited liability company.
             An ordinance of the City of East Moline amending title 3 “Business Regulations”, chapter
19-13        7 “Liquor Dealers”, section 3-7-6 “License Fees” of the city code of the City of East
             Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois.
             An ordinance of the City of East Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois, approving a real
19-14        estate purchase agreement by and between the City of East Moline, Rock Island County,
             Illinois and Great River Property Development, LLC.
             An ordinance of the City of East Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois amending the city
19-15        code of the City of East Moline to provide for an amusement tax and a places for eating
             tax.
19-16        Voided.
             An ordinance of the City of East Moline amending title 2 “Boards And Commissions”,
19-17        chapter 5 “Board Of Zoning Appeals”, section 2-5-1 “Creation, Membership And Procedure”
             and section 2-5-3 “Powers Of Board” of the city code of the City of East Moline, Rock
             Island County, Illinois.
19-18        Voided.
             An ordinance of the City of East Moline amending title 3 “Business Regulations”, chapter
19-19        7 “Liquor Dealers”, section 3-7-6 “License Fees” of the city code of the City of East
             Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois.
             An ordinance of the City of East Moline amending title 3 “Business Regulations”, chapter
19-20        7 “Liquor Dealers”, section 3-7-6 “License Fees”, creating an E-2 license of the city
             code of the City of East Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois.
             An ordinance of the City of East Moline repealing title 9 “Traffic”, chapter 2 “Rules
             For Driving”, section 9-2-43 “Commercial Vehicles Prohibited From Parking In Residence
19-21        Districts” and creating title 9 “Traffic”, chapters “Parking Rules”, section 9-3-16
             “Commercial Vehicle Parking Prohibited” of the city code of the City of East Moline,
             Rock Island County, Illinois.
             An ordinance of the City of East Moline amending title 3 “Business Regulations”, chapter
19-22        7 “Liquor Dealers”, section 3-7-6 “License Fees” of the city code of the City of East
             Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois.
19-23        An ordinance approving membership in the Illinois Municipal League Risk Management
             Association and authorizing the execution of an intergovernmental cooperation contract.
19-24        An ordinance authorizing the execution of the RMA minimum/maximum contribution
             agreement.
19-25        Voided.
             An ordinance of the City of East Moline amending title 3 “Business Regulations”, chapter
19-26        7 “Liquor Dealers”, section 3-7-6 “License Fees” of the city code of the City of East
             Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois.
             An ordinance of the City of East Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois, approving an
19-27        amendment to an economic incentive agreement by and between the City of East Moline and
             Fifth Avenue Maid Rite, Inc.
             An ordinance amending chapter 3 (zoning title, purpose, Definitions), chapter 4 (General
             Zoning Provisions), chapter 18 (B-3 General Business District), chapter 19 (B-4 Highway/
19-28        Intensive Business District), chapter 21 (I-1 Light Industrial District) and Chapter 22
             (I-2 General Industrial District) of title 10 (Zoning Ordinance) of the East Moline
             municipal code pertaining to adult-use cannabis.
19-29        An ordinance adopting the 2018 International Fire Code.
19-30        An ordinance of the City of East Moline amending title 5 “Fire Regulations”, of the city
             code of the City of East Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois.
             An ordinance Amending the municipal code Of the City of East Moline, Illinois By the
19-31        addition of section 7 to chapter 3 imposing a municipal cannabis retailers’ occupation
             tax.
19-32        An ordinance for the levying and assessment of taxes For the tax levy year 2019
             collectible in the year 2020.
             An ordinance creating Article VI entitled “Police Protection Tax” of chapter 26 entitled
- -          “Occupation Taxes” in the municipal code of the City of East Moline, Illinois, of 1963,
             and as amended.
             An ordinance creating Article VI entitled “Fire Protection tax” of chapter 26 entitled
- -          “Occupation Taxes” in the municipal code of the City of East Moline, Illinois, of 1963,
             and as amended.
19-33        An ordinance levying a special ad valorem tax within the East Moline 15th Avenue special
             service area of the City of East Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
19-34        and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2010A, of the City of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
19-35        and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2010c, of the City of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
19-36        and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2010D, of the City of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
19-37        and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2010E, of the City of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
19-38        and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2011, of the City of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
19-39        and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2011A, of the City of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
19-40        and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2011B, of the City of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
19-41        and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2011C, of the City of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
19-42        and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2014, of the City of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
19-43        An ordinance of the City of East Moline approving the $10.2 million line of credit and
             bond issuance.
             An ordinance adopting the budget for all corporate purposes of the City of East Moline,
19-44        Illinois, in lieu of the appropriation ordinance for the fiscal year commencing on the
             first day of January, 2020 and ending on the thirty-first day of December, 2020.
             An ordinance authorizing the issuance of general obligation alternate bonds (tax
             increment and state revenue sharing alternate revenue source) of the City of East
             Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois, in an aggregate principal amount not to exceed
             $12,000,000, for the purpose of (a) refinancing the outstanding bank line of credit
20-01        entered into to finance the payment of certain “redevelopment project costs” in
             furtherance of the “tax increment finance City of East Moline port of call redevelopment
             project area redevelopment plan and project,” and (b) reimbursing the city for its prior
             payment of interest due under such loan; providing for the publication of public notice
             of intent to issue such bonds; providing for holding and giving notice of a public
             hearing under the bond issue notification act; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance authorizing the issuance and providing for the sale of not to exceed
             $10,000,000 general obligation alternate bonds (tax increment and state revenue sharing
             alternate revenue source), series 2020A, and not to exceed $2,500,000 taxable general
             obligation alternate bonds (tax increment and state revenue sharing alternate revenue
             source), series 2020B (together, the “series 2020 bonds”), of the City of East Moline,
             Rock Island County, Illinois, for the purpose of refinancing a portion of an outstanding
             bank line of credit entered into to finance the payment of certain “redevelopment
             project costs” in furtherance of the “tax increment finance City of East Moline port of
             call redevelopment project area redevelopment plan and project” and reimbursing the city
20-02        for its prior payment of a portion of the interest due under the bank line of credit;
             providing for the pledge of (a) tax increment revenues received and to be received by
             the city with respect to the port of call redevelopment project area and (b) revenues
             derived from distributions to the city of state income tax revenue-sharing revenues, to
             the payment of principal of and interest on the series 2020 bonds; providing for the
             levy of a direct annual tax for the payment of principal of and interest on the series
             2020 bonds; providing procedures for the abatement of such tax based on the availability
             of alternate revenues; delegating to authorized officers the authority to determine
             certain terms of the series 2020 bonds within parameters established in this ordinance;
             providing for the execution and delivery of a continuing disclosure undertaking in
             connection with the series 2020 bonds; and concerning related matters.
20-03        An ordinance of the city council of the City of East Moline, Illinois, vacating an alley
             located in the City of East Moline.
20-04        An ordinance of the City of East Moline releasing a utilities connection lien on 4343
             Kennedy Drive.
             An ordinance of the City of East Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois, approving a
20-05        development agreement by and between the City of East Moline and the Chicago Regional
             Council of Carpenters.
             An ordinance of the City of East Moline amending title 3 “Business Regulations”, chapter
20-06        7 “Liquor Dealers”, section 3-7-6 “License Fees” and section 3-7-24 “Operation” of the
             city code of the City of East Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois.
             An ordinance of the City of East Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois, approving the
20-07        first amendment to the development agreement by and between the City of East Moline and
             the Chicago Regional Council of Carpenters.
20-08        An ordinance of the City of East Moline approving the Metronet non-exclusive franchise
             agreement.
20-09        An ordinance establishing temporary executive powers pursuant to chapter 6, article I of
             the East Moline Municipal Code and 65 ILCS 5/11-1-6 of the Illinois Revised Statutes.
20-10        An ordinance adopting a policy prohibiting sexual harassment for the City of East
             Moline, Illinois.
20-11        An ordinance establishing temporary executive powers pursuant to Chapter 6, Article I of
             the East Moline Municipal Code and 65 ILCS 5/11-1-6 of the Illinois Revised Statutes.
             An ordinance of the City of East Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois, approving an
20-12        economic incentive agreement by and between the City of East Moline and Mutual Wheel
             Company, Inc.
             An ordinance of the City of East Moline amending title 3 “Business Regulations” and
20-13        title 7 “Health And Sanitation”, of the city code of the City of East Moline, Rock
             Island County, Illinois.
             An ordinance Amending Ordinance No. 18-33 related to the establishment of an Enterprise
             Zone in the County of Rock Island, Illinois, pursuant to an Intergovernmental Agreement
20-14        with the Cities of East Moline, Illinois, Moline, Illinois, Rock Island, Illinois,
             Silvis, Illinois, the Village of Milan, Illinois the County of Rock Island, Illinois, by
             revising Section 1, Exhibits “A” and “B” to include new territory within the Quad Cities
             Enterprise Zone.
             An ordinance of the City of East Moline amending title 8 “Public Ways And Property”,
20-15        chapter 8 “Water And Sewer”, section 8-8-30 “Water Meters” of the city code of the City
             of East Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois.
20-19 -      Not used.
             An ordinance of the City of East Moline amending title 9 “Traffic”, chapter 3 “Parking
20-36        Rules”, section 9-3-1 “No Parking Places” of the city code of the City of East Moline,
             Rock Island County, Illinois.
20-37        Second amendment to the development agreement for a union training facility in the City
             of East Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois.
20-38        An ordinance of the City of East Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois, terminating the
             “great river industrial park tax increment redevelopment project area”.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
20-39        and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2010A, of the City of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
20-40        and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2010D, of the City of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
20-41        and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2010E, of the City of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
20-42        and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2011, of the City of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
20-43        and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2011A, of the City of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
20-44        and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2011B, of the City of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
20-45        and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2011c, of the City of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
20-46        and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2014, of the City of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
20-47        and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2020, of the City of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             An ordinance adopting the budget for all corporate purposes of the City of East Moline,
20-48        Illinois, in lieu of the appropriation ordinance for the fiscal year commencing on the
             first day of January, 2021 and ending on the thirty-first day of December, 2021
20-49        An ordinance for the levying and assessment of taxes for the tax levy year 2020
             collectible in the year 2021.
             An ordinance creating Article VI entitled “Police Protection Tax” of chapter 26 entitled
- -          “Occupation Taxes” in the municipal code of the City of East Moline, Illinois, of 1963,
             and as amended.
             An ordinance creating Article VI entitled “Fire Protection tax” of chapter 26 entitled
- -          “Occupation Taxes” in the municipal code of the City of East Moline, Illinois, of 1963,
             and as amended.
20-50        An ordinance levying a special ad valorem tax within the East Moline 15th Avenue special
             service area of the City of East Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois.
21-01        Reimbursement and disposal agreement.
21-02        An ordinance of the city of East Moline approving the 2021 fiscal year budget
             adjustments.
             An ordinance of the City of East Moline amending title 9 “Traffic”, chapter 1
21-03        “Definitions And General Provisions”, section 9-1-1 “Definitions” and title 9 “Traffic”,
             chapter 2 “Rules For Driving”, section 9-2-46 “Engine Braking Prohibited” of the city
             code of the City of East Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois.
21-04        An ordinance of the City of East Moline approving the amendment to an intergovernmental
             agreement providing for the Rock River Valley regional sewage system.
             An ordinance amending Ordinance No. 88-22 related to the establishment of an Enterprise
             Zone in the County of Rock Island, Illinois, pursuant to an Intergovernmental Agreement
21-05        with the cities of East Moline, Illinois, Moline, Illinois, Rock Island, Illinois,
             Silvis, Illinois, the Village of Milan, Illinois the County of Rock Island, Illinois, by
             revising Section 1, Exhibits “A” and “B” to include new territory within the Quad Cities
             Enterprise Zone.
21-06        First amendment to intergovernmental agreement.
21-07        an ordinance of the City of East Moline amending title 6 “Police Regulations” and title
             9 “Traffic” of the city code of the City of East Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois.
21-08        An ordinance of the City of East Moline approving the budget amendment for the addition
             of a maintenance services worker.
             An ordinance of the City of East Moline amending title 8 “Public Ways And Property”,
21-09        chapter 8 “Water And Sewer”, section 8-8-27 “Notice Of Delinquency” of the city code of
             the City of East Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois.
             An ordinance of the City of East Moline creating title 6 “Police Regulations”, chapter 1
21-10        “Police Department”, section 6-1-20 “Unreasonable Noise” of the city code of the City of
             East Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois.
             An ordinance authorizing the issuance of General Obligation Bonds (Alternate Revenue
             Source) of the City of East Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois, in an aggregate
21-11        principal amount not to exceed $49,000,000 for the purpose of funding all or a portion
             of the unfunded liability of the police and firefighters’ pension funds of said City,
             providing for a budget stabilization fund with respect thereto, and paying the expenses
             incident thereto.
             An ordinance authorizing the issuance of General Obligation Bonds (Alternate Revenue
             Source) of the City of East Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois, in an aggregate
21-12        principal amount not to exceed $49,000,000 for the purpose of funding all or a portion
             of the unfunded liability of the police and firefighters’ pension funds of said City,
             providing for a budget stabilization fund with respect thereto, and paying the expenses
             incident thereto.
21-13        An ordinance of the City of East Moline approving the water and sewer rate study from
             HDR Engineering, Inc.
21-14        An ordinance of the City Council of the City of East Moline, Illinois, approving the
             sale of the property located at 109 16th Avenue.
             An ordinance of the City of East Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois, approving a
21-15        development agreement by and among the City of East Moline, Rock Island County,
             Illinois, revitalize and develop, East Moline, Inc. and B & L Development at the
             Quarter, LLC.
             An ordinance of the City of East Moline amending title 8 - Public Ways And Property,
21-16        chapter 8 - Water And Sewer, section 27 - Notice Of Delinquency of the City code of the
             City of East Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois.
21-17        An ordinance of the City of East Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois, dissolving the
             “Riverfront Redevelopment Project Area (TIF 2)”.
21-18        An ordinance Of the City of East Moline approving the outside rates for the water and
             sewer rate study from HDR Engineering, Inc.
             An ordinance adopting the budget for all corporate purposes of the City of East Moline,
21-19        Illinois, in lieu of the appropriation ordinance for the fiscal year commencing on the
             first day of January, 2022 and ending on the thirty-first day of December, 2022
21-20        An ordinance for the levying and assessment of taxes for the tax levy year 2021
             collectible in the year 2022.
             An ordinance creating Article VI entitled “Police Protection Tax” of chapter 26 entitled
- -          “Occupation Taxes” in the municipal code of the City of East Moline, Illinois, of 1963,
             and as amended.
             An ordinance creating Article VI entitled “Fire Protection tax” of chapter 26 entitled
- -          “Occupation Taxes” in the municipal code of the City of East Moline, Illinois, of 1963,
             and as amended.
21-21        An ordinance levying a special ad valorem tax within the East Moline 15th Avenue special
             service area of the City of East Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
21-22        and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation- alternate bonds, series
             2010E, of the City of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
21-23        and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2011, of the City of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
21-24        and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2011B, of the City of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
21-25        and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2011C, of the City of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
21-26        and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2014, of the City of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
21-27        and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2020, of the City of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
21-28        and interest on certain of the outstanding general obligation alternate bonds, series
             2021, of the City of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             An ordinance of the City of East Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois authorizing the
21-29        mayor and city clerk to execute addendum #1 to the intergovernmental agreement for the
             construction of an integrated P-25 emergency radio tower system In Rock Island County,
             Illinois.
21-30        An ordinance of the City of East Moline, Illinois, approving the increase of the garbage
             collection fee for the City of East Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois.
21-31        An ordinance of the City of East Moline, Illinois, approving the increase of the
             curbside recycle fee for the City of East Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois.
             An ordinance of the City of East Moline, Illinois, approving a comprehensive updated
22-01        version of Chapter 2 (Food Service Sanitation) of Article 7 (Health and Sanitation) of
             the municipal code for the City of East Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois.
             An ordinance of the City of East Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois, cancelling
22-02        advances to Riverfront Redevelopment Project Area (TIF 2) from the general fund of the
             City of East Moline.
             An ordinance of the City of East Moline, Illinois, approving a comprehensive updated
22-03        version of Chapter 4 (Plants and Weeds) of Article 7 (Health and Sanitation) of the
             municipal code for the City of East Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois.
             An ordinance of the City of East Moline, Illinois, approving a comprehensive updated
22-04        version of Chapter 3 (Parking Rules) of Article 9 (Traffic) of the municipal code for
             the City of East Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois.
22-05        An ordinance of the City of East Moline, Illinois, authorizing the solicitation of bids
             and sale of property located at 721 23rd Street (PIN #09-30-217-019).
             An ordinance of the City of East Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois, cancelling
22-06        advances to Riverfront Redevelopment Project Area (TIF 2) from certain funds of the City
             of East Moline.
22-07        An ordinance of the City of East Moline, Illinois, authorizing the solicitation of bids
             and sale of property located at 2510 3rd Street (PIN #08-35-400-012).
22-09        An ordinance of the City of East Moline, Illinois, approving an amendment to the final
             FY2021 Budget.
             An ordinance of the City of East Moline, Illinois, approving a comprehensive updated
22-12        version of Tobacco Ordinances (3-21-6, 6-3-49, 6-3-50) of the municipal code for the
             City of East Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois.
             An ordinance of the City of East Moline, Illinois, approving a comprehensive updated
22-13        version of stop and yield streets within the municipal code (Sec. 9-5-3) for the City of
             East Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois.
             An ordinance of the City of East Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois, dissolving the
22-15        Lucky Strike Redevelopment Project Area Special Tax allocation fund and terminating the
             designation of the Lucky Strike Redevelopment Project Area.
             An ordinance of the City of East Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois authorizing
22-16        distribution of surplus from the special tax allocation fund of Lucky Strike
             Redevelopment Project Area.
22-17        An ordinance of the City of East Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois, relating to
             review of Plan Commission decision on PC-034-2022.
22-18        An ordinance of the City of East Moline, Illinois, approving an amendment to the final
             FY2022 Budget.
22-19        An ordinance for the levying and assessment of taxes for the tax levy year 2022
             collectible in the year 2023.
             An ordinance adopting the budget for all corporate purposes of the City of East Moline,
22-20        Illinois, in lieu of the appropriation ordinance for the fiscal year commencing on the
             first day of January, 2023 and ending on the thirty-first day of December, 2023.
22-21        An ordinance levying a special ad valorem tax within the East Moline 15th Avenue special
             service area of the City of East Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
22-22        and interest on certain of the outstanding General Obligation Alternate Bonds, Series
             2010E, of the City of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
22-23        and interest on certain of the outstanding General Obligation Alternate Bonds, Series
             2011, of the City of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
22-24        and interest on certain of the outstanding General Obligation Alternate Bonds, Series
             2014, of the City of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
22-25        and interest on certain of the outstanding General Obligation Alternate Bonds, Series
             2020, of the City of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
             Ordinance providing for the abatement of the ad valorem taxes levied to pay principal of
22-26        and interest on certain of the outstanding General Obligation Alternate Bonds, Series
             2021, of the City of East Moline, Illinois; and concerning related matters.
23-01        An ordinance of the City of East Moline, Illinois, authorizing the solicitation of bids
             and sale of property located at 120 15th Avenue (PIN #08-35-202-005).
23-02        An ordinance of the City of East Moline, Illinois, authorizing the solicitation of bids
             and sale of property located at 814/816 15th avenue (PIN #08-25-406-003).
             An ordinance of the City of East Moline, Illinois, authorizing an intergovernmental
23-03        agreement between the City of East Moline, Village of Carbon Cliff and City of Silvis
             for the construction, operation, inspection, and maintenance for water interconnection
             and sale of water.
23-04        An ordinance of the City of East Moline, Illinois, authorizing the 2022 mutual aid box
             alarm system master agreement.
             An ordinance of the City of East Moline, Illinois, authorizing an intergovernmental
23-08        agreement between the City of East Moline, Village of Carbon Cliff and City of Silvis
             for the construction, operation, inspection, and maintenance for water interconnection
             and sale of water.
             An ordinance of the City of East Moline, Illinois, authorizing the Mayor and City Clerk
23-09        to execute the amendment to an intergovernmental agreement providing for the Rock River
             Valley regional sewerage system.
23-10        An ordinance of the City of East Moline, Illinois, authorizing the addition of a full-
             time community service officer (CSO).
23-11        Authorizing a development agreement/phase 3 between the city of East Moline, revitalize
             and develop East Moline and B & L Development at the Quarter, LLC.
23-12        An ordinance of the City of East Moline, Illinois, approving an amendment to the final
             FY2022 budget.
             An ordinance of the City of East Moline, Illinois, levying property taxes for the City
23-13        of East Moline, Illinois for the purpose of raising revenue to meet certain necessary
             expenses of the city for the fiscal year beginning January 1, 2024, and ending December
             31, 2024.
             An ordinance of the City of East Moline, Illinois, abating the property tax levy for the
23-14        City of East Moline, Illinois for general obligation alternate revenue source series
             2014 bonds.
             An ordinance of the City of East Moline, Illinois, abating the property tax levy for the
23-15        City of East Moline, Illinois for general obligation alternate revenue source series
             2020A bonds.
             An ordinance of the City of East Moline, Illinois, abating the property tax levy for the
23-16        City of East Moline, Illinois for general obligation alternate revenue source series
             2020B bonds.
             An ordinance of the City of East Moline, Illinois, abating the property tax levy for the
23-17        City of East Moline, Illinois for general obligation alternate revenue source series
             2021 bonds.
23-18        An ordinance levying a special ad valorem tax within the East Moline 15th Avenue special
             service area of the City of East Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois.
23-22        An ordinance of the City Council of the City of East Moline, Illinois, approving the
             hiring of six new positions starting with the 2024 fiscal year.
23-23        An ordinance of the City Council of the City of East Moline, Illinois, authorizing
             Republic Services solid waste collection fees for 2024.
             An ordinance adopting the budget for all corporate purposes of the City of East Moline,
23-24        Illinois, in lieu of the appropriation ordinance for the fiscal year commencing on the
             first day of January, 2024 and ending on the thirty-first day of December, 2024.
             An ordinance of the City of East Moline, Illinois, abating the property tax levy for the
23-25        City of East Moline, Illinois for general obligation alternate revenue source series
             2010E bonds.
             An ordinance of the city of East Moline, Illinois, abating the property tax levy for the
23-26        City of East Moline, Illinois for general obligation alternate revenue source series
             2011 bonds.
             An ordinance establishing a Commercial Property Assessed Clean Energy (CPACE) Program
             and establishing the Illinois Finance Authority Property Assessed Clean Energy Program
23-27        for record owners of property that, from time to time, may voluntarily request the levy
             of special assessments to secure the financing or refinancing of their PACE projects;
             authorizing program administrators to act thereunder; designating the Illinois Finance
             Authority as the sole issuer of bonds and notes; and approving related matters.
23-28        An ordinance regarding the Illinois Paid Leave For All Workers Act for the City of East
             Moline.
             An ordinance to propose the approval of a business development district redevelopment
24-01        plan and establish a date for a public hearing for the East Moline Business Development
             District (BDD) No. 2.
             Designating and approving the East Moline Business Development District No. 2 and
24-02        imposing a Retailers' Occupation Tax, a Service Occupation Tax and a Hotel Operators'
             Occupation Tax in the East Moline Business Development District No. 2.
24-09        An ordinance implementing a municipal grocery retailers’ occupation tax and a municipal
             grocery service occupation tax for the City of East Moline.
24-11        Authorization of the execution of the 2025 IML-RMA minimum/maximum contribution
             agreement.
24-12        An ordinance levying a special ad valorem tax within the East Moline 15th Avenue special
             service area of the City of East Moline, Rock Island County, Illinois.
             An ordinance of the City of East Moline, Illinois, abating the property tax levy for the
24-13        City of East Moline, Illinois for general obligation alternate revenue source series
             2010E bonds.
             An ordinance of the City of East Moline, Illinois, abating the property tax levy for the
24-14        City of East Moline, Illinois for general obligation alternate revenue source series
             2011E bonds.
             An ordinance of the City of East Moline, Illinois, abating the property tax levy for the
24-15        City of East Moline, Illinois for general obligation alternate revenue source series
             2014 bonds.
             An ordinance of the City of East Moline, Illinois, abating the property tax levy for the
24-16        City of East Moline, Illinois for general obligation alternate revenue source series
             2020A bonds.
             An ordinance of the City of East Moline, Illinois, abating the property tax levy for the
24-17        City of East Moline, Illinois for general obligation alternate revenue source series
             2021 bonds.
             An ordinance of the City of East Moline, Illinois, levying property taxes for the City
24-18        of East Moline, Illinois for the purpose of raising revenue to meet certain necessary
             expenses of the city for the fiscal year beginning January 1, 2025, and ending December
             31, 2025.
             An ordinance adopting the budget for all corporate purposes of the City of East Moline,
24-19        Illinois, in lieu of the appropriation ordinance for the fiscal year commencing on the
             first day of January, 2025 and ending on the thirty-first day of December, 2025.
25-01        An ordinance authorizing the sale of surplus real estate located at 4701 Kennedy Drive,
             East Moline, Illinois.
25-02        An ordinance awarding the sale of surplus municipal property (08-36-138-021).
25-03        A resolution of the city council of the city of East Moline, Illinois, authorizing
(Resolution) wastewater treatment plant equipment replacement of influent pump number 4.
             An ordinance for the city of East Moline, Illinois authorizing a change in zoning
25-05        district classification for the land owned by David J. Lohman from an “AG” Agricultural
             Preservation District to “I-2" Industrial General District.
             An ordinance for the city of East Moline, Illinois authorizing a change in zoning
25-06        district classification for the land owned by relative investments LLC from an “AG”
             Agricultural Preservation District to “I-2" Industrial General District.
             An ordinance for the city of East Moline, Illinois authorizing a change in zoning
25-08        district classification for the land owned by David J. Lohman form an “I-2" General
             Industrial District to “I-1" Light Industrial District.
             An ordinance for the city of East Moline, Illinois authorizing a change in zoning
25-11        district classification for the land owned by Blackhawk Bank And Trust from “B-2"
             Medium-Density Business District to “B-4" Highway/Intensive Business District.
             
