VILLAGE CODE
of
ERIE, ILLINOIS
1976
Code current through:
Ord. 806, passed 10-14-2025
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
PREFACE
   This code of the Village of Erie, as supplemented, contains ordinances up to
and including ordinance 806, passed October 14, 2025. Ordinances of the Village
adopted after said ordinance supersede the provisions of this code to the
extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent therewith. Consult the Village
office in order to ascertain whether any particular provision of the code has
been amended, superseded or repealed.
      American Legal Publishing
      Cincinnati, Ohio
ORDINANCES PENDING REVIEW FOR CODIFICATION
Listed ordinances have been passed, but they are pending review by the
publisher, and they may not affect the code of ordinances. Additionally,
ordinances listed in this section may not show the original ordinances in their
entirety. Please contact the office of the clerk if there are any questions
concerning any listed ordinances.
 
TITLE 1
ADMINISTRATIVE
CHAPTER 1
OFFICIAL VILLAGE CODE
SECTION:
1-1-1: Title
1-1-2: Acceptance
1-1-3: Amendments
1-1-4: Interpretations
1-1-5: Code Alteration
1-1-1: TITLE:
Upon adoption by the board of trustees this code is hereby declared to be and
shall hereafter constitute the official village code of the village of Erie.
This code of ordinances shall be known and cited as the ERIE MUNICIPAL CODE,
and it is hereby published by authority of the board of trustees and shall be
kept up to date as provided in section
1-1-3 of this chapter under the direction of the village attorney, acting for
said village board of trustees. Any reference to the number of any section
contained herein shall be understood to refer to the position of the same
number, its appropriate chapter and title heading, and to the general penalty
clause relating thereto, as well as to the section itself, when reference is
made to this code by title in any legal document. (1976 Code)
1-1-2: ACCEPTANCE:
This code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be received
without further proof in all courts and in all administrative tribunals of this
state as the ordinances of the village of general and permanent effect, except
the excluded ordinances enumerated in section
1-2-1 of this title. (1976 Code)
1-1-3: AMENDMENTS:
Any ordinance amending this code shall set forth the title, chapter and section
number of the section or sections to be amended, and this shall constitute a
sufficient compliance with any statutory requirement pertaining to the
amendment or revision by ordinance of any part of this code. All such
amendments or revisions by ordinance shall be immediately forwarded to the
codifiers and the said ordinance material shall be prepared for insertion in
its proper place in each copy of this code. Each such replacement page shall be
properly identified and shall be inserted in each individual copy of this code
within thirty (30) days from the date of its final passage. (1976 Code)
1-1-4: INTERPRETATIONS:
In the determination of the provisions of each section of this code the
following rules shall be observed:
   (A)   Intent To Defraud: Whenever an intent to defraud is required in order
to constitute an offense, it shall be sufficient if an intent appears to
defraud any person.
   (B)   Liability Of Employers And Agents: When the provisions of any section
of this code prohibits the commission of an act, not only the person actually
doing the prohibited act or omitting the directed act, but also the employer
and all other persons concerned with or in aiding or abetting the said person
shall be guilty of the offense described and liable to the penalty set forth.
(1976 Code)
1-1-5: CODE ALTERATION:
It shall be deemed unlawful for any person to alter, change, replace or deface
in any way any section or any page of this code in such a manner that the
meaning of any phrase or order may be changed or omitted. Replacement pages may
be inserted according to the official instructions when so authorized by the
village board. The clerk shall see that the replacement pages are properly
inserted in the official copies maintained in the office of the clerk.
Any person having in his custody an official copy of this code shall make every
effort to maintain said code in an up to date and efficient manner. He shall
see to the immediate insertion of new or replacement pages when such are
delivered to him or made available to him through the office of the village
clerk. Said code books, while in actual possession of officials and other
interested persons, shall be and remain the property of the village and shall
be returned to the office of the clerk when directed so to do by order of the
village board. (1976 Code)
CHAPTER 2
SAVINGS CLAUSE
SECTION:
1-2-1: Repeal Of General Ordinances
1-2-2: Public Utility Ordinances
1-2-3: Court Proceedings
1-2-1: REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES:
All general ordinances of the village passed prior to the adoption of this code
are hereby repealed, except such as are referred to herein as being still in
force or are by necessary implication herein reserved from repeal (subject to
the saving clauses contained in the following section), from which are excluded
the following ordinances which are not hereby repealed:tax levy ordinances;
appropriation ordinances; ordinances relating to boundaries and annexations;
franchise ordinances and other ordinances granting special rights to persons or
corporations; contract ordinances and ordinances authorizing the execution of a
contract or the issuance of warrants; salary ordinances; ordinances
establishing, naming or vacating streets, alleys or other public places;
improvement ordinances; bond ordinances; ordinances relating to elections;
ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of real estate by or from the
village; and all special ordinances. (1976 Code)
1-2-2: PUBLIC UTILITY ORDINANCES:
No ordinance relating to railroads or railroad crossings with streets and other
public ways, or relating to the conduct, duties, service or rates of public
utilities shall be repealed by virtue of the adoption of this code or by virtue
of the preceding section, excepting as this code may contain provisions for
such matters, in which case this code shall be considered as amending such
ordinance or ordinances in respect to such provisions only. (1976 Code)
1-2-3: COURT PROCEEDINGS:
No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a former ordinance,
whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not, as to any offense
committed against such former ordinance or as to any act done, any penalty,
forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued or claim arising
under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any such offense
or act so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so
incurred or any right accrued or claim arising before the new ordinance takes
effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter shall conform to the
ordinance in force at the time of such proceeding, so far as practicable. If
any penalty, forfeiture or punishment be mitigated by any provision of a new
ordinance, such provision may be, by the consent of the party affected, applied
to any judgment announced after the new ordinance takes effect.
This section shall extend to all repeals, either by express words or
implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making any new provisions
upon the same subject or in any other ordinance.
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed as abating any action now
pending under or by virtue of any general ordinance of the village herein
repealed and the provisions of all general ordinances contained in this code
shall be deemed to be continuing provisions and not a new enactment of the same
provision; nor shall this chapter be deemed as discontinuing, abating,
modifying or altering any penalty accrued or to accrue, or as affecting the
liability of any person, firm or corporation, or as waiving any right of the
village under any ordinance or provision thereof in force at the time of the
adoption of this code. (1976 Code)
CHAPTER 3
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
1-3-1: Construction Of Words
1-3-2: General Definitions
1-3-3: Catchlines
1-3-1: CONSTRUCTION OF WORDS:
Whenever any word in any section of this code importing the plural number is
used in describing or referring to any matters, parties or persons, any single
matter, party or person shall be deemed to be included, although distributive
words may not have been used.
When any subject matter, party or person is referred to in this code by words
importing the singular number only, or the masculine gender, several matters,
parties or persons and females as well as males and bodies corporate shall be
deemed to be included; provided, that these rules of construction shall not be
applied to any section of this code which contains any express provision
excluding such construction or where the subject matter or content may be
repugnant thereto. (1976 Code)
1-3-2: GENERAL DEFINITIONS:
Whenever the following words or terms are used in this code they shall have the
meanings herein ascribed to them, unless the context makes such meaning
repugnant thereto:
AGENT: A person acting on behalf of another.
BOARD: Unless otherwise indicated, shall mean the board of trustees of the
village.
CODE: The municipal code of Erie and amendments thereto.
COUNTY: The county of Whiteside.
EMPLOYEES: Whenever reference is made in this code to a village employee by
title only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words "of the
village of Erie".
FEE: A sum of money charged by the village for the carrying on of a business,
profession or occupation.
FISCAL YEAR: The "fiscal year" of the village shall commence on May 1 and
terminate on April 30 in each year.
KNOWINGLY: Imports only a knowledge that the facts exist which bring the act or
omission within the provisions of this code. It does not require any knowledge
of the unlawfulness of such act or omission.
LICENSE: The permission granted for the carrying on of a business, profession
or occupation.
MISDEMEANOR: Any offense deemed a violation of the provisions of this code
which is a lesser offense than a felony as defined by state law.
NEGLIGENT, NEGLECT, NEGLIGENCE AND NEGLIGENTLY: Imports a want of such
attention to the nature of probable consequences of the act or omission as a
prudent man ordinarily bestows in acting in his own concern.
NUISANCE: Anything offensive or obnoxious to the health and welfare of the
inhabitants of the village; or any act or thing repugnant to, or creating a
hazard to, or having a detrimental effect on the property of another person or
to the community.
OCCUPANT: Applied to a building or land shall include any person who occupies
the whole or any part of such building or land whether alone or with others.
OFFENSE: Any act forbidden by any provision of this code or the omission of any
act required by the provisions of this code.
OFFICERS: Whenever reference is made in this code to a village officer by title
only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words "of the village
of Erie".
OPERATOR: The person who is in charge of any operation, business or profession.
OWNER: Applied to a building or land shall include any part owner, joint owner,
tenant in common, joint tenant or lessee of the whole or of a part of such
building or land.
PERSON: Any natural individual, firm, trust, partnership, association or
corporation in his or its own capacity or as administrator, conservator,
executor, trustee, receiver or other representative appointed by the court.
Whenever the word "person" is used in any section of this code prescribing a
penalty or fine as applied to partnerships or associations, the word shall
include the partners or members thereof, and such word as applied to
corporations shall include the officers, agents or employees thereof who are
responsible for any violation of said section.
PERSONAL PROPERTY: Shall include every description of money, goods, chattels,
effects, evidence of rights in action and all written instruments by which any
pecuniary obligation, right or title to property is created, acknowledged,
transferred, increased, defeated, discharged or diminished and every right or
interest therein.
RETAILER: Unless otherwise specifically defined shall be understood to relate
to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things in small quantities
direct to the consumer.
STATE: Unless otherwise indicated, shall mean the state of Illinois.
STREET: Shall include alleys, lanes, courts, boulevards, public squares, public
places and sidewalks.
TENANT: Applied to a building or land shall include any person who occupies the
whole or any part of such building or land whether alone or with others.
VILLAGE: The village of Erie, county of Whiteside, state of Illinois.
WHOLESALER AND WHOLESALE DEALER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, shall
be understood to relate to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things
in quantity to persons who purchase for the purpose of resale.
WILFULLY: When applied to the intent with which an act is done or omitted,
implies simply a purpose or willingness to commit the act or make the omission
referred to. It does not require any intent to violate law, or to injure
another, or to acquire an advantage.
WRITTEN, IN WRITING: May include printing and any other mode of representing
words and letters, but when the written signature of any person is required by
law to any official or public writing or bond required by law, it shall be in
the proper handwriting of such person, or in case he is unable to write, by his
proper mark. (1909 Code §15.1; amd. 1976 Code)
1-3-3: CATCHLINES:
The catchlines of the several sections of this code are intended as mere
catchwords to indicate the content of the section and shall not be deemed or
taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor unless
expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections,
including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. (1976 Code)
CHAPTER 4
PENALTY
SECTION:
1-4-1: Penalty
1-4-2: License
1-4-3: Application
1-4-4: Liability Of Officers
1-4-1: PENALTY:
Any person convicted of a violation of any section of this code shall be fined
in a sum not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) for any one offense.
(1976 Code)
1-4-2: LICENSE:
When a person is convicted of a violation of any section of this code any
license previously issued him by the village may be revoked by the court or by
the board of trustees. (1976 Code)
1-4-3: APPLICATION:
The penalty provided in this chapter shall be applicable to every section of
this code the same as though it were a part of each and every separate section.
Any person convicted of a violation of any section of this code where any duty
is prescribed or obligation imposed, or where any act which is of a continuing
nature or declared to be unlawful, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. A
separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day such duty or
obligation remains unperformed or such act continues, unless otherwise
specifically provided in this code.
In all cases where the same offense is made punishable or is created by
different clauses or sections of this code the prosecuting officer may elect
under which to proceed; but not more than one recovery shall be had against the
same person for the same offense; provided, that the revocation of a license or
permit shall not be considered a recovery or penalty so as to bar any other
penalty being enforced.
Whenever the doing of any act or the omission to do any act constitutes a
breach of any section or provision of this code and there shall be no fine or
penalty specifically declared for such breach, the provisions of this chapter
shall apply and a separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day
during or on which a breach or violation occurs or continues. (1976 Code)
1-4-4: LIABILITY OF OFFICERS:
No provision of this code designating the duties of any officer or employee
shall be so construed as to make such officer or employee liable for any fine
or penalty provided for a failure to perform such duty, unless the intention of
the board of trustees to impose such fine or penalty on such officer or
employee is specifically and clearly expressed in the section creating the
duty. (1976 Code)
CHAPTER 5
VILLAGE PRESIDENT; BOARD OF TRUSTEES
SECTION:
1-5-1: Election; Compensation
1-5-2: Time Of Meetings; Adjourned Meetings
1-5-3: Transaction Of Business At Meetings
1-5-4: Place Of Meetings
1-5-5: Rules For Addressing Public Officials
1-5-1: ELECTION; COMPENSATION:
The village president and members of the board of trustees shall be elected at
the time and in the manner provided by law and shall perform such duties as are
and may be required of them by the laws of this state and the provisions of
this code. The village president shall receive as compensation the sum of five
thousand dollars ($5,000.00) per annum, effective April 1, 2025, to be paid in
equal semiannual installments. Each trustee shall receive as compensation,
effective April 1, 2025, the sum of seventy-five dollars ($75.00) for regular
meetings of the president and board of trustees actually attended by him or
her, and seventy-five dollars ($75.00) per meeting for each regularly called
and held special meeting of the president and board of trustees actually
attended by him or her, and seventy-five dollars ($75.00) for each continuation
meeting for a regular meeting or special meeting of the president and board of
trustees actually attended by him or her. Compensation of trustees shall be
paid semiannually. (Ord. 297, 1-23-1973; amd. Ord. 402, 11-8-1988; Ord. 442, 2-
9-1993; Ord. 583, 11-9-2004; Ord. 800A, 9-10-2024)
1-5-2: TIME OF MEETINGS; ADJOURNED MEETINGS:
The regular stated meetings of the president and board of trustees of the
village shall be held on the second Tuesday of each and every month. The
regular stated meetings shall commence at the hour of six o'clock (6:00) P.M.
Whenever a regular stated meeting date shall happen to be a regular holiday,
the president and board of trustees shall meet on the day next following at the
appropriate hour. The president and board of trustees may, at a regular
meeting, adjourn to such time as may be then and there agreed upon, and, at
such adjourned meeting may transact any business which might be transacted at a
regular meeting. (Ord. 377, 4-9-1985; amd. Ord. 519, 4-11-2000; Ord. 746, 12-
10-2019)
1-5-3: TRANSACTION OF BUSINESS AT MEETINGS:
At any meeting held pursuant to an adjournment, as provided in the preceding
section, any business may be transacted which might have been transacted at the
meeting from which such an adjournment has been taken, but at any special
meeting held pursuant to law, no vote of the president and board of trustees of
the village shall be reconsidered or rescinded unless, at such special meeting
there shall be presented as large a number of trustees as were present when
such vote was taken. (1909 Code §1.2)
1-5-4: PLACE OF MEETINGS:
The place of the meetings provided for in this chapter shall be at the "village
and town hall" in the village trustees' rooms thereof, situated on Main Street
in the village; or at any other place which they may at any time designate or
adjourn to, or at which any meeting may be called within the limits of the
village. (1909 Code §1.3)
1-5-5: RULES FOR ADDRESSING PUBLIC OFFICIALS:
The village recognizes the Illinois open meetings act provides that any person
shall be permitted an opportunity to address public officials under rules
established by the village. The village board, by majority votes of its members
then holding office shall establish rules for public participation to balance
the rights of individuals to address the board with the board's need to
maintain meeting decorum and efficiencies. The rules may be amended from time
to time by majority vote of the members of the village board then holding
office. (Ord. 689, 12-9-2014)
CHAPTER 6
VILLAGE OFFICERS
SECTION:
1-6-1: Appointment Of Officers; Terms
1-6-2: Oath And Bond
1-6-3: Police Officers
1-6-3-1: Part Time Police Officers
1-6-4: Village Treasurer
1-6-5: Village Attorney
1-6-6: Salaries
1-6-7: Participation In Illinois Municipal Retirement Fund
1-6-8: Village Clerk
1-6-1: APPOINTMENT OF OFFICERS; TERMS:
It shall be the duty of the president and board of trustees, at their first
regular monthly meeting after each annual election, to appoint a village
treasurer and a chief of police, each of whom shall be commissioned as provided
by state law. Such officers so appointed shall hold their respective offices
for the term of one year and until their successors are appointed and
qualified, but the term of office of any officer appointed by virtue of this
section may at any time be terminated and any officer so appointed may at any
time be removed in the manner hereinafter provided. (1909 Code §2.1)
1-6-2: OATH AND BOND:
Before entering upon the duties of their respective offices, the village clerk
and all officers appointed by virtue of section
1-6-1 of this chapter shall respectively take and subscribe the oath or
affirmation prescribed by state law, and all of said officers shall enter into
bond with security to be approved by the president and board of trustees in the
penal sum as determined by the village board of trustees, said bonds to be
conditioned as prescribed by state law. (1909 Code §2.2)
1-6-3: POLICE OFFICERS:
The village president, when he shall deem it necessary or expedient to preserve
the peace and tranquility of the village, is hereby authorized to appoint, at
the expense of the village, any number of police officers, and he shall deposit
with the village clerk a written statement, showing the names of such persons
appointed, and the length of time they are to serve, and thereupon the village
clerk shall issue commissions to such persons accordingly. Notwithstanding
anything to the contrary herein, all sworn police officers of the village
police department shall be considered officers of the village for all purposes
in construing any criminal statute of the state of Illinois, whether a petty
misdemeanor or felony offense. (Ord. 248, 10-25-1966; amd. Ord. 616, 5-13-2008)
1-6-3-1: PART TIME POLICE OFFICERS:
The following rules and regulations shall apply to all part time police
officers in the village:
   (A)   Appointment, Hire, Discipline, Discharge By Board: The board of
trustees in their discretion may appoint, hire, discipline, and discharge part
time police officers.
   (B)   Chief Of Police Establish Hiring Standards: Part time police officers
shall abide by hiring standards for part time police officers adopted by the
chief of police and submitted and approved by the Illinois law enforcement
training and standards board. The chief of police shall have the authority to
establish such hiring standards and shall be required to submit those standards
to the training and standards board.
   (C)   Not Entitled To Benefits: All part time police officers shall be
members of the regular police department but shall not be entitled to any
pension benefits that full time police officers are entitled to.
   (D)   Not To Supervise Full Time Officers: Part time police officers shall
not be assigned under any circumstances to supervise or direct full time police
officers of the police department.
   (E)   Not Used As Permanent Replacement: Part time police officers shall not
be used as permanent replacements for full time police officers.
   (F)   Part Time Officers Training: Part time police officers shall be
trained under the intergovernmental law enforcement officer's in-service
training act in accordance with the procedures for part time police officers
established by the Illinois law enforcement training and standards board.
   (G)   Supervision When Certification Not Yet Received: A part time police
officer hired by the village who has not yet received certification under
section 8.2 of the Illinois police training act shall be directly supervised.
(Ord. 656, 2-8-2011)
   (H)   Restricted Hours: The number of hours a part time officer may work
within a calendar year are restricted.
   (I)   Hiring Standards: Any person employed as a part time police officer
must meet the following standards:
      1.   Be of good moral character, of temperate habits, of sound health,
and physically and mentally able to perform assigned duties.
      2.   Be at least twenty one (21) years of age.
      3.   Pass a medical examination.
      4.   Possess a high school diploma or GED certificate.
      5.   Possess a valid state of Illinois driver's license.
      6.   Possess no prior felony convictions.
      7.   Any individual who has served in the U.S. military must have been
honorably discharged. (Ord. 665, 5-8-2012)
1-6-4: VILLAGE TREASURER:
The village treasurer shall receive all monies belonging to the village. His
books and accounts shall always be subject to the inspection of any member of
the board of trustees and president, and said treasurer shall perform such
other duties as are or may be required of him by the laws of the state of
Illinois and the provisions of this code, and his duties shall be performed in
the manner prescribed by said laws and this code.
In addition to his other duties, the village treasurer shall be ex officio
village collector and shall have all powers given to, and perform all duties
required of the village collector by the provisions of this code and the
statutes of the state of Illinois. He shall keep, in books to be furnished by
the village, an accurate account of all monies collected by him as village
collector, separate from the books and accounts required to be kept by him as
the treasurer, and separately file and preserve all warrants returned into his
hands and all vouchers and papers relating to his duties as village collector,
but all monies collected by him shall from the time of collection be deemed to
be in his hands as village treasurer. He shall further make such reports of the
performance of his duties as village collector as are or shall be required of
village collectors by the statutes of the state or the provisions of this code,
which reports shall be separate from such reports as are or may be required of
him as village treasurer. (Ord. 1921-52, 3-21-1921)
1-6-5: VILLAGE ATTORNEY:
   (A)   There is hereby continued, created and established the office of
village attorney.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of the village attorney to attend all the regular
and special meetings of the president and board of trustees, to counsel with
and advise all municipal officers respecting legal problems connected with
municipal business and affairs and the duties of their respective offices, to
represent the village in connection with the conduct and prosecution of all
suits brought by and on behalf of the village for the recovery of any penalty
for the violation of any provision of this code, to represent the village in
the circuit court on the hearing of tax objections, and at the request of the
president or chairman of the committee on ordinances or revision of ordinances
to draft proposed ordinances to be submitted to the president and board of
trustees for action thereon, excepting that it shall be no part of the duties
of said village attorney to draft any proposed ordinances making a general
revision of the ordinances of the village, any zoning ordinance, any resolution
or ordinance relating to any proposed special assessment or any ordinance
relating to any proposed bond issue; nor shall it be any part of the duties of
the village attorney to perform any service relating to the levy of special
assessments, proposed bond issues or the establishment of zoning regulations;
nor with reference to suits brought by or against the village in any court of
record except with reference to tax objections aforesaid.
   (C)   The village attorney shall be appointed by the president with the
advice and consent of the board of trustees. The term of office shall be one
year beginning May 1 of the year of his appointment. He shall take and
subscribe to the oath of office provided for village officers. (Ord. 203, 5-14-
1961)
   (D)   The salary of the village attorney shall be determined each year by
the board of trustees, payable in equal semiannual installments. He may be
specifically retained with respect to legal services in relation to this
section. In the event of such retainer for such additional service, the usual,
reasonable and customary fee shall be paid for any service for which he is so
retained or such amount as may be agreed upon at the time of such retainer.
(Ord. 298, 1-23-1973; amd. 1976 Code)
1-6-6: SALARIES:
Salaries of elected or appointed officers, not specifically enumerated in this
code, shall be as set from time to time by the president and board of trustees.
(1976 Code)
1-6-7: PARTICIPATION IN ILLINOIS MUNICIPAL RETIREMENT FUND:
The village hereby elects to participate in the Illinois municipal retirement
fund, effective January 1, 1992.
The standard of IMRF participation shall be a position normally requiring
performance of duty for one thousand (1,000) hours per year.
The village clerk shall file a certified copy of the ordinance codified herein
with the board of trustees of the Illinois municipal retirement fund. (Ord.
430, 9-26-1991)
1-6-8: VILLAGE CLERK:
The village clerk shall be elected by the voters of the village for a four (4)
year term and until a successor is elected and qualified. The clerk shall have
duties as provided by state law, village ordinance and as directed by the board
of trustees. The president is authorized to appoint two (2) deputy clerks as
necessary to discharge the functions and duties of the office of village clerk,
who need not be a resident of the village. A deputy clerk shall receive
compensation as determined by the board from time to time. (Ord. 675, 5-14-
2013)
CHAPTER 7
VILLAGE DEPOSITORY
SECTION:
1-7-1: Village Depository
1-7-1: VILLAGE DEPOSITORY:
The board of trustees shall, each year, designate a bank or banks to be the
depository of the village funds. (1976 Code)
CHAPTER 8
VILLAGE JAIL
SECTION:
1-8-1: Jail Established
1-8-1: JAIL ESTABLISHED:
The county jail of Whiteside County, Illinois, is hereby established as the
village jail for the village of Erie, pursuant to state law. (Ord. 164, 9-1-
1955)
CHAPTER 9
ETHICS ACT
SECTION:
1-9-1: State Officials And Employees Ethics Act
1-9-1: STATE OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES ETHICS ACT:
   (A)   The regulations of section 5-15 1  and article 10 2  of the state
officials and employees ethics act, 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/1-1 et
seq. (hereinafter referred to as the "act" in this chapter), are hereby adopted
by reference and made applicable to the officers and employees of the village
to the extent required by 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/70-5.
   (B)   The solicitation or acceptance of gifts prohibited to be solicited or
accepted under the act, by any officer or any employee of the village, is
hereby prohibited.
   (C)   The offering or making of gifts prohibited to be offered or made to an
officer or employee of the village under the act, is hereby prohibited.
   (D)   The participation in political activities under the act, by any
officer or employee of the village is hereby prohibited.
   (E)   For purposes of this chapter, the terms "officer" and "employee" shall
be defined as set forth in 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/70-5(c).
   (F)   The penalties for violations of this chapter shall be the same as
those penalties set forth in 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/50-5 for similar
violations of the act.
   (G)   This chapter does not repeal or otherwise amend or modify any existing
ordinances or policies which regulate the conduct of village officers and
employees. To the extent that any such existing ordinances or policies are less
restrictive than this chapter except as specifically set forth herein, however,
the provisions of this chapter shall prevail in accordance with the provisions
of 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/70-5(a).
   (H)   Any amendment to the act that becomes effective after the effective
date of this chapter shall be incorporated into this chapter by reference and
shall be applicable to the solicitation, acceptance, offering and making of
gifts and to prohibited political activities. However, any amendment that makes
its provisions optional for adoption by municipalities shall not be
incorporated into this chapter by reference without formal action by the
corporate authorities of the village.
   (I)   If the Illinois supreme court declares the act unconstitutional in its
entirety, then this chapter shall be repealed as of the date that the Illinois
supreme court's decision becomes final and not subject to any further appeals
or rehearings. This chapter shall be deemed repealed without further action by
the corporate authorities of the village if the act is found unconstitutional
by the Illinois supreme court.
   (J)   If the Illinois supreme court declares part of the act
unconstitutional but upholds the constitutionality of the remainder of the act,
or does not address the remainder of the act, then the remainder of the act as
adopted by this chapter shall remain in full force and effect; however, that
part of this chapter relating to the part of the act found unconstitutional
shall be deemed repealed without further action by the corporate authorities of
the village. (Ord. 577, 5-11-2004)
 
Notes
1    15 ILCS 430/5-15.
2    25 ILCS 430/10-10 - 10-40.
CHAPTER 10
ILLINOIS FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT
SECTION:
1-10-1: Freedom Of Information Officer
1-10-2: Requests For Public Record
1-10-3: Electronic Training Curriculum
1-10-4: Obtaining Records
1-10-5: Copies
1-10-6: Denial
1-10-7: Document Requirements
1-10-8: Repeal Of Conflicting Provisions
1-10-9: Severability
1-10-10: Pamphlet Publication
Exhibit A: Municipal Information Directory
Exhibit B: Sample Block Diagram Of Functional Subdivisions
Exhibit C: Municipal Records Directory
Exhibit D: Cataloging And Indexing Of Public Records
1-10-1: FREEDOM OF INFORMATION OFFICER:
Village Clerk and Chief of Police are hereby designated as the Freedom of
Information Officer to whom all initial requests for access to the records of
the Village are to be referred. Such requests are to be made at the offices of
the clerk at Erie, Illinois, between the hours of eight o’clock (8:00) a.m. to
four o’clock (4:00) p.m. In the event that the Village Clerk and Chief of
Police are not available during the times described above, the Village
President is designated as the Deputy Freedom of Information Officer to whom
such initial requests are to be made. In the event that the Village Clerk,
Chief of Police and Village President are not available to perform the duties
of the Freedom of Information Officer, the President shall appoint a person to
be designated as the Freedom of Information Officer. Except in instances when
records are furnished immediately, the Freedom of Information Officer, or his
or her designee(s), shall receive requests submitted to the Village under FOIA,
ensure that the Village responds to FOlA requests in a timely fashion, and
issue responses as required or authorized under FOIA. The Freedom of
Information Officer shall develop a list of documents or categories of records
that the Village shall immediately disclose upon request.
(Ord. 768, 3-8-2022)
1-10-2: REQUESTS FOR PUBLIC RECORD:
Upon receiving a request for a public record, the Freedom of Information
Officer shall:
(A)   Note the date the Village receives the written request;
(B)   Compute the day on which the period for response will expire and make a
notation of that date on the written request;
(C)   Maintain an electronic or paper copy of a written request, including all
documents submitted with the request until the request has been complied with
or denied; and
(D)   Create a file for the retention of the original request, a copy of the
response, a record of written communications with the requester and a copy of
other communications relating to the request.
(Ord. 768, 3-8-2022)
1-10-3: ELECTRONIC TRAINING CURRICULUM:
The Freedom of Information Officer and Deputy Freedom of Information Officer(s)
shall, within thirty (30) days of designation, successfully complete an
electronic training curriculum through the Illinois Attorney General Public
Access Counselor and thereafter successfully complete an annual training
program. Whenever a new Freedom of Information Officer is designated by the
Village, that person shall successfully complete the electronic training
curriculum within thirty (30) days after assuming the position.
(Ord. 768, 3-8-2022)
1-10-4: OBTAINING RECORDS:
Any records which are the subject of a request under FOIA shall be retrieved
from such place as they are stored by the Freedom of Information Officer, or by
an employee of the Village acting under the direction of the Freedom of
Information Officer. In no event shall records be retrieved by the party
requesting them or by any person who is not employed by the Village.
(Ord. 768, 3-8-2022)
1-10-5: COPIES:
If copies of records are requested, the fees for such copies, whether certified
or not, shall be as determined from time to time by the Freedom of Information
Officer pursuant lo Section 6(b) of FOIA. The clerk shall maintain a written
schedule of current fees in the clerk's office. The fees so charged shall
reflect the actual cost of copying the records, and the cost of certifying
copies, if certification is requested, subject to the limitations under FOIA.
(Ord. 768, 3-8-2022)
1-10-6: DENIAL:
In the event that a request to inspect Village records is denied by the Freedom
of Information Officer, the denial may be appealed to the Illinois Attorney
General Public Access Counselor.
(Ord. 768, 3-8-2022)
1-10-7: DOCUMENT REQUIREMENTS:
The President shall prepare:
   (A)   A Village Information Directory;
   (B)   A block diagram of the functional Subdivisions of the Village;
   (C)   A Village Records Directory; and
   (D)   A Records Catalog, all of which shall be substantially in the same
form as the documents attached hereto and made a part hereof as Exhibits A, B,
C, and D.
This information shall also be posted on the Village's website.
(Ord. 768, 3-8-2022)
1-10-8: REPEAL OF CONFLICTING PROVISIONS:
All ordinances, resolutions and policies, or parts thereof. in conflict with
the provisions of this chapter are. to the extent of the conflict, expressly
repealed on the effective date of this chapter.
(Ord. 768, 3-8-2022)
1-10-9: SEVERABILITY:
If any provision of this chapter or application thereof to any person or
circumstances is ruled unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, such invalidity
shall not affect other provisions or applications of this chapter that can be
given effect without the invalid application or provision, and each invalid
provision or invalid application of this chapter is severable.
(Ord. 768, 3-8-2022)
1-10-10: PAMPHLET PUBLICATION:
The clerk is directed by the corporate authorities to publish this chapter in
pamphlet form. This chapter shall be in full force and effect after its passage
and publication in accordance with 65 ILCS 5/1-2-4.
(Ord. 768, 3-8-2022)
EXHIBIT A
MUNICIPAL INFORMATION DIRECTORY
Village of Erie
The Village is a municipality incorporated and organized under the laws of the
State of Illinois for the purpose of providing its residents ,vith the
following services:
(A)   Police protection.
(B)   Fire protection.
(C)   Sewer and water service.
(D)   Garbage collection service.
The Village has certain functional subdivisions which are shown on Table 1
attached hereto. The approximate amount of the operating budget of the Village
is $1,200,000. The Village office is located at 740 Main Street, Erie, IL, and
the Village also has a pumping station for its water distribution system
located on 9th Avenue, Erie, IL. The Village currently employs 11 full and
part-time employees. The members of any board, commission or committee of the
Village are as follows:
 
Board -             
Commission - Member Title
Committee -
                   
                   
                   
                   
                   
 
(You should then list such members of each of the various boards. etc.,
including such boards as the city council, village board or town board, plan
commission, zoning board of appeals, police pension board, board of fire and
police commissioners, etc. Additional pages may be required.)
(Ord. 768, 3-8-2022)
EXHIBIT B
SAMPLE BLOCK DIAGRAM OF FUNCTIONAL SUBDIVISIONS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a111ee76a86366326eb9b7a7fc6d46a3dea62bfb/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1157.png]
 
The Freedom oflnformation Officer(s) for the Village are:
Name:                  Contact information:
Village Clerk               309-659-7740
Chief of Police            309-659-7792
(Ord. 768, 3-8-2022)
EXHIBIT C
MUNICIPAL RECORDS DIRECTORY
Village of Erie
Any person requesting records of the Village may make such a request either in
person, orally or in writing at the clerk's office located at 740 Main Street,
Erie, IL. Such a request should be made to Village Clerk or Chief of Police,
Freedom of Information Officers at such address and if she/he is not present in
person, you should see Village President, Deputy Freedom of Information
Officer. Another method would be by mailing, faxing or emailing a written
request to either 740 Main Street, Erie, IL, Freedom oflnformation Officer or
Deputy Freedom of Information Officer specifying in pmiicular the records
requested to be disclosed and copied. All written requests should be addressed
to the Freedom of Information Officer at the address of the clerk's office. If
you desire that any records be certified, you must indicate that in your
request and specify which records must be certified.
The fees for any such records, if the person requesting the records wishes them
to be copied, are as follows:
First 50 pages, black and white, letter or legal size copies, no cost.
Additional pages, black and white, letter or legal, actual cost to $0.15 per
page.
Electronic records will be formatted subject to reimbursement for costs of
recording medium. Color copies or copies in a size other than letter or legal
shall be reimbursed to actual costs.
Costs of certifying a record will be $1.00.
Records may be furnished without charge or at a reduced charge, as determined
by the Village, if the person requesting the documents states the specific
purpose for the request and indicates that a waiver or reduction of the fee is
in the public interest. Waiver or reduction of the fee is in the public
interest if the principal purpose of the request is to access and disseminate
information regarding the health, safety and welfare or the legal rights of the
general public and is not for the principal purpose of personal or commercial
benefit.
(Ord. 768, 3-8-2022)
EXHIBIT D
CATALOGING AND INDEXING OF PUBLIC RECORDS
The Act requires that public bodies must list ( catalog) all types or
categories of records under their control ,vhich are prepared or received after
July 1, 1984. There is some question, and perhaps it can only be resolved by
litigation, whether the municipality must catalog exempt records. The Act
indicates that the purpose of the catalogued list is to aid individuals to
“gain access” to public records under the Act, and since certain records are
exempt from public access, the most reasonable interpretation of the Act would
be that you do not have to catalog or list exempt records. However, you may
wish to maintain a separate catalog or listing of exempt records until such
time as the Attorney General or the courts clarify the extent of cataloguing
required.
Please note that the Act requires the list to be by "type" or "category" of
records and not listing every individual record. Suggested below are different
types of categories that a public body might wish to establish to cover the
records that it has under its control and which are subject to inspection under
the Act. This list is by no means meant to be exhaustive and is merely for
reference or descriptive purposes. Obviously, the number of types or categories
will vary from municipality to municipality (e.g., some municipalities have
fire departments, some do not, etc).
(A)   The "type" of records is meant to be a broad general category and the
category is a sub-part of the type. For example, one type of record is a
financial record. Under "financial records" may be the following categories:
   1.   Budget;
   2.   Appropriation ordinance;
   3.   Audit;
   4.   Bills;
   5.   Receipts for revenue;
   6.   Vouchers;
   7.   Cancelled checks;
   8.   Water bills;
   9.   Sewer bills;
   10.   Receipts for fines;
   11.   Sales tax receipts;
   12.   Real estate tax receipts;
   13.   Liquor license fees;
   14.   Other license fees;
   15.   Building permit fees;
   16.   Salary schedules;
   17.   Utility bills (e.g., telephone, gas and electric);
   18.   Etc.
(B)   This gives you examples of categories that could be listed under the
general type “Financial record”. Other general types could include, for
example, the following:
   1.   Building inspection reports;
   2.   Administrative memoranda;
   3.   Building permits;
   4.   Board minutes;
   5.   Board resolutions;
   6.   Board ordinances;
   7.   Correspondence received by municipality;
   8.   Correspondence from municipality;
   9.   Bidding specifications;
   10.   Board policies;
   11.   Administrative rules and regulations;
   12.   Personnel code;
   13.   Village maps;
   14.   Comprehensive plan;
   15.   Zoning ordinance;
   16.   Building ordinance;
   17.   Personnel files;
   18.   Office equipment;
   19.   Insurance;
   20.   Capital equipment;
   21.   Real estate;
   22.   Legal notices;
   23.   Newspaper articles;
   24.   Consulting contracts;
   25.   Contracts for capital equipment;
   26.   Contracts for office supplies;
   27.   Contracts for maintenance and repair;
   28.   Professional consultant contracts;
   29.   Pension fund records;
   30.   Hospitalization records;
   31.   Worker's compensation records;
   32.   Training records;
   33.   Official bonds;
   34.   Municipal stickers;
   35.   Village vehicles;
   36.   Animal control records;
   37.   Village liens;
   38.   Police department records;
   39.   Fire department records;
   40.   Etc.
Again, the above list is not meant to be exhaustive. While you certainly need
not catalog your records to the same degree as you list expenses in your annual
appropriation ordinance or your annual budget, such may be used as a convenient
starting point for determining what categories and types of records you may
wish to list. Of course, you also should rely on your past experience by
reviewing the records you currently have on hand and dividing them into what
will appear to you to be meaningful categories. Remember, there is a great deal
of latitude in determining what the categories or types of records will be and
consequently what the list would contain, but keep in mind the stalutory
mandate being that the list must be "reasonably current" and must be
"reasonably detailed" in order to assist the individual in obtaining access to
public records.
(Ord. 768, 3-8-2022)
CHAPTER 11
POLICY PROHIBITING SEXUAL HARASSMENT
SECTION:
1-11-1: Prohibition On Sexual Harassment
1-11-2: Definition Of Sexual Harassment
1-11-3: Procedure For Reporting An Allegation Of Sexual Harassment
1-11-4: Prohibition On Retaliation For Reporting Sexual Harassment Allegations
1-11-5: Consequences Of A Violation To The Prohibition On Sexual Harassment
1-11-6: Consequences For Knowingly Making A False Report
1-11-1: PROHIBITION ON SEXUAL HARASSMENT:
It is unlawful to harass a person because of that person's sex. The courts have
determined that sexual harassment is a form of discrimination under Title Vll
of the U.S. Civil Rights Act of 1964, as amended in 1991. All persons have a
right to work in an environment free from sexual harassment. Sexual harassment
is unacceptable misconduct which affects individuals of all genders and sexual
orientations. It is a policy of Village of Erie to prohibit harassment of any
person by any municipal official, municipal agent, municipal employee,
municipal agency or municipal office on the basis of sex or gender. All
municipal officials, municipal agents, municipal employees and municipal
agencies or municipal offices are prohibited from sexually harassing any
person, regardless of any employment relationship or lack thereof. (Ord. 752,
7-14-2020)
1-11-2: DEFINITION OF SEXUAL HARASSMENT:
This policy adopts the definition of sexual harassment as stated in the
Illinois Human Rights Act, which currently defines sexual harassment as:
   (A)   Any unwelcome sexual advances or requests for sexual favors or any
conduct of a sexual nature when:
      1.   Submission to such conduct is made a term or condition of an
individual's employment, either explicitly or implicitly; or
      2.   Submission to or rejection of such conduct by an individual is used
as the basis for employment decisions affecting such individual; or
      3.   Such conduct has the purpose or effect of substantially interfering
with an individual's work performance or creating an intimidating, hostile or
offensive working environment.
   (B)   Conduct which may constitute sexual harassment includes, but is not
limited to:
      1.   Verbal Harassment: Sexual innuendos, suggestive comments, insults,
humor, jokes about: sex, anatomy or gender-specific traits, sexual
propositions, threats, repeated requests for dates; or, statements of a sexual
nature about other employees, even outside of their presence.
      2.   Non-Verbal Harassment: Suggestive or insulting sounds (whistling),
leering, obscene gestures, sexually suggestive bodily gestures, "catcalls,"
"smacking" or "kissing" noises.
      3.   Visual: Posters, signs, pin-ups or slogans of a sexual nature,
viewing pornographic material or websites.
      4.   Physical Harassment: Touching, unwelcome hugging or kissing,
pinching, brushing the body, any coerced sexual act or actual assault.
      5.   Textual/Electronic Harassment: "Sexting" (electronically sending
messages with sexual content, including pictures or video), the use of sexually
explicit language, harassment, cyber stalking and threats via all forms of
electronic communication email/text/picture/video messages, intranet/online
postings, blogs, instant messages and posts on social network websites (like
Facebook and Twitter).
   (C)   The most severe and overt forms of sexual harassment are easier to
determine. On the other end of the spectrum, some sexual harassment is more
subtle and depends, to some extent, on individual perception and
interpretation. The courts will assess sexual harassment by a standard of what
would offend a "reasonable person." (Ord. 752, 7-14-2020)
1-11-3: PROCEDURE FOR REPORTING AN ALLEGATION OF SEXUAL HARASSMENT:
   (A)   An employee who either observes sexual harassment or believes herself/
himself to be the object of sexual harassment should deal with the incident(s)
as directly and firmly as possible by clearly communicating her/his position to
the offending employee, and her/his immediate supervisor. It is not necessary
for sexual harassment to be directed at the person making the report.
   (B)   Any employee may report conduct which is believed to be sexual
harassment, including the following:
      1.   Electronic/Direct Communication: If there is sexual harassment
behavior in the workplace, the harassed employee should directly and clearly
express her/his objection that the conduct is unwelcome and request that the
offending behavior stop. The initial message may be verbal. If subsequent
messages are needed, they should be put in writing in a note or a memo.
      2.   Contact With Supervisory Personnel: At the same time direct
communication is undertaken, or in the event the employee feels threatened or
intimidated by the situation, the problem must be promptly reported to the
immediate supervisor of the person making the report, a department head, a
director of human resources, an ethics officer, the city manager or
administrator or the chief elected official of the municipality.
   (C)   The employee experiencing what she/he believes to be sexual harassment
must not assume that the employer is aware of the conduct. If there are no
witnesses and the victim fails to notify a supervisor or other responsible
officer, the municipality will not be presumed to have knowledge of the
harassment.
      1.   Resolution Outside Municipality. The purpose of this policy is to
establish prompt, thorough and effective procedures for responding to every
report and incident so that problems can be identified and remedied by the
municipality. However, all municipal employees have the right to contact the
Illinois Department of Human Rights (IDHR) or the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC) for information regarding filing a formal complaint with
those entities. An IDHR complaint must be filed within three hundred (300) days
of the alleged incidents) unless it is a continuing offense. A complaint with
the EEOC must also be filed within three hundred (300) days.
      2.   Allegations Of Sexual Harassment Made Against An Elected Official Of
The Governmental Unit By Another Elected Official Of A Governmental Unit: In
addition to the methods of reporting included above, an elected official may
request an independent review of a complaint of sexual harassment by another
elected official. The request shall be made to the human resources director,
the city manager or administrator or the chief elected official of the
municipality. The official receiving the request shall take immediate action in
keeping with the procurement process of the municipality to retain a qualified
individual or entity for the independent review of the allegations of sexual
harassment in violation of this policy. The outcome of the independent review
shall be reported to the corporate authorities.
   (D)   Documentation of any incident may be submitted with any report (what
was said or done, the date, the time and the location), including, but not
limited to. written records such as letters, notes, memos and telephone
messages.
   (E)   All allegations, including anonymous reports, will be accepted and
investigated regardless of how the matter comes to the attention of the
municipality. However, because of the serious implications of sexual harassment
charges and the difficulties associated with their investigation and the
questions of credibility involved, the claimant's willing cooperation is a
vital component of an effective inquiry and an appropriate outcome. (Ord. 752,
7-14-2020)
1-11-4: PROHIBITION ON RETALIATION FOR REPORTING SEXUAL HARASSMENT ALLEGATIONS:
   (A)   No municipal official, municipal agency, municipal employee or
municipal office shall take any retaliatory action against any municipal
employee or official due to a municipal employee's or official's:
      1.   Disclosure or threatened disclosure of any violation of this policy;
or
      2.   Providing information related to an investigation or testimony
before any public body conducting an investigation, healing or inquiry into any
violation of this policy; or
      3.   Assistance with or participation in a proceeding to enforce the
provisions of this policy.
   (B)   For purposes of this policy, retaliatory action means the reprimand,
discharge, suspension, demotion, denial of promotion or transfer or change in
the terms or conditions of employment of any municipal employee that is taken
in retaliation for a municipal employee's or official's involvement in
protected activity pursuant to this policy.
   (C)   No individual making a report will be retaliated against, even if a
report made in good faith is not substantiated. In addition, any witness will
be protected from retaliation.
   (D)   Similar to the prohibition against retaliation contained herein, the
State Officials and Employees Ethics Act (5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/15-
10) provides whistleblower protection from retaliatory action, and this policy
prohibits retaliatory action such as reprimand, discharge, suspension,
demotion, or denial of promotion or transfer that occurs in retaliation for an
employee who does any of the following:
      1.   Discloses or threatens to disclose to a supervisor or to a public
body an activity, policy or practice of any officer, member, agency or other
employee that the employee reasonably believes is in violation of a law, rule
or regulation; or
      2.   Provides information to or testifies before any public body
conducting an investigation, hearing or inquiry into any violation of a law,
rule or regulation by any officer, member, agency or other employee; or
      3.   Assists or participates in a proceeding to enforce the provisions of
the State Officials and Employees Ethics Act or this policy.
   (E)   Pursuant to the Whistleblower Act (740 Illinois Compiled Statutes 174/
15(a)), an employer may not retaliate against an employee who discloses
information in a court, an administrative hearing, before a legislative
commission or committee or in any other proceeding, where the employee has
reasonable cause to believe that the information discloses a violation of a
state or federal law, rule or regulation. In addition, an employer may not
retaliate against an employee for disclosing information to a government or law
enforcement agency, where the employee has reasonable cause to believe that the
information discloses a violation of a state or federal law, rule or
regulation. (See 740 Illinois Compiled Statutes 174/15(b).)
   (F)   According to the Illinois Human Rights Act (775 ILCS 5/6-301), it is a
civil rights violation for a person, or for two (2) or more people to conspire
to retaliate against a person because she/he has opposed that which she/he
reasonably and in good faith believes to be sexual harassment in employment,
because she/he has made a charge, filed a complaint, testified, assisted or
participated in an investigation, proceeding or hearing under the Illinois
Human Rights Act.
   (G)   An employee who is suddenly transferred to a lower paying job or
passed over for a promotion after filing a complaint with IDHR or EEOC, may
file a retaliation charge within three hundred (300) days of the alleged
retaliation. (Ord. 752, 7-14-2020)
1-11-5: CONSEQUENCES OF A VIOLATION TO THE PROHIBITION ON SEXUAL HARASSMENT:
In addition to any and all other discipline that may be applicable pursuant to
municipal policies, employment agreements, procedures, employee handbooks and/
or collective bargaining agreements, any person who violates this policy or the
prohibition on sexual harassment contained in 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/
5-65, may be subject to a fine of up to five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) per
offense, applicable disciplinary actions or discharge by the municipality and
any applicable fines and penalties established pursuant to local ordinance,
state law or federal law. Each violation may constitute a separate offense. Any
discipline imposed by the municipality shall be separate and distinct from any
penalty imposed by an ethics commission and any fines or penalties imposed by a
court of law or a state or federal agency. (Ord. 752, 7-14-2020)
1-11-6: CONSEQUENCES FOR KNOWINGLY MAKING A FALSE REPORT:
   (A)   A false report is a report of sexual harassment made by an accuser to
accomplish an outcome other than stopping sexual harassment or stopping
retaliation for reporting sexual harassment. A false report is not a report
made in good faith which cannot be proven. Given the seriousness of the
consequences for the accused, a false or frivolous report is a severe offense
that can itself result in disciplinary action. Any person who intentionally
makes a false report alleging a violation of any provision of this policy shall
be subject to disciplinary action or discharge pursuant to applicable municipal
policies, employment agreements, procedures, employee handbooks and/or
collective bargaining agreements.
   (B)   In addition, any person who intentionally makes a false report
alleging a violation of any provision of the State Officials and Employees
Ethics Act to an ethics commission, an inspector general, the Illinois State
Police, a State's Attorney, the Attorney General or any other law enforcement
official is guilty of a Class A misdemeanor. An ethics commission may levy an
administrative fine of up to five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) against any
person who intentionally makes a false, frivolous or bad faith allegation.
(Ord. 752, 7-14-2020)
CHAPTER 12
EXPENSE REIMBURSEMENT POLICY
SECTION:
1-12-1: Policy
1-12-2: Definitions
1-12-3: Guidelines For Necessary Expenditures
1-12-4: Pre-Approval For Authorized Expenditures
1-12-5: Reimbursement Procedure For Authorized Expenditures
1-12-1: POLICY:
   (A)   It is a policy of the Village of Erie to reimburse employees for all
necessary expenditures or losses incurred by the employee within the employee's
scope of employment and directly related to services performed for the Village
of Erie. The Village of Erie is not responsible for losses due to an employee's
own negligence, losses due to normal wear or losses due to theft unless the
theft was a result of the Village of Erie's negligence.
   (B)   This policy was drafted using the Illinois Wage Payment and Collection
Act, 820 Illinois Compiled Statutes 115/9.5, effective January 1, 2019. (Ord.
738, 8-13-2019)
1-12-2: DEFINITIONS:
 
                        An employee, officer or official of the Village of
                        Erie. Municipal officers and officials may be subject
EMPLOYEE:               to additional conditions or restrictions for
                        reimbursement of expenses related to their specific
                        offices and other state statutes or local ordinances.
                        All reasonable expenditures or losses required of the
                        employee in the discharge of employment duties and that
NECESSARY EXPENDITURES: inure to the primary benefit of the Village of Erie,
                        subject to the provisions of this policy. (Ord. 738, 8-
                        13-2019)
 
1-12-3: GUIDELINES FOR NECESSARY EXPENDITURES:
   (A)   Authorized expenditures may include cell phone expenses, lap top,
mileage, tools, equipment, internet, meals, registration fees, training
expenses, tolls and parking fees.
   (B)   Unauthorized expenditures may include home internet service, personal
cell phone expenses, mileage incurred on personal vehicles, alcoholic beverages
and entertainment expenses.
   (C)   Any expenditure that is not requested and approved prior to purchase
is deemed an unauthorized expenditure and may not be reimbursed.
   (D)   Reimbursement of travel, meal or lodging expenses incurred by an
employee is guided by chapter 1-14 of this code, passed by the Village Board of
Trustees pursuant to the Local Government Travel Expense Control Act, 50
Illinois Compiled Statutes 150/. (Ord. 738, 8-13-2019)
1-12-4: PRE-APPROVAL FOR AUTHORIZED EXPENDITURES:
   (A)   An employee shall submit a written request to purchase any of the
above authorized expenditures at least three (3) business days in advance of
incurring the expense on a form entitled "Expense Reimbursement Form" as
approved by the Board. Following approval of the expense, the employee will be
reimbursed as provided in the following section. If the expense is not approved
following a written request, the employee will not be entitled to
reimbursement.
   (B)   In the event that an expense is not pre-approved, reimbursement will
be subject to the discretion of the Board of Trustees. (Ord. 738, 8-13-2019)
1-12-5: REIMBURSEMENT PROCEDURE FOR AUTHORIZED EXPENDITURES:
An employee shall submit an "Expense Reimbursement Form" on a form approved by
the Board of Trustees along with appropriate supporting documentation not later
than thirty (30) calendar days after incurring the expense. Where supporting
documentation is nonexistent, missing or lost, the employee shall submit a
signed statement regarding any such receipts. An employee may not be entitled
to reimbursement if the employee has failed to comply with this Expense
Reimbursement Policy. (Ord. 738, 8-13-2019)
CHAPTER 13
POLICY ON USE OF UNOFFICIAL EMAIL ACCOUNTS AND TEXT MESSAGES FOR WORK-RELATED
COMMUNICATION
SECTION:
1-13-1: Unofficial Email Accounts
1-13-2: Text Messages
1-13-1: UNOFFICIAL EMAIL ACCOUNTS:
   (A)   Public officials and employees should not use their personal email
accounts for work-related communications. Such work-related communications may
constitute public records subject to the Freedom of Information Act, 5 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 140/. If an official or employee uses a personal email
account for work-related communication (either inadvertently or when it is
unavoidable), he or she must ensure that a copy of such email is maintained in
official files. This may include, for example, forwarding a copy of each such
email immediately to the official's or employee's government email account.
This policy applies to all work-related emails sent or received on private
accounts, including receipt of unsolicited work-related emails.
   (B)   With regard to trustees or other purely legislative officials (that
is, officials who have no executive branch or administrative roles), personal
accounts may be used, but all emails discussing public business that are either
sent or received during a public meeting or that include a majority of a quorum
of the legislative body, shall also copy an official email account designated
by the public body for the purposes of collecting and retaining such emails.
Moreover, care should be taken that said communications do not violate the Open
Meetings Act, 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 120/. (Ord. 743, 11-12-2019)
1-13-2: TEXT MESSAGES:
Public officials and employees should not use text messaging for work-related
communications. Such work-related communications may constitute public records
subject to the Freedom of Information Act, 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 140/.
If an official or employee uses a text message for work-related communication
(either inadvertently or when it is unavoidable), he or she must ensure that a
copy of such work-related text message sent or received by the official or
employee is maintained in the official files. The retention and disposal of
these records is subject to the Local Records Act, 50 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 205/. (Ord. 743, 11-12-2019)
CHAPTER 14
TRAVEL, MEAL AND LODGING EXPENSES
SECTION:
1-14-1: Definitions
1-14-2: Reimbursement
1-14-3: Approval Procedures
1-14-4: Authorization Form
1-14-5: Exclusions
1-14-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following terms shall be defined as provided in the Act and as the Act may
hereafter be amended:
 
                   Includes, but is not limited to, shows, amusements,
ENTERTAINMENT:     theaters, circuses, sporting events, or any other place of
                   public or private entertainment or amusement, unless
                   ancillary to the purpose of the program or event.
                   Shall only be those duties, activities and functions which
                   are required for the operation of the Village of Erie. The
OFFICIAL BUSINESS: definition of official business of any employee or
                   department shall be determined by the department head or
                   President.
                   Expenses incurred in the performance of a public purpose
PUBLIC BUSINESS:   which is required or useful for the benefit of the Village
                   to carry out the responsibilities of Village business.
                   Any expenditure directly incident to official travel by
                   employees and officers of the Village or by wards or charges
TRAVEL:            of the Village involving reimbursement to travelers or
                   direct payment to private agencies providing transportation
                   or related services. (Res. 702, 12-13-2016)
 
1-14-2: REIMBURSEMENT:
The reimbursement rate for travel expenses shall be that of the US General
Services Administration as outlined and updated annually at www.gsa.gov for
mileage, per diem within Illinois, per diem for outside of Illinois, lodging
expenses within Illinois, and lodging expenses outside of Illinois, or as
otherwise approved by majority vote of the Board of Trustees and the President
and majority vote by both the Board of Trustees and the President is
hereinafter referred to as the vote of the "Corporate Authorities". (Res. 702,
12-13-2016)
1-14-3: APPROVAL PROCEDURES:
Expenses for travel, meals, and lodging of: (1) any officer or employee that
exceeds the maximum reimbursement allowed under the regulations adopted under
this chapter or (2) the President or any member of the Board of Trustees of the
Village, may only be approved by roll call vote at an open meeting of the
Corporate Authorities of the Village. However, in the event of an emergency or
other extraordinary circumstance, the Corporate Authorities may by majority
vote approve more than the maximum allowable expenses set forth herein. (Res.
702, 12-13-2016)
1-14-4: AUTHORIZATION FORM:
   (A)   A standardized form for use in obtaining reimbursement is hereby
established in the form attached as Exhibit "A" to Resolution 702, and
incorporated by reference as if fully set forth herein ("Authorization Form").
All documents and information submitted with the Authorization Form shall be
subject to disclosure under the Freedom of Information Act of Illinois.
   (B)   The authorization form shall be accurately completed by each
individual requesting reimbursement and be presented to the Corporate
Authorities for approval when required under the terms of this chapter. (Res.
702, 12-13-2016)
1-14-5: EXCLUSIONS:
The Village shall not reimburse any elected official, employee, or officer for
any activities which would be considered entertainment. Activities which would
otherwise be considered entertainment, but which are excluded from the
prohibition on reimbursement due to being ancillary to the purpose of the
program or event, may be reimbursed in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter. Alcohol shall be specifically excluded from reimbursement under any
circumstances to any employee or officer. (Res. 702, 12-13-2016)
CHAPTER 15
SOCIAL MEDIA USE POLICY
SECTION:
1-15-1: Statement Of Purpose
1-15-2: Administration Of Accounts
1-15-3: Comment Policy
1-15-4: Compliance With Laws
1-15-5: Employee Usage
1-15-6: Employee Acknowledgment
1-15-1: STATEMENT OF PURPOSE:
The Village of Erie believes that the use of social media platforms can
effectively broaden the reach of government communication to its constituents
and foster a dynamic environment for social discourse. The use of social media
by the Village of Erie is to convey or obtain information that is useful to, or
will further the goals of, this local government. (Ord. 761, 4-13-2021)
1-15-2: ADMINISTRATION OF ACCOUNTS:
A designated administrator, or administrators, will be responsible for
maintenance and supervision of each social media platform of the Village. Each
administrator will be knowledgeable regarding the terms of the social media use
policy, regarding other responsibilities to review content to ensure it is in
compliance with the policy and in furtherance of the Village's goals. (Ord.
761, 4-13-2021)
1-15-3: COMMENT POLICY:
   (A)   Social media platforms not only provide the government with a
communications venue but often allow for public comment to be posted to the
Village's sites. Any comment made by a member of the public as a social media
user is that user's opinion only. Publication of the comment does not imply
endorsement or agreement by the government nor reflect the opinions or policies
of the government.
   (B)   The following enumerated list of content may not be permitted on the
Village's social media platforms and such content is subject to removal and/or
restriction by the administrator. Content that:
      1.   Promotes discrimination;
      2.   Violates a legal ownership interest (such as a copyright or
trademark);
      3.   Threatens any person or organization;
      4.   Includes personally identifiable information, such as a Social
Security number or other sensitive information;
      5.   Violates any federal, state or local law or encourages illegal
activity;
      6.   Is obscene, sexual or pornographic in content, and/or language;
      7.   Promotes commercial activities not related to government business;
      8.   Is spam or links to malware/viruses; or
      9.   Discloses confidential government information, sensitive information
or personal information relating to government officials and employees, or
members of the public.
   (C)   Each particular private social media enterprise maintains a "Terms of
Use" agreement. All comments posted to any Village social media platform are
bound by those Terms of Use agreements and the Village reserves the right to
report any user violation to the respective enterprise.
   (D)   The Village of Erie reserves the right to remove content from, or deny
access to, any government social media platforms if any individual or
organization violates the social media use policy. (Ord. 761, 4-13-2021)
1-15-4: COMPLIANCE WITH LAWS:
All Village social media platforms shall adhere to applicable federal, state
and local laws, regulations and policies. Content posted on any Village social
media platform by any user is subject to the Freedom of Information Act, record
retention laws and may be subject to e-discovery laws. Property that is
protected by copyright or trademark should not be posted or maintained on a
social media platform in violation of the owner's legal interest. (Ord. 761, 4-
13-2021)
1-15-5: EMPLOYEE USAGE:
   (A)   The Village of Erie recognizes that social media creates opportunities
for community engagement, interpersonal connection and self-expression, but it
also creates risks and responsibilities. Everyone should assume that any use of
social media - whether on a business or personal account - could be viewed by a
colleague, supervisor, partner, supplier or member of the public. If any social
media activity of an employee of the government adversely affects the
employee's job performance, the performance of fellow employees, or otherwise
adversely affects the goals of the government, an employee of the government
may be subject to disciplinary action up to and including termination.
   (B)   Disclosure of confidential government information, sensitive
information or personal information relating to government officials and
employees, or members of the public, is prohibited.
   (C)   It is requested that employees who identify themselves as employees of
the Village of Erie post a disclaimer on their own personal social media
platforms that any posts or blogs are solely the opinion of the employee and
not the employer.
   (D)   Personal use of social media in the workplace may be allowed within
reasonable time limits so long as it does not adversely impact the government
employee's job performance.
   (E)   Employees of the Village have no expectation of privacy when using the
Internet on employer equipment or during hours of employment. (Ord. 761, 4-13-
2021)
1-15-6: EMPLOYEE ACKNOWLEDGMENT:
Employees are required to sign a written acknowledgment that they have
received, read and understand this policy, and submit that acknowledgment to
the designated administrator. The form attached to Ordinance 761, which is
hereby incorporated by reference as if set forth in full herein, shall
sufficiently satisfy this requirement upon receipt. (Ord. 761, 4-13-2021)
TITLE 2
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
CHAPTER 1
BOARD OF LOCAL IMPROVEMENTS
SECTION:
2-1-1: Board Created; Duties
2-1-2: Selection Of Members
2-1-3: President Of Board
2-1-1: BOARD CREATED; DUTIES:
The board of local improvements for the village is hereby created and shall
consist of three (3) members, namely the president of the village and two (2)
members of the board of trustees, which shall function as and perform all
duties of the board of local improvements, as provided in chapter 24, Illinois
municipal code, Illinois Compiled Statutes. (1976 Code)
2-1-2: SELECTION OF MEMBERS:
The members from the board of trustees, to act as members of the board of local
improvements, shall be selected by the president of the board of trustees, with
the approval of a majority vote of the village trustees. (1976 Code)
2-1-3: PRESIDENT OF BOARD:
The president of the village shall be the president of said board of local
improvements. (1976 Code)
CHAPTER 2
BOARD OF APPEALS
SECTION:
2-2-1: Creation And Membership
2-2-2: Meetings
2-2-3: Appeal
2-2-4: Fee
2-2-5: Decision
2-2-6: Variations
2-2-7: Vote Required
2-2-8: Notice
2-2-1: CREATION AND MEMBERSHIP:
A board of appeals is hereby authorized to be established. The word "board"
when used in this chapter shall be construed to mean the board of appeals. The
said board shall consist of seven (7) members appointed by the president by and
with the consent of the board of trustees. The members shall be appointed for
successive six (6) year terms. One of the members of said board shall be
designated by the president, with the consent of the board of trustees, as
chairman of said board, and shall hold his said office as chairman until his
successor is appointed. Such chairman, or in his absence the acting chairman,
may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. The president
shall have the power to remove any member of said board for cause and after a
public hearing. Vacancies upon said board shall be filled for the unexpired
term of the member whose place has become vacant, in the manner herein provided
for the appointment of such member. (Ord. 215, 9-17-1962)
In cases where the board believes it to be in the best interest of the general
public and in the event a meeting of the board cannot be held because of a lack
of quorum of the members appointed by the president, the chairman or acting
chairman may request that any or all trustees of the village board be permitted
to act as an alternate member of the board for such meeting and shall have the
authority for that meeting as a member of the board of appeals, including the
right to vote and all other privileges accorded a regular member of the board
of appeals. (Ord. 613, 1-8-2008)
In addition to the seven (7) appointed members, the president shall also have
the authority, with the consent of the board of trustees, to appoint not more
than three (3) alternate members to the board (herein "alternates"). The
chairman shall have the authority, in his or her sole discretion, if one of the
seven (7) members of the board are not able for any reason to attend any
meeting of the board, to request that an alternate attend such meeting and the
alternate shall in such event have the same power and authority as the seven
(7) members of the board of appeals, including the right to vote and all other
privileges accorded a regular member of the board of appeals. (Ord. 634, 8-11-
2009)
2-2-2: MEETINGS:
All meetings of the board of appeals shall be held at the call of the chairman
and at such times as such board may determine. All hearings conducted by said
board shall be open to the public. The board shall keep minutes of its
proceedings showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent or
failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall also keep records of its
hearings and other official actions. Findings of fact shall be included in the
minutes of each case of a requested variation, the reasons for recommending or
denying such variation shall be specified. Every rule or regulation, every
amendment or repeal thereof, and every order, requirement, decision or
determination of the board shall be filed immediately in the office of the
board and shall be a public record. The board shall adopt its own rules of
procedure not in conflict with the zoning title 1  or with the Illinois
statutes in such case made and provided, and may select or appoint such
officers as it deems necessary. (Ord. 215, 9-17-1962)
 
Notes
1    See title 9 of this code.
2-2-3: APPEAL:
An appeal may be taken to the board of appeals by any person, or by any
officer, department, board or bureau affected by a decision of the building
official relative to the zoning title. Such appeal shall be taken within such
time as shall be prescribed by the board of appeals by general rule, by filing
with the building permit director and with the board of appeals a notice of
appeal, specifying the grounds thereof. The building official shall forthwith
transmit to the board all of the papers constituting the record upon which the
action appealed from was taken.
An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed
from, unless the building official certifies to the board of appeals after the
notice of appeal has been filed with him that by reason of facts stated in the
certificate a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or
property, in which case the proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a
restraining order, which may be granted by the board of appeals or by a court
of record on application, on notice to the building official and on due cause
shown.
The board shall select a reasonable time and place for the hearing of the
appeal and give due notice thereof to the parties and shall render a decision
on the appeal without unreasonable delay. Any person may appear and testify at
the hearing, either in person or by duly authorized agent or attorney. (Ord.
215, 9-17-1962; amd. Ord. 803, 5-13- 2025)
2-2-4: FEE:
A fee shall be paid at the time the notice of appeal is filed. The amount of
the fee shall be determined from time to time by majority vote of the board of
trustees and shall be as set forth in a schedule of fees on file and available
for public inspection in the office of the village clerk. (Ord. 540, 9-11-2001)
2-2-5: DECISION:
The board may reverse or affirm wholly or partly or may modify or amend the
order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from to the extent and
in the manner that the board may decide to be fitting and proper in the
premises. (Ord. 215, 9-17-1962)
2-2-6: VARIATIONS:
When a property owner shows that a strict application of the terms of the
zoning title relating to the use, construction or alteration of buildings or
structures, or to the use of land, imposes upon him practical difficulties or
particular hardship, then the board may make such variations of the strict
application of the terms of the zoning title as are in harmony with its general
purpose and intent when the board is satisfied, under the evidence heard before
it, that a granting of such variation will not merely serve as a convenience to
the applicant, but is necessary to alleviate some demonstrable hardship or
difficulty so great as to warrant a variation in the following instances:
   (A)   To permit the extension of a district where the boundary line of a
district divides a lot in single ownership as shown on record.
   (B)   To permit the reconstruction of a nonconforming building which has
been destroyed or damaged to an extent of more than fifty percent (50%) of its
value, by fire, or act of God, or the public enemy, where the board shall find
some compelling public necessity requiring a continuation of the nonconforming
use, but in no case shall such a permit be issued if its primary function is to
continue a monopoly.
   (C)   To permit the erection and use of a building or the use of premises in
any location for a public service corporation for public utility purposes which
the board deems reasonably necessary for the public convenience or welfare.
   (D)   To make a variance where, by reason of an exceptional situation,
surroundings or condition of a specific piece of property, or by reason of
exceptional narrowness, shallowness or shape of a specific piece of property of
record, or by reason of exceptional topographical conditions the strict
application of any provision of the zoning title would result in peculiar and
exceptional practical difficulties or particular hardship upon the owner of
such property and amount to a practical confiscation of property, as
distinguished from a mere inconvenience to such owner, provided such relief can
be granted without substantial detriment to the public good and without
substantially impairing the general purpose and intent of the comprehensive
plan as established by the regulations and provisions contained in the zoning
title.
   (E)   To interpret the provisions of the zoning title where the street
layout actually on the ground varies from the street layout as shown on the
district map fixing the several districts.
   (F)   To extend the period within which a nonconforming commercial or
industrial use is to be removed from a dwelling district, when the owner or
owners can furnish substantial proof that the building was so extensively
remodeled, reconstructed or structurally altered after the original
construction that it practically resulted in a new building, but such extension
of the period shall not exceed forty (40) years from the date of such
remodeling, reconstruction or structural alteration.
   (G)   To waive the parking requirements in the outlying business or the
industrial districts whenever the character or use of the building is such as
to make unnecessary the full provision of parking facilities or where such
regulations would impose an unreasonable hardship upon the use of the lot, as
contrasted with merely granting an advantage or a convenience.
   (H)   To permit land within two hundred feet (200') of a multiple dwelling
to be improved for the parking spaces required in connection with a multiple
dwelling, but only when there is positive assurance that such land will be used
for such purpose during the existence of, and for the use of the occupants of,
the multiple dwelling.
   (I)   To permit a lot or tract to be subdivided and used by more than one
main building even though the width of the lot and other similar requirements
may not be fully complied with, but only when the distances between the
proposed use and other existing structures or lot lines conform to the minimum
requirements of the district in which the lot is located and when adequate
vehicular access can be provided. (Ord. 215, 9-17-1962)
A variance to construct or alter any building or structure granted pursuant to
this section shall terminate and shall be null and void unless construction of
such building or structure shall be substantially complete within one year from
the date the variance was granted by the zoning board of appeals or within such
other period of time specifically approved by the zoning board of appeals at
the time the variance is granted. The vote required to grant a specific period
of time for completion pursuant to this paragraph shall be by majority vote of
the zoning board of appeals. (Ord. 499, 12-8-1998)
2-2-7: VOTE REQUIRED:
In considering all appeals and all proposed variations to the zoning title 1
the board shall, before making any variation from the zoning title in a
specific case, first determine that the proposed variation will not impair an
adequate supply of light and air to adjacent property, or unreasonably increase
the congestion in public streets, or increase the danger of fire or endanger
the public safety, or unreasonably diminish or impair established property
values within the surrounding area, or in any other respect impair the public
health, safety, comfort, morals or welfare of the inhabitants of the village.
The concurring vote of four (4) members of the board shall be necessary to
reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of the building
official, or to decide in favor of the applicant any matter upon which it is
authorized by the zoning title to render a decision. (Ord. 215, 9-17-1962)
 
Notes
1    See title 9 of this code.
2-2-8: NOTICE:
The board shall make no recommendation except in a specific case and after a
public hearing conducted by the board. A notice of the time and place of such
public hearing shall be published in a paper of general circulation in the
village at least fifteen (15) days previous to the hearing. Such notice shall
contain the address or location of the property for which the variation or
other ruling by the board is sought, as well as a brief description of the
nature of the appeal. (Ord. 215, 9-17-1962)
TITLE 3
BUSINESS REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
AMUSEMENTS, ENTERTAINMENTS
SECTION:
3-1-1: License Required
3-1-2: Definitions
3-1-3: Conditions Of License
3-1-4: License Fees
3-1-5: Insurance
3-1-6: Athletic Exhibitions; License
3-1-7: Supervision
3-1-8: Penalty
3-1-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful to conduct or operate within the village any exhibitions
or carnivals which are open to the public without first securing a license
therefor; provided, that this section shall not be held to apply to those
amusements or exhibitions which are specifically licensed in other sections of
this title or other titles in this code. (1976 Code)
3-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
CARNIVAL: As used herein shall mean and include amusement activities, rides,
merry-go-rounds, booths for the conduct of games of skill, food dispensing
facilities and side shows. A carnival shall not include gambling devices, games
of chance, lotteries, punchboards or other activities in violation of village
ordinances.
EXHIBITIONS: As used in this chapter shall be held to mean and include
theaters, circuses, menageries, carnivals, side shows and other similar
amusement enterprises which are open to the public and for admission to which a
fee is charged. (1976 Code)
3-1-3: CONDITIONS OF LICENSE:
In addition to other requirements set forth herein, the applicant shall furnish
suitable evidence of his intention and ability to comply with the following
conditions: The operator and sponsor of the carnival or exhibition shall each
be wholly responsible for maintaining order, and for keeping the site clean,
free of trash, papers and other debris. Trash containers in adequate number
shall be placed in convenient locations for the use of the public.
No ride shall be placed in operation for public use until the same has been
inspected for mechanical, structural, electrical and other hazards, by such
officers or employees of the village having jurisdiction. Adequate safeguards
shall be placed to protect both operators and the general public from
inadvertently coming into contact with moving parts, belts, motor gears,
electrical switches and other possible or potential hazards. (1976 Code)
3-1-4: LICENSE FEES:
Upon satisfactory application being made to the village clerk, and after having
paid the required license fee to the village treasurer, the village clerk shall
issue the license. The fee for the license shall be ten dollars ($10.00).
Provided further, that no fee shall be charged for any amusement, exhibition or
carnival where the same is sponsored by or given for the benefit of any
religious, educational, charitable, social or fraternal organization. (1976
Code)
3-1-5: INSURANCE:
No license shall be issued for conducting an exhibition or carnival until the
applicant therefor has placed on file with the village clerk a certificate or
certificates of insurance indicating that there is in effect public liability
insurance covering any damages arising out of the use and operation of any and
all devices and facilities operated in connection with such carnival or
exhibition. Such insurance shall be in the minimum amount of one hundred
thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for each person, and three hundred thousand
dollars ($300,000.00) for each accident. (1976 Code)
3-1-6: ATHLETIC EXHIBITIONS; LICENSE:
It shall be unlawful to conduct, operate or exhibit any race between persons,
animals or vehicles, boxing or wrestling match, or any other athletic contest
or exhibition for admittance to which a fee is charged without having first
secured a license therefor; provided, that no license shall be required for any
such contest or exhibitions given under the auspices or for the benefit of any
religious, educational, charitable, social or fraternal organization. (1976
Code)
3-1-7: SUPERVISION:
For the purpose of preserving and maintaining order, a sufficient number of
policemen shall be admitted to such exhibitions free of charge. (1976 Code)
3-1-8: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be fined not
less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for
each offense; and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day
during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (1976 Code)
CHAPTER 2
BILLIARD, POOL HALLS
SECTION:
3-2-1: License Required
3-2-2: License Restrictions
3-2-3: License Fee, Term
3-2-4: Liquor Consumption
3-2-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall operate, maintain or conduct a billiard, pool, bagatelle or
pigeonhole table open to the public without first having obtained a license
therefor as herein required. All applications for such license shall state
thereon the intended location of the place of business, the number of tables to
be used therein and set forth facts establishing the right of the applicant to
have a license issued to him. Provided, however, that a "class A" tavern
license issued pursuant to the provisions of this code shall entitle the
licensee to maintain and operate in connection with and as a part of the
licensed premises one only, three-fourths (3/4) size, coin operated pool table
without obtaining a license as provided in this chapter, and the conditions and
restrictions set forth in this chapter shall have no application to any such
table so authorized to be maintained and operated in connection with and as a
part of a licensed tavern. (Ord. 265, 11-26-1968)
3-2-2: LICENSE RESTRICTIONS:
No license shall be issued to a person who is under the age of eighteen (18)
years or who has been convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude. (Ord.
234, 4-27-1965)
3-2-3: LICENSE FEE, TERM:
The annual fee for such license shall be the sum of one dollar ($1.00). The
license shall be issued by the clerk on application showing the applicant to
have the required qualifications and upon payment of the license fee. The first
license issued to any person terminates at the end of the then current fiscal
year of the village and licenses thereafter shall be for the fiscal year
beginning on May 1 and ending on April 30 next thereafter. (Ord. 234, 4-27-
1965)
3-2-4: LIQUOR CONSUMPTION:
No alcoholic liquor shall be kept or permitted to be consumed upon the
premises, and the premises shall at all times be maintained and operated in an
orderly manner. The use of profanity or loud and unusual noises shall be
prohibited and the premises shall be at all times conducted and maintained in
an orderly manner. No gambling or card playing shall be permitted upon the
premises. (Ord. 234, 4-27-1965)
CHAPTER 3
PEDDLERS; TRANSIENT MERCHANTS
(Rep. by Ord. 375, 12-11-1984)
CHAPTER 4
JUNKYARDS
SECTION:
3-4-1: Definition
3-4-2: License Required
3-4-3: Location; Consent
3-4-4: License Fee; Bond
3-4-5: Receiving Articles From Minors
3-4-6: Sanitary Conditions
3-4-7: Leaving Premises
3-4-8: Nuisance
3-4-1: DEFINITION:
"Junkyard" as used in this chapter shall mean a plot of ground, which may be
covered with buildings, partly covered with buildings, or without any
buildings, which plot of ground is used in connection with the buying, selling,
storing or trading in of old iron, rags, hides, furs, rubber, wool, used car
parts, old metals, bottles and the like commonly called junk. (Ord. 81, 5-12-
1941)
3-4-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall operate within the limits of the village a junkyard without
first having obtained a license so to do. (Ord. 81, 5-12-1941)
3-4-3: LOCATION; CONSENT:
No junkyard shall be established in those parts of the village that are
predominantly residential unless consent is obtained in writing of seventy five
percent (75%) of the residents within a radius of five hundred feet (500') from
the outer limits of the location of said proposed junkyard. (Ord. 81, 5-12-
1941)
3-4-4: LICENSE FEE; BOND:
A license shall be granted to any person of good moral character on written
application being made showing a compliance with this chapter and upon payment
of a license fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) per year. A bond in the sum of five
hundred dollars ($500.00) with two (2) sureties, to be approved by the village
clerk, conditioned on full compliance with the terms of this chapter and
further conditioned that within thirty (30) days after the right to conduct a
junkyard at the location licensed shall have terminated by expiration of the
license period, revocation of the license or in any other manner all junk,
refuse, old iron, car bodies and car parts, dirt and debris shall be removed
from said premises and without the limits of the village, or to some other
location within the village licensed for use as a junkyard, shall accompany the
application. (Ord. 81, 5-12-1941)
3-4-5: RECEIVING ARTICLES FROM MINORS:
A licensee under this chapter shall not purchase or receive from minors any
article whatsoever without the written consent of their parents or guardian.
(Ord. 81, 5-12-1941)
3-4-6: SANITARY CONDITIONS:
A licensee under this chapter shall at all times keep and maintain the premises
licensed in a sanitary condition, free from all objectional or offensive odors,
so maintained and operated as not to become a harboring or breeding place of
rats and mice and shall not permit junk or debris from the business to encroach
upon or obstruct any of the streets or alleys of the village. (Ord. 81, 5-12-
1941)
3-4-7: LEAVING PREMISES:
A licensee under this chapter shall, within thirty (30) days after his right to
do business at any licensed location shall have expired for any reason
whatsoever, remove from said premises to a point outside of the village or to
some other location within the village licensed for use as a junkyard, all old
iron, rags, hides, furs, rubber, wool, used car parts, old metals, bottles and
the like commonly called junk, so as to leave said premises free from all junk
and debris and in a clean and sanitary condition and so that the same is not
likely to become or continue to be a breeding or harboring place for rats or
mice and any person now operating within the village any "junkyard" as defined
in this chapter, who shall fail for thirty (30) days after the effective date
of this chapter to secure a license hereunder shall immediately remove from the
premises used by him as a junkyard all such junk, leaving the premises free and
clear of all junk to the same extent as he would be required to do if he had
become licensed under this chapter and his license to do business had
terminated. A failure to remove junk from premises and clean up the same as
required by this chapter shall be deemed continuing in the operation of a
junkyard contrary to the terms of this chapter and shall be punished
accordingly. (Ord. 81, 5-12-1941)
3-4-8: NUISANCE:
A junkyard established or operated in the village contrary to the terms of this
chapter is hereby declared a nuisance. (Ord. 81, 5-12-1941)
CHAPTER 5
LIQUOR
SECTION:
3-5-1: Definitions
3-5-2: License Required
3-5-3: President To Grant License
3-5-4: Application
3-5-5: Restrictions On Issuance Of License
3-5-6: Classification And Fees
3-5-7: Effect Of Transfers On The Fee For The First Year Of Issuance Of A
License
3-5-8: Term Of License; Prorating Fees; Renewal Of License
3-5-9: Disposition Of Fees
3-5-10: Consumption On Premises
3-5-11: Record
3-5-12: Privileges Granted By License
3-5-13: Change Of Location
3-5-14: Sanitary Conditions
3-5-15: Restrictions On Use Of Premises
3-5-16: Restrictions
3-5-17: Closing Hours
3-5-18: Posting License
3-5-19: Revocation Of License
3-5-20: Dramshop Insurance
3-5-21: Temporary Licenses
3-5-22: Supplemental License, Outdoor Use
3-5-23: Conduct On Premises
3-5-24: Registration And Documentation Of Retail Sales Of Keg Alcoholic
Beverages
3-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context otherwise requires, the following terms as used in this
chapter shall be construed according to the definitions given below.
                                       The product of distillation of any
                                       fermented liquid, whether rectified or
ALCOHOL:                               diluted, whatever may be the origin
                                       thereof, and includes synthetic ethyl
                                       alcohol. It does not include denatured
                                       alcohol or wood alcohol.
                                       Includes alcohol, spirits, wine and
                                       beer, and every liquid or solid,
                                       patented or not, containing alcohol,
                                       spirits, wine or beer, and capable of
                                       being consumed as a beverage by a human
                                       being. The provisions of this chapter
                                       shall not apply to alcohol used in the
                                       manufacture of denatured alcohol
                                       produced in accordance with Acts of
ALCOHOLIC LIQUORS OR ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR: Congress and regulations promulgated
                                       thereunder, nor to any liquid or solid
                                       containing one-half of one percent
                                       (0.5%), or less, of alcohol by volume.
                                       This chapter shall not apply to wine
                                       intended for use and used by any church
                                       or religious organization for
                                       sacramental purposes, provided that such
                                       wine shall be purchased from a licensed
                                       manufacturer or importing distributor
                                       under this Act.
                                       A beverage obtained by the alcoholic
                                       fermentation of an infusion or
BEER:                                  concoction of barley, or other grain,
                                       malt and hops in water, and includes,
                                       among other things, beer, ale, stout,
                                       lager beer, porter and the like.
                                       A corporation organized under the laws
                                       of this state, not for pecuniary profit,
                                       solely for the promotion of some common
                                       object other than the sale or
                                       consumption of alcoholic liquors, kept,
                                       used and maintained by its members
                                       through the payment of annual dues, and
                                       owning, hiring or leasing a building, or
                                       space in a building of such extent and
                                       character as may be suitable and
                                       adequate for the reasonable and
                                       comfortable use and accommodation of its
                                       members and their guests, and provided
                                       with suitable and adequate kitchen and
CLUB:                                  dining room space and equipment,
                                       provided, that such club files with the
                                       president of the board of trustees at
                                       the time of its application for a
                                       license, under this chapter, two (2)
                                       copies of a list of names, and residence
                                       of its members; and provided, further,
                                       that its affairs and management are
                                       conducted by a board of directors,
                                       executive committee or similar body
                                       chosen by the members at their annual
                                       meeting; and provided further that no
                                       such club shall sell to anyone not a
                                       member of such club, unless accompanied
                                       by a member of such club.
                                       The President of the Board of Trustees
LIQUOR CONTROL COMMISSIONER:           shall be the Local Liquor Control
                                       Commissioner.
                                       Any public place kept, used, maintained,
                                       advertised and held out to the public as
                                       a place where meals are served, and
                                       entertainment and dancing facilities are
                                       offered; and where meals are actually
                                       and regularly served excluding all
                                       places where merely short order meals or
                                       lunches are provided, and no actual
                                       meals are prepared for sale, and
                                       provided further that all such places be
                                       provided with adequate and sanitary
                                       kitchen and dining room equipment and
                                       capacity, and have employed therein a
                                       sufficient number and kind of employees
RESTAURANT:                            to prepare, cook and serve suitable food
                                       for its guests, and provided further,
                                       that any and all such places have no
                                       sleeping accommodations for public use,
                                       and when at least fifty percent (50%) of
                                       the gross receipts or anticipated gross
                                       receipts of the licensee or applicant
                                       are generated by the sale of food or
                                       nonalcoholic beverages. Upon request of
                                       the liquor control commissioner, the
                                       licensee shall produce the necessary
                                       records or financial data to verify that
                                       fifty percent (50%) of gross receipts of
                                       the licensee are attributable to the
                                       sale of food or nonalcoholic beverages.
RETAIL SALES:                          The sale for the use or consumption, and
                                       not for resale.
                                       Any person who sells or offers for sale
RETAILER:                              alcoholic liquors, malt or vinous
                                       beverages for use or consumption and not
                                       for resale in any form.
                                       Any beverage which contains alcohol
                                       obtained by distillation, mixed with
                                       water or other substance in solution,
SPIRITS:                               and includes brandy, rum, whiskey, gin,
                                       or other spirituous liquors, and such
                                       liquors when rectified, blended or
                                       otherwise missed with alcohol or other
                                       substances.
                                       Any public place, not a "restaurant" or
                                       "club" as herein defined, kept, used,
TAVERN:                                maintained, advertised or held out to
                                       the public as a place where alcoholic
                                       liquors are sold for consumption on the
                                       premises.
                                       Any alcoholic beverage obtained by the
                                       fermentation of the natural contents of
WINE:                                  fruits, or vegetables, containing sugar,
                                       including such beverage when fortified
                                       by the addition of alcohol or spirits,
                                       as above defined. (Ord. 753, 9-8-2020)
 
3-5-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell alcoholic liquor at retail
or to make any sale of alcoholic liquor at retail within the village without
first having obtained a liquor license as provided by this chapter.
      1.   A "sale at retail" or "to sell at retail" means sales for use or
compensation, and not for resale, in any form.
      2.   A "sale" means any transfer, exchange or barter, in any manner or by
any means whatsoever for a consideration, and includes and means all sales made
by any person, whether as principal, proprietor agent, servant, or employee,
and includes, but is not limited to, all of the following acts when done for
consideration:
         (a)   The selling of alcoholic liquor.
         (b)   The "giving away" of alcoholic liquor.
         (c)   The dispensing of alcoholic liquor.
         (d)   The providing of mix, ice, water or glasses for the purposes of
mixing drinks containing alcoholic liquor for consumption on the same premises.
         (e)   The pouring of alcoholic liquor.
         (f)   The providing of "set ups" containing alcoholic liquor.
         (g)   The maintaining of a private or public club which serves
alcoholic liquor on its premises to its patrons, or members.
         (h)   The maintaining of a restaurant which serves alcoholic liquor on
its premises to its patrons.
         (i)   The possessing in any business or commercial establishment
alcoholic liquor to be served to patrons on the premises.
         (j)   The charging of a cover charge to enter an establishment and the
giving away of all alcoholic liquor to all persons paying such cover charge.
   (B)   It is the intent of this section to require a license for the sale of
alcoholic liquor at retail within the village for any consideration, whether
direct or indirect, regardless of the form that the sale takes. (Ord. 753, 9-8-
2020)
3-5-3: PRESIDENT TO GRANT LICENSE:
Subject to the limitations and restrictions herein set forth, and all other
lawful limitations and restrictions, the Liquor Control Commissioner, or anyone
designated by him or her, may, from time to time, grant licenses for the retail
sale of alcoholic liquors within the village limits to any person or any
Illinois corporation qualified to receive such license, or any company, limited
liability company, association or partnership qualified to receive such
license; providing, however, that an application is made to the Liquor Control
Commissioner in writing; and providing, further, that any and all such persons
or entities furnish sufficient evidence to satisfy the Liquor Control
Commissioner, or anyone designated by him or her, that the applicant is a
person of good moral character, has never been convicted of a felony, has never
possessed a license to sell at retail intoxicating liquors that was revoked by
state authorities or any municipality and such other evidence that the Liquor
Control Commissioner may request to make sure the applicant is qualified under
all applicable laws and resolutions. (Ord. 753, 9-8-2020)
3-5-4: APPLICATION:
   (A)   An application for a license for retail sale of alcoholic liquor shall
be made to the Liquor Control Commissioner in writing and, if the applicant is
an individual, shall be signed by the applicant, or if the applicant is a club,
corporation for profit, limited liability company, or partnership, shall be
signed by a duly authorized agent or partner thereof. Applications for such
license shall provide the following information:
      1.   Where the applicant is an individual, the name, age, date of birth
and residence address of the applicant.
      2.   Where the applicant is a partnership, whether the partnership is a
general or limited partnership, and the name, age, date of birth and residence
address of each partner and whether such partner is a general or limited
partner.
      3.   Where the applicant is a corporation for profit, or a limited
liability company, the following:
         (a)   The date of incorporation or organization;
         (b)   State of incorporation or organization;
         (c)   Objects for which organized;
         (d)   Name, date of birth and residence address of each officer and
director if a corporation or manager and member if a limited liability company;
         (e)   Name, date of birth and residence address of each stockholder
owning more than five percent (5%) of the voting stock of the corporation or
member of a limited liability company owning more than five percent (5%) of the
membership interest;
         (f)   The name, date of birth and residence address of the resident
manager of the establishment and location for which the license is sought.
      4.   If the applicant is a club or corporation not for profit, the date
of organization or incorporation, object for which organized, name, date of
birth and residence address of each officer and director of the club or
corporation, and the name, date of birth and residence address of the resident
manager of the location for which the license is sought as designated by
corporation or club.
      5.   If the applicant is a corporation, the application shall have
attached to it a copy of the most recent annual report filed by the corporation
with the Secretary of State of Illinois, or if the corporation shall have been
organized for a period of time less than one year, a copy of the articles of
incorporation.
      6.   If the applicant is a limited liability company, the application
shall have attached to it a copy of the most recent annual report filed by the
limited liability company with the Secretary of State of Illinois, or if the
limited liability company shall have been organized for a period of time less
than one year, a copy of the articles of organization.
      7.   If the applicant is an individual, a statement as to the citizenship
of the applicant, place of birth of the applicant, and if naturalized citizen,
the time and place of naturalization.
      8.   The location and description of the premises or place of business
which is to be operated under such license.
      9.   A statement as to whether the applicant has made a similar
application for a similar license on premises other than described in this
application in any jurisdiction, and the disposition of such application.
      10.   A statement that the applicant has never been convicted of a felony
and is not disqualified to receive a license by reason of any matter or thing
contained in this chapter or under the laws of Illinois or ordinances of the
village.
      11.   Whether a previous liquor license issued to the applicant by any
state or subdivision thereof or by the federal government has been revoked, and
the reasons therefor.
      12.   A statement that the applicant will not violate the laws of the
State of Illinois or the United States, or any ordinance of the Village in the
conduct of the business to receive the license.
      13.   Where the applicant is a corporation for profit, a corporation not
for profit, a limited liability company or a club, the application shall be
signed by the chief executive officer and by the person designated as a
resident manager, and signature of the resident manager shall constitute an
acknowledgment by the resident manager of the requirements for operation as a
licensee under this chapter and of the laws of the state.
      14.   Where the applicant is a partnership, the application shall be
signed by all general partners.
   (B)   Application for a new license shall be submitted to the office of the
village clerk for filing at least thirty (30) days prior to the proposed
effective date of the license. Applications for renewal licenses shall be
submitted to the office of the village clerk for filing at least thirty (30)
days prior to the effective date of the renewed license. Upon filing of such
applications, the Liquor Control Commissioner is authorized to direct the chief
of police to investigate the qualifications of the applicant, and report
findings to the Liquor Control Commissioner. In the event that the Liquor
Control Commissioner shall determine that the license application, new or
renewal, should be denied, a copy of any report of investigation submitted by
the chief of police shall be delivered to the applicant with the statement of
denial. Any applicant whose application is denied may request a hearing, and
such request shall be in writing and submitted to the Liquor Control
Commissioner within seven (7) days after service of the notice of denial. The
Liquor Control Commissioner shall schedule a hearing for the denied applicant
promptly, and shall conduct the hearing in accordance with the requirements
applicable to proceedings against license holders for violations. (Ord. 753, 9-
8-2020)
3-5-5: RESTRICTIONS ON ISSUANCE OF LICENSE:
   (A)   No alcoholic liquor license shall be issued to:
      1.   A person who is not a resident of the village if operating as a sole
proprietorship. The residency requirement shall not apply to a partnership,
corporation or limited liability company and a local manager is not required;
      2.   A person who is not of good character and reputation in the
community;
      3.   A person who is not a citizen of the United States;
      4.   A person who has been convicted of a felony under any federal or
state law, unless the state liquor control commission determines that such
person has been sufficiently rehabilitated to warrant the public trust after
considering matters set forth in such person's application and the commission
investigation;
      5.   A person who has been convicted of being the keeper or is keeping a
house of ill fame;
      6.   A person who has been convicted of pandering or other crime or
misdemeanor opposed to decency and morality;
      7.   A person whose license issued under this chapter has been revoked
for cause;
      8.   A person who, at the time of application for renewal of any license
issued hereunder, would not be eligible for such license upon a first
application;
      9.   A partnership, if any general partner thereof, or any limited
partner thereof owning more than five percent (5%) of the interest in such
partnership or more than five percent (5%) of the assets of such partnership,
would not be eligible to receive a license hereunder for any reason;
      10.   A corporation or limited liability company, if any member, officer,
manager or director thereof, or any stockholder or stockholders owning in the
aggregate more than five percent of the stock of such corporation or membership
interests of such limited liability company, would not be eligible to receive a
license hereunder for any reason other than citizenship in the village;
      11.   A corporation or limited liability company unless it is
incorporated or organized in Illinois, or unless it is a foreign corporation or
foreign limited liability company which is qualified under the Illinois
Business Corporation Act, as may be amended or the Illinois Limited Liability
Act, as may be amended, and is authorized to transact business in Illinois. The
liquor control commissioner shall permit and accept from an applicant for a
license proof prepared from the Secretary of State's website that the
corporation or limited liability company is in good standing and is qualified
under the Illinois Business Corporation Act or the Illinois Limited Liability
Act to transact business in Illinois;
      12.   A person whose place of business is conducted by a manager or agent
unless the manager or agent possesses the same qualifications required of a
licensee;
      13.   A person who has been convicted of a violation of any federal or
state law concerning the manufacture, possession or sale of alcoholic liquor,
or has forfeited his or her bond to appear in court to answer charges for any
such violation;
      14.   A person who does not beneficially own the premises for which a
license is sought, or does not have a written lease with the owner of the
premises for the full period for which the license is to be issued;
      15.   No law enforcing public official, including the Liquor Control
Commissioner or member of the Board of Trustees shall have a direct interest in
the manufacture, sale or distribution of alcoholic liquor, except that a
license may be granted to such official in relation to premises that are not
located within the village if the issuance of such license is approved by the
state liquor control commission, and except that a license may be granted to
any member of the Board of Trustees in relation to premises that are located
within the Village if (i) the sale of alcoholic liquor pursuant to the license
is incidental to the selling of food; (ii) the issuance of the license is
approved by the state liquor control commission; (iii) the issuance of the
license is in accordance with all applicable local ordinances in effect with
the Village; and, (iv) the member of the Board of Trustees granted a license
does not vote on alcoholic liquor issues pending before the Board of Trustees.
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this subsection (A)1 to the contrary, a
member of the Board of Trustees may have a direct interest in the manufacture,
sale or distribution of alcoholic liquor, as long as he or she is not a law
enforcing public official, or village board president, or president of a county
board. To prevent any conflict of interest, the member of the Board of Trustees
with the direct interest in the manufacture, sale or distribution of alcoholic
liquor shall not participate in any meeting, hearings or decisions on matters
impacting the manufacture, sale or distribution of alcoholic liquor;
      16.   A person who is not a beneficial owner of the business to be
operated by the licensee;
      17.   A person who has been convicted of a gambling offense under the
Illinois Criminal Code as it may be amended from time to time;
      18.   A person or entity to whom a federal wagering stamp has been issued
by the federal government, unless the person or entity is eligible to be issued
a license under the Illinois Raffles Act, or the Illinois Pull Tabs and
Jargames Act;
      19.   A person who intends to sell alcoholic liquors for use or
consumption on his or her licensed retail premises who does not have or
maintain liquor insurance coverage (dram shop insurance) for such premises in
an amount that is at least equal to the maximum liability amounts set forth in
Chapter 235, Act 6, Section 21(G) of the Illinois Compiled Statutes as may be
amended from time to time.
   (B)   No license shall be issued to any person for the sale at retail of any
alcoholic liquor at any store or other place of business where the majority of
customers are minors of school age or where the principal business transacted
consisted of school books, school supplies, food, lunches or drinks for such
minors.
   (C)   No license shall be issued to any person, firm or corporation which
would be in violation of the provisions of section 6-11 of the Illinois Liquor
Act of 1934, as amended (Chapter 235, Act 5 of the Illinois Compiled Statutes).
(Ord. 753, 9-8-2020)
3-5-6: CLASSIFICATION AND FEES:
Such licenses shall be, and are hereby, divided into six (6) classes and fees
as follows:
   (A)   Class A license, which shall authorize the retail sale on the premises
of alcoholic liquors in any tavern for consumption on the premises, as well as
other retail sales of such liquor. The fee for the first year of issuance for a
class A license shall be five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), which fee for the
first year of issuance shall be paid in one lump sum and not prorated
semiannually. The annual renewal fee for a class A license shall be one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00), which shall be paid in semiannual payments of
five hundred dollars ($500.00) each.
   (B)   Class B license, which shall authorize the retail sale on the premises
of alcoholic liquors in any tavern, for consumption on the premises where sold
only. The fee for the first year of issuance for a class B license shall be
five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), which fee for the first year of issuance
shall be paid in one lump sum and not prorated semiannually. The annual renewal
fee for a class B license shall be six hundred dollars ($600.00), which shall
be paid in semiannual payments of three hundred dollars ($300.00) each.
   (C)   Class C license, which shall authorize the retail sale of alcoholic
liquors in sealed original packages, and not for consumption on the premises
where sold. The fee for the first year of issuance of a class C license shall
be five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), which fee for the first year of issuance
shall be paid in one lump sum and not prorated semiannually. The annual renewal
fee for a class C license shall be five hundred dollars ($500.00), which shall
be paid in semiannual payments of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) each.
   (D)   Class D license, which shall authorize the retail sale on the premises
of alcoholic liquors in any club, for consumption on the premises. The fee for
the first year of issuance for a class D license shall be five thousand dollars
($5,000.00), which fee for the first year of issuance shall be paid in one lump
sum and not prorated semi-annually. The annual renewal fee for a class D
license shall be six hundred dollars ($600.00), which shall be paid in
semiannual payments of three hundred dollars ($300.00) each.
   (E)   Class E license, which shall authorize the retail sale on the premises
of alcoholic liquors in any restaurant for consumption on the premises. The
liquor control commissioner shall have access at all reasonable times to
inspect the records of the licensee. The fee for the first year of issuance for
a class E license shall be five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), which fee for the
first year of issuance shall be paid in one lump sum and not prorated
semiannually. The annual renewal fee for a class E license shall be six hundred
dollars ($600.00) per annum, which shall be paid in semiannual payments of
three hundred dollars ($300.00) each.
   (F)   Class F license, which shall authorize the retail sale on the premises
of alcoholic liquors in any restaurant or club for consumption on the premises
as well as other retail sales of such liquor. The liquor control commissioner
shall have access at all reasonable times to inspect the records of the
licensee. The fee for the first year of issuance for a class F license shall be
five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), which fee for the first year of issuance
shall be paid in one lump sum and not prorated semiannually. The annual renewal
fee for a class F license shall be one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per annum,
which shall be paid in semiannual payments of five hundred dollars ($500.00)
each. (Ord. 753, 9-8-2020)
3-5-7: EFFECT OF TRANSFERS ON THE FEE FOR THE FIRST YEAR OF ISSUANCE OF A
LICENSE:
   (A)   The fee for the first year of issuance for any license shall not be
assessed whenever a current licensee changes the location of his or her
business.
   (B)   The fee for the first year of issuance of any license shall not be
assessed whenever a current licensee, changes the manner in which he or she
sells alcoholic liquor, whether or not he or she changes premises, and whether
or not a more or less restrictive license is required or any other license
permitted under section
3-5-6 is issued to the licensee.
   (C)   1.   A fee for the first year of issuance of any license shall not be
assessed upon the sale, transfer, exchange, assumption, or assignment of the
assets, inventory, equipment, fixtures, good will, real estate, or accounts
receivable, or any part thereof of a business licensed under this chapter,
engaged, primarily or secondarily, in the sale of alcoholic liquor, only if the
purchaser, transferee, or assignee continues to sell alcoholic liquor on the
premises described in the seller's, transferor's, or assignor's application and
license; nor shall a fee for the first year of issuance of any license be
assessed if said purchaser, transferee or assignee continues to sell alcoholic
liquor in the same manner as the seller, transferor, or assignor, which is
intended to mean, if alcoholic liquor was sold by the seller, transferor or
assignor for consumption on the premises, then the purchaser, transferee or
assignee shall continue to sell in like manner. If alcoholic liquor was sold by
the seller, transferor, or assignor in sealed original packages not for
consumption on premises where sold, then the purchaser, transferee or assignee
shall continue to sell in that manner.
      2.   Notwithstanding anything to the contrary or herein, a fee for the
first year of issuance of any license shall be assessed to any applicant if any
one of the following shall occur:
   a.   The license has been revoked for any reason, regardless of whether
there has been a sale as previously described herein.
   b.   If a current license has not been renewed for any reason, regardless of
whether there has been a sale as described herein, unless the exception set
forth in subsection (C) of this section applies.
   c.   If a license has been suspended and following the suspension, the
license has not been renewed for any reason, regardless of whether there has
been a sale as described herein.
   d.   A fee for the first year of issuance of a license shall not be assessed
in the event a license has not been renewed for a period of less than one year,
and the license fee due for the year the license was not renewed is paid in
full before issuance of the new license by the licensee or a purchaser,
transferee or assignee of the licensees' business and assets. This exception
shall not apply unless all license fees are paid and there is no lapse of
payment for a license. (Ord. 753, 9-8-2020)
3-5-8: TERM OF LICENSE; PRORATING FEES; RENEWAL OF LICENSE:
Such license shall be issued to terminate at the end of the half of the fiscal
year of the village within which the same is issued. Such license shall
terminate on April 30 or October 31, whichever month comes first, next
following its issuance. The fee for the first year of issuance of any license
shall not be prorated but a credit for this next year's annual fee shall be
credited in an amount determined by the Liquor Control Commissioner. The fee
for the first year of issuance shall be considered a payment for the license
fee for a period of one (1) full year from the first day of the month in which
the five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) first year of issuance fee is paid. Any
fee other than the fee for the first year of issuance of any license may be
reduced in proportion to the full calendar months which have expired in the
semiannual period prior to the issuance of the license. A licensee may renew
his or her license at the expiration thereof; provided that he or she is then
qualified to receive a license and the premises for which renewal license is
sought is suitable for the purposes, and provided further that the renewal
privilege herein provided for shall not be construed as a vested right which
shall in any case prevent the village from decreasing the number of licenses to
be issued within its jurisdiction. (Ord. 753, 9-8-2020)
3-5-9: DISPOSITION OF FEES:
All such fees shall be paid to the village office at the time application is
made, and shall be forthwith turned over to the treasurer. In the event the
license applied for is denied, the fee shall be returned to the applicant. If
the license is granted, then the fee shall be deposited in the general
corporation fund, or in such other fund as designated by the board of trustees.
(Ord. 753, 9-8-2020)
3-5-10: CONSUMPTION ON PREMISES:
It shall be unlawful for anyone not having a class A, B, D, E or F license to
sell, offer for sale, alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises where
sold, or to permit the same to be consumed on the premises where sold. (Ord.
753, 9-8-2020)
3-5-11: RECORD:
The Liquor Control Commissioner shall keep, or cause to be kept, a complete
record of all such licenses issued by him or her and shall pay to the village
clerk all license fees received within forty eight (48) hours after the
issuance of such licenses. (Ord. 753, 9-8-2020)
3-5-12: PRIVILEGES GRANTED BY LICENSE:
   (A)   A license shall be purely a personal privilege good for not to exceed
the end of the semiannual period of the calendar year next following its
issuance, unless sooner revoked as provided in this chapter, and shall not
constitute property, nor shall it be subject to attachment, garnishment or
execution, nor shall it be alienable or transferable voluntarily or
involuntarily, nor subject to being encumbered or hypothecated. Such license
shall not descend by the laws of testate or intestate devolution, but it shall
cease upon the death of the licensee; provided, that executors or
administrators of the estate of any deceased licensee and the trustee of any
bankrupt licensee, when such estate consists, in part, of alcoholic liquor, may
continue the business of the sale or manufacture of alcoholic liquor by order
of the appropriate court, and may exercise the privileges of the deceased, or
bankrupt, until the expiration of such license, but no longer than six (6)
months after the death or bankruptcy of such licensee. A refund shall be made
of that portion of the license fee paid for any period in which the licensee
shall be prevented from operating under such license in accordance with the
provisions of this section.
   (B)   Any licensee may renew his or her license at the expiration thereof;
provided, that he or she is then qualified to receive a license, and the
premises for which such renewal license is sought is suitable for such
purposes; and provided, further, that the renewal privilege herein provided for
shall not be construed as a vested right which shall in any case prevent the
Liquor Control Commissioner of the Board of Trustees from decreasing the number
of licenses to be issued within the Village. (Ord. 753, 9-8-2020)
3-5-13: CHANGE OF LOCATION:
A liquor license granted under this chapter shall permit the sale of alcoholic
liquor only in the premises described in the application and license. Such
location may be changed only if a written permit to make such changes is issued
by the Liquor Control Commissioner. No changes of location shall be permitted
unless the proposed new location is a proper one for the retail sale of
alcoholic liquor under the laws of this state, and the provisions of this
chapter. (Ord. 753, 9-8-2020)
3-5-14: SANITARY CONDITIONS:
All licensed premises used for the sale or storage of alcoholic liquors or sale
of food shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition and shall be provided
with adequate facilities that comply with all applicable laws and regulations
from every applicable jurisdiction, and shall be kept in full compliance with
the provisions of this code and the laws of the State of Illinois and the
Ordinances of Whiteside County, Illinois and any and all other applicable
jurisdictions regulating the condition of premises used for the storage or sale
of food and alcoholic liquors for human consumption. The premises shall be
maintained in a thoroughly clean and sanitary condition at all times. (Ord.
753, 9-8-2020)
3-5-15: RESTRICTIONS ON USE OF PREMISES:
No one operating or conducting a tavern shall serve or permit to be served any
alcoholic liquors of any kind in any booth or private apartment of any kind,
the interior of which is shut off from general public view, or serve any such
liquor to any person while said person is shut off from public view by doors,
curtains, screens, partitions or other device of any kind, and no such private
apartment, booths, screens or curtains may be maintained as a part of or
adjacent to any tavern. (Ord. 753, 9-8-2020)
3-5-16: RESTRICTIONS:
   (A)   No license of any class shall be issued for the sale at retail of any
alcoholic liquor within one hundred feet (100') of any church, school,
hospital, home for the aged or indigent persons or for veterans, their wives or
families, or any military or naval station.
   (B)   No alcoholic liquor shall be sold on any premises that has access from
the premises to any part of the same building used for living or lodging and
kept accessible for use by the public, except where the access from the
licensed premises leads to living quarters of the licensee and is restricted to
their and their guests' personal use.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful to peddle alcoholic liquor in the village.
   (D)   No licensee shall sell, give away, or deliver alcoholic liquor to any
minor or to any intoxicated person. No minor shall be allowed to serve
alcoholic liquor in any place licensed under the provisions of this chapter.
The legal definition of a "minor" shall, for the purposes of this chapter, be
the same as provided in the Illinois Compiled Statutes, which statutory
definition is hereby expressly adopted.
   (E)   No licensee shall employ or permit any minor to act as his or her
agent, barkeeper, clerk, employee or entertainer in or about any premises
licensed under this chapter.
   (F)   No curb service for the sale of alcoholic liquor shall be carried on
in connection with premises for which a license has been granted for the sale
of intoxicating liquors for consumption upon the premises, either upon a public
street or private property contiguous to such premises so licensed.
   (G)   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of twenty one (21)
years to be in or remain on any premises licensed under this chapter as a class
A or class B licensee, provided that this subsection shall not apply to any
person who is accompanied by his or her parent or guardian, and further
provided that this subsection shall not apply to a person eighteen (18),
nineteen (19) or twenty (20) years of age if accompanied by his or her lawful
spouse provided the lawful spouse is twenty one (21) years of age or older.
Nothing herein shall be construed to permit or encourage any eighteen (18),
nineteen (19) or twenty (20) year old person to drink alcoholic liquors.
   (H)   If a license is not used by a licensee within a period of sixty (60)
days from the date of its issuance, the license is subject to revocation in the
discretion of the liquor control commissioner, provided further that if the use
of a license lapses for a period of sixty (60) days, the license is subject to
revocation in the discretion of the liquor control commissioner. Any unused
portion of the license fee shall be refunded when such license is revoked or
canceled as provided in this subsection or the preceding subsection. The
provisions of this subsection shall not apply to a business holding a class D
license which operates seasonally or is not open for business during any part
of the calendar year.
   (I)   No person or licensee shall disturb, tend to disturb or aid in
disturbing the peace of others by violent, tumultuous, offensive or
obstreperous conduct, and no person or licensee shall knowingly permit such
conduct upon any premises owned or possessed by him or her or under his or her
control and licensed to sell alcoholic liquor. All licensees shall assist the
village police department and other law enforcement agencies in any manner as
directed to quell any activities prohibited under any village ordinance or
criminal statute by reporting said conduct as soon as possible and shall
cooperate with the village in the investigation and prosecution of violators of
this subsection.
   (J)   Every act or omission of whatsoever nature constituting a violation of
any of the provisions of this chapter or the state liquor control act by any
officer, director, manager or other agent or employee of any licensee shall be
deemed and held to be the act of the licensee, and the licensee shall be
punishable in the same manner as if said act or omission had been done or
omitted by the licensee. (Ord. 753, 9-8-2020)
3-5-17: CLOSING HOURS:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any class licensee to sell, or offer for sale
any alcoholic liquors in the village at any time or hours other than the
following:
      1.   Monday through Saturday seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to one o'clock (1:
00) A.M. on the following day.
      2.   Sunday from ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. to eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M.
   (B)   The Liquor Control Commissioner shall have the authority in his or her
discretion to extend the hours for the sale of alcoholic liquors on New Year's
Eve, New Year's Day and such other times and hours on any other day of the year
by an affirmative vote of the board of trustees.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for class A or class B licensee to remain open to
the public for a period in excess of fifteen (15) minutes after the prohibited
hours for a grace period after closing to clear out the patrons. No alcoholic
liquor shall be consumed by any customers of the establishment and, further,
the establishment will be responsible for the removal of alcoholic liquor from
the customer areas fifteen (15) minutes after the prohibited hours.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for a licensee to be open for business or admit
the public on any premises licensed under this chapter during the hours when
sale of alcohol liquors are unlawful except class A, B, D, E and F licensees
may, during prohibited hours each Sunday from five thirty o'clock (5:30) A.M.
to ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. and each Monday through Saturday from five thirty
o'clock (5:30) A.M. to seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. only ("Prohibited Hours"),
remain open for service of food only and admit the public into the premises
under the following conditions:
      1.   No alcoholic liquor shall be served in or taken to the part of the
premises open to the public during the prohibited hours.
      2.   No alcoholic liquor shall be consumed by any customers of the
licensee or any member of the public on the premises during prohibited hours.
      3.   A conspicuous sign, pedestal, curtain or identification marked
"closed" shall be placed on the bar or adjacent to the bar and any other
location determined by the liquor control commissioner to notify all customers
and the public that no alcoholic liquor shall be sold during prohibited hours,
and such shall remain in place at all times during prohibited hours. (Ord. 753,
9-8-2020)
3-5-18: POSTING LICENSE:
Every licensee shall cause his or her license to be framed and kept in plain
view in a conspicuous place on the licensed premises. (Ord. 753, 9-8-2020)
3-5-19: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
The Liquor Control Commissioner may suspend or revoke any license issued by the
village, for any violation of any provision of this chapter or any violation of
any law of the state relating to the business of the licensee, or violation of
any rule or regulation established by the state liquor commission. All
proceedings concerning a suspension or revocation of a liquor license shall be
recorded by a certified court reporter. No transcription of such record shall
be made unless requested in writing by an interested party who shall also order
a copy of such transcription for all other interested parties and one official
transcript for filing with the state commission. Appeals from the decision of
the local liquor control commissioner shall be as provided in Chapter 235 of
the Illinois Compiled Statutes, as amended, however, appeals shall not be heard
de novo, but shall be made upon the record provided for herein, all as
authorized by Chapter 235 of the Illinois Compiled Statutes for appeals. (Ord.
753, 9-8-2020)
3-5-20: DRAMSHOP INSURANCE:
It shall be required prior to the issuance of any license and during the term
of any license, that the licensee maintain full coverage dramshop insurance and
shall further file a certificate of such insurance with the liquor control
commissioner indicating that dramshop insurance is carried by the licensee and
further providing that the liquor control commissioner shall be notified of any
change in such insurance, including termination. (Ord. 753, 9-8-2020)
3-5-21: TEMPORARY LICENSES:
   (A)   Purpose: A temporary liquor license may be issued for a limited period
of time for the purpose of allowing the licensee to raise funds for charitable,
educational or civic purposes.
   (B)   Licensees: A temporary license may be issued to not for profit
corporations or organizations operating under the laws of the state for
charitable, educational or civic purposes. No license shall be issued unless
the applicant has been incorporated or organized for a period of not less than
one year prior to making application for such license. Application shall be
submitted to the Liquor Control Commissioner at least sixty (60) days prior to
the date of intended sale or distribution of alcoholic liquor unless three-
fourths (3/4) of the board of trustees shall approve a shorter application
period and shall be made in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The
board of trustees, if approved by three-fourths (3/4) of the trustees then
holding office, may approve a shorter period than one year of existence for any
prospective licensee making application, if the board of trustees believes that
granting a temporary license to an organization or not for profit corporation,
which has been in existence not less than one year prior to making application,
would be in the best interests of the village and would further the intent of
the temporary license ordinance of the village and would further a charitable,
educational, or civic purpose, and such benefits would outweigh any detriment
which may be caused by granting a temporary license to a not for profit
corporation or organization which has not been in existence under the laws of
the state of Illinois for the stated purposes for a period of not less than one
year prior to making the application.
   (C)   Term Of License: A temporary license may be issued for a period not to
exceed three (3) consecutive calendar days and shall be subject to the
provisions of this chapter regarding time of sale, unless the liquor control
commissioner further restricts the time of sale. No applicant shall receive
more than three (3) temporary licenses in any calendar year.
   (D)   Application: In addition to the usual requirements the applicant shall
include the following information:
      1.   The location for which the license is sought;
      2.   A copy of the written, signed lease or rental agreement or other
written authority for the use of the location if the applicant is not the owner
of said location;
      3.   A statement setting forth the purpose for the issuance of said
license;
      4.   A statement setting forth the applicant's arrangements for crowd
control;
      5.   Certificate of insurance showing evidence of dramshop and liability
insurance coverage;
      6.   A request for specific times and dates for the term of said license.
   (E)   Fees: The fee for a temporary license shall be twenty five dollars
($25.00) for each calendar day or part thereof for which the license is issued
and shall be paid in full at the time the license is issued.
   (F)   Number: The number of temporary licenses shall not exceed one per day.
(Ord. 753, 9-8-2020)
3-5-22: SUPPLEMENTAL LICENSE, OUTDOOR USE:
   (A)   Any licensee holding a valid license under this chapter authorizing
the retail sale on the premises of alcoholic liquors for consumption on the
premises may also obtain a supplemental license for the retail sale of
alcoholic liquors in an outdoor use area adjacent to the licensed premises if
such licensee otherwise meets the requirements of this section and is granted a
supplemental license as provided herein. An application shall be submitted for
a supplemental license which application shall include all information
requested by the liquor control commissioner and the following:
      1.   A scaled drawing of the proposed outdoor use area, including all
improvements, surrounding fence and its specific boundaries.
      2.   The method by which the outdoor use area shall be confined to
prohibit the removal of alcoholic liquor from the outdoor use area and to
constrict noise from the outdoor use area to prevent disturbances of the
general public.
      3.   Plans for a reasonably substantial structure across which alcoholic
liquor shall be served which shall afford bartenders reasonable protection from
patrons unless the outdoor use area is served directly from the indoor licensed
premises.
      4.   Locations of at least two (2) exits from the outdoor use area, only
one of which shall be through a building and such exits shall be approved by
the building inspector of the village.
   (B)   A supplemental license shall not be issued for any location in a
residence zoning district of the village. Any live music shall be permitted but
must cease on or before ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. each day. Noise from the
outdoor use area shall not disturb the general public.
   (C)   The first year of issuance and the annual renewal fee shall be one
hundred dollars ($100.00) for a supplemental license issued under this section.
Such fee shall be in addition to all other license fees required under this
chapter and shall be paid in one lump sum.
   (D)   The outdoor use area shall be confined by a boundary line fence a
minimum of four feet (4') high in compliance with all ordinances of the village
and constructed in a manner approved by the board of trustees. The licensee
shall be responsible to ensure that no patron, employee, or other person
removes alcoholic liquor from the outdoor use area or the licensed premises.
The supplemental license shall define the specific boundary of the outdoor use
area and sporting activities area. The approval by the board of trustees to
construct a boundary line fence a minimum of four feet (4') high as required
under this subsection shall be the only approvals required by the licensee. The
licensee shall not be required to obtain any variance or permit under title 9,
chapter 11, "Fences And Walls", of this code, or under any other permits
required under village ordinances.
   (E)   All food prepared or served in the outdoor use area or in the indoor
area shall be prepared, distributed and consumed in the outdoor use area or
indoor area in accordance with all applicable health rules and regulations of
the Village, Whiteside County, State of Illinois and the United States.
   (F)   Any person holding a valid supplemental license under this section may
be granted permission from the liquor control commissioner to use the outdoor
use area for the purpose of conducting basketball, volleyball and other similar
sports activities in the outdoor use area during times allowed. Sporting
activities shall only be allowed in the outdoor use area. Use of the outdoor
use area for sporting activities shall be subject to such written rules and
regulations established from time to time by the Board of Trustees.
   (G)   No special lighting devices shall be constructed or used in the
limited outdoor use area without permission from the liquor control
commissioner. The licensee shall keep the limited outdoor use area free of
debris.
   (H)   The term of the supplemental license shall be as prescribed in section
3-5-8 of this chapter, but such supplemental license shall be reviewable and
subject to termination at any time in the sole discretion of the board of
trustees.
   (I)   No supplemental license shall be issued or renewed if the board of
trustees finds that it would alter or has altered the essential character of
the neighborhood, would cause or has caused undue traffic or parking problems
in the neighborhood or has caused a noise problem in the neighborhood.
   (J)   Each supplemental license shall be issued by the liquor control
commissioner only after an affirmative recommendation by the board of trustees.
The board may establish such specific rules and regulations for the use of each
supplemental license issued under this section as the board deems in its sole
discretion to be necessary based upon the specific circumstances of each
licensee, the licensed premises and the outdoor use area. (Ord. 753, 9-8-2020)
3-5-23: CONDUCT ON PREMISES:
   (A)   General: In addition to any other requirement of this chapter, this
code, or other applicable law or ordinance, the licensee shall have the
following duties:
      1.   Disorderly Or Dangerous Persons: No licensee shall permit any person
to enter into or remain upon the licensed or accessory premises who is engaged
in conduct which, under the circumstances, constitutes, creates or which would
tend to create a breach of the peace or any person that commits or attempts to
commit a battery, assault, indecent exposure, criminal damage to property, or
other violation of federal, state or local law, upon the licensed or accessory
premises.
      2.   Discrimination: No licensee shall discriminate in service because of
race, sex, religion, national origin or physical handicap.
      3.   Violations Of City, State Or Federal Laws:
         (a)   No licensee shall permit or allow the violation of any
ordinance, state statute or federal law upon the licensed or accessory premises
by any person.
         (b)   No licensee shall violate any ordinance, state statute or
federal law upon the licensed or accessory premises.
      4.   Fighting Prohibited; Licensees Conduct: Fighting, by patrons, either
inside a licensed premise or any place outside the premises that is owned or
leased by and used for the licensed premises or on any public way adjacent to
the licensed premises is prohibited. For the purpose of this section,
"fighting" shall mean any threatening or touching of another person which
provokes or tends to provoke a breach of the peace.
      5.   Entertainment Activities: No licensee shall allow, offer, or sponsor
on the licensed premises any entertainment, exhibition, performance,
demonstration, activity, sport or exercise that involves any type of physical
contact or conduct between individuals such as wrestling, boxing, or fighting.
      6.   Duty To Control: The licensee shall be obligated and shall have the
duty to control the licensed premises to prohibit any person on the licensed
premises from being injured by any other person in the licensed premises. (Ord.
753, 9-8-2020)
3-5-24: REGISTRATION AND DOCUMENTATION OF RETAIL SALES OF KEG ALCOHOLIC
BEVERAGES:
   (A)   "Keg" shall mean any metal, wooden, plastic, paper or other container
designed to hold four (4) or more gallons of liquid and contains any amount of
alcoholic liquor.
   (B)   Each purchaser of a keg shall provide a current government issued
photo identification and the purchaser's name, address, and individual
identification number to the licensee who shall record and document that
information in a log. The log shall also contain the individual keg
identification assigned to the keg by the licensee, and include the date of
sale and indicate that the photo identification that was produced was matched
to the purchaser. The log shall also record the name of the person responsible
for the sale of each keg sold by the licensee. The information required under
this section shall be maintained by the licensee for a minimum period of six
(6) months after the date of sale.
   (C)   All licensees shall assign, record and attach to each keg sold for off
site consumption an individual keg registration label or sticker ("sticker"),
before the sale and the sticker shall also include a prominent warning stating
that it is illegal to alter, damage or remove the sticker from the keg.
   (D)   Licensees of keg alcohol shall obtain the individual keg
identification stickers from the Whiteside County sheriffs department which
shall record to whom the stickers are distributed and shall restrict the
distribution of the stickers. (Ord. 753, 9-8-2020)
CHAPTER 6
OCCUPATION TAXES
SECTION:
3-6-1: Retailers' Occupation Tax
3-6-2: Service Occupation Tax
3-6-3: Municipal Use Tax
3-6-4: Municipal Utility Tax
3-6-5: Telecommunications Infrastructure Maintenance Fee
3-6-6: Municipal Electric Utility Tax
3-6-7: Locally Imposed And Administered Tax Rights And Responsibility
3-6-8: Cable And Video Service Provider Fee
3-6-9: Municipal Cannabis Retailers’ Occupation Tax
3-6-1: RETAILERS' OCCUPATION TAX:
   (A)   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of
selling tangible personal property at retail in the village at the rate of one
percent (1%) of the gross receipts of such sales made in the course of such
business while this section is in effect, in accordance with the provisions of
65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-1.
   (B)   Every such person engaged in such business in the village shall file
on or before the last day of each calendar month, the report to the state
department of revenue required by section three of "an act in relation to a tax
upon persons engaged in the business of selling tangible personal property to
purchasers for use or consumption" approved June 28, 1933, as amended.
   (C)   At the time such report is filed, there shall be paid to the state
department of revenue the amount of tax hereby imposed on account of the
receipts from sales of tangible personal property during the preceding month.
(Ord. 276, 8-26-1969)
3-6-2: SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX:
   (A)   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in this municipality
in the business of making sales of service at the rate of one percent (1%) of
the cost price of all tangible property transferred by said serviceman either
in the form of tangible personal property or real estate as an incident to a
sale of service, in accordance with the provisions of 65 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/8-11-5.
   (B)   Every supplier or serviceman required to account for the municipal
service occupation tax for the benefit of this municipality shall file, on or
before the last day of each calendar month, the report to the state department
of revenue required by section nine of the "service occupation tax act",
approved July 10, 1961, as amended.
   (C)   At the time such report is filed, there shall be paid to the state
department of revenue, the amount of tax hereby imposed. (Ord. 275, 8-26-1969)
3-6-3: MUNICIPAL USE TAX:
   (A)   A tax is hereby imposed in accordance with the provisions of 65
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-6 upon the privilege of using in the village
any item of tangible personal property which is purchased outside Illinois at
retail from a retailer, and which is titled or registered with an agency of
Illinois government. The tax shall be at a rate of one percent (1%) of the
selling price of such tangible property with "selling price" to have the
meaning as defined in the use tax act, approved July 14, 1955.
   (B)   Such tax shall be collected by the Illinois department of revenue for
all municipalities imposing the tax and shall be paid before the title or
certificate of registration for the personal property is issued. (1976 Code)
3-6-4: MUNICIPAL UTILITY TAX 1 :
   (A)   A tax is imposed on all persons engaged in the following occupations
or privileges:
      1.   Persons engaged in the business of transmitting messages by means of
electricity, at the rate of three and five-tenths percent (3.5%) of the gross
receipts from such business originating within the corporate limits of Erie.
      2.   Persons engaged in the business of distributing, supplying,
furnishing or selling gas for use or consumption within the corporate limits of
Erie, and not for resale, at the rate of three and five-tenths percent (3.5%)
of the gross receipts therefrom.
      3.   Persons engaged in the business of distributing, supplying,
furnishing or selling electricity for use or consumption within the corporate
limits of Erie and not for resale, at the rate of three and five-tenths percent
(3.5%) of the gross receipts therefrom.
   (B)   No tax is imposed by this section with respect to any transaction in
interstate commerce or otherwise to the extent to which such business may not,
under the constitution and statutes of the United States, be made subject to
taxation by this state or any political subdivision thereof; nor shall any
persons engaged in the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing or
selling gas, water or electricity, or engaged in the business of transmitting
messages be subject to taxation under the provisions of this section for such
transactions as are or may become subject to taxation under the provisions of
the "municipal retailers' occupation tax act" authorized by 65 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-1.
   (C)   Such tax shall be in addition to the payment of money, or value of
products or services furnished to this municipality by the taxpayer as
compensation for the use of its streets, alleys or other public places, or
installation and maintenance therein, thereon or thereunder of poles, wires,
pipes or other equipment used in the operation of the taxpayer's business.
   (D)   For the purposes of this section the following definitions shall
apply:
   GROSS RECEIPTS: The consideration received for the transmission of messages,
or for distributing, supplying, furnishing or selling gas or electricity for
use or consumption and not for resale, as the case may be; and for all services
rendered in connection therewith valued in money, whether received in money or
otherwise, including cash, credit, services and property of every kind and
material and for all services rendered therewith; and shall be determined
without any deduction on account of the cost of transmitting said messages
without any deduction on account of the cost of the service, product or
commodity supplied, the cost of materials used, labor or service cost or any
other expenses whatsoever.
   PERSON: Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership,
association, joint stock company, joint adventure, corporation, municipal
corporation or political subdivision of this state, or a receiver, trustee,
conservator or other representative appointed by order of any court.
   TRANSMITTING MESSAGES: In addition to the usual and popular meaning of
person to person communication, shall include the furnishing, for a
consideration, of services or facilities (whether owned or leased) or both, to
persons in connection with the transmission of messages where such persons do
not, in turn, receive any consideration in connection therewith, but shall not
include such furnishing of services or facilities to persons for the
transmission of messages to the extent that any such services or facilities for
the transmission of messages are furnished for a consideration, by such persons
to other persons, for the transmission of messages.
   (E)   This section shall take effect after publication and the tax provided
for herein shall be based on the "gross receipts", as herein defined, actually
paid to the taxpayer for services billed on or after September 1, 1978.
   (F)   On or before January 31, 1979, each taxpayer shall make a return to
the village treasurer for the months of October, November and December 1978,
stating:
      1.   His name;
      2.   His principal place of business;
      3.   His gross receipts during these months upon the basis of which the
tax is imposed;
      4.   Amount of tax;
      5.   Such other reasonable and related information as the corporate
authorities may require.
On or before the last day of every third month thereinafter, each taxpayer
shall make a like return to the village treasurer for a corresponding three (3)
month period.
   (G)   The taxpayer making the return herein provided for shall, at the time
of making such return, pay to the village treasurer, the amount of tax herein
imposed; provided, that in connection with any return the taxpayer may, if he
so elects, report and pay an amount based upon his total billings of business,
subject to the tax during the period for which the return is made (exclusive of
any amounts previously billed) with prompt adjustments of later payments based
upon any differences between such billings and the taxable gross receipts.
   (H)   If it shall appear that an amount of tax has been paid which was not
due under the provisions of this section, whether as the result of a mistake of
fact or an error of law, then such amount shall be credited against any tax
due, or to become due, under this section from the taxpayer who made the
erroneous payment; provided that no amounts erroneously paid more than three
(3) years prior to the filing of a claim therefor shall be so credited.
   (I)   No action to recover any amount of tax due under the provisions of
this section shall be commenced more than three (3) years after the due date of
such amount.
   (J)   Any taxpayer who fails to make a return, or who makes a fraudulent
return, or who wilfully violates any other provision of this section is guilty
of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not less than one
hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) and in
addition shall be liable in a civil action for the amount of tax due. (Ord.
324, 6-27-1978)
 
Notes
1 1. See subsections
  3-6-6(I) and (J) of this chapter.
3-6-5: TELECOMMUNICATIONS INFRASTRUCTURE MAINTENANCE FEE:
   (A)   Definitions: As used in this section, the following terms have the
following meanings:
GROSS CHARGES: The amount paid to a telecommunications retailer for the act or
privilege of originating or receiving telecommunications within the village,
and for all services rendered in connection therewith, valued in money whether
paid in money or otherwise, including cash, credits, services, and property of
every kind or nature, and shall be determined without any deduction on account
of the cost of such telecommunications, the cost of the materials used, labor
or service costs, or any other expense whatsoever. In case credit is extended,
the amount thereof shall be included only as and when paid. "Gross charges" for
private line service shall include charges imposed at each channel point within
the village, charges for the channel mileage between each channel point within
the village, and charges for that portion of the interstate interoffice channel
provided within the village. However, "gross charges" shall not include:
      1.   Any amounts added to a purchaser's bill because of a charge made
under: a) the fee imposed by this section, b) additional charges added to a
purchaser's bill under 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/9-221 or 5/9-222, c)
amounts collected under 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-17, d) the tax
imposed by the telecommunications excise tax act, e) 911 surcharges, or f) the
tax imposed by section 4251 of the internal revenue code;
      2.   Charges for a sent collect telecommunication received outside the
village;
      3.   Charges for leased time on equipment or charges for the storage of
data or information or subsequent retrieval or the processing of data or
information intended to change its form or content. Such equipment includes,
but is not limited to, the use of calculators, computers, data processing
equipment, tabulating equipment, or accounting equipment and also includes the
usage of computers under a time sharing agreement;
      4.   Charges for customer equipment, including such equipment that is
leased or rented by the customer from any source, wherein such charges are
disaggregated and separately identified from other charges;
      5.   Charges to business enterprises certified under 220 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/9-222.1 to the extent of such exemption and during the
period of time specified by the village;
      6.   Charges for telecommunications and all services and equipment
provided in connection therewith between a parent corporation and its wholly
owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, and only to the extent
that the charges between the parent corporation and wholly owned subsidiaries
or between wholly owned subsidiaries represent expense allocation between the
corporations and not the generation of profit other than a regulatory required
profit for the corporation rendering such services;
      7.   Bad debts ("bad debt" means any portion of a debt that is related to
a sale at retail for which gross charges are not otherwise deductible or
excludable that has become worthless or uncollectible, as determined under
applicable federal income tax standards; if the portion of the debt deemed to
be bad is subsequently paid, the retailer shall report and pay the tax on that
portion during the reporting period in which the payment is made);
      8.   Charges paid by inserting coins in coin operated telecommunications
devices; or
      9.   Charges for telecommunications and all services and equipment
provided to the village.
   PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY: Any municipal street, alley, water or public right of
way dedicated or commonly used for utility purposes, including utility
easements wherein the village has acquired the right and authority to locate or
permit the location of utilities consistent with telecommunications facilities.
"Public right of way" shall not include any real or personal village property
that is not specifically described in the previous sentence and shall not
include village buildings and other structures or improvements, regardless of
whether they are situated in the public right of way.
   RETAILER MAINTAINING A PLACE OF BUSINESS IN THIS STATE (Or Any Like Term):
Means and includes any retailer having or maintaining within the state of
Illinois, directly or by a subsidiary, an office, distribution facilities,
transmission facilities, sales office, warehouse, or other place of business,
or any agent or other representative operating within this state under the
authority of the retailer or its subsidiary, irrespective of whether such place
of business or agent or other representative is located here permanently or
temporarily, or whether such retailer or subsidiary is licensed to do business
in this state.
   SALE OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS AT RETAIL: The transmitting, supplying, or
furnishing of telecommunications and all services rendered in connection
therewith for a consideration, other than between a parent corporation and its
wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, when the gross
charge made by one such corporation to another such corporation is not greater
than the gross charge paid to the retailer for their use or consumption and not
for sale.
   SERVICE ADDRESS: The location of telecommunications equipment from which
telecommunications services are originated or at which telecommunications
services are received. If this is not a defined location, as in the case of
wireless telecommunications, paging systems, maritime systems, air to ground
systems, and the like, "service address" shall mean the location of the
customer's primary use of the telecommunications equipment as defined by the
location in Illinois where bills are sent.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS: Includes, but is not limited to, messages or information
transmitted through use of local, toll, and wide area telephone service,
channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter service, computer exchange
services, private line services, specialized mobile radio services, or any
other transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar means,
between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio,
satellite, or similar facilities. Unless the context clearly requires
otherwise, "telecommunications" shall also include "wireless
telecommunications" as hereinafter defined. "Telecommunications" shall not
include value added services in which computer processing applications are used
to act on the form, content, code, and protocol of the information for purposes
other than transmission. "Telecommunications" shall not include purchase of
telecommunications by a telecommunications service provider for use as a
component part of the service provided by him or her to the ultimate retail
consumer who originates or terminates the end to end communications. Retailer
access charges, right of access charges, charges for use of intercompany
facilities, and all telecommunications resold in the subsequent provision and
used as a component of, or integrated into, end to end telecommunications
service shall not be included in gross charges as sales for resale.
"Telecommunications" shall not include the provision of cable services through
a cable system as defined in the cable communications act of 1984 (47 USC
section 521 and following) as now or hereafter amended or cable or other
programming services subject to an open video system fee payable to the village
through an open video system as defined in the rules of the federal
communications commission (47 CDF 76.1550 and following) as now or hereafter
amended.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER: 1) Any telecommunications retailer; and 2) any
person that is not a telecommunications retailer that installs, owns, operates
or controls equipment in the public right of way that is used or designed to be
used to transmit telecommunications in any form.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS RETAILER OR RETAILER OR CARRIER: Means and includes every
person engaged in the business of making "sales of telecommunications at
retail" as defined in this section. The village may, in its discretion, upon
application, authorize the collection of the fee hereby imposed by any retailer
not maintaining a place of business within this state, who, to the satisfaction
of the village, furnishes adequate security to ensure collection and payment of
the fee. When so authorized, it shall be the duty of such retailer to pay the
fee upon all of the gross charges for telecommunications in the same manner and
subject to the same requirements as a retailer maintaining a place of business
within the village.
   WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS: Includes cellular mobile telephone services,
personal wireless services as defined in section 704(C) of the
telecommunications act of 1996 (Public Law no. 104-104), 42 USC section 332(c)
(7), as now or hereafter amended, including all commercial mobile radio
services, and paging services.
   (B)   Registration Of Telecommunications Providers:
      1.   Every "telecommunications provider" as defined by this section shall
register with the village within thirty (30) days after the effective date of
this section or becoming a telecommunications provider, whichever is later, on
a form to be provided by the village; provided, however, that any
telecommunications retailer that has filed a return pursuant to subsection (D)3
of this section shall be deemed to have registered in accordance with this
section.
      2.   Every telecommunications provider who has registered with the
village pursuant to subsection (B)1 of this section as an affirmative duty to
submit an amended registration form or current return as required by subsection
(D)3 of this section, as the case may be, to the village within thirty (30)
days from the date of the occurrence of any changes in the information provided
by the telecommunications provider in the registration form or most recent
return on file with the village.
   (C)   Fee Imposed:
      1.   A village telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee is
hereby imposed upon all telecommunications retailers in the amount of one
percent (1%) of all gross charges charged by the telecommunications retailer to
service addresses within the village for telecommunications originating or
received in the village.
      2.   Upon the effective date of the infrastructure maintenance fee
authorized in this section, the village infrastructure maintenance fee
authorized hereunder shall be the only fee or compensation for the use of all
public rights of way within the village by telecommunications retailers.
Imposition of the infrastructure maintenance fee provided under this section
does not, however, serve as a limitation on the levying of any taxes or
imposition of any fees otherwise authorized by law.
      3.   The village telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee
authorized by this section shall be collected, enforced, and administered as
set forth in subsection (D)4 of this section.
   (D)   Collection, Enforcement, And Administration:
      1.   A telecommunications retailer shall charge to and collect from each
customer an additional charge in an amount equal to the village infrastructure
maintenance fee attributable to that customer's service address.
      2.   Unless otherwise approved by the village president, the
infrastructure maintenance fee shall be remitted by the telecommunications
retailer to the village not later than the last day of the month subsequent to
the month in which a bill is issued to the customer; provided, however, that
the telecommunications retailer may retain an amount not to exceed two percent
(2%) of the village infrastructure maintenance fee collected by it to reimburse
itself for expenses incurred in accounting for and remitting the fee.
      3.   Remittance of the municipal infrastructure fee to the village shall
be accompanied by a return, in a form to be prescribed by the village
president, which shall contain such information as the village president may
reasonably require.
      4.   Any infrastructure maintenance fee required to be collected pursuant
to this section and any such infrastructure maintenance fee collected by such
telecommunications retailer shall constitute a debt owed by the
telecommunications retailer to the village. The charge imposed under subsection
(D)1 of this section by the telecommunications retailer pursuant to this
section shall constitute a debt of the purchaser to the telecommunications
retailer who provides such services until paid and, if unpaid, is recoverable
at law in the same manner as the original charge for such services.
      5.   If it shall appear that an amount of infrastructure maintenance fee
has been paid that was not due under the provisions of this section, whether as
a result of a mistake of fact or an error of law, then such amount shall be
credited against any infrastructure maintenance fee due, or to become due,
under this section, from the telecommunications retailer who made the erroneous
payment; provided, however, the village president may request, and
telecommunications retailer shall provide, written substantiation for such
credit. However, no claim for such credit may be made more than three (3) years
after the date of the erroneous payment unless: a) the credit is used only to
offset a claim of underpayment made by the village within the applicable
statutory period of limitations, and b) the credit derives from an overpayment
made by the same telecommunications retailer during the applicable statutory
period of limitations.
      6.   Amounts paid under this section by telecommunications retailers
shall not be included in the tax base under any of the following acts as
described immediately below:
         (a)   Gross charges for purposes of the telecommunications excise tax
act;
         (b)   Gross receipts for purposes of the municipal utility tax as
prescribed in 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-2;
         (c)   Gross charges for purposes of the municipal telecommunications
tax as prescribed in 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-17;
         (d)   Gross revenue for purposes of the tax on annual gross revenue of
public utilities prescribed in 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/2-202.
      7.   The village shall have the right, in its discretion, to audit the
books and records of all telecommunications retailers subject to this section
to determine whether the telecommunications retailer has properly accounted to
the village for the village infrastructure maintenance fee. Any underpayment of
the amount of the village infrastructure maintenance fee due to the village by
the telecommunications retailer shall be paid to the village plus five percent
(5%) of the total amount of the underpayment determined in an audit, plus any
costs incurred by the village in conducting the audit, in an amount not to
exceed five percent (5%) of the total amount of the underpayment determined in
an audit. Said sum shall be paid to the village within twenty one (21) days
after the date of issuance of an invoice for same.
      8.   The village president, or his or her designee, may promulgate such
further or additional regulations concerning the administration and enforcement
of this section, consistent with its provisions, as may be required from time
to time and shall notify all telecommunications retailers that are registered
pursuant to subsection (B) of this section of such regulations.
   (E)   Compliance With Other Laws: Nothing in this section shall excuse any
person or entity from obligations imposed under any law, including, but not
limited to:
      1.   Generally applicable taxes; and
      2.   Standards for construction on, over, under, or within, use of or
repair of the public rights of way, including standards relating to
freestanding towers and other structures upon the public rights of way, as
provided; and
      3.   Any liability imposed for the failure to comply with such generally
applicable taxes or standards governing construction on, over, under, or
within, use of or repair of the public rights of way; and
      4.   Compliance with any ordinance or provision of this code concerning
uses or structures not located on, over, or within the right of way.
   (F)   Existing Franchises And Licenses: Any franchise, license, or similar
agreements between telecommunications retailers and the village entered into
before the effective date of this section regarding the use of public rights of
way shall remain valid according to and for their stated terms except for any
fees, charges or other compensation to the extent waived.
   (G)   Penalties: Any telecommunications provider who violates, disobeys,
omits, neglects or refuses to comply with any of the provisions of this section
shall be subject to fine in accordance with the general penalty provisions of
this code.
   (H)   Enforcement: Nothing in this section shall be construed as limiting
any additional or further remedies that the village may have for enforcement of
this section.
   (I)   Severability: If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or
portion of this section is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by
any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate,
distinct, and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the
validity of the remaining portions hereof.
   (J)   Conflict: This section supersedes all sections or parts of sections
adopted prior hereto which are in conflict herewith, to the extent of such
conflicts.
   (K)   Waiver And Fee Implementation:
      1.   The village hereby waives all fees, charges, and other compensation
that may accrue, after the effective date of the waiver, to the village by a
telecommunications retailer pursuant to any existing village franchise,
license, or similar agreement with a telecommunications retailer during the
time the village imposes the telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee.
This waiver shall only be effective during the time the infrastructure
maintenance fee provided for in this section is subject to being lawfully
imposed on the telecommunications retailer and collected by the
telecommunications retailer from the customer.
      2.   The village clerk shall send a notice of the waiver by certified
mail/return receipt requested to each telecommunications retailer with whom the
village has a franchise.
      3.   The village infrastructure maintenance fee provided for in this
section shall become effective and imposed on the first day of the month not
less than ninety (90) days after the village provides written notice by
certified mail to each telecommunications retailer with whom the village has an
existing franchise, license, or similar agreement that the village waives all
compensation under such existing franchise, license, or similar agreement
during such time as the fee is subject to being lawfully imposed and collected
by the retailer and remitted to the village. The infrastructure maintenance fee
shall apply to the gross charges billed on or after the effective date as
established in the preceding sentence. (Ord. 483, 9-23-1997)
3-6-6: MUNICIPAL ELECTRIC UTILITY TAX:
There is hereby established a municipal electric utility tax on the privilege
of using electricity based upon kilowatt hour usage of individual customers.
   (A)   Definitions: As used in this section, unless the context otherwise
requires the following terms shall mean:
   PERSON: Any natural, individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership,
association, joint stock company, joint adventure, corporation, limited
liability company, municipal corporation, the state or any of its political
subdivisions, any state university created by statute, or a receiver, trustee,
conservator or other representative appointed by order of any court.
   PERSON MAINTAINING A PLACE OF BUSINESS IN THIS STATE: Any person having or
maintaining within this state, directly or by a subsidiary or other affiliate,
an office, generation facility, distribution facility, transmission facility,
sales office or other place of business, or any employee, agent, or other
representative operating within this state under the authority of the person or
its subsidiary or other affiliate, irrespective of whether such place of
business or agent or other representative is located in this state permanently
or temporarily, or whether such person, subsidiary or other affiliate is
licensed or qualified to do business in this state.
   PURCHASE AT RETAIL: Any acquisition of electricity by a purchaser for
purposes of use or consumption, and not for resale, but shall not include the
use of electricity by a public utility, as defined in section 8-11-2 of the
Illinois municipal code 1  directly in the generation, production,
transmission, delivery or sale of electricity.
   PURCHASER: Any person who uses or consumes, within the corporate limits of
the village, electricity acquired in a purchase at retail.
   TAX COLLECTOR: The person delivering electricity to the purchaser.
   VILLAGE: The village of Erie.
   (B)   Tax Imposed:
      1.   A tax is imposed on all persons engaged in the following occupations
or privileges:
The privilege of using or consuming electricity acquired in a purchase at
retail and used or consumed within the corporate limits of the municipality at
the following rates, calculated on a monthly basis for each purchaser:
         (a)   For the first 2,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a month;
0.370 cents per kilowatt hour;
         (b)   For the next 48,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a month;
0.242 cents per kilowatt hour;
         (c)   For the next 50,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a month;
0.218 cents per kilowatt hour;
         (d)   For the next 400,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a month;
0.212 cents per kilowatt hour;
         (e)   For the next 500,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a month;
0.206 cents per kilowatt hour;
         (f)   For the next 2,000,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a
month; 0.194 cents per kilowatt hour;
         (g)   For the next 2,000,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a
month; 0.191 cents per kilowatt hour;
         (h)   For the next 5,000,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a
month; 0.188 cents per kilowatt hour;
         (i)   For the next 10,000,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a
month; 0.185 cents per kilowatt hour;
         (j)   For all electricity used or consumed in excess of 20,000,000
kilowatt hours in a month; 0.182 cents per kilowatt hour. (Ord. 490, 6-9-1998)
      2.   Pursuant to 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-2, the rates set
forth in subsection (B)1 of this section shall be effective: a) on August 1,
1998, for residential customers; and b) on the earlier of: 1) the first bill
issued on or after January 1, 2001, or 2) the date of the first bill issued
pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/16-104, for nonresidential
customers. (Ord. 490, 6-9-1998; amd. Ord. 493, 8-11-1998)
      3.   Pursuant to 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-2, section
3-6-4 of this chapter shall specifically remain in effect: a) for receipts
attributable to residential customers, until July 31, 1998; and b) for receipts
attributable to nonresidential customers, the earlier of: 1) through the last
bill issued prior to December 31, 2000, or 2) the date of the first bill issued
to such nonresidential customer pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/
16-104.
      4.   The provisions of this section shall not be effective until August
1, 1998.
   (C)   Exceptions: None of the taxes authorized by this section may be
imposed with respect to any transaction in interstate commerce or otherwise to
the extent to which the business or privilege may not, under the constitution
and statutes of the United States, be made the subject of taxation by this
state or any political subdivision thereof, nor shall any persons engaged in
the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing, or selling or transmitting
gas, water, or electricity, or engaged in the business of transmitting
messages, or using or consuming electricity acquired in a purchase at retail,
be subject to taxation under the provisions of this section for those
transactions that are or may become subject to taxation under the provisions of
the municipal retailers' occupation tax act as authorized by 65 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-1; nor shall any tax authorized by this section be
imposed upon any person engaged in a business or on any privilege unless the
tax is imposed in like manner and at the same rate upon all persons engaged in
businesses of the same class in the municipality, whether privately or
municipally owned or operated, or exercising the same privilege within the
municipality.
   (D)   Additional Taxes: Such tax shall be in addition to other taxes levied
upon the taxpayer or its business. (Ord. 490, 6-9-1998)
   (E)   Collection: The tax authorized by this section shall be collected from
the purchaser by the person maintaining a place of business in this state who
delivers the electricity to the purchaser. This tax shall constitute a debt of
the purchaser to the person who delivers the electricity to the purchaser and
if unpaid, is recoverable in the same manner as the original charge for
delivering the electricity. Any tax required to be collected pursuant to this
section and any such tax collected by a person delivering electricity shall
constitute a debt owed to the municipality by such person delivering the
electricity, provided that the person delivering electricity shall be allowed a
credit for such tax related to deliveries of electricity, the charges for which
are written off as uncollectible, and provided further, that if such charges
are thereafter collected, the delivering supplier shall be obligated to remit
such tax. Persons delivering electricity shall collect the tax from the
purchaser by adding such tax to the gross charge for delivering the
electricity. Persons delivering electricity shall also be authorized to add to
such gross charge an amount equal to three percent (3%) of the tax to reimburse
the person delivering electricity for the expense incurred in keeping records,
billing customers, preparing and filing returns, remitting the tax and
supplying data to the municipality upon request. If the person delivering
electricity fails to collect the tax from the purchaser, then the purchaser
shall be required to pay the tax directly to the municipality in the manner
prescribed by the municipality. Persons delivering electricity who file returns
pursuant to this section shall, at the time of filing such return, pay the
municipality the amount of the tax collected pursuant to this section. (Ord.
490, 6-9-1998; amd. Ord. 493, 8-11-1998)
   (F)   Reports To Municipality: On or before the last day of each month, each
person delivering electricity shall make a return to the village treasurer for
the preceding month stating:
      1.   His name.
      2.   His principal place of business.
      3.   The kilowatt hour usage during the month upon the basis of which the
tax is imposed.
      4.   Amount of tax.
      5.   Such other reasonable and related information as the corporate
authorities may require.
The person delivering electricity making the return herein provided for shall,
at the time of making such return, pay to the village, the amount of tax herein
imposed; provided that if the person delivering electricity fails to collect
the tax from the purchaser or is excused from collecting the tax under
subsection (E) of this section, then the purchaser shall file a return in a
form prescribed by the municipality and pay the municipality on or before the
last day of the month following the month during which the electricity is used
or consumed. (Ord. 520, 4-11-2000)
   (G)   Credit For Overpayment: If it shall appear that an amount of tax has
been paid which was not due under the provisions of this section, whether as
the result of a mistake of fact or an error of law, then such amount shall be
credited against any tax due, or to become due, under this section from the
taxpayer who made the erroneous payment; provided that no amounts erroneously
paid more than three (3) years prior to the filing of a claim therefor shall be
so credited.
No action to recover any amount of tax due under the provisions of this section
shall be commenced more than three (3) years after the due date of such amount.
   (H)   Penalty: Any taxpayer who fails to make a return, or who makes a
fraudulent return, or who wilfully violates any other provision of this section
is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not
less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than two hundred dollars
($200.00); in addition, shall be liable in a civil action for the amount of tax
due 1 .
   (I)   Repeal Of Conflicting Provisions: In the event that public act 90-561
is hereby declared unconstitutional, or if subsection (B) of this section
created by ordinance 490 is voided by court action, the provisions of section
3-6-4 of this chapter repealed in subsection (J) of this section shall remain
in effect in all respects as if it had never been amended by this section, and
any amounts paid to the village by any person delivering electricity pursuant
to this section shall be deemed to have been paid pursuant to the gross
receipts utility tax as it existed prior to the passage of this section.
   (J)   Exception: All reference to the tax imposed in section
3-6-4 of this chapter is repealed as it relates only to the tax on persons
engaged in the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing, selling
electricity for use or consumption in the village. (Ord. 490, 6-9-1998)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/8-11-2.
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/8-11-2.
3-6-7: LOCALLY IMPOSED AND ADMINISTERED TAX RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITY:
   (A)   Short Title: This section shall be known as, and may be cited as, the
LOCALLY IMPOSED AND ADMINISTERED TAX RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITY ORDINANCE.
   (B)   Scope: The provisions of this section shall apply to the village's
procedures in connection with all of the village's locally imposed and
administered taxes.
   (C)   Definitions: Certain words or terms herein shall have the meanings
ascribed to them as follows:
   ACT: The "local government taxpayers' bill of rights act".
   CORPORATE AUTHORITIES: The village's president and board of trustees.
   LOCAL TAX ADMINISTRATOR: The village clerk is charged with the
administration and collection of the locally imposed and administered taxes,
including staff, employees or agents to the extent they are authorized by the
local tax administrator to act in the local tax administrator's stead. The
local tax administrator shall have the authority to implement the terms of this
section to give full effect to this section. The exercise of such authority by
the local tax administrator shall not be inconsistent with this section and the
act.
   LOCALLY IMPOSED AND ADMINISTERED TAX OR TAX: Each tax imposed by the village
that is collected or administered by the village and not an agency or
department of the state. It does not include any taxes imposed upon real
property under the property tax code or fees collected by the village other
than infrastructure maintenance fees.
   NOTICE: Each audit notice, collection notice or other similar notice or
communication in connection with each of the village's locally imposed and
administered taxes.
   TAX ORDINANCE: Each ordinance adopted by the village that imposes any
locally imposed and administered tax.
   TAXPAYER: Every person required to pay any locally imposed and administered
tax and generally includes the person upon whom the legal incidence of such tax
is placed and with respect to consumer taxes includes the business or entity
required to collect and pay the locally imposed and administered tax to the
village.
   VILLAGE: The village of Erie, Whiteside County, Illinois.
   (D)   Notices: Unless otherwise provided, whenever notice is required to be
given, the notice is to be in writing mailed not less than seven (7) calendar
days prior to the day fixed for any applicable hearing, audit or other
scheduled act of the local tax administrator. The notice shall be sent by the
local tax administrator as follows:
      1.   First class or express mail, or overnight mail, addressed to the
persons concerned at the persons' last known address, or
      2.   Personal service or delivery.
   (E)   Late Payment: Any notice, payment, remittance or other filing required
to be made to the village pursuant to any tax ordinance shall be considered
late unless it is: 1) physically received by the village on or before the due
date, or 2) received in an envelope or other container displaying a valid,
readable U.S. postmark dated on or before the due date, properly addressed to
the village with adequate postage prepaid.
   (F)   Payment: Any payment or remittance received for a tax period shall be
applied in the following order: 1) first to the tax due for the applicable
period; 2) second to the interest due for the applicable period; and 3) third
to the penalty for the applicable period.
   (G)   Certain Credits And Refunds:
      1.   The village shall not refund or credit any taxes voluntarily paid
without written protest at the time of payment in the event that a locally
imposed and administered tax is declared invalidly enacted or unconstitutional
by a court of competent jurisdiction. However, a taxpayer shall not be deemed
to have paid the tax voluntarily if the taxpayer lacked knowledge of the facts
upon which to protest the taxes at the time of payment or if the taxpayer paid
the taxes under duress.
      2.   The statute of limitations on a claim for credit or refund shall be
one year after the end of the calendar year in which payment in error was made.
The village shall not grant a credit or refund of locally imposed and
administered taxes, interest, or penalties to a person who has not paid the
amounts directly to the village.
      3.   The procedure for claiming a credit or refund of locally imposed and
administered taxes, interest or penalties paid in error shall be as follows:
         (a)   The taxpayer shall submit to the local tax administrator in
writing a claim for credit or refund together with a statement specifying:
            (1)   The name of the locally imposed and administered tax subject
to the claim;
            (2)   The tax period for the locally imposed and administered tax
subject to the claim;
            (3)   The date of the tax payment subject to the claim and the
canceled check or receipt for the payment;
            (4)   The taxpayer's recalculation, accompanied by an amended or
revised tax return, in connection with the claim; and
            (5)   A request for either a refund or a credit in connection with
the claim to be applied to the amount of tax, interest and penalties overpaid,
and, as applicable, related interest on the amount overpaid; provided, however,
that there shall be no refund and only a credit given in the event the taxpayer
owes any monies to the village.
         (b)   Within ten (10) days of the receipt by the local tax
administrator of any claim for a refund or credit, the local tax administrator
shall either:
            (1)   Grant the claim; or
            (2)   Deny the claim, in whole or in part, together with a
statement as to the reason for the denial or the partial grant and denial.
         (c)   In the event the local tax administrator grants, in whole or in
part, a claim for refund or credit, the amount of the grant for refund or
credit shall bear interest at the rate of five percent (5%) per annum, based on
a year of three hundred sixty five (365) days and the number of days elapsed,
from the date of the overpayment to the date of mailing of a refund check or
the grant of a credit.
   (H)   Audit Procedure: Any request for proposed audit pursuant to any local
administered tax shall comply with the notice requirements of this section.
      1.   Each notice of audit shall contain the following information:
         (a)   The tax;
         (b)   The time period of the audit; and
         (c)   A brief description of the books and records to be made
available for the auditor.
      2.   Any audit shall be conducted during normal business hours and if the
date and time selected by the local tax administrator is not agreeable to the
taxpayer, another date and time may be requested by the taxpayer within thirty
(30) days after the originally designated audit and during normal business
hours.
      3.   The taxpayer may request an extension of time to have an audit
conducted. The audit shall be conducted not less than seven (7) days nor more
than thirty (30) days from the date the notice is given, unless the taxpayer
and the local tax administrator agreed to some other convenient time. In the
event taxpayer is unable to comply with the audit on the date in question, the
taxpayer may request another date within the thirty (30) days, approved in
writing, that is convenient to the taxpayer and the local tax administrator.
      4.   Every taxpayer shall keep accurate books and records of the
taxpayer's business or activities, including original source documents and
books of entry denoting the transactions which had given rise or may have given
rise to any tax liability, exemption or deduction. All books shall be kept in
the English language and shall be subject to and available for inspection by
the village.
      5.   It is the duty and responsibility of every taxpayer to make
available its books and records for inspection by the village. If the taxpayer
fails to provide the documents necessary for audit within the time provided,
the local tax administrator may issue a tax determination and assessment based
on the tax administrator's determination of the best estimate of the taxpayer's
tax liability.
      6.   If an audit determines there has been an overpayment of a locally
imposed and administered tax as a result of the audit, written notice of the
amount of overpayment shall be given to the taxpayer within thirty (30) days of
the village's determination of the amount of overpayment.
      7.   In the event a tax payment was submitted to the incorrect local
governmental entity, the local tax administrator shall notify the local
governmental entity imposing such tax.
   (I)   Appeal:
      1.   The local tax administrator shall send written notice to a taxpayer
upon the local tax administrator's issuance of a protestable notice of tax due,
a bill, a claim denial, or a notice of claim reduction regarding any tax. The
notice shall include the following information:
         (a)   The reason for the assessment;
         (b)   The amount of the tax liability proposed;
         (c)   The procedure for appealing the assessment; and
         (d)   The obligations of the village during the audit, appeal, refund
and collection process.
      2.   A taxpayer who receives written notice from the local tax
administrator of a determination of tax due or assessment may file with the
local tax administrator a written protest and petition for hearing, setting
forth the basis of the taxpayer's request for a hearing. The written protest
and petition for hearing must be filed with the local tax administrator within
forty five (45) days of receipt of the written notice of the tax determination
and assessment.
      3.   If a timely written notice and petition for hearing is filed, the
local tax administrator shall fix the time and place for hearing and shall give
written notice to the taxpayer. The hearing shall be scheduled for a date
within thirty (30) days of receipt of the written protest and petition for
hearing, unless the taxpayer requests a later date convenient to all parties.
      4.   If a written protest and petition for hearing is not filed within
the forty five (45) day period, the tax determination, audit or assessment
shall become a final bill due and owing without further notice.
      5.   Upon the showing of reasonable cause by the taxpayer and the full
payment of the contested tax liability along with interest accrued as of the
due date of the tax, the local tax administrator may reopen or extend the time
for filing a written protest and petition for hearing. In no event shall the
time for filing a written protest and petition for hearing be reopened or
extended for more than ninety (90) days after the expiration of the forty five
(45) day period.
   (J)   Hearing:
      1.   Whenever a taxpayer or a tax collector has filed a timely written
protest and petition for hearing under subsection (I) of this section the local
tax administrator shall conduct a hearing regarding any appeal.
      2.   No continuances shall be granted except in cases where a continuance
is absolutely necessary to project the rights of the taxpayer. Lack of
preparation shall not be grounds for a continuance. Any continuance granted
shall not exceed fourteen (14) days.
      3.   At the hearing the local tax administrator shall preside and shall
hear testimony and accept any evidence relevant to the tax determination, audit
or assessment. The strict rules of evidence applicable to judicial proceedings
shall not apply.
      4.   At the conclusion of the hearing, the local tax administrator shall
make a written determination on the basis of the evidence presented at the
hearing. The taxpayer or tax collector shall be provided with a copy of the
written decision.
   (K)   Interest And Penalties: In the event a determination has been made
that a tax is due and owing, through audit, assessment or other bill sent, the
tax must be paid within the time frame otherwise indicated.
      1.   Interest: The village hereby provides for the amount of interest to
be assessed on a late payment, underpayment, or nonpayment of the tax, to be
twelve percent (12%) per annum, based on a year of three hundred sixty five
(365) days and the number of days elapsed.
      2.   Late Filing And Payment Penalties: If a tax return is not filed
within the time and manner provided by the controlling tax ordinance, a late
filing penalty of five percent (5%) of the amount of tax required to be shown
as due on a return shall be imposed, and a late payment penalty of five percent
(5%) of the tax due shall be imposed. If no return is filed within the time or
manner provided by the controlling tax ordinance and prior to the village
issuing a notice of tax delinquency or notice of tax liability, then a failure
to file penalty shall be assessed equal to twenty five percent (25%) of the
total tax due for the applicable reporting period for which the return was
required to be filed. A late filing or payment penalty shall not apply if a
failure to file penalty is imposed by the controlling ordinance.
   (L)   Abatement: The local tax administrator shall have the authority to
waive or abate any late filing penalty, late payment penalty or failure to file
penalty if the local tax administrator shall determine reasonable cause exists
for delay or failure to make a filing.
   (M)   Installment Contracts: The village may enter into an installment
contract with the taxpayer for the payment of taxes under the controlling tax
ordinance. The local tax administrator may not cancel any installment contract
so entered unless the taxpayer fails to pay any amount due and owing. Upon
written notice by the local tax administrator that the payment is thirty (30)
days delinquent, the taxpayer shall have fourteen (14) working days to cure any
delinquency. If the taxpayer fails to cure the delinquency within the fourteen
(14) day period or fails to demonstrate good faith in restructuring the
installment contract with the local administrator, the installment contract
shall be canceled without further notice to the taxpayer.
   (N)   Statute Of Limitations: The village, through the local tax
administrator, shall review all tax returns in a prompt and timely manner and
inform taxpayers of any amounts due and owing. The taxpayer shall have forty
five (45) days after receiving notice of the reviewed tax returns to make any
request for refund or provide any tax still due and owing.
      1.   No determination of tax due and owing may be issued more than four
(4) years after the end of the calendar year for which the return for the
applicable period was filed or for the calendar year in which the return for
the applicable period was due, whichever occurs later.
      2.   If any tax return is not filed or if during any four (4) year period
for which a notice of tax determination or assessment may be issued by the
village, the tax paid was less than seventy five percent (75%) of the tax due,
the statute of limitations shall be six (6) years after the end of the calendar
year in which return for the applicable period was due or end of the calendar
year in which the return for the applicable period was filed.
      3.   No statute of limitations shall apply if a fraudulent tax return was
filed by the taxpayer.
   (O)   Voluntary Disclosure: For any locally imposed and administered tax for
which a taxpayer has not received a written notice of an audit, investigation,
or assessment from the local tax administrator, a taxpayer is entitled to file
an application with the local tax administrator for a voluntary disclosure of
the tax due. A taxpayer filing a voluntary disclosure application must agree to
pay the amount of tax due, along with interest of one percent (1%) per month,
for all periods prior to the filing of the application but not more than four
(4) years before the date of filing the application. A taxpayer filing a valid
voluntary disclosure application may not be liable for any additional tax,
interest, or penalty for any period before the date the application was filed.
However, if the taxpayer incorrectly determined and underpaid the amount of tax
due, the taxpayer is liable for the underpaid tax along with applicable
interest on the underpaid tax, unless the underpayment was the result of fraud
on the part of the taxpayer, in which case the application shall be deemed
invalid and void. The payment of tax and interest must be made by no later than
ninety (90) days after the filing of the voluntary disclosure application or
the date agreed to by the local tax administrator. However, any additional
amounts owed as a result of an underpayment of tax and interest previously paid
under this section must be paid within ninety (90) days after a final
determination and the exhaustion of all appeals of the additional amount owed
or the date agreed to by the local tax administrator, whichever is longer.
   (P)   Publication Of Tax Ordinances: Any locally administered tax ordinance
shall be published via normal or standard publishing requirements. The posting
of a tax ordinance on the internet shall satisfy the publication requirements.
Copies of all tax ordinances shall be made available to the public upon request
at the village clerk's office.
   (Q)   Internal Review Procedure: The local tax administrator shall establish
an internal review procedure regarding any liens filed against any taxpayers
for unpaid taxes. Upon a determination by the local tax administrator that the
lien is valid, the lien shall remain in full force and effect. If the lien is
determined to be improper, the local tax administrator shall:
      1.   Timely remove the lien at the village's expense;
      2.   Correct the taxpayer's credit record; and
      3.   Correct any public disclosure of the improperly imposed lien.
   (R)   Conflicting Tax Provisions: This section shall be liberally construed
and administered to supplement all of the village's tax ordinances. To the
extent that any tax ordinance is in conflict with or inconsistent with this
section, this section shall be controlling. (Ord. 532, 12-12-2000)
3-6-8: CABLE AND VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEE:
   (A)   Pursuant to the authority granted in 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/
21-801, the Village hereby establishes a cable television system provider fee
and the provider of cable television to the Village, currently MCC Illinois
LLC, shall pay an annual service provider fee to this Village in an amount
equal to five percent (5%) of annual gross revenues derived from the provision
of cable or video to households located within the Village.
   (B)   The service provider fee payment shall be due annually and payable
within ninety (90) days after the close of the preceding calendar year. Each
payment shall be accompanied by a brief report prepared by a representative of
the grantee showing the basis for the computation. If mailed, the fee shall be
considered paid on the date it is postmarked.
   (C)   For the purposes of the calculation of the service provider fee,
"gross revenues" shall mean consideration of any kind or nature, including,
without limitation, cash, credits, property, and in-kind contributions received
by the provider, currently MCC Illinois LLC, for the operation of its cable
system to provide cable or video service within the Village, including the
following: (i) recurring charges for cable service or video service; (ii)
event-based charges for cable service or video service, including, but not
limited to, pay-per-view and video-on-demand charges; (iii) rental of set-top
boxes and other cable service or video service equipment; (iv) service charges
related to the provision of cable service or video service, including, but not
limited to, activation, installation, and repair charges; (v) administrative
charges related to the provision of cable service or video service, including
hut not limited to service order and service termination charges; and (vi) late
payment fees or charges, insufficient funds check charges, and other charges
assessed to recover the costs of collecting delinquent payments.
   (D)   For purposes of the calculation of the service provider fee, "gross
revenues" shall not include: (i) revenues not actually received, even if
billed, such as bad debt; (ii) the service provider fee or any tax, fee or
assessment of general applicability; (iii) any revenues received from services
not classified as cable service or video service, including, without
limitation, revenue received from telecommunications services, voice over
internet protocol (VoIP) services, information services, the provision of
directory or Internet advertising, or any other revenues attributed by the
holder to non-cable service or non-video service in accordance with the
holder's books and records and records kept in the regular course of business
and any applicable laws, rules, regulations, standards, or orders; (iv)
security deposits collected from subscribers, or (v) any amounts paid by
subscribers to "home shopping" or similar vendors for merchandise sold through
any home shopping channel offered as part of the cable service or video
service. (Ord. 719, 1-9-2018)
3-6-9: MUNICIPAL CANNABIS RETAILERS’ OCCUPATION TAX:
   (A)   Tax Imposed; Rate:
      1.   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of
selling cannabis, other than cannabis purchased under the Compassionate Use of
Medical Cannabis Pilot Program Act, at retail in the Village at the rate of
three percent (3%) of the gross receipts from these sales made in the course of
that business.
      2.   The imposition of this tax is in accordance with the provisions of
section 8-11-22 of the Illinois Municipal Code, 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/8-11-22.
   (B)   Collection Of Tax By Retailers:
      1.   The tax imposed by this section shall be remitted by such retailer
to the Illinois Department of Revenue (Department). Any tax required to be
collected pursuant to or as authorized by this section and any such tax
collected by such retailer and required to be remitted to the Department shall
constitute a debt owed by the retailer to the State. Retailers may reimburse
themselves for their seller's tax liability hereunder by separately stating
that tax as an additional charge, which charge may be stated in combination, in
a single amount, with any State tax that sellers are required to collect.
      2.   The taxes hereby imposed, and all civil penalties that may be
assessed as an incident thereto, shall be collected and enforced by the
Department. The Department shall have full power to administer and enforce the
provisions of this section. (Ord. 740, 9-23-2019)
CHAPTER 7
RAFFLES
SECTION:
3-7-1: Short Title
3-7-2: Purpose
3-7-3: Construction
3-7-4: Definitions
3-7-5: Compliance Required
3-7-6: Application
3-7-7: License Qualifications
3-7-8: License Issuance
3-7-9: Conduct Of Raffles
3-7-10: Raffles Manager
3-7-11: Records
3-7-12: Fees
3-7-13: Prize Limitations
3-7-14: Chance Limitation
3-7-15: Persons Exempt From Licensing
3-7-16: Penalties And Abatement
3-7-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known, cited, and referred to as the RAFFLE ORDINANCE OF
THE VILLAGE OF ERIE. (Ord. 397, 4-12-1988)
3-7-2: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate and control the conduct of raffles
within the corporate limits of the village of Erie. (Ord. 397, 4-12-1988)
3-7-3: CONSTRUCTION:
In the construction of this chapter, the definitions hereunder shall be
observed and applied, except when the context clearly indicates otherwise:
   (A)   Words used in the present tense shall include the future tense; words
used in the singular number shall include the plural number; words used in the
masculine gender shall include the female gender; and such inclusive words
shall be reciprocal.
   (B)   The word "may" is permissive or discretionary.
   (C)   The word "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary. (Ord. 397, 4-12-
1988)
3-7-4: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the words and phrases listed hereunder have
the meanings designated herein, except when a particular context clearly
requires a different meaning:
BOARD OF TRUSTEES: The board of trustees of the village of Erie, Illinois.
CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION: An organization or institution organized and operated
to benefit an indefinite number of the public. The service rendered to those
eligible for benefits must also confer some benefit upon the public.
EDUCATIONAL ORGANIZATION: An organization or institution organized and operated
to provide systematic instruction in useful branches of learning by methods
common to schools and institutions of learning which compare favorably in their
scope and intensity with the course of study presented in tax supported
schools.
FRATERNAL ORGANIZATION: An organization of persons having a common interest,
the primary interest of which is to both promote the welfare of its members and
to provide assistance to the general public in such a way as to lessen the
burden of government by caring for those who otherwise would be cared for by
the government.
LABOR ORGANIZATION: An organization composed of workers organized with the
objective of betterment of the conditions of those engaged in such pursuit and
the development of a higher degree of efficiency in their respective
occupations.
LICENSEE: An organization which has been issued a license to operate a raffle.
NET PROCEEDS: The gross receipts from the conduct of raffles, less sums
expended for prizes, local license fees, and other reasonable operating
expenses incurred as a result of operating a raffle.
NONPROFIT: Organized, operated, and conducted on a not for profit basis with no
personal profit inuring to anyone as a result of said operation.
PERSON: An individual, firm, organization, public or private corporation,
government, partnership, or unincorporated association.
RAFFLE: A form of lottery, as defined in section 28-2(b) of the criminal code
of 1961, conducted by an organization licensed under this chapter in which:
   (A)   The player pays or agrees to pay something of value for a chance
represented and differentiated by a number or by a combination of numbers or by
some other means, one or more of which chances is to be designated the winning
choice; and
   (B)   The winning chance is to be determined through a drawing or by some
other method based on an element of chance by an act or set of acts on the part
of persons conducting or connected with the lottery, except the winning chance
shall not be determined by the outcome of a publicly exhibited sporting
contest.
RELIGIOUS ORGANIZATION: Any church, congregation, society, or organization
founded for the purpose of religious worship.
VETERANS ORGANIZATION: An organization or association comprised of members of
which substantially all are individuals who are veterans or spouses, widows, or
widowers of veterans, the primary purpose of which is to promote the welfare of
its members and to provide assistance to the general public in such a way as to
confer a public benefit.
VILLAGE: The village of Erie, county of Whiteside, Illinois.
VILLAGE CLERK: The village clerk of the village of Erie, Illinois. (Ord. 397,
4-12-1988)
3-7-5: COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful to conduct or operate a raffle or to sell, offer for sale,
convey, issue, or otherwise transfer for value a chance on a raffle except as
provided herein. (Ord. 397, 4-12-1988)
3-7-6: APPLICATION:
Any person seeking to conduct or operate a raffle shall file an application
therefor with the village clerk on forms provided by the village clerk. Said
applications shall contain the following information:
   (A)   The name, address, and type of organization;
   (B)   The length of existence of the organization and, if incorporated, the
date and state of incorporation;
   (C)   The name, address, telephone number, social security number, and date
of birth of the organization's presiding officer, secretary, raffles manager,
and any other members responsible for the conduct and operation of the raffle;
   (D)   The aggregate retail value of all prizes to be awarded in the raffle;
   (E)   The maximum retail value of each prize to be awarded in the raffle;
   (F)   The maximum price charged for each raffle chance issued or sold;
   (G)   The maximum number of raffle chances to be issued;
   (H)   The area or areas in which raffle chances will be sold or issued;
   (I)   The time period during which raffle chances will be issued or sold;
   (J)   The date, time and location at which winning chances will be
determined;
   (K)   A sworn statement attesting to the not for profit character of the
applicant organization, signed by its presiding officer and secretary;
   (L)   A certificate signed by the presiding officer of the applicant
organization attesting to the fact that the information contained in the
application is true and correct; and
   (M)   A fidelity bond in the name of the raffle manager in an amount equal
to the aggregate retail value of all prizes to be awarded shall accompany said
application. (Ord. 397, 4-12-1988)
3-7-7: LICENSE QUALIFICATIONS:
Raffle licenses shall be issued only to bona fide charitable, educational,
fraternal, labor, religious, and veterans organizations that operate without
profit to their members and which have been in existence continuously for a
period of five (5) years or more immediately before making application for a
license and which have had during that entire five (5) year period a bona fide
membership engaged in carrying out their objects. The following are ineligible
for any raffle license:
   (A)   Any person who has been convicted of a felony;
   (B)   Any person who is or has been a professional gambler or gambling
promoter;
   (C)   Any person who is not of good moral character;
   (D)   Any organization in which a person defined in subsection (A), (B), or
(C) of this section has a proprietary, equitable or credit interest, or in
which such person is active or employed;
   (E)   Any organization in which a person defined in subsection (A), (B), or
(C) of this section is an officer, director, or employee, whether compensated
or not; and
   (F)   Any organization in which a person defined in subsection (A), (B), or
(C) of this section is to participate in the management or operation of a
"raffle" as defined herein. (Ord. 397, 4-12-1988)
3-7-8: LICENSE ISSUANCE:
   (A)   The village clerk shall review all raffle license applications,
recommend approval or denial, and submit them to the board of trustees within
ten (10) days from the date of application. The board of trustees shall, within
thirty (30) days from the date of application accept or reject a raffle license
application. If an application is accepted, the village clerk shall forthwith
issue a raffle license to the applicant. A raffle license shall be valid for a
period of ninety (90) days from and after its issuance unless the board of
trustees has specifically authorized a license for a longer period of time.
   (B)   A raffle license shall show the following:
      1.   The area or areas in which raffle chances may be sold or issued; and
      2.   The period of time during which raffle chances may be sold or
issued; and
      3.   The date, time and location on or at which winning chances will be
determined.
   (C)   Said license shall be prominently displayed at the time and location
of the determination of the winning chances.
   (D)   A license shall be valid for one raffle only; however, multiple
licenses may be issued for multiple raffles to a license. (Ord. 397, 4-12-1988)
3-7-9: CONDUCT OF RAFFLES:
The operation and conduct of raffles are subject to the following restrictions:
   (A)   The entire net proceeds of any raffle must be exclusively devoted to
the lawful purpose of the licensee;
   (B)   No person except a bona fide member of the licensee may participate in
the management or operation of the raffle;
   (C)   No person may receive remuneration or profit for participating in the
management or operation of the raffle;
   (D)   A licensee may rent a premises on which to determine the winning
chance or chances in a raffle only from an organization which is also licensed
under this chapter;
   (E)   Raffle chances may be sold, offered for sale, conveyed, issued, or
otherwise transferred for value only within the area specified on the license;
and the winning chances may be determined only at the location specified on the
license;
   (F)   No person under the age of eighteen (18) years may participate in the
operation or conduct of raffles. A person under the age of eighteen (18) years
may be within the area where winning chances are being determined only when
accompanied by his parent or guardian. (Ord. 397, 4-12-1988)
3-7-10: RAFFLES MANAGER:
The operation and conduct of a raffle shall be under the supervision of a
single raffle manager designated by the licensee. The manager shall give a
fidelity bond equal in amount to the aggregate retail value of all prizes to be
awarded in favor of the licensee conditioned upon his honesty in the
performance of his duties. The terms of the bond shall provide that notice
shall be given in writing to the village not less than thirty (30) days prior
to its cancellation. (Ord. 397, 4-12-1988)
3-7-11: RECORDS:
   (A)   Each licensee shall keep records of its gross receipts, expenses, and
net proceeds for each single gathering or occasion at which winning chances are
determined. All deductions from gross receipts for each single gathering or
occasion shall be documented with receipts or other records indicating the
amount, a description of the purchased item or service or other reason for the
deduction, and the recipient. The distribution of net proceeds shall be
itemized as to payee, purpose, amount, and date of payment.
   (B)   Gross receipts from the operation of raffles shall be segregated from
other revenues of the licensee including bingo gross receipts, if bingo games
are also conducted by the same nonprofit organization pursuant to license
therefor issued by the department of revenue of the state of Illinois, and
placed in a separate account. Each licensee shall keep separate records of its
raffles. The person who accounts for gross receipts, expenses, and net proceeds
from the operation of raffles shall not be the same person who accounts for
other revenues of the licensee.
   (C)   Each licensee shall report to its membership and to the village its
gross receipts, expenses, and net proceeds from the raffle, and the
distribution of net proceeds itemized as required herein.
   (D)   Raffle records shall be preserved for three (3) years, and
organizations shall make available their records relating to the operation of
raffles for public inspection at reasonable times and places. (Ord. 397, 4-12-
1988)
3-7-12: FEES:
The following fees shall be paid to the village clerk when an application for a
raffle license is filed:
 
Aggregate Retail Value Of Prizes Fee
Less than $500.00                $5.00
$500.00 or more                  $25.00 plus 1/2 of 1% of the aggregate retail
                                 value of prizes with a maximum fee of $100.00
 
Said application fees are nonrefundable even should the application be rejected
by the board of trustees. (Ord. 397, 4-12-1988)
3-7-13: PRIZE LIMITATIONS:
The aggregate retail value of all prizes awarded in a single raffle shall not
exceed sixty thousand dollars ($60,000.00), and the retail value of any one
prize awarded in a single raffle shall not exceed sixty thousand dollars
($60,000.00). (Ord. 397, 4-12-1988)
3-7-14: CHANCE LIMITATION:
The price which may be charged for each raffle chance sold, offered for sale,
conveyed, issued, or otherwise transferred for value shall not exceed the
following schedule:
 
Aggregate Retail Value Of Prizes Chance Price
Less than $1,000.00              $10.00
$1,000.00 to $60,000.00          500.00
 
(Ord. 397, 4-12-1988)
3-7-15: PERSONS EXEMPT FROM LICENSING:
In the event that Whiteside County has in force an ordinance regulating the
adoption of raffles, licensees who have obtained licenses from said county are
hereby authorized and allowed to sell, offer for sale, convey, issue, or
otherwise transfer for value, raffle chances within the corporate boundaries of
the village of Erie without first obtaining a license pursuant to this chapter,
provided that said county has adopted an ordinance, or part thereof, granting
reciprocity to the licensee who has been licensed by the village of Erie. (Ord.
397, 4-12-1988)
3-7-16: PENALTIES AND ABATEMENT:
   (A)   Penalties: Failure to comply with any of the requirements of this
chapter shall constitute a violation; any person upon conviction thereof, shall
be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense.
   (B)   Abatement: The imposition of the penalties herein prescribed shall not
preclude the village attorney from instituting appropriate action to prevent
unlawful raffles or to restrain, correct, or abate a violation of this chapter
or of the conditions of a raffle license issued pursuant hereto. (Ord. 397, 4-
12-1988)
CHAPTER 8
FAIR HOUSING POLICY
SECTION:
3-8-1: Definitions
3-8-2: Prohibitions
3-8-3: Complaint Procedures
3-8-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings respectively assigned to them:
FAMILIAL STATUS: One or more individuals (who have not attained the age of 18
years) being domiciled with:
   (A)   A parent or other person having legal custody of such individual or
individuals; or
   (B)   The designee of such parent or other person having such custody, with
the written permission of such parent or other person.
The protection afforded by this chapter against discrimination on the basis of
familial status applies to any person who is pregnant or in the process of
securing legal custody of any individual who has not attained the age of
eighteen (18) years.
HOUSING ACCOMMODATIONS: Includes any improved or unimproved real property, or
part thereof, which is used or occupied, or is maintained, arranged or designed
to be used or occupied, as the home or residence of one or more individuals.
LENDING INSTITUTION: Any bank, insurance company, savings and loan association,
other person in the business of lending money or guaranteeing loans, any person
in the business of obtaining, arranging or negotiating loans or guarantees as
agent or broker, and any person in the business of buying loans or instruments
for the payment of money which are secured by title to or a security interest
in real property, but shall not include any religious institution or
organization nor any charitable or educational organization operated,
supervised or controlled by a religious institution or organization.
OWNER: Any person who holds legal or equitable title to, or owns any beneficial
interest in, any real property or who holds legal or equitable title to shares
of, or holds any beneficial interest in, any real estate cooperative which owns
any real property.
REAL ESTATE BROKER OR SALESMAN: A person or entity, whether licensed or not,
who, for or with the expectation of receiving a consideration, lists, sells,
purchases, exchanges, rents, or leases real property, or who negotiates or
attempts to negotiate any of these activities, or who holds himself or herself
out as engaged in these.
REAL ESTATE TRANSACTION: Includes the sale, exchange, rental, lease or sublease
of real property and also includes the brokering or appraising of real property
to be used or used as a housing accommodation and the making or purchasing of
loans or providing other financial assistance:
   (A)   For purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing or maintaining a
dwelling; or
   (B)   Secured by residential real estate.
REAL PROPERTY: Includes buildings, structures, real estate, lands, tenements,
leaseholds, interest in real estate cooperatives, condominiums, and
hereditament, corporeal and incorporeal, or any interest therein intended to be
used or used as a housing accommodation.
SALE: Includes any contract to sell, exchange, convey, transfer or assign legal
or equitable title to or beneficial interest in real property.
SOLICITATION: Any conduct designed or intended to induce the owner of any real
property to sell, rent, exchange, convey, transfer or list for sale or rental
such real property. (Ord. 591, 5-10-2005)
3-8-2: PROHIBITIONS:
   (A)   Discrimination Prohibited: No owner, lessee, or sublessee of real
property, real estate broker or salesman, lending institution, advertiser, or
agent of any of the foregoing, shall discriminate against any person because of
that person's race, color, religion, creed, gender, national origin, ancestry,
age, marital status, physical or mental disability or handicap or familial
status with respect to any real estate transaction.
   (B)   Enumeration Of Unfair Housing Practices: Any "act of discrimination"
(as defined herein) in a real estate transaction involving a housing
accommodation shall be considered an unfair housing practice, including, but
not limited to, the following if by reason of an "act of discrimination" as
defined herein:
      1.   Refusal to engage in or make available a real estate transaction
with a person.
      2.   Altering the terms, conditions or privileges of a real estate
transaction or in the furnishings of facilities or services in connection
therewith.
      3.   Refusal to receive or failure to transmit a bona fide offer to
engage in a real estate transaction from a person.
      4.   Refusal to negotiate for a real estate transaction with a person.
      5.   Representing to a person that real property is not available for
inspection, sale, rental, or lease when in fact it is so available, or failure
to bring a property listing to his or her attention, or refusal to permit him
or her to inspect real property.
      6.   Printing, circulating, posting, mailing, publishing or causing to be
published a written or oral statement, advertisement or sign, or using a form
of application for a real estate transaction, which expresses any limitation
founded upon, or indicating, directly or indirectly an intent to engage in
unlawful discrimination.
      7.   Offering, soliciting, accepting, using or retaining a listing of
real property with knowledge that unlawful discrimination or discrimination is
intended in a real estate transaction.
      8.   Soliciting for sale, leasing, listing or purchasing any residential
real property within the village on the grounds of loss of value due to the
present or prospective entry into the vicinity of the real property involved of
any person or persons of any particular race, color, religion, creed, gender,
national origin, ancestry, age, marital status, familial status or physical or
mental disability or handicap.
      9.   Discrimination or participating in discrimination in connection with
borrowing or lending money, guaranteeing loans, accepting mortgages or
otherwise obtaining or making available funds for the purchase, acquisition,
construction, rehabilitation, repairs or maintenance of any real property in
the village. For the purpose of this subsection, discrimination in lending
shall include:
         (a)   Refusal to make loans; or
         (b)   Differentiation in the type of loans, including interest rates,
charges to buyer or seller, duration and amount of loan; or
         (c)   Influencing appraisals in connection with loans; or
         (d)   Delaying processing loan applications. (Ord. 591, 5-10-2005)
3-8-3: COMPLAINT PROCEDURES:
   (A)   Assistance By Village: The village shall act as a local source for
assistance and information for persons who have complaints related to unfair
housing practices.
   (B)   Information Provided: The village shall provide assistance and
information to any such person, which shall include, but is not limited to:
      1.   The rights and remedies available to a person who has been
discriminated against by virtue of an unfair housing practice;
      2.   The types of discrimination which are considered to be unfair
housing practices;
      3.   The names, addresses and phone numbers of county, state, and federal
agencies where such person may file formal complaints; and
      4.   Such other relevant information or assistance as the village may
have available to assist such person.
   (C)   Coordination: The board of trustees shall be responsible for
coordination and directing the village's fair housing procedures. (Ord. 591, 5-
10-2005)
CHAPTER 9
VIDEO GAMING
SECTION:
3-9-1: Authority To Regulate
3-9-2: Fee
3-9-3: Definitions
3-9-4: License Required
3-9-5: Number Of Devices Allowed
3-9-6: Application Form Required
3-9-7: Length Of License
3-9-8: License Not Transferable
3-9-9: Regulation On Disturbing The Peace
3-9-10: Conditions Governing License
3-9-11: Suspension Or Revocation Of License
3-9-12: Information Requirement
3-9-13: Time Of Application
3-9-1: AUTHORITY TO REGULATE:
This chapter is passed pursuant to 230 Illinois Compiled Statutes 40/1 et seq.
(the Illinois video gaming act), notwithstanding anything to the contrary in
any ordinance of the village. (Ord. 668, 6-12-2012)
3-9-2: FEE:
There is hereby imposed on the privilege of operating every video gaming
terminal in the village, as defined by the Illinois video gaming act, 230
Illinois Compiled Statutes 40/65, an annual fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00)
for each terminal. (Ord. 668, 6-12-2012)
3-9-3: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
PERSON: As used herein shall include any person, firm, corporation or
association, or partnership which, as permitted by state law and regulation,
owns or possesses or places for use by the public any video gaming terminal,
and shall also mean any such person, firm, corporation, partnerships or
association having control over any video gaming terminal.
VIDEO GAMING TERMINAL: The same meaning as set forth in the Illinois gaming
act, 230 Illinois Compiled Statutes 40/5. (Ord. 668, 6-12-2012)
3-9-4: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall own, possess, keep or display for use or patronage by the
public within the village, any video gaming terminal without having first
obtained a license from the village, through the village president, and said
license shall be framed and hung in plain view in a conspicuous place on the
licensed premises. The posted license may include more than one terminal on the
licensed premises. It shall be a prerequisite to any license from the village
that the person have a valid license from the state of Illinois for each video
gaming terminal and the loss or suspension of any license issued by the state
of Illinois shall automatically result in the loss and suspension of the
license issued by the village, without refund of any license fee. Pursuant to
state regulation, the village, through the village president, shall report to
the state of Illinois any discipline or change in status of any video gaming
licenses issued by the village. (Ord. 668, 6-12-2012)
3-9-5: NUMBER OF DEVICES ALLOWED:
The number of video gaming terminal devices permitted upon a licensed premises
at any one time shall not exceed that number authorized in the license issued
for said premises by the state of Illinois. (Ord. 668, 6-12-2012)
3-9-6: APPLICATION FORM REQUIRED:
An application for a video gaming license shall be made to the village
president on forms furnished by the village president. The application shall
set forth the number of video gaming terminals sought for the licensed
premises; shall include a copy of the license from the state of Illinois for
each video gaming terminal for which an application to the village is being
made; and shall be accompanied by payment of the appropriate fee. (Ord. 668, 6-
12-2012)
3-9-7: LENGTH OF LICENSE:
Every license granted hereunder shall expire on December 31 of the year in
which it is granted. The fee shall not be prorated. (Ord. 668, 6-12-2012)
3-9-8: LICENSE NOT TRANSFERABLE:
No license issued to any person hereunder shall be transferable to any other
person or for any other premises other than as set forth on the license.
Application must be made annually. (Ord. 668, 6-12-2012)
3-9-9: REGULATION ON DISTURBING THE PEACE:
No license issued under this chapter shall permit the operation of any video
gaming terminal at any place or in any manner which will disturb the peace and
quiet of persons outside, or beyond the premises on which the terminal is being
used. No immoral or indecent selection shall be presented in any video gaming
terminal. (Ord. 668, 6-12-2012)
3-9-10: CONDITIONS GOVERNING LICENSE:
In addition to any other condition or regulation contained in this chapter or
in the laws of the state of Illinois, no video gaming terminal shall be located
in any establishment that does not qualify as a "licensed establishment", as
that term is defined in the Illinois video gaming act. (Ord. 668, 6-12-2012)
3-9-11: SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
The village president may suspend or revoke any license issued under this
chapter upon due notice to the licensee of the time and place of a public
hearing, and after a public hearing, if the village president determines that
the licensee has failed or refused to comply with any provision in this
chapter, has failed or refused to comply with other law applicable to the
business of keeping or providing video gaming terminals or has been convicted
by a court of competent jurisdiction of a violation of any provision of this
chapter or the Illinois video gaming act. (Ord. 668, 6-12-2012)
3-9-12: INFORMATION REQUIREMENT:
Applications for the licenses required above shall be filed in duplicate with
the village president (with 1 of said copies being retained, each, by the
village president and by the applicant), and shall contain the following
information:
   (A)   If the applicant is a corporation or limited liability company:
      1.   Corporate name and address.
      2.   Names, dates of birth, and addresses of corporate officers and
directors.
      3.   Statement of principal kind of business in which corporation
engages.
      4.   Statement of whether corporate business will be conducted by a
manager, and the name, address and authority of any such manager or agent.
      5.    Names, dates of birth, and addresses of all persons, firms and
organizations owning of record five percent (5%) or more of the corporation's
stock.
      6.   Statement of whether any officer, manager, director, or shareholder
owning five percent (5%) or more of the stock of the corporation has ever been
convicted of a felony charge.
      7.   The location of the place of business where the video gaming
terminal is to be kept or displayed.
      8.   Statement or personal history of the manager or agent conducting
business for the corporation.
      9.   Any other information which the village president shall require.
   (B)   If the applicant is an individual, partnership, or association:
      1.   Name and address, and date of birth of applicant.
      2.   Location of place of business.
      3.   Principal kind of business engaged in.
      4.   Statement of whether business will be conducted by a manager or
agent, and the name and address and date of birth of any such manager or agent.
      5.   The location of the place of business where the video gaming
terminal is to be kept or displayed.
      6.   Statement of personal history of the manager or agent conducting
business for applicant.
      7.   Any other information which the village president shall require.
(Ord. 668, 6-12-2012)
3-9-13: TIME OF APPLICATION:
Any such application submitted above shall be submitted at least thirty (30)
days prior to the commencement of the period for which the license is sought.
(Ord. 668, 6-12-2012)
CHAPTER 10
CANNABIS BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENTS PROHIBITED
SECTION:
3-10-1: Definitions
3-10-2: Cannabis Business Establishments Prohibited
3-10-3: Public Nuisance Declared
3-10-4: Violations
3-10-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases shall, for the purposes of this chapter, have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section, as follows:
                                        A cultivation center, craft grower,
ADULT-USE CANNABIS BUSINESS             processing organization, infuser
ESTABLISHMENT:                          organization, dispensing organization
                                        or transporting organization.
                                        A facility operated by an organization
                                        or business that is licensed by the
                                        Illinois Department of Agriculture to
                                        cultivate, dry, cure and package
                                        cannabis and perform other necessary
ADULT-USE CANNABIS CRAFT GROWER:        activities to make cannabis available
                                        for sale at a dispensing organization
                                        or use at a processing organization,
                                        per the Cannabis Regulation and Tax
                                        Act, P.A.101-0027, as it may be amended
                                        from time to time, and regulations
                                        promulgated thereunder.
                                        A facility operated by an organization
                                        or business that is licensed by the
                                        Illinois Department of Agriculture to
                                        cultivate, process, transport and
                                        perform necessary activities to provide
ADULT-USE CANNABIS CULTIVATION CENTER:  cannabis and cannabis-infused products
                                        to licensed cannabis business
                                        establishments, per the Cannabis
                                        Regulation and Tax Act, P.A.101-0027,
                                        as it may be amended from time to time,
                                        and regulations promulgated thereunder.
                                        A facility operated by an organization
                                        or business that is licensed by the
                                        Illinois Department of Financial and
                                        Professional Regulation to acquire
                                        cannabis from licensed cannabis
                                        business establishments for the purpose
ADULT-USE CANNABIS DISPENSING           of selling or dispensing cannabis,
ORGANIZATION:                           cannabis-infused products, cannabis
                                        seeds, paraphernalia or related
                                        supplies to purchasers or to qualified
                                        registered medical cannabis patients
                                        and caregivers, per the Cannabis
                                        Regulation and Tax Act, P.A.101-0027,
                                        as it may be amended from time to time,
                                        and regulations promulgated thereunder.
                                        A facility operated by an organization
                                        or business that is licensed by the
                                        Illinois Department of Agriculture to
                                        directly incorporate cannabis or
ADULT-USE CANNABIS INFUSER ORGANIZATION cannabis concentrate into a product
OR INFUSER:                             formulation to produce a cannabis-
                                        infused product, per the Cannabis
                                        Regulation and Tax Act, P.A.101-0027,
                                        as it may be amended from time to time,
                                        and regulations promulgated thereunder.
                                        A facility operated by an organization
                                        or business that is licensed by the
                                        Illinois Department of Agriculture to
                                        either extract constituent chemicals or
                                        compounds to produce cannabis
ADULT-USE CANNABIS PROCESSING           concentrate or incorporate cannabis or
ORGANIZATION OR PROCESSOR:              cannabis concentrate into a product
                                        formulation to produce a cannabis
                                        product, per the Cannabis Regulation
                                        and Tax Act, P.A.101-0027, as it may be
                                        amended from time to time, and
                                        regulations promulgated thereunder.
                                        An organization or business that is
                                        licensed by the Illinois Department of
                                        Agriculture to transport cannabis on
                                        behalf of a cannabis business
ADULT-USE CANNABIS TRANSPORTING         establishment or a community college
ORGANIZATION OR TRANSPORTER:            licensed under the Community College
                                        Cannabis Vocational Training Pilot
                                        Program, per the Cannabis Regulation
                                        and Tax Act, P.A. 101-0027, as it may
                                        be amended from time to time, and
                                        regulations promulgated thereunder.
                                        Any person, firm, corporation,
                                        association, club, society or other
PERSON:                                 organization, including any owner,
                                        manager, proprietor, employee,
                                        volunteer or agent. (Ord. 760, 4-13-
                                        2021)
 
3-10-2: CANNABIS BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENTS PROHIBITED:
The following adult-use cannabis business establishments are prohibited in the
Village of Erie. No person shall locate, operate, own, suffer, allow to be
operated or aide, abet or assist in the operation within the Village of Erie of
any of the following:
   (A)   Adult-use cannabis craft grower;
   (B)   Adult-use cannabis cultivation center;
   (C)   Adult-use cannabis dispensing organization;
   (D)   Adult-use cannabis infuser organization or infuser;
   (E)   Adult-use cannabis processing organization or processor; and/or
   (F)   Adult-use cannabis transporting organization or transporter. (Ord.
760, 4-13-2021)
3-10-3: PUBLIC NUISANCE DECLARED:
Operation of any prohibited cannabis business establishment within the Village
in violation of the provisions of this chapter is hereby declared a public
nuisance and shall be abated pursuant to all available remedies. (Ord. 760, 4-
13-2021)
3-10-4: VIOLATIONS:
Violations of this chapter may be enforced in accordance with the provisions of
chapter 4, title 1 of this Code. (Ord. 760, 4-13-2021)
TITLE 4
BUILDING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
BUILDING PERMIT DIRECTOR
SECTION:
4-1-1: Office Created
4-1-2: Term Of Office
4-1-3: Oath
4-1-4: Duties
4-1-5: Right Of Entry
4-1-6: Permit Required
4-1-7: Application
4-1-8: Contents Of Application
4-1-9: Fees And Compensation
4-1-10: Penalty
4-1-1: OFFICE CREATED:
The office of building permit director is hereby created and the executive
official in charge shall be known as the building permit director. The building
permit director shall be appointed by the president with the advice and consent
of the board of trustees. During temporary absence or disability of the
building permit director, the appointing authorities shall designate an acting
building permit director. (Ord. 351, 5-18-1982; amd. Ord. 803, 5-13-2025)
4-1-2: TERM OF OFFICE:
The building permit director shall hold office from the date of his appointment
to and until May 1 next following the regular election for the election of a
village president for the full term and until his successor shall have been
appointed and shall be qualified. (Ord. 351, 5-18-1982; amd. Ord. 803, 5-13-
2025)
4-1-3: OATH:
Before entering upon the duties of his office, the building permit director
shall take an oath to faithfully discharge the duties of his office in the form
prescribed by law. (Ord. 351, 5-18-1982; amd. Ord. 803, 5-13-2025)
4-1-4: DUTIES:
It shall be the duty of the building permit director to enforce all laws
regulating the construction, location, alteration, removal and demolition of
buildings, structures, and private swimming pools, and all laws relating to
zoning, occupancy and use of premises. (Ord. 351, 5-18-1982; amd. Ord. 803, 5-
13-2025)
4-1-5: RIGHT OF ENTRY:
The building permit director, in the discharge of his official duties, and upon
proper identification, shall have authority to enter any building, structure or
premises at any reasonable hour. (Ord. 351, 5-18-1982; amd. Ord. 803, 5-13-
2025)
4-1-6: PERMIT REQUIRED:
No person shall construct, erect, install, or locate any building or structure,
public or private, without first obtaining a building permit as herein
provided. (Ord. 351, 5-18-1982)
The building permit director shall be given at least twenty four (24) hours'
notice of the starting of work under the building permit. Construction pursuant
to the permit must begin within ninety (90) days of its issuance. The permit
will expire at the end of one year from the issuance date; however, where the
size of the building project takes longer than one year to complete and/or
there is a valid reason to extend the construction period beyond one year, the
building permit director may grant up to two (2) 90-day extensions for the
project after a showing of reasonable cause. (Ord. 592, 5-10-2005; amd. Ord.
803, 5-13-2025)
4-1-7: APPLICATION:
Any person desiring to construct, erect, install or locate any building or
structure in the village shall first make written application for a permit to
the village clerk. At the time written application is submitted to the village
clerk, the village clerk shall collect in full a fee for each building permit
as hereinafter set forth. Thereafter, the village clerk shall transmit the
written application to the building permit director. Upon receipt by him of the
written application for a permit, the building permit director shall determine
if the application is adequate and whether the proposed building or structure
conforms to the requirements of this code. If the building permit director
determines that the application is adequate, and further that the building or
structure conforms to the requirements of this code, the building permit
director shall forthwith issue an appropriate building permit. (Ord. 351, 5-18-
1982; amd. Ord. 803, 5-13-2025)
4-1-8: CONTENTS OF APPLICATION:
The application shall state the name of the owner of the property upon which
the building or structure is proposed to be constructed, erected, installed, or
located; the name and address of the applicant and if the applicant is other
than the owner, whether the applicant will act as agent, servant or employee of
the owner, or as an independent contractor; a brief legal description of the
premises to be improved, and for this purpose the street address of the
property shall be sufficient; the value of the building or structure to be
constructed, erected, installed, or located; the use to which the building or
structure is proposed to be put. If the proposed building or structure shall
contain more than one living unit and/or more than one commercial unit, the
application shall so state. (Ord. 351, 5-18-1982)
4-1-9: FEES AND COMPENSATION:
A fee for each building permit shall be paid to the village clerk at the time
written application for a permit is submitted to the village clerk. The fee for
each building permit shall be two dollars ($2.00) per each one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) of valuation or fraction thereof, but in no case shall the fee be
less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00). The determination of value or valuation under any of the provisions
of this chapter, or any building code, shall be made by the building permit
director, whose decision shall be final and binding. The building permit
director shall have and retain for his own use and as full compensation for the
services rendered pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and title 9 of
this code, the fees paid hereunder pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 351, 5-18-1982; amd. Ord. 492, 8-11-1998; amd. Ord. 803, 5-13-2025)
4-1-10: PENALTY:
Where construction, erection, installation, or location, for a building or
structure for which a permit is required is started, or proceeded with, prior
to obtaining said permit, the fee above specified shall be tripled, but the
payment of each triple fee shall not relieve any person from fully complying
with the requirements of this code, in the execution of the work or from any
other penalty prescribed therein, or in any other applicable provisions of this
code. Additionally, the village attorney may proceed at law or in equity to
enforce the provisions of this chapter, and any such enforcement action shall
not relieve any person from fully complying with the requirements of this code,
in the execution of the work or from any other penalty prescribed therein, or
in any other applicable provisions of this code. (Ord. 351, 5-18-1982)
CHAPTER 2
MOVING BUILDINGS
SECTION:
4-2-1: Permit Required
4-2-2: Application; Bond
4-2-3: Contents Of Application
4-2-4: Permit Fee
4-2-5: Conditions Of Bond
4-2-6: Notify Public Utilities
4-2-1: PERMIT REQUIRED:
No person shall move over, along or upon any public highway, street or alley
within the village any house, barn or other building or structure or shall
operate or propel over, along or upon any such public highway, street or alley
any vehicle or conveyance having a gross weight, including load, in excess of
ten (10) tons, or having a maximum height from the ground, including load, of
over twelve feet (12') or having a maximum overall length in excess of thirty
five feet (35'), without first obtaining a license or permit as herein
provided, for such movement or operation. (Ord. 127, 11-14-1950)
4-2-2: APPLICATION; BOND:
Permits shall be issued by the village clerk on written application of the
person desiring to make any movement within the terms of this chapter and on
the filing of the bond and payment of the license or permit fee as hereinafter
provided. (Ord. 127, 11-14-1950)
4-2-3: CONTENTS OF APPLICATION:
The application shall state the name of the owner of the property proposed to
be transported; the name and address of the applicant and if the applicant is
other than the owner, whether the applicant in transporting said property will
act as agent, servant or employee of the owner or as an independent contractor.
Such application shall also state the route over which said property is
proposed to be transported, particularly designating each portion of each
street proposed to be used in such transportation, and the length of time which
will be required for the transportation of said property over such public
highways, streets and alleys and shall contain an agreement on the part of the
applicant that no damage will be done to any public highway, street or alley,
or to the pavement or surfacing of the same or to any hydrant, pole, wire or
other structure lawfully on or within such public highway, street or alley and
that should any such damage result to the village or to other property, the
applicant will promptly reimburse the village or other person, firm or
corporation injured, for the amount of the injury and will promptly restore all
public highways, streets and alleys used in such transportation, together with
all structures lawfully upon the same, to a like condition and state of repair
as the same were immediately prior to the beginning of such transportation.
(Ord. 127, 11-14-1950)
4-2-4: PERMIT FEE:
The fee for such permit or license shall be ten dollars ($10.00) per day for
each day or fraction thereof required for such transportation and shall be paid
to the village clerk before the issuance of a license or permit. (Ord. 127, 11-
14-1950)
4-2-5: CONDITIONS OF BOND:
The applicant shall also deposit with the village clerk a bond in the penal sum
of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) with two (2) good and sufficient sureties
(if individual sureties are offered), or with one surety (if a corporation
authorized to do business as a surety company within the state of Illinois is
offered), said bond to be approved by the clerk, said bond shall be payable to
the village for the use of any person injured and shall be conditioned that the
applicant will move only over the portions of the highways, streets and alleys
specified in his application, will promptly restore said highway and all
structures therein and thereon to a like condition as the same were immediately
preceding the time of said movement and will promptly pay all damages caused by
said movement to any property belonging to the village or to any other person.
(Ord. 127, 11-14-1950)
4-2-6: NOTIFY PUBLIC UTILITIES:
Any and every person obtaining a permit or license under this chapter shall
give to each public utility corporation at least twenty four (24) hours'
advance notice specifying with particularity all poles and wires in or
overhanging the public highway, street or alley which will be interfered with
in any way by said movement and specifying the approximate hour of the day when
removal of such poles or wires will be required and no licensee shall undertake
to remove or otherwise meddle or interfere with in any way any pole or wire of
any public utility corporation. (Ord. 127, 11-14-1950)
CHAPTER 3
DEVELOPMENT IN FLOODPLAIN AREAS
SECTION:
4-3-1: Purpose
4-3-2: Definitions
4-3-3: Base Flood Elevation
4-3-4: Duties Of The Building Permit Director
4-3-5: Development Permit
4-3-6: Preventing Increased Flood Heights And Resulting Damages
4-3-7: Protecting Buildings
4-3-8: Subdivision Requirements
4-3-9: Public Health And Other Standards
4-3-10: Carrying Capacity And Notification
4-3-11: Variances
4-3-12: Disclaimer Of Liability
4-3-13: Penalty
4-3-14: Abrogation And Greater Restrictions
4-3-1: PURPOSE:
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the police powers granted to the village of
Erie (herein referred to as "Erie" or "community") by the Illinois municipal
code 1  in order to accomplish the following purposes:
   (A)   To prevent unwise developments from increasing flood or drainage
hazards to others;
   (B)   To protect new buildings and major improvements to buildings from
flood damage;
   (C)   To promote and protect the public health, safety, and general welfare
of the citizens from the hazards of flooding;
   (D)   To lessen the burden on the taxpayer for flood control, repairs to
public facilities and utilities, and flood rescue and relief operations;
   (E)   To maintain property values and a stable tax base by minimizing the
potential for creating blight areas;
   (F)   To make federally subsidized flood insurance available; and
   (G)   To preserve the natural characteristics and functions of watercourses
and floodplains in order to moderate flood and storm water impacts, improve
water quality, reduce soil erosion, protect aquatic and riparian habitat,
provide recreational opportunities, provide aesthetic benefits and enhance
community and economic development. (Ord. 655, 1-11-2011)
 
Notes
1    165 ILCS 5/1-2-1, 5/11-12-12, 5/11-30-2, 5/11-30-8, 5/11-31-2.
4-3-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions are adopted:
BASE FLOOD: The flood having a one percent (1%) probability of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year. The base flood is also known as the 100-year flood.
The base flood elevation at any location is as defined in section
4-3-3 of this chapter.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE): The elevation in relation to mean sea level of the
crest of the base flood.
BASEMENT: That portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground
level) on all sides.
BUILDING: A walled and roofed structure, including gas or liquid storage tank,
which is principally aboveground, including manufactured homes, prefabricated
buildings, and gas or liquid storage tanks. The term also includes recreational
vehicles and travel trailers installed on a site for more than one hundred
eighty (180) days per year.
CRITICAL FACILITY: Any facility which is critical to the health and welfare of
the population and, if flooded, would create an added dimension to the
disaster. Damage to these critical facilities can impact the delivery of vital
services, can cause greater damage to other sectors of the community, or can
put special populations at risk.
Examples of critical facilities where flood protection should be required
include: emergency services facilities (such as fire and police stations),
schools, hospitals, retirement homes and senior care facilities, major roads
and bridges, critical utility sites (telephone switching stations or electrical
transformers), and hazardous material storage facilities (chemicals,
petrochemicals, hazardous or toxic substances).
DEVELOPMENT: Any manmade change to real estate including, but not necessarily
limited to:
   (A)   Demolition, construction, reconstruction, repair, placement of a
building, or any structural alteration to a building;
   (B)   Substantial improvement of an existing building;
   (C)   Installation of a manufactured home on a site, preparing a site for a
manufactured home, or installing a travel trailer on a site for more than one
hundred eighty (180) days per year;
   (D)   Installation of utilities, construction of roads, bridges, culverts or
similar projects;
   (E)   Construction or erection of levees, dams, walls or fences;
   (F)   Drilling, mining, filling, dredging, grading, excavating, paving, or
other alterations of the ground surface;
   (G)   Storage of materials including the placement of gas and liquid storage
tanks, and channel modifications or any other activity that might change the
direction, height, or velocity of flood or surface waters.
"Development" does not include routine maintenance of existing buildings and
facilities, resurfacing roads, or gardening, plowing, and similar practices
that do not involve filling, grading, or construction of levees.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed or buildings to be constructed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations
adopted by a community.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: The preparation
of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of
utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the
pouring of concrete pads).
FEMA: Federal emergency management agency.
FLOOD: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of
normally dry land areas from the overflow, the unusual and rapid accumulation,
or the runoff of surface waters from any source.
FLOOD FRINGE: That portion of the floodplain outside of the regulatory
floodway.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP: A map prepared by the federal emergency management
agency that depicts the floodplain or special flood hazard area (SFHA) within a
community. This map includes insurance rate zones and may or may not depict
floodways and show base flood elevations.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY: An examination, evaluation and determination of flood
hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations.
FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION (FPE): The elevation of the base flood plus one foot
(1') of freeboard at any given location in the floodplain.
FLOODPLAIN AND SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA): These two (2) terms are
synonymous. Those lands within the jurisdiction of Erie, the extraterritorial
jurisdiction of Erie, or that may be annexed into Erie, which are subject to
inundation by the base flood. The floodplains of Erie are generally identified
as such on panel numbers 17195C0287E and 17195CO0289E of the countywide flood
insurance rate map of Whiteside County prepared by the federal emergency
management agency and dated February 18, 2011. Floodplain also includes those
areas of known flooding as identified by the community.
The floodplains of those parts of unincorporated Whiteside County that are
within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of Erie or that may be annexed into
Erie are generally identified as such on the flood insurance rate map prepared
for Whiteside County by the federal emergency management agency and dated
February 18, 2011.
FLOODPROOFING: Any combination of structural or nonstructural additions,
changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to
real estate, property and their contents.
FLOODPROOFING CERTIFICATE: A form published by the federal emergency management
agency that is used to certify that a building has been designed and
constructed to be structurally dry floodproofed to the flood protection
elevation.
FLOODWAY: That portion of the floodplain required to store and convey the base
flood. The floodway for the floodplains of Rock River shall be according to the
best data available from federal, state, or other sources.
FREEBOARD: An increment of elevation added to the base flood elevation to
provide a factor of safety for uncertainties in calculations, future watershed
development, unknown localized conditions, wave actions and unpredictable
effects such as those caused by ice or debris jams.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE: Any structure that is:
   (A)   Listed individually in the national register of historic places or
preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the national register.
   (B)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior
as contributing to the historic district or a district preliminarily determined
by the secretary to qualify as a registered historic district.
   (C)   Individually listed on the state inventory of historic places by the
Illinois historic preservation agency.
   (D)   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places that has
been certified by the Illinois historic preservation agency.
IDNR/OWR: Illinois department of natural resources/office of water resources.
LOWEST FLOOR: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor. Provided that such
enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable nonelevation design requirements of section
4-3-7 of this chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure transportable in one or more sections, which is
built on a permanent chassis and is designed to be used with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to required utilities.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land
divided into two (2) or more lots for rent or sale.
NFIP: National flood insurance program.
NEW CONSTRUCTION: Structures for which the start of construction commenced on
or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a
community and includes any subsequent improvements of such structures.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed or buildings to be constructed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
completed on or after the effective date of the floodplain management
regulations adopted by a community.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE OR TRAVEL TRAILER: A vehicle which is:
   (A)   Built on a single chassis;
   (B)   Four hundred (400) square feet or less in size;
   (C)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty
truck and designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use.
REPETITIVE LOSS: Flood related damages sustained by a structure on two (2)
separate occasions during a ten (10) year period for which the cost of repairs
at the time of each such flood event on the average equals or exceeds twenty
five percent (25%) of the market value of the structure before the damage
occurred.
SFHA: See definition of Floodplain And Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA).
START OF CONSTRUCTION: Includes substantial improvement and means the date the
building permit was issued. This, provided the actual start of construction,
repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement or other
improvement, was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The
actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a
structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation
of piles, the construction of columns or any work beyond the stage of
excavation or placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. For a
substantial improvement, actual start of construction means the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building
whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE: See definition of Building.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the
cumulative percentage of damage subsequent to the adoption of this chapter
equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure
before the damage occurred regardless of actual repair work performed.
Volunteer labor and materials must be included in this determination. The term
includes "repetitive loss buildings" (see definition).
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or
improvement of a structure taking place subsequent to the adoption of this
chapter in which the cumulative percentage of improvements:
   (A)   Equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the
structure before the improvement or repair is started, or
   (B)   Increases the floor area by more than twenty percent (20%).
"Substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of
any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building commences,
whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the
structure. This term includes structures which have incurred repetitive loss or
substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work done.
The term does not include:
   (A)   Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing
state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely
necessary to assure safe living conditions, or
   (B)   Any alteration of a structure listed on the national register of
historic places or the Illinois register of historic places.
VIOLATION: The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure
or other development without the required federal, state, and/or local permits
and elevation certification is presumed to be in violation until such time as
the documentation is provided. (Ord. 655, 1-11-2011)
4-3-3: BASE FLOOD ELEVATION:
This chapter's protection standard is the base flood. The best available base
flood data are listed below. Whenever a party disagrees with the best available
data, the party shall finance the detailed engineering study needed to replace
the existing data with better data and submit it to the FEMA and IDNR/OWR for
approval prior to any development of the site.
   (A)   The base flood elevation for the floodplains of the Rock River shall
be as delineated on the 100-year flood profiles in the countywide flood
insurance study of Whiteside County prepared by the federal emergency
management agency dated February 18, 2011.
   (B)   The base flood elevation for each floodplain delineated as an "AH
zone" or "AO zone" shall be that elevation (or depth) delineated on the
countywide flood insurance rate map of Whiteside County.
   (C)   The base flood elevation for each of the remaining floodplains
delineated as an "A zone" on the countywide flood insurance rate map of
Whiteside County shall be according to the best data available from federal,
state or other sources. Should no other data exist, an engineering study must
be financed by the applicant to determine base flood elevations.
   (D)   The base flood elevation for the floodplains of those parts of
unincorporated Whiteside County that are within the extraterritorial
jurisdiction of Erie, or that may be annexed into Erie, shall be as delineated
on the 100-year flood profiles in the flood insurance study of Whiteside County
prepared by the federal emergency management agency and dated February 18,
2011. (Ord. 655, 1-11-2011)
4-3-4: DUTIES OF THE BUILDING PERMIT DIRECTOR:
The building permit director shall be responsible for the general
administration of this chapter and ensure that all development activities
within the floodplains under the jurisdiction of Erie meet the requirements of
this chapter. Specifically, the building permit director shall:
   (A)   Process development permits in accordance with section
4-3-5 of this chapter;
   (B)   Ensure that all development in a floodway (or a floodplain with no
delineated floodway) meets the damage prevention requirements of section
4-3-6 of this chapter;
   (C)   Ensure that the building protection requirements for all buildings
subject to section
4-3-7 of this chapter are met and maintain a record of the "as built" elevation
of the lowest floor (including basement) or floodproof certificate;
   (D)   Assure that all subdivisions and annexations meet the requirements of
section
4-3-8 of this chapter;
   (E)   Ensure that water supply and waste disposal systems meet the public
health standards of section
4-3-9 of this chapter;
   (F)   If a variance is requested, ensure that the requirements of section
4-3-11 of this chapter are met and maintain documentation of any variances
granted;
   (G)   Inspect all development projects and take any and all penalty actions
outlined in section
4-3-13 of this chapter as necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter;
   (H)   Assure that applicants are aware of and obtain any and all other
required local, state, and federal permits;
   (I)   Notify IDNR/OWR and any neighboring communities prior to any
alteration or relocation of a watercourse;
   (J)   Provide information and assistance to citizens upon request about
permit procedures and floodplain construction techniques;
   (K)   Cooperate with state and federal floodplain management agencies to
coordinate base flood data and to improve the administration of this chapter;
   (L)   Maintain for public inspection base flood data, floodplain maps,
copies of state and federal permits, and documentation of compliance for
development activities subject to this chapter;
   (M)   Perform site inspections to ensure compliance with this chapter and
make substantial damage determinations for structures within the floodplain;
and
   (N)   Maintain the accuracy of floodplain maps including notifying IDNR/OWR
and/or submitting information to FEMA within six (6) months whenever a
modification of the floodplain may change the base flood elevation or result in
a change to the floodplain map. (Ord. 655, 1-11-2011; amd. Ord. 803, 5-13-2025)
4-3-5: DEVELOPMENT PERMIT:
No person, firm, corporation, or governmental body not exempted by law shall
commence any development in the floodplain without first obtaining a
development permit from the building permit director. The building permit
director shall not issue a development permit if the proposed development does
not meet the requirements of this chapter.
(A)   The application for development permit shall be accompanied by:
   1.   Drawings of the site, drawn to scale showing property line dimensions;
   2.   Existing grade elevations and all changes in grade resulting from
excavation or filling;
   3.   The location and dimensions of all buildings and additions to
buildings;
   4.   The elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) of all proposed
buildings subject to the requirements of section
4-3-7 of this chapter; and
   5.   Cost of project or improvements as estimated by a licensed engineer or
architect. A signed estimate by a contractor may also meet this requirement.
(B)   Upon receipt of an application for a development permit, the building
permit director shall compare the elevation of the site to the base flood
elevation. Any development located on land that can be shown by the base flood
elevation. Any development located on land that can be shown by survey data to
be higher than the current base flood elevation and which has not been filled
after the date of the site's first flood insurance rate map is not in the
floodplain and therefore not subject to the requirements of this chapter.
Conversely, any development located on land shown to be below the base flood
elevation and hydraulically connected, but not shown on the current flood
insurance rate map, is subject to the provisions of this chapter.
   The building permit director shall maintain documentation of the existing
ground elevation at the development site and certification that this ground
elevation existed prior to the date of the site's first flood insurance rate
map identification.
   The building permit director shall be responsible for obtaining from the
applicant copies of all other federal, state, and local permits, approvals or
permit not required letters that may be required for this type of activity. The
building permit director shall not issue a permit unless all other federal,
state, and local permits have been obtained. (Ord. 655, 1-11-2011; amd. Ord.
803, 5-13-2025)
4-3-6: PREVENTING INCREASED FLOOD HEIGHTS AND RESULTING DAMAGES:
Within any floodway identified on the countywide flood insurance rate map, and
within all other floodplains where a floodway has not been delineated, the
following standards shall apply:
   (A)   Except as provided in subsection (B) of this section, no development
shall be allowed which, acting in combination with existing and anticipated
development, will cause any increase in flood heights or velocities or threat
to public health and safety. The following specific development activities
shall be considered as meeting this requirement:
      1.   Bridge and culvert crossings of streams in rural areas meeting the
following conditions of the Illinois department of natural resources, office of
water resources statewide permit number 2:
         (a)   The crossing will not result in an increase in water surface
profile elevation in excess of 1.0 foot, and
         (b)   The crossing will not result in an increase in water surface
profile elevation in excess of one-half foot (0.5') at a point one thousand
feet (1,000') upstream of the proposed structure.
         (c)   There are no buildings in the area impacted by the increases in
water surface profile.
         (d)   The proposed bridge or culvert crossing will not involve
straightening, enlarging, or relocating the existing channel.
         (e)   The design must be certified by a licensed professional engineer
in the state of Illinois and the designs must meet the conditions of an IDNR/
OWR permit.
         (f)   The design must be certified by a second licensed professional
engineer.
      2.   Barge fleeting facilities meeting the following conditions of IDNR/
OWR statewide permit number 3:
         (a)   The permit is only applicable when deadmen, pier cells, or other
similar anchorage devices have been permitted by the U.S. army corps of
engineers.
      3.   Aerial utility crossings meeting the following conditions of IDNR/
OWR statewide permit number 4:
         (a)   The utility line must be constructed above the existing 100-year
flood elevation or attached to an existing bridge.
         (b)   A utility line attached to an existing bridge shall be
constructed above the low cord elevation of the bridge.
         (c)   No supporting towers or poles shall be located in a river, lake
or stream.
         (d)   Supporting towers including foundation and poles shall be
designed and located so as to not cause an obstruction of flood flows by
trapping debris.
         (e)   All disturbed areas shall be returned to preconstruction grades
and revegetated.
         (f)   All Illinois commerce commission, national electrical safety
code, and federal requirements must be met.
      4.   Minor boat docks meeting the following conditions of IDNR/OWR
statewide permit number 5:
         (a)   The boat dock must not extend more than fifty feet (50') into a
waterway and no more than one-fourth (1/4) of the width of the waterway and
shall not extend beyond the navigational limit established by the IDNR and
corps of engineers.
         (b)   The width of the boat dock shall not be more than ten feet
(10').
         (c)   For L-shaped or T-shaped docks, the length of that portion
parallel to the shoreline must not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the
landowner's shoreline frontage nor fifty feet (50').
         (d)   Docks must be aligned so as not to cross the projection of
property lines into the waterway or come within ten feet (10') of the projected
property line.
         (e)   Dock posts must be marked by reflective devices.
         (f)   The boat dock must be securely anchored to prevent detachment
during times of high wind or water.
         (g)   Metal drums or containers may not be used as buoyancy units
unless they are filled with flotation foam. Containers which previously stored
pesticides, herbicides, or any other toxic chemicals are not permissible.
         (h)   This permit does not authorize any other related construction
activity such as shore protection or fill.
         (i)   Nonfloating boat docks must be constructed in a manner which
will minimize obstruction to flow.
         (j)   At any future date, the permittee must agree to make necessary
modifications to the dock as determined by the IDNR or corps of engineers.
      5.   Minor, nonobstructive activities meeting the following conditions of
IDNR/OWR statewide permit number 6:
         (a)   The following activities (not involving fill or positive change
in grade) are covered by this permit:
            (1)   The construction of underground utility lines, wells, or
septic tanks not crossing a lake or stream.
            (2)   The construction of light poles, signposts, and similar
structures.
            (3)   The construction of sidewalks, driveways, athletic fields
(excluding fences), patios, and similar structures.
            (4)   The construction of properly anchored, unwalled, open
structures such as playground equipment, pavilions, and carports.
            (5)   The placement of properly anchored buildings not exceeding
seventy (70) square feet in size, nor ten (10) square feet in any dimension.
Only one such building on a property is authorized by this statewide permit.
            (6)   The raising of existing buildings provided no changes are
made to the outside dimensions of the building and the placement of fill is not
involved.
      6.   Outfall structures and drainage ditch outlets meeting the following
conditions of IDNR/OWR statewide permit number 7:
         (a)   Any outfall structure, including any headwall or end section,
shall not extend riverward or lakeward of the existing adjacent natural bank
slope or adjacent bank protection.
         (b)   The velocity of the discharge shall not exceed the scour
velocity of the channel soil, unless channel erosion would be prevented by the
use of riprap or other design measures.
         (c)   Outlets from drainage ditches shall not be opened to a stream
until the ditch is vegetated or otherwise stabilized to minimize stream
sedimentation.
         (d)   Disturbance of streamside vegetation shall be kept to a minimum
during construction to prevent erosion and sedimentation. All disturbed
floodway areas, including the stream banks, shall be restored to their original
contours and seeded or otherwise stabilized upon completion of construction.
      7.   Underground pipeline and utility crossings meeting the conditions of
IDNR/OWR statewide permit number 8:
         (a)   In all cases, the crossing shall be placed beneath the bed of
the river, lake or stream and, unless the crossing is encased in concrete or
entrenched in bedrock, a minimum of three feet (3') of cover shall be provided.
The river, lake or stream bed shall be returned to its original condition.
         (b)   Disturbance of streamside vegetation shall be kept to a minimum
during construction to prevent erosion and sedimentation. All disturbed
floodway areas, including stream banks, shall be restored to their original
contours and seeded or otherwise stabilized upon completion of construction.
         (c)   Any utility crossing carrying material which may cause water
pollution, as defined by the environmental protection act 1 , shall be provided
with shutoff valves on each side of the body of water to be crossed.
         (d)   If blasting is to be utilized in the construction of the
crossing, the permittee shall notify the IDNR/OWR at least ten (10) days prior
to the blasting date to allow monitoring of any related fish kills.
      8.   Bank stabilization projects meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR
statewide permit number 9:
         (a)   Only the following materials may be utilized in urban areas:
stone and concrete riprap, steel sheet piling, cellular blocks, fabric formed
concrete, gabion baskets, rock and wire mattresses, sand/cement filled bags,
geotechnical fabric materials, natural vegetation and treated timber. Urban
areas are defined as: areas of the state where residential, commercial, or
industrial development currently exists or, based on land use plans or
controls, is expected to occur within ten (10) years. (The department should be
consulted if there is a question of whether or not an area is considered
urban.)
         (b)   In addition to the materials listed in subsection (A)8(a) of
this section, other materials (e.g., tire revetments) may be utilized in rural
areas provided all other conditions of this permit are met.
         (c)   The following materials shall not be used in any case: auto
bodies, garbage or debris, scrap lumber, metal refuse, roofing materials,
asphalt or other bituminous materials, or any material which would cause water
pollution as defined by the environmental protection act 2 .
         (d)   The affected length of shoreline, stream bank, or channel to be
protected shall not exceed, either singularly or cumulatively, one thousand
feet (1,000').
         (e)   All material utilized shall be properly sized or anchored to
resist anticipated forces of current and wave action.
         (f)   Materials shall be placed in a way which would not cause erosion
or the accumulation of debris on properties adjacent to or opposite the
project.
         (g)   Materials shall not be placed higher than the existing top of
the bank.
         (h)   Materials shall be placed so that the modified bank full width
and cross sectional area of the channel will conform to or be no more
restrictive than that of the natural channel upstream and downstream of the
site.
For projects involving continuous placement of riprap along the bank, toe of
the bank or other similar applications, in no case shall the cross sectional
area of the natural channel be reduced by more than ten percent (10%) nor the
volume of material placed exceed two (2) cubic yards per linear foot of the
stream bank or shoreline. The bank may be graded to obtain a flatter slope and
to lessen the quantity of material required.
         (i)   If broken concrete is used, all protruding materials such as
reinforcing rods shall be cut flush with the surface of the concrete and
removed from the construction area.
         (j)   Disturbance of vegetation shall be kept to a minimum during
construction to prevent erosion and sedimentation. All disturbed areas shall be
seeded or otherwise stabilized upon completion of construction.
         (k)   In the case of seawalls and gabion structures on lakes, the
structure shall be constructed at or landward of the water line as determined
by the normal pool elevation, unless:
            (1)   It is constructed in alignment with an existing seawall(s) or
gabion structure(s), and
            (2)   The volume of material placed, including the structure, would
not exceed two (2) cubic yards per linear foot.
         (l)   Excess material excavated during the construction of the bank or
shoreline protection shall be placed in accordance with local, state, and
federal laws and rules, shall not be placed in a floodway.
      9.   Accessory structures and additions to existing residential buildings
meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR statewide permit number 10:
         (a)   The accessory structure or building addition must comply with
the requirements of this chapter.
         (b)   The principal structure to which the project is being added must
have been in existence on the effective date of this permit (July 25, 1988).
         (c)   The accessory structure or addition must not exceed five hundred
(500) square feet in size and must not deflect floodwaters onto another
property.
         (d)   Must not involve the placement of any fill material.
         (e)   No construction shall be undertaken in, or within fifty feet
(50') of the bank of the stream channel.
         (f)   The accessory structure or addition must be properly anchored to
prevent its movement during flood conditions.
         (g)   Only one accessory structure or addition to an existing
structure shall be authorized by this permit; plans for any subsequent addition
must be submitted to IDNR/OWR for review.
         (h)   Disturbances of vegetation shall be kept to a minimum during
construction to prevent erosion and sedimentation. All disturbed floodway areas
shall be seeded or otherwise stabilized upon completion of construction.
      10.   Minor maintenance dredging activities meeting the following
conditions of IDNR/OWR statewide permit number 11:
         (a)   The affected length of the stream shall not either singularly or
cumulatively exceed one thousand feet (1,000').
         (b)   The project shall not include the construction of any new
channel; all work must be confined to the existing channel or to reestablishing
flows in the natural stream channel.
         (c)   The cross sectional area of the dredged channel shall conform to
that of the natural channel upstream and downstream of the site.
         (d)   Dredged or spoil material shall not be disposed of in a wetland
and shall be either:
            (1)   Removed from the floodway;
            (2)   Used to stabilize an existing bank provided no materials
would be placed higher than the existing top of bank and provided the cross
sectional area of the natural channel would not be reduced by more than ten
percent (10%), nor the volume of material placed exceed two (2) cubic yards per
linear foot of stream bank;
            (3)   Used to fill an existing washed out or scoured floodplain
area such that the average natural floodplain elevation is not increased;
            (4)   Used to stabilize an existing levee provided the height of
the levee would not be increased nor its alignment changed;
            (5)   Placed in a disposal site previously approved by the
department in accordance with the conditions of the approval; or
            (6)   Used for beach nourishment, provided the material meets all
applicable water quality standards.
         (e)   Disturbance of streamside vegetation shall be kept to a minimum
during construction to prevent erosion and sedimentation. All disturbed
floodway areas, including the stream banks, shall be seeded or otherwise
stabilized upon completion of construction.
      11.   Bridge and culvert replacement structures and bridge widening
meeting the following conditions of IDNR/OWR statewide permit number 12:
         (a)   A licensed professional engineer shall determine and document
that the existing structure has not been the cause of demonstrable flood
damage. Such documentation shall include, at a minimum, confirmation that:
            (1)   No buildings or structures have been impacted by the
backwater induced by the existing structure, and
            (2)   There is no record of complaints of flood damages associated
with the existing structure.
         (b)   A licensed professional engineer shall determine that the new
structure will provide the same or greater effective waterway opening as the
existing structure. For bridge widening projects the existing piers and the
proposed pier extensions must be in line with the direction of the approaching
flow upstream of the bridge.
         (c)   The project shall not include any appreciable raising of the
approach roads. (This condition does not apply if all points on the approaches
exist at an elevation equal to or higher than the 100-year frequency flood
headwater elevation as determined by a FEMA flood insurance study completed or
approved by IDNR/OWR.)
         (d)   The project shall not involve the straightening, enlargement or
relocation of the existing channel of the river or stream except as permitted
by the department's statewide permit number 9 (minor shoreline, channel and
stream bank protection activities) or statewide permit number 11 (minor
maintenance dredging activities).
         (e)   The permittee shall maintain records of projects authorized by
this permit necessary to document compliance with the above conditions.
      12.   Temporary construction activities meeting the following conditions
of IDNR/OWR statewide permit number 13:
         (a)   No temporary construction activity shall be commenced until the
individual permittee determines that the permanent structure (if any) for which
the work is being performed has received all required federal, state and local
authorizations.
         (b)   The term "temporary" shall mean not more than one construction
season. All temporary construction materials must be removed from the stream
and floodway within one year of their placement and the area returned to the
conditions existing prior to the beginning of construction. Any desired
subsequent or repetitive material placement shall not occur without the review
and approval of the IDNR/OWR.
         (c)   The temporary project shall be constructed such that it will not
cause erosion or damage due to increases in water surface profiles to adjacent
properties. For locations where there are structures in the upstream
floodplain, the temporary project shall be constructed such that all water
surface profile increases, due to the temporary project, are contained within
the channel banks.
         (d)   This permit does not authorize the placement or construction of
any solid embankment or wall such as a dam, roadway, levee, or dike across any
channel or floodway.
         (e)   No temporary structure shall be placed within any river or
stream channel until a licensed professional engineer determines and documents
that the temporary structure will meet the requirements of special condition
number 3 of this statewide permit. Such documentation shall include, at a
minimum, confirmation that no buildings or structures will be impacted by the
backwater induced by the temporary structure.
         (f)   The permittee shall maintain records of projects authorized by
this permit necessary to document compliance with the above condition.
         (g)   Disturbance of vegetation shall be kept to a minimum during
construction to prevent erosion and sedimentation. All disturbed areas shall be
seeded or otherwise stabilized upon completion of the removal of the temporary
construction.
         (h)   Materials used for the project shall not cause water pollution
as defined by the environmental protection act 1 .
      13.   Any development determined by IDNR/OWR to be located entirely
within a flood fringe area shall be exempt from state floodway permit
requirements.
   (B)   Other development activities not listed in subsection (A) of this
section may be permitted only if:
      1.   Permit has been issued for the work by IDNR/OWR (or written
documentation is provided that an IDNR/OWR permit is not required), or
      2.   Sufficient data has been provided to FEMA when necessary, and
approval obtained from FEMA for a revision of the regulatory map and base flood
elevation. (Ord. 655, 1-11-2011)
 
Notes
1    1415 ILCS 5.
2    2415 ILCS 5.
1    1415 ILCS 5.
4-3-7: PROTECTING BUILDINGS:
   (A)   In addition to the damage prevention requirements of section
4-3-6 of this chapter, all buildings located in the floodplain shall be
protected from flood damage below the flood protection elevation. This building
protection requirement applies to the following situations:
      1.   Construction or placement of a new building or alteration or
addition to an existing building valued at more than one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) or seventy (70) square feet.
      2.   Substantial improvements or structural alterations made to an
existing building that increase the floor area by more than twenty percent
(20%) or equal or exceed the market value by fifty percent (50%). Alteration
shall be figured cumulatively subsequent to the adoption of this chapter. If
substantially improved, the existing structure and the addition must meet the
flood protection standards of this section.
      3.   Repairs made to a substantially damaged building. These repairs
shall be figured cumulatively subsequent to the adoption of this chapter. If
substantially damaged the entire structure must meet the flood protection
standards of this section.
      4.   Installing a manufactured home on a new site or a new manufactured
home on an existing site. (The building protection requirements do not apply to
returning a manufactured home to the same site it lawfully occupied before it
was removed to avoid flood damage.)
      5.   Installing a travel trailer or recreational vehicle on a site for
more than one hundred eighty (180) days per year.
      6.   "Repetitive loss" to an existing building as defined in section
4-3-2 of this chapter.
   (B)   Residential or nonresidential buildings can meet the building
protection requirements by one of the following methods:
      1.   The building may be constructed on permanent land fill in accordance
with the following:
         (a)   The lowest floor (including basement) shall be at or above the
flood protection elevation.
         (b)   The fill shall be placed in layers no greater than six inches
(6") before compaction and should extend at least ten feet (10') beyond the
foundation before sloping below the flood protection elevation.
         (c)   The fill shall be protected against erosion and scour during
flooding by vegetative cover, riprap, or other structural measure.
         (d)   The fill shall be composed of rock or soil and not incorporated
debris or refuse material, and
         (e)   Shall not adversely affect the flow of surface drainage from or
onto neighboring properties and when necessary stormwater management techniques
such as swales or basins shall be incorporated.
      2.   The building may be elevated on solid walls in accordance with the
following:
         (a)   The building or improvements shall be elevated on stilts, piles,
walls, crawl space, or other foundation that is permanently open to
floodwaters.
         (b)   The lowest floor and all electrical, heating, ventilating,
plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and utility meters shall be located at
or above the flood protection elevation.
         (c)   If walls are used, all enclosed areas below the flood protection
elevation shall address hydrostatic pressures by allowing the automatic entry
and exit of floodwaters. Designs must either be certified by a licensed
professional engineer or by having a minimum of one permanent opening on each
wall no more than one foot (1') above grade with a minimum of two (2) openings.
The openings shall provide a total net area of not less than one square inch
for every one square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding below the base
flood elevation, and
         (d)   The foundation and supporting members shall be anchored,
designed, and certified so as to minimize exposure to hydrodynamic forces such
as current, waves, ice, and floating debris.
            (1)   All structural components below the flood protection
elevation shall be constructed of materials resistant to flood damage.
            (2)   Water and sewer pipes, electrical and telephone lines,
submersible pumps, and other service facilities may be located below the flood
protection elevation provided they are waterproofed.
            (3)   The area below the flood protection elevation shall be used
solely for parking or building access and not later modified or occupied as
habitable space, or
            (4)   In lieu of the above criteria, the design methods to comply
with these requirements may be certified by a licensed professional engineer or
architect.
      3.   The building may be constructed with a crawl space located below the
flood protection elevation provided that the following conditions are met:
         (a)   The building must be designed and adequately anchored to resist
flotation, collapse, and lateral movement of the structure resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy.
         (b)   Any enclosed area below the flood protection elevation shall
have openings that equalize hydrostatic pressures by allowing for the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters. A minimum of one opening on each wall having a
total net area of not less than one square inch per one square foot of enclosed
area. The openings shall be no more than one foot (1') above grade.
         (c)   The interior grade of the crawl space below the flood protection
elevation must not be more than two feet (2') below the lowest adjacent
exterior grade.
         (d)   The interior height of the crawl space measured from the
interior grade of the crawl space to the top of the foundations wall must not
exceed four feet (4') at any point.
         (e)   An adequate drainage system must be installed to remove
floodwaters from the interior area of the crawl space within a reasonable
period of time after a flood event.
         (f)   Portions of the building below the flood protection elevation
must be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage, and
         (g)   Utility systems within the crawl space must be elevated above
the flood protection elevation.
   (C)   Nonresidential buildings may be structurally dry floodproofed (in lieu
of elevation) provided a licensed professional engineer or architect certifies
that:
      1.   Below the flood protection elevation the structure and attendant
utility facilities are watertight and capable of resisting the effects of the
base flood.
      2.   The building design accounts for flood velocities, duration, rate of
rise, hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces, the effects of buoyancy, and the
impact from debris and ice.
      3.   Floodproofing measures will be incorporated into the building design
and operable without human intervention and without an outside source of
electricity.
      4.   Levees, berms, floodwalls and similar works are not considered
floodproofing for the purpose of this subsection.
   (D)   Manufactured homes or travel trailers to be permanently installed on
site shall be:
      1.   Elevated to or above the flood protection elevation in accordance
with subsection (B) of this section, and
      2.   Anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement by being
tied down in accordance with the rules and regulations for the Illinois mobile
home tiedown act issued pursuant to 77 Illinois administrative code section
870.
   (E)   Travel trailers and recreational vehicles on site for more than one
hundred eighty (180) days per year shall meet the elevation requirements of
subsection (D) of this section unless the following conditions are met:
      1.   The vehicle must be either self-propelled or towable by a light duty
truck.
      2.   The hitch must remain on the vehicle at all times.
      3.   The vehicle must not be attached to external structures such as
decks and porches.
      4.   The vehicle must be designed solely for recreation, camping, travel,
or seasonal use rather than as a permanent dwelling.
      5.   The vehicle's largest horizontal projections must be no larger than
four hundred (400) square feet.
      6.   The vehicle's wheels must remain on axles and inflated.
      7.   Air conditioning units must be attached to the frame so as to be
safe for movement of the floodplain.
      8.   Propane tanks as well as electrical and sewage connections must be
quick disconnect and above the 100-year flood elevation.
      9.   The vehicle must be licensed and titled as a recreational vehicle or
park model, and
      10.   The vehicle must either:
         (a)   Entirely be supported by jacks, or
         (b)   Have a hitch jack permanently mounted, have the tires touching
the ground and be supported by blocks in a manner that will allow the blocks to
be easily removed by use of the hitch jack.
   (F)   Garages, sheds or other minor accessory structures constructed
ancillary to an existing residential use may be permitted provided the
following conditions are met:
      1.   The garage or shed must be nonhabitable.
      2.   The garage or shed must be used only for the storage of vehicles and
tools and cannot be modified later into another use.
      3.   The garage or shed must be located outside of the floodway or have
the appropriate state and/or federal permits.
      4.   The garage or shed must be on a single-family lot and be accessory
to an existing principal structure on the same lot.
      5.   Below the base flood elevation, the garage or shed must be built of
materials not susceptible to flood damage.
      6.   All utilities, plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical
must be elevated above the flood protection elevation.
      7.   The garage or shed must have at least one permanent opening on each
wall not more than one foot (1') above grade with one square inch of opening
for every one square foot of floor area.
      8.   The garage or shed must be less than ten thousand dollars
($10,000.00) in market value or replacement cost whichever is greater or less
than five hundred (500) square feet.
      9.   The structure shall be anchored to resist flotation and overturning.
      10.   All flammable or toxic materials (gasoline, paint, insecticides,
fertilizers, etc.) shall be stored above the flood protection elevation.
      11.   The lowest floor elevation should be documented and the owner
advised of the flood insurance implications. (Ord. 655, 1-11-2011)
4-3-8: SUBDIVISION REQUIREMENTS:
The zoning board of appeals shall take into account hazards, to the extent that
they are known, in all official actions related to land management use and
development.
   (A)   New subdivisions, manufactured home parks, annexation agreements,
planned unit developments, and additions to manufactured home parks and
subdivisions shall meet the damage prevention and building protection standards
of sections
4-3-6 and
4-3-7 of this chapter. Any proposal for such development shall include the
following data:
      1.   The base flood elevation and the boundary of the floodplain, where
the base flood elevation is not available from an existing study, the applicant
shall be responsible for calculating the base flood elevation,
      2.   The boundary of the floodway when applicable, and
      3.   A signed statement by a licensed professional engineer that the
proposed plat or plan accounts for changes in the drainage of surface waters in
accordance with the plat act 1 .
Streets, blocks, lots, parks and other public grounds shall be located and laid
out in such a manner as to preserve and utilize natural streams and channels.
Wherever possible the floodplains shall be included within parks or other
public grounds. (Ord. 655, 1-11-2011)
 
Notes
1    1765 ILCS 205/2.
4-3-9: PUBLIC HEALTH AND OTHER STANDARDS:
   (A)   Public health standards must be met for all floodplain development. In
addition to the requirements of sections
4-3-6 and
4-3-7 of this chapter the following standards apply:
      1.   No development in the floodplain shall include locating or storing
chemicals, explosives, buoyant materials, flammable liquids, pollutants, or
other hazardous or toxic materials below the flood protection elevation unless
such materials are stored in a floodproofed and anchored storage tank and
certified by a professional engineer or floodproofed building constructed
according to the requirements of section
4-3-7 of this chapter.
      2.   Public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas and electric
shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage.
      3.   Public sanitary sewer systems and water supply systems shall be
located and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters
into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters.
      4.   New and replacement on site sanitary sewer lines or waste disposal
systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or
contamination from them during flooding. Manholes or other aboveground openings
located below the flood protection elevation shall be watertight.
      5.   Construction of new or substantially improved critical facilities
shall be located outside the limits of the floodplain. Construction of new
critical facilities shall be permissible within the floodplain if no feasible
alternative site is available. Critical facilities constructed within the SFHA
shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated or structurally dry
floodproofed to the 500-year flood frequency elevation or three feet (3') above
the level of the 100-year flood frequency elevation whichever is greater.
Floodproofing and sealing measures must be taken to ensure that toxic
substances will not be displaced by or released into floodwaters. Access routes
elevated to or above the level of the base flood elevation shall be provided to
all critical facilities.
   (B)   All other activities defined as "development" shall be designed so as
not to alter flood flows or increase potential flood damages. (Ord. 655, 1-11-
2011)
4-3-10: CARRYING CAPACITY AND NOTIFICATION:
For all projects involving channel modification, fill, or stream maintenance
(including levees), the flood carrying capacity of the watercourse shall be
maintained.
In addition, Erie shall notify adjacent communities in writing thirty (30) days
prior to the issuance of a permit for the alteration or relocation of the
watercourse. (Ord. 655, 1-11-2011)
4-3-11: VARIANCES:
Whenever the standards of this chapter place undue hardship on a specific
development proposal, the applicant may apply to the board of appeals for a
variance. The board of appeals shall review the applicant's request for a
variance and shall submit its recommendation to the Erie board of trustees. The
board of trustees may attach such conditions to granting of a variance as it
deems necessary to further the intent of this chapter.
   (A)   No variance shall be granted unless the applicant demonstrates that
all of the following conditions are met:
      1.   The development activity cannot be located outside the floodplain.
      2.   An exceptional hardship would result if the variance were not
granted.
      3.   The relief requested is the minimum necessary.
      4.   There will be no additional threat to public health, safety or
creation of a nuisance.
      5.   There will be no additional public expense for flood protection,
rescue or relief operations, policing, or repairs to roads, utilities, or other
public facilities.
      6.   The applicant's circumstances are unique and do not establish a
pattern inconsistent with the intent of the NFIP.
      7.   All other state and federal permits have been obtained.
   (B)   The board of appeals shall notify an applicant in writing that a
variance from the requirements of the building protection standards of section
4-3-7 of this chapter that would lessen the degree of protection to a building
will:
      1.   Result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to twenty
five dollars ($25.00) per one hundred dollars ($100.00) of insurance coverage;
      2.   Increase the risk to life and property; and
      3.   Require that the applicant proceed with knowledge of these risks and
that the applicant acknowledge in writing the assumption of the risk and
liability.
   (C)   Variances to the building protection requirements of section
4-3-7 of this chapter which are requested in connection with reconstruction,
repair, or alteration of a historic site or historic structure as defined in
"historic structures", may be granted using criteria more permissive than the
requirements of sections
4-3-6 and
4-3-7 of this chapter subject to the conditions that:
      1.   The repair or rehabilitation is the minimum necessary to preserve
the historic character and design of the structure.
      2.   The repair or rehabilitation will not result in the structure being
removed as a certified historic structure. (Ord. 655, 1-11-2011)
4-3-12: DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY:
The degree of protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for
regulatory purposes and is based on available information derived from
engineering and scientific methods of study. Larger floods may occur or flood
heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not
imply that development either inside or outside of the floodplain will be free
from flooding or damage. This chapter does not create liability on the part of
Erie or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damage that results from
proper reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision made lawfully
thereunder. (Ord. 655, 1-11-2011)
4-3-13: PENALTY:
Failure to obtain a permit for development in the floodplain or failure to
comply with the conditions of a permit or a variance shall be deemed to be a
violation of this chapter. Upon due investigation, the building permit director
may determine that a violation of the minimum standards of this chapter exists.
The building permit director shall notify the owner in writing of such
violation.
   (A)   If such owner fails after ten (10) days' notice to correct the
violation:
      1.   Erie shall make application to the circuit court for an injunction
requiring conformance with this chapter or make such other order as the court
deems necessary to secure compliance with this chapter.
      2.   Any person who violates this chapter shall upon conviction thereof
be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) or more than seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00) for each offense.
      3.   A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or
on which a violation occurs or continues.
      4.   Erie shall record a notice of violation on the title of the
property.
   (B)   The building permit director shall inform the owner that any such
violation is considered a wilful act to increase flood damages and therefore
may cause coverage by a standard flood insurance policy to be suspended.
      The building permit director is authorized to issue an order requiring
the suspension of the subject development. The stop work order shall be in
writing, indicate the reason for the issuance, and shall order the action, if
necessary, to resolve the circumstances requiring the stop work order. The stop
work order constitutes a suspension of the permit.
      No site development permit shall be permanently suspended or revoked
until a hearing is held by the board of appeals. Written notice of such hearing
shall be served on the permittee and shall state:
      1.   The grounds for the complaint, reasons for suspension or revocation,
and
      2.   The time and place of the hearing.
      At such hearing the permittee shall be given an opportunity to present
evidence on their behalf. At the conclusion of the hearing, the board of
appeals shall determine whether the permit shall be suspended or revoked.
   (C)   Nothing herein shall prevent Erie from taking such other lawful action
to prevent or remedy any violations. All costs connected therewith shall accrue
to the person or persons responsible. (Ord. 655, 1-11-2011; amd. Ord. 803, 5-
13-2025)
4-3-14: ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS:
This chapter repeals and replaces other ordinances or sections of this code
adopted by the board of appeals to fulfill the requirements of the national
flood insurance program including the floodplain ordinance passed on May 11,
2004. However, this chapter does not repeal the original resolution or
ordinance adopted to achieve eligibility in the program. Nor does this chapter
repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed
restrictions. Where this chapter and any other easements, covenants or deed
restrictions conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent
restrictions shall prevail. (Ord. 655, 1-11-2011)
CHAPTER 4
LIFE SAFETY CODE
SECTION:
4-4-1: Code Adopted
4-4-2: Requirements
4-4-1: CODE ADOPTED:
The village hereby adopts all applicable standards, rules and regulations of
the 2000 edition of the National Fire Protection Association's life safety code
for all occupancies or structures in the village except one- and two-family
dwellings and public schools. (Ord. 630, 5-12-2009)
4-4-2: REQUIREMENTS:
The building inspector shall determine in his or her sole discretion whether or
not a structure is required to comply with the act. If a structure is required
to comply with the act, the applicant shall be responsible for all costs,
expenses or fees of any kind or nature that may be incurred by the village. The
village shall hire an independent consultant, at the sole cost of the
applicant, to ensure that the structure is constructed according to the act.
The building inspector shall provide the building permit applicant
("applicant") with information regarding the consultant the building inspector
deems appropriate. The building inspector shall advise the independent
consultant it is the consultant's responsibilities to ensure the compliance
with the act by the village. The applicant, by signing the zoning application,
shall agree and be fully and completely responsible for all costs and expenses
incurred by the village except for the fees or salary paid to the building
inspector, including, but not limited to, all fees and costs incurred by the
independent consultant and all costs, fees and expenses incurred by the village
in ensuring compliance with the act. The building inspector may, in his or her
sole discretion, require a payment in advance prior to issuing the building
permit for the estimated cost to be incurred by the applicant under this
section. The applicant shall be required to pay any monies due the village or
the independent consultant under the terms of this chapter within ten (10) days
of receipt of a bill from the village. If the applicant fails to timely pay any
monies due under the terms of this chapter, the building inspector shall have
the authority to withdraw any permit issued under any village ordinance for the
structure including the right to occupy the structure until all amounts
required to be paid herein are paid in full and the applicant shall be
responsible to pay all reasonable attorney fees, court costs, and all other
expenses incurred by the village in enforcing the act or collecting any monies
due from the applicant and the amount due shall accrue interest after its due
date at the rate of ten percent (10%) simple interest per annum. (Ord. 630, 5-
12-2009)
TITLE 5
POLICE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
MISDEMEANORS
SECTION:
5-1-1: Advertisements, Posting
5-1-2: Barbed Wire Fences
5-1-3: Destruction Of Property
5-1-4: Disorderly Conduct
5-1-5: Disturbing Lawful Assemblies
5-1-6: Gambling
5-1-7: Indecent Exposure
5-1-8: Liquor On Public Ways
5-1-9: Weapons, Discharging
5-1-10: Sports, Activities In Public Restricted
5-1-11: Unlawful Interference With Public Utility Services
5-1-12: Penalty
5-1-1: ADVERTISEMENTS, POSTING:
It shall be unlawful for any person to advertise wares or occupations or any
other matter by posting, tacking, pasting, printing or painting any notice of
same or affixing them to any fence or other private property or on any rocks or
other natural objects without the consent of the owner or in the highway or any
public place or building, telephone or electric light poles, sidewalks or trees
without the permission of proper authorities. (Ord. 1912-15, 9-3-1912)
5-1-2: BARBED WIRE FENCES:
It is hereby declared to be unlawful for any person to put up, or keep or
maintain any barbed wire fence or to use for a fence any barbed wire on any
lot, block or parcel of land within the corporate limits of the village within
the distance of four feet (4') from any sidewalk now kept or maintained or
which shall hereafter be kept or maintained by the village. (1909 Code §6.28)
5-1-3: DESTRUCTION OF PROPERTY:
It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully and maliciously injure or
destroy any property, real or personal, owned or controlled by the village, or
to tear up, break or destroy any public pavement, sidewalk, crosswalk, drain,
gutter, water pipe or sewer or any part thereof within the village. (1909 Code
§6.7)
5-1-4: DISORDERLY CONDUCT:
The provisions of 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/26-1, entitled Disorderly
Conduct, is hereby adopted and by this reference made a part of this section
with the same force and effect as though set forth herein verbatim. (1909 Code
§6.1; amd. Ord. 749, 5-12-2020)
5-1-5: DISTURBING LAWFUL ASSEMBLIES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to disturb any congregation, lawful
assemblage or association of people by rude, indecent or improper behavior or
language, either within or upon the outside of any building or place where such
assemblage shall be convened. (1909 Code §6.2)
5-1-6: GAMBLING:
It shall be unlawful for any person to set up, maintain, keep or operate,
either by himself or agent, within the limits of the village, any species of
gambling or playing with cards, dice, dominoes or any other thing, contrivance
or device by which any game of chance or skill or partly chance or partly skill
shall be played for money, property or other thing or for anything of value or
anything representing value, or to keep or maintain by himself or agent any
room or place where such game of chance or game of skill or game of partly
chance and partly skill shall be played for money, property or thing of value
or anything representing value. It shall further be unlawful for any person to
play at any such game of chance or game partly of chance and partly of skill
for money, property or thing of value or anything representing value. (1909
Code §6.4)
5-1-7: INDECENT EXPOSURE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to appear in any public place, within the
limits of the village, in a state of nudity or in a dress markedly and grossly
not belonging to his or her sex for any wanton, improper or illegal purpose, or
in an indecent or lewd dress, or to make any indecent exposure of his or her
person or to be guilty of any lewd or indecent act or behavior, or to exhibit,
sell or offer to sell any indecent or lewd book, picture or thing, or to
exhibit or perform any indecent, immoral or lewd play or other representation.
(1909 Code §6.15)
5-1-8: LIQUOR ON PUBLIC WAYS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to drink or give away any intoxicating
liquor, or to possess, or to carry any intoxicating liquor, except if in the
original package and with the seal unbroken, upon any sidewalk, street, alley,
park or other public place within the village limits. "Intoxicating liquor"
means any spirits, wines, beers, ales, or other liquids containing more than
one-half (1/2) of one percent (1%) of alcohol by volume which is fit for
beverage purposes. (Ord. 338, 8-28-1979)
5-1-9: WEAPONS, DISCHARGING:
It shall be unlawful to discharge any firearm or air gun, BB gun or any toy
gun, projecting lead or any missiles excepting in a regularly established
shooting gallery; provided, that this section shall not be construed to
prohibit any officer of the law from discharging a firearm in the performance
of his duty; nor to prohibit any citizen from discharging a firearm when
lawfully defending person or property. (Ord. 290, 2-22-1972)
5-1-10: SPORTS, ACTIVITIES IN PUBLIC RESTRICTED:
No person shall, in any public place, engage in any sport or exercise likely to
injure other persons, hinder the passage of vehicles, obstruct the passage or
business of other people, or interfere with the enjoyment of private property.
(Ord. 339, 8-28-1979)
5-1-11: UNLAWFUL INTERFERENCE WITH PUBLIC UTILITY SERVICES:
   (A)   The village hereby adopts 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/16-14, as
may hereafter be amended, and 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 285/117 and 285/
117a, as may hereafter be amended, by reference, and all village ordinances or
parts thereof in conflict with such sections adopted by reference are hereby
repealed. (Ord. 435, 3-10-1992)
5-1-12: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provisions hereby adopted by reference shall be fined
not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) but not more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00) for each offense. Each day that an offense shall continue to
occur shall be considered a separate offense. (Ord. 435, 3-10-1992)
CHAPTER 2
ANIMALS
SECTION:
5-2-1: Title
5-2-2: Definitions
5-2-3: Dogs And Cats Running At Large
5-2-4: Disturbing The Peace; Public Nuisance
5-2-5: Dogs On The Property Of Another; Public Nuisance
5-2-6: Dangerous Dogs Or Cats
5-2-7: Muzzling Required, Proclamation
5-2-8: Impoundment; Redemption
5-2-9: Disposition Of Unredeemed Animals
5-2-10: Dog Or Cat Bites; Procedure
5-2-11: Compliance With County Provisions Required
5-2-12: Defecation By Dogs On Private Property
5-2-13: Destruction Of Private Property By Dog
5-2-14: Restriction Of Animals From Public Places
5-2-15: Dogs Chasing Vehicles Or Bicycles
5-2-16: Abandoning Animals Within The Village
5-2-17: Keeping Animals In Sanitary Condition
5-2-18: Certain Animals Prohibited In Village
5-2-19: Penalty
5-2-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as the ANIMAL ORDINANCE OF THE VILLAGE OF ERIE.
(Ord. 401, 11-8-1988)
5-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
Whenever used in this chapter, unless a contrary intention is clearly evident,
the following terms are used as herein defined:
CAT: Any member of the family Felidae.
DOG: Any member of the family Canidae.
INOCULATION AGAINST RABIES: Means the injection, subcutaneously or otherwise,
as approved by the department of agriculture of the state of Illinois, or
canine antirabic vaccine approved by said department of agriculture and by the
United States department of agriculture.
OWNER: Any person having a right of property in dog or cat, or who keeps or
harbors a dog or cat, or who has it in his care, or acts as its custodian, or
who knowingly permits a dog or cat to remain on or about any premises occupied
by him. If such person is a minor, then the parent or guardian with whom such
child resides shall be considered to be the owner of such dog or cat.
PERSON: Any person, whether natural or artificial and includes partnership and
unincorporated associations. (Ord. 401, 11-8-1988)
5-2-3: DOGS AND CATS RUNNING AT LARGE:
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dog or cat to permit or suffer such
dog or cat to “run at large” within the Village. Any dog or cat that is not
attached to a leash and held by a person, who is on any property other than
that belonging to the owner of said dog or cat, shall be termed “running at
large.” It shall be the duty of all police officers in the Village to take up
any dog or cat running at large in the Village. (Ord. 401, 11-8-1988; amd. Ord.
800, 12-10-2024)
5-2-4: DISTURBING THE PEACE; PUBLIC NUISANCE:
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dog to permit or suffer such dog to
disturb the peace of any person in the village by barking or making other loud
or unusual noises. Any such dog shall be declared a public nuisance. (Ord. 401,
11-8-1988)
5-2-5: DOGS ON THE PROPERTY OF ANOTHER; PUBLIC NUISANCE:
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dog to permit or suffer such dog to
disturb any person by being on the property of that person and disturbing that
person. Any such dog shall be declared a public nuisance. (Ord. 401, 11-8-1988)
5-2-6: DANGEROUS DOGS OR CATS:
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dog or cat to permit or suffer such
animal, by reason of its dangerous, fierce, or vicious nature, to disturb the
peace of any person in the village. Any dog or cat so doing or any dog or cat
that shall bite any person or injure any person shall be declared a public
nuisance, and it shall be the duty of all police officers of the village to
take up such dog or cat and cause said dog or cat to be impounded in accordance
with the provisions of section
5-2-8 of this chapter. (Ord. 401, 11-8-1988)
5-2-7: MUZZLING REQUIRED, PROCLAMATION:
At any time when an emergency has been proclaimed by the village, county or
state official because of the prevalence of rabies, or for any cause, it shall
be unlawful for the owner of any dog to permit or suffer such dog to be in or
upon any public place or any private premises not enclosed by an adequate fence
or wall, unless such dog is securely muzzled. (Ord. 401, 11-8-1988)
5-2-8: IMPOUNDMENT; REDEMPTION:
Any dog or cat which is the subject of a violation of any section of this
chapter may, or in the case of a violation of section
5-2-6 of this chapter shall, be impounded by order of the police department or
any officer of the village. Such impoundment shall be at any public or private
impoundment facility; provided, however, that preference shall be given to
impoundment facilities within the village. The owner of any dog or cat so
impounded may redeem said dog or cat by compliance with the following
procedures:
   (A)   The owner must pay the impoundment facility for the board of the dog
or cat while impounded. (Ord. 401, 11-8-1988)
   (B)   The owner shall pay a reclamation fee for the impoundment of a dog or
cat for violation of this chapter as set forth in the schedule of fees
established by the board of trustees and on file and available for public
inspection in the office of the village clerk. The reclamation fee must be paid
to the village before the impoundment facility will be authorized to release
the dog or cat. (Ord. 643, 1-12-2010)
   (C)   The owner of any impounded dog must present proof of a current rabies
inoculation, as required by Whiteside County ordinance. In the event the dog
has not been so inoculated, the dog must receive such inoculation and the owner
must pay for it, prior to release of the dog. (Ord. 401, 11-8-1988)
5-2-9: DISPOSITION OF UNREDEEMED ANIMALS:
When not redeemed by the owner within three (3) days of impoundment, a dog or
cat impounded for violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be humanely
dispatched, offered for adoption or otherwise disposed of by the impoundment
facility in accordance with the laws that exist or may hereafter exist. (Ord.
401, 11-8-1988)
5-2-10: DOG OR CAT BITES; PROCEDURE:
Any dog or cat which shall bite any person or injure any person shall be kept
under the observation of a licensed veterinarian for a period of ten (10) days,
and the veterinarian shall, at the end of the ten (10) day period make a
written report to the health officer and should said dog or cat show evidence
of rabies, it shall be destroyed in a humane manner. In the event the dog or
cat is pronounced free from rabies by the veterinarian, said dog or cat shall
be released to the owner upon the owner's compliance with the provisions of
section
5-2-11 of this chapter. If the owner does not claim the dog or cat at this
time, any person may redeem it by making a like payment. If the dog or cat is
not claimed as set forth herein, said dog or cat shall be destroyed in a humane
manner. (Ord. 401, 11-8-1988)
5-2-11: COMPLIANCE WITH COUNTY PROVISIONS REQUIRED:
Nothing in this chapter shall be regarded and interpreted as relieving any dog
or cat owner in the village from complying with all requirements of the
ordinances of Whiteside County, including the requirements, if any, of
registering dogs or cats with the county, inoculating dogs or cats against
rabies and the requirements concerning dangerous dogs or cats and dog and cat
bites. (Ord. 401, 11-8-1988)
5-2-12: DEFECATION BY DOGS ON PRIVATE PROPERTY:
It shall be unlawful for any owner or possessor to permit a dog to walk or
defecate upon private property without the consent of the occupant thereof.
(Ord. 401, 11-8-1988)
5-2-13: DESTRUCTION OF PRIVATE PROPERTY BY DOG:
It shall be unlawful for any owner or possessor of any dog to permit such dog
to damage or destroy any personal property of another person. (Ord. 401, 11-8-
1988)
5-2-14: RESTRICTION OF ANIMALS FROM PUBLIC PLACES:
It shall be unlawful for any owner or possessor of any animal to permit such
animal to enter any religious premises, public hall, bank building, automobile
gasoline station, public garage or any place where food or beverage is sold or
served during such time as those establishments are open for use to the public
or persons entitled to use the same; provided, however, that the owner of any
of the above establishments may permit a watch dog to remain therein if such
dog is held and restrained in such a way that such dog cannot injure any patron
or come in contact with any food. (Ord. 401, 11-8-1988)
5-2-15: DOGS CHASING VEHICLES OR BICYCLES:
It shall be unlawful for any person owning or possessing any dog to permit such
dog to chase any motor vehicle or bicycle traveling upon any public or private
street or sidewalk. (Ord. 401, 11-8-1988)
5-2-16: ABANDONING ANIMALS WITHIN THE VILLAGE:
It shall be unlawful for any owner or person in control of any animal to
abandon such animal within the village. (Ord. 401, 11-8-1988)
5-2-17: KEEPING ANIMALS IN SANITARY CONDITION:
Every owner or person in possession of an animal shall maintain his animal in a
clean and sanitary condition. (Ord. 401, 11-8-1988)
5-2-18: CERTAIN ANIMALS PROHIBITED IN VILLAGE:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to own, use, keep or permit to be
at large within the village any of the following animals: bees, pigeons,
horses, cattle, sheep, ponies, mules, goats, pigs, swine, hogs, ducks, geese,
chickens, minks, skunks, foxes or any other livestock or poultry or any wild or
vicious animal dangerous to mankind.
   (B)   Any animal named above which is found at large within the village
shall be impounded, if possible; provided, however, that whenever any police
officer believes such animal endangers any person, such animal may be killed by
said officer.
   (C)   In addition to any other penalties imposed upon any person violating
this section, such person shall also be liable for the costs of impounding or
killing such animal, if necessary. (Ord. 401, 11-8-1988)
5-2-19: PENALTY:
Any owner who permits or suffers any dog or cat to violate a provision of this
chapter shall be fined in the sum of not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00)
nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). (Ord. 401, 11-8-1988)
CHAPTER 3
INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLES
SECTION:
5-3-1: Nuisance Declared
5-3-2: Exception
5-3-3: Definition
5-3-4: Notice Of Violation
5-3-5: Vehicle Disposal Time Limit
5-3-6: Failure To Dispose Of Vehicle
5-3-7: Disposal By Village, Recovery Of Costs
5-3-8: Sale Of Vehicle And Disposition Of Funds
5-3-9: Proper Proof Of Registration Required
5-3-10: Violation
5-3-1: NUISANCE DECLARED:
All inoperable motor vehicles, whether on public or private property and in
view of the public, are hereby declared to be a nuisance and dangerous to the
public safety. (Ord. 381, 8-13-1985)
5-3-2: EXCEPTION:
Nothing in this chapter shall apply to any motor vehicle that is kept
permanently within a building when not in use, or to a motor vehicle on the
premises of a licensed junkyard and duly licensed used or new car, motor
vehicle dealer or a person regularly involved for profit in the repair or
maintenance of motor vehicles. The provisions of this section shall apply to
all public or private property in the village whether zoned A residence
district, B outlying business district, C central business district or D
industrial district, unless a specific exception as stated herein applies.
(Ord. 626, 10-14-2008)
5-3-3: DEFINITION:
"Inoperable motor vehicle" means:
   (A)   Any motor vehicle from which, for a period of at least seven (7) days,
the engine, wheels, or other parts have been altered, damaged or otherwise so
treated that the vehicle is incapable of being driven under its own power, or
   (B)   Any motor vehicle which for a period of at least seven (7) days, does
not have attached thereto and displayed thereon when and as required by law,
proper evidence of registration in Illinois, as follows:
      1.   A vehicle required to be registered in Illinois. A current and valid
Illinois registration sticker or stickers and plate or plates, or an Illinois
temporary registration permit, or a driveway decal or in transit permit, issued
therefor by the secretary of state; or
      2.   A vehicle eligible for reciprocity. A current and valid reciprocal
foreign registration plate or plates properly issued to such vehicle or a
temporary registration issued therefor, by the reciprocal state, and, in
addition, when required by the secretary of state, a current and valid Illinois
reciprocity permit or prorate decal issued therefor by the secretary of state.
(Ord. 381, 8-13-1985)
5-3-4: NOTICE OF VIOLATION:
The owner, owners, tenants, lessees, or occupants of any private property
within the corporate limits of the village, or the owner, owners, lessees, or
possessors of said inoperable motor vehicle shall be served a notice from the
village which notice states that such person is to dispose of any inoperable
motor vehicle. (Ord. 381, 8-13-1985)
5-3-5: VEHICLE DISPOSAL TIME LIMIT:
The said notice shall give the person not less than ten (10) days to dispose of
any inoperable motor vehicle after service of notice. (Ord. 381, 8-13-1985;
amd. Ord. 509, 8-10-1999)
5-3-6: FAILURE TO DISPOSE OF VEHICLE:
Whenever any person shall fail to dispose of any inoperable motor vehicle after
due service of notice and after expiration of not less than ten (10) days after
service of notice, then the person shall be guilty of a violation and shall be
fined in an amount of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five
hundred dollars ($500.00). (Ord. 509, 8-10-1999)
5-3-7: DISPOSAL BY VILLAGE, RECOVERY OF COSTS:
Whenever a person fails to dispose of any inoperable motor vehicle, then the
village may also remove the inoperable motor vehicle to a location of its
election, the expenses therefor to be billed to said person, and the bill to be
recoverable in a suit at law. (Ord. 381, 8-13-1985)
5-3-8: SALE OF VEHICLE AND DISPOSITION OF FUNDS:
When any inoperable motor vehicle has been removed and placed in storage by the
village, the inoperable motor vehicle may be sold by the village in accordance
with the laws of the state, and any proceeds of such sale shall be paid first
to recover the village's costs, and if the proceeds are in excess of costs,
then the balance shall be paid to said person, or persons as their interest may
appear, or deposited into the village treasury. (Ord. 381, 8-13-1985)
5-3-9: PROPER PROOF OF REGISTRATION REQUIRED:
No person shall lend to another any certificate of title, registration card,
registration plate, registration sticker, special plate or permit or other
evidences of proper registration issued to him if the person desiring to borrow
the same would not be entitled to the use thereof, nor shall any person
knowingly permit the use of any of the same by one not entitled thereto, nor
shall any person display upon a vehicle any registration card, registration
sticker, registration plate or other evidences of proper registration not
issued for such vehicles or not otherwise lawfully used thereon. Any and all
certificate of title, registration card, registration plate, registration
sticker, special plate or permit or other evidences of proper registration must
be in the name, or names, of the same person, or persons. (Ord. 381, 8-13-1985)
5-3-10: VIOLATION:
In any case in which an offense is of a continuing nature, each day such
violation shall continue is deemed a separate violation and shall subject the
person so violating such provision to a separate fine for each such day. (Ord.
381, 8-13-1985)
CHAPTER 4
NUISANCES
SECTION:
5-4-1: Nuisances Prohibited
5-4-2: Definitions
5-4-3: Notice Of Violation
5-4-4: Lien
5-4-5: Penalty
5-4-1: NUISANCES PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person to create, cause, or permit a "nuisance", as
defined in this chapter, to exist or be maintained within the limits of the
village. (Ord. 385, 7-8-1986)
5-4-2: DEFINITIONS:
For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined as follows:
NUISANCE: Whatever is injurious to health, indecent or offensive to the senses
or an obstacle to the free use of property so as essentially to interfere with
the comfortable enjoyment of life or property. The following are declared to be
nuisances; provided, however, that the following shall not be deemed to be
exclusive:
   (A)   The erecting, continuing or using any building or other place for the
exercise of any trade, employment or manufacture, which, by occasioning noxious
exhalation, offensive smells or other annoyances, becomes injurious and
dangerous to the health, comfort or property of individuals or the public;
   (B)   The obstructing or impeding without legal authority the passage of any
navigable river, harbor or collection of water;
   (C)   The corrupting or rendering unwholesome or impure the water of any
river, stream or pond, or unlawfully diverting the same from its natural course
or state, to the injury or prejudice of others;
   (D)   The obstructing or encumbering by fences, buildings or otherwise the
public roads, private ways, streets, alleys, commons, landing places or burying
grounds;
   (E)   Billboards, signboards and advertising signs, whether erected and
constructed on public or private property, which so obstruct and impair the
view of any portion or part of a public street, avenue, highway, boulevard or
alley or of a railroad or street railway track as to render dangerous the use
thereof;
   (F)   All substances which emit or cause foul, obnoxious, unhealthful,
putrid, noisome, or disagreeable odor or effluvia and which are objectionable
or offensive to any person or persons residing near the same or to any person
passing along any street, sidewalk, or alley near the same;
   (G)   For any person to dump, deposit, store, or place any garbage, rubbish,
trash, or refuse upon property within the village, except in covered
containers;
   (H)   To cause or permit any premises within the village to become or remain
littered with tin cans, glass jars, bottles, scrap glass, paper cartons, scraps
of paper, boxes, ashes, iron, old hot water tanks, oil storage tanks, tin or
other metal materials, refuse, rubbish, junk, waste, manure, straw, piles of
grass clippings, lumber, old bricks, concrete blocks, chunks of broken
concrete, plaster board, discarded furniture, household appliances, mattresses,
bedsprings, portable swimming pools in disrepair, tires or other like matters
of things;
   (I)   To create or permit to be created or remain upon any premises within
the village for a period of more than thirty (30) days the storing, piling,
scattering, accumulating, heaping, amassing or collecting of bricks, concrete
materials, straw, lumber, structural iron, pipe, roofing materials, or any
building materials where the same is in public view and where the same may or
does constitute a safety hazard to children playing in the area or so that the
same may or does become an attraction to or haven for vermin or rodents;
building material stored outdoors on any site for construction authorized by a
building permit shall not be permitted to remain more than thirty (30) days
after completion of construction upon a job site;
   (J)   To cause or permit the existence or storage in any place accessible to
children of any abandoned or discarded refrigerator, icebox, ice chest, deep
freeze, or other airtight appliance or container of any kind of a capacity of
one and one-half (11/2) cubic feet or more from which the lids, doors, or other
covers have not been removed, or which cannot easily be opened by a child, by
means of pushing only, from the inside;
   (K)   Permitting or causing the carcasses of animals to remain exposed more
than twelve (12) hours after death;
   (L)   All slop, foul or dirty water, filth, or refuse or offal discharged in
or upon any street, avenue, sidewalk, alley, park, public square, or public or
private enclosure, or allowed to accumulate there or in a pond or pool;
   (M)   To obstruct any water source, ravine, or gutter so as to cause water
to stagnate therein, or permit foul or stagnant water to stand upon any
premises;
   (N)   Any growth of weeds, grasses, bushes to a greater height than twelve
inches (12"); provided that this shall not apply to planted and cultivated
flowers, shrubbery, or other landscaping;
   (O)   To allow an unkempt appearance to exist on the parkway immediately
adjacent to private property as caused by rubbish, debris, or overgrown,
uncultivated plant life.
   (P)   To allow any growth of zoysia grass in the village cemetery as defined
in title 7, chapter 3, "Cemetery", of this code, which is hereby determined by
the village, pursuant to section 11-20-7 of the Illinois municipal code to be a
nuisance greenery and adopts by reference the entirety of section 11-20-7 as
amended.
PERSON: A person shall include a natural person, joint venture, joint stock
company, partnership, association, club, company, corporation, business, trust,
organization or the manager, lessee, agent, servant, officer, or employee of
any of them.
PROPERTY OWNER: The contract purchaser if there is one of record, otherwise the
record holder of legal title. (Ord. 385, 7-8-1986; amd. Ord. 685, 7-8-2014)
5-4-3: NOTICE OF VIOLATION:
The chief of police shall cause notice to be given the person or property owner
of each violation of this chapter. Such notice shall be in writing, define the
violation and describe the location of the violation. The notice shall be
served personally or forwarded by United States mail to the last known address
of the person or property owner. Further, the notice shall demand abatement of
the nuisance within ten (10) days from the date the notice was served or
mailed. If the nuisance is not remedied within such period or time, the village
may cause such nuisance to be remedied at the exclusive cost of the person
violating this chapter. (Ord. 385, 7-8-1986)
5-4-4: LIEN:
In the event that payment of the actual costs of the abatement of any nuisance
by the village under the provisions of this chapter is not made on demand, such
costs shall become a lien upon the property from which such nuisance was
abated. (Ord. 385, 7-8-1986)
5-4-5: PENALTY:
   (A)   Every person who creates or causes or permits a nuisance under this
chapter, and every owner, occupant, agent, or trustee of any premises where
such nuisance exists, who fails or refuses to abate the same as provided in
this chapter shall be deemed guilty of violating this chapter; and each day
that such nuisance continues after the date of abatement as set forth in the
notice required herein shall constitute and be a separate and distinct
violation thereof.
   (B)   Any person who fails to comply with the provisions of this chapter
shall be fined and penalized the sum of fifty dollars ($50.00) for each
violation. (Ord. 385, 7-8-1986)
CHAPTER 5
OFFENSES BY OR AGAINST MINORS
SECTION:
5-5-1: Prevention Of Tobacco Use By Persons Under Twenty One (21) Years Of Age
And Sale And Distribution Of Tobacco Products Act
5-5-1: PREVENTION OF TOBACCO USE BY PERSONS UNDER TWENTY ONE (21) YEARS OF AGE
AND SALE AND DISTRIBUTION OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS ACT:
The Illinois Prevention of Tobacco Use by Persons Under 21 Years of Age and
Sale and Distribution of Tobacco Products Act, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes
675/1,1.5 and 2, as may be amended from time to time by the State of Illinois
(the "Act"), is hereby adopted in its entirety, by reference, as though fully
and completely set forth in this section. Any other section of the Erie
Municipal Code of the Village in conflict with the Act as amended are hereby
declared void and ineffective and are hereby repealed. Any person, firm or
corporation that violates any provision of the Act adopted by this reference
shall, upon conviction, be subject to a minimum fine of not less than one
hundred dollars ($100.00) and the maximum fine shall not exceed seven hundred
fifty dollars ($750.00). Each violation committed shall be deemed a separate
offense. (Ord. 477, 6-24-1997; amd. Ord. 741, 10-8-2019)
TITLE 6
HEALTH AND SANITATION
CHAPTER 1
SEWERS
SECTION:
6-1-1: Supervision
6-1-2: Definition
6-1-3: Sewer Connection Charge
6-1-4: Specific Requirements
6-1-5: Specifications
6-1-6: Shutoff Valves
6-1-7: Inspection
6-1-8: Septic Tanks, Privies
6-1-9: Stormwater Drains
6-1-10: Violation
6-1-1: SUPERVISION:
The public works director shall be appointed by the board of trustees and shall
be under the direction of the board of trustees. He or she shall supervise all
house sewer connections and excavations for the purpose of installing or
repairing the same. (Ord. 167, 3-1-1956; amd. Ord. 780, 12-13-2022)
6-1-2: DEFINITION:
"Building sewer" or "house sewer" shall be defined as that part of the
horizontal pipe which begins outside of the wall of a building and connects the
"house drain" with the main public sewer, septic tank or other disposal
terminal. (Ord. 167, 3-1-1956; amd. Ord. 780, 12-13-2022)
6-1-3: SEWER CONNECTION CHARGE:
Generally: Each person making an application for a permit to connect to the
sewer system of the village shall pay to the village at the time of making such
application, and before actual excavation is commenced, a sewer connection fee.
The sewer connection fee in an amount as set forth in the schedule of fees
maintained on file and available for public inspection at the office of the
village clerk. The said fee shall be in addition to, and not as a part of, all
costs incurred in the entire sewer lateral cost is the responsibility of the
building owner, all of which installation costs, including, but not limited to,
street repair, shall be paid in full by the applicant before service is
commenced. After installation, the private property owner must pay all costs
for any subsequent repair up to the main public sewer. The village in its sole
discretion may waive the aforesaid fee if the street abutting the private
premises does not have a seal coat. The said sewer connection fee shall be paid
directly to the village clerk. Upon receipt by the village clerk of the said
sewer connection fee, he shall thereupon notify the public works director to
turn on said service. (Ord. 342, 3-25-1980; amd. Ord. 352, 5-18-1982; Ord. 780,
12-13-2022)
6-1-4: SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS:
   (A)   Rainwater Leaders: Roof leaders, surface drains or groundwater drains
shall not be connected to the sanitary sewer.
   (B)   Use Of Public Sewer Required: Where a public sewer is accessible in a
street or alley to a building or premises abutting thereon the liquid wastes
from any plumbing system in said building shall discharge into the public sewer
unless otherwise authorized by the board of trustees.
   (C)   Connection To The Main Public Sewer: Before any connection is made to
a public sewer, an approved permit for such connection must be obtained from
the board of trustees or its designated representative.
Each connection shall be made at the "Y" designated for that property. The only
exception shall be where the designated “Y” is not located within three feet
(3') of the point of measurement furnished by the board of trustees. Any
connection not made at the designated "Y” in the main sewer shall be made under
the direct supervision of the public works director. (Ord. 167, 3-1-1956; amd.
Ord. 780, 12-13-2022)
6-1-5: SPECIFICATIONS:
   (A)   Material: All house sewers shall be constructed of Solid PVC
(Polyvinyl Chloride) ASTM D2729.
   (B)   Size Of House Sewer: No house sewer shall be less than four inches
(4") in diameter. No building or house sewer for a commercial building or a
multiple dwelling unit shall be less than six inches (6") in diameter.
   (C)   Grades For House Sewers: Unless otherwise authorized all house sewers
shall have a grade of not less than one-eighth inch (1/8") per foot. A grade of
one-fourth inch (1/4") per foot shall be used wherever practical.
   (D)   Trenching And Backfilling: All excavations shall be open trench work
unless otherwise authorized by the public works director. The foundation in the
trench shall be formed to prevent any subsequent settlement of the pipes. If
the foundation is good, firm earth, the earth shall be pared or molded to give
a full support to the lower third of each pipe. Care must be exercised in
backfilling below the centerline of the pipe in order to give it proper
support. Backfilling shall be placed in layers and solidly tamped or packed up
to two feet (2') above the pipe. Backfilling shall not be done until final
inspection is made by the public works director.
   (E)   Use Of Old House Sewers: Old house sewers or portions thereon may be
approved for use by the public works director. The public works director may
request that the old sewer be excavated for the purpose of facilitating
inspection. No old cesspool or septic tank shall be connected to any portion of
a house sewer that is also connected to the public sewer. (Ord. 219, 4-15-1963;
amd. Ord. 780, 12-13-2022)
6-1-6: SHUTOFF VALVES:
All drains and sewer pipes connected therewith shall be so constructed and
installed as to be completely watertight to a point at least four feet (4')
above the bottom of the inside of the main or lateral sewer to which connection
is made and in such manner as to prevent sewage which may build up in said
sewer to a height of four feet (4') above said bottom of said sewer tile at a
point of connection from escaping from the sewer through any opening, joint or
loose connection in any such service line or fixture connected therewith;
provided, however, that basement floor drains and other basement drains having
an intake at less than the required elevation may be installed if provided with
an automatic valve to prevent backflow and a manually operated shutoff valve by
means of which all flow in the service connection can be positively cut off.
The risk of sewage escaping through the malfunctioning of any valve so
installed or from any connection made or maintained contrary to the provisions
of this section, or from any cause, and all costs incurred as a result shall be
solely the responsibility of the property owner. (Ord. 207, 7-17-1961; amd.
Ord. 780, 12-13-2022)
6-1-7: INSPECTION:
Each and every part of the house sewer shall be inspected and approved by the
public works director before concealed or backfilled. (Ord. 167, 3-1-1956; amd.
Ord. 342, 3-25-1980; Ord. 780, 12-13-2022)
6-1-8: SEPTIC TANKS, PRIVIES:
No person shall construct or install, or permit to be constructed or installed
in or upon any premises owned or controlled by him, any cesspool, septic tank,
privy or privy vault. Provided however, that this section shall not apply to
any lot, tract or parcel of ground which, cannot be conveniently and
economically connected with the public sewer system.
Any lot, tract or parcel of land within the village shall be deemed to be so
situated that it can be conveniently and economically connected with the public
sewer system if any part of any building in connection with which sewer service
is required or desired, is within two hundred feet (200') of any public sewer
main or sewer lateral. The distance shall be measured over the shortest route
along which a sewer can be practicably constructed. (Ord. 172, 10-17-1956; amd.
Ord. 780, 12-13-2022)
6-1-9: STORMWATER DRAINS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to connect or cause to be connected, any
drain carrying, or to carry, any toilet, sink, basement, septic tank, cesspool,
industrial waste or any fixture or device discharging polluting substances to
any stormwater drain in the village. (Ord. 277, 9-24-1969; amd. Ord. 780, 12-
13-2022)
6-1-10: VIOLATION:
Any person found guilty of violating any of the provisions or prohibitions of
this chapter or who shall make or cause to be made any connection with any main
or lateral sewer or any part of the sewage collection system or outfall sewer,
without having obtained a permit so to do as herein provided shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to penalty. Any water consumer violating
any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to having the water shut
off from his/her premises. (Ord. 167, 3-1-1956; amd. Ord. 780, 12-13-2022)
CHAPTER 2
WASTES
SECTION:
6-2-1: Definitions
6-2-2: Discharge Of Storm Drainage Waters And Connection To Public Storm
Drainage Systems
6-2-3: Prohibited Discharges
6-2-4: Powers And Authority Of Inspectors
6-2-5: Protection From Damage
6-2-6: Service Surcharge
6-2-7: Violation
6-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms used
in this chapter shall be as follows:
BOD (Denoting BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND): The quantity of oxygen utilized in
the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure
in five (5) days at twenty degrees Celsius (20°C), expressed in milligrams per
liter.
BUILDING DRAIN: That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system
which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside
the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five
feet (5') outside the inner face of the building wall.
BUILDING SEWER: The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or
other place of disposal.
DIRECTOR: The director of public works of the village of Erie, or his
authorized agent or representative.
GARBAGE: Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of produce.
INDUSTRIAL WASTES: The liquid wastes from industrial manufacturing process,
trade or business as distinct from sanitary sewage.
MAY: Is permissive.
NATURAL OUTLET: Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body
of surface or ground water.
pH: The logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per
liter of solution.
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE: The wastes from the preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles
will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public
sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch (1/2") in any dimension.
PUBLIC SEWER: A sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal
rights and is controlled by public authority.
SANITARY SEWER: A sewer which carries sewage and to which storm, surface and
ground waters are not intentionally admitted.
SEWAGE: A combination of the water carried wastes from residences, business
buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together with such
ground, surface and storm waters as may be present.
SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT: Any arrangement of devices and structures used for
treating sewage.
SHALL: Is mandatory.
SLUG: Any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which in concentration
of any given constituent or in any quantity of flow exceeds for any period of
duration longer than fifteen (15) minutes more than five (5) times the average
twenty four (24) hour concentration or flows during normal operation.
STORM SEWER OR STORM DRAIN: A sewer which carries storm and surface waters and
drainage, but excludes sewage and industrial wastes, other than unpolluted
cooling water.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS: Solids that either float on the surface of or are in
suspension in water, sewage or other liquids and which are removable by
laboratory filtering.
WATERCOURSE: A channel in which a flow of water occurs either continuously or
intermittently. (Ord. 474, 1-14-1997)
6-2-2: DISCHARGE OF STORM DRAINAGE WATERS AND CONNECTION TO PUBLIC STORM
DRAINAGE SYSTEMS:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge or cause to be
discharged any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface
drainage, uncontaminated cooling water, or unpolluted industrial process waters
into any sanitary sewer, storm sewer, french drain, or any system or drain
(excluding an open ditch) situated on property of the village, including a
right of way dedicated for roadway purposes or utility easements or any system
owned or operated by the village. It shall be unlawful for any person to
connect or cause to be connected, any tube, pipe, conduit or device of any kind
or any nature for the purpose of removing any stormwater, surface water,
groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water or
unpolluted industrial process waters from private property into any sanitary
sewer, storm sewer, french drain, or any system or drain of any kind or nature
whatsoever whether opened, covered or enclosed, natural or artificial,
aboveground or underground, situated on property of the village, including a
right of way dedicated for roadway purposes or utility easements or any system
owned or operated by the village for the purpose of removal of stormwater or
for drainage of water or on any public property owned or operated by the
village. A "system" shall mean any drainage system or other system by which
lands in the village are drained or protected from overflow or both and
includes any drains or drainage structures of any kind or nature whatsoever.
(Ord. 640, 11-10-2009)
   (B)   Stormwater, industrial cooling water, unpolluted process waters and
all other unpolluted discharge, on approval by the sewer inspector, shall be
discharged into a storm sewer or natural outlet. (Ord. 474, 1-14-1997)
6-2-3: PROHIBITED DISCHARGES:
   (A)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the
following described waters or wastes into any public sewers:
      1.   Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid or gas;
      2.   Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids
or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other
wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a
hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or create any hazard in
the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant;
      3.   Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or greater than 9.5
or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to
structures, equipment and personnel of the sewage works;
      4.   Any solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size
capable of causing obstruction of the flow in sewers, or other interference
with the proper operation of the sewage works such as, but not limited to,
ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar,
plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and
fleshings, entrails, papers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders.
      5.   Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one hundred
fifty degrees Fahrenheit (150°F).
   (B)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following
described substances, materials, water or wastes beyond the following
concentrations if it appears likely in the opinion of the sewer inspector that
such wastes can harm either the sewers, sewage treatment process or equipment,
have an adverse effect on the receiving stream, or can otherwise endanger life,
limb, public property or constitute a nuisance. In forming his opinion as to
the acceptability of these wastes, the sewer inspector will give consideration
to such factors as the quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows and
velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, nature of
the sewage treatment process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant and other
pertinent factors. The substances and their maximum concentrations expressed in
milligrams per liter are:
1. Waste Or Chemical Concentration mg/l
1. Waste Or Chemical                                      Concentration mg/l
   Chromium (hexavalent)                                  5.0
   Chromium (trivalent)                                   10.0
   Boron                                                  1.0
   Copper                                                 3.0
   Cyanide                                                2.0
   Iron                                                   15.0
   Lead                                                   0.1
   Nickel                                                 3.0
   Oil, grease, etc.                                      100.0
   Acid iron pickling waste or concentrated plating waste 0.0
   Zinc                                                   2.0
   Cadmium                                                2.0
   Chlorine demand                                        30.0
   Phenols                                                0.5
 
      2.   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation
and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths (3/
4) horsepower or greater shall be subject to the review and approval of the
sewer inspector.
Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste or odor producing
substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits which may be established by
the sewer inspector as necessary, after treatment of the composite sewage, to
meet the requirements of the state and federal agencies for discharge into the
receiving waters.
Materials which exert or cause:
         (a)   Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but
not limited to, fuller's earth, lime slurries and lime residues) or of
dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium
sulfate).
         (b)   Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes
and vegetable tanning solutions).
         (c)   A five (5) day BOD not greater than three hundred milligrams per
liter (300mg/l) of suspended solids.
         (d)   Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting
"slugs" as defined herein.
      3.   Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amendable to
treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed, or are
amendable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant
effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction
over discharge to the receiving waters are prohibited.
   (C)   If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be
discharged, to the public sewers which waters contain the substances or possess
the characteristics enumerated in subsection (B) of this section, and which in
the judgment of the sewer inspector, may have deleterious effect upon the
sewage works, processes, equipment or receiving waters, or which otherwise
create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the sewer inspector
may:
      1.   Reject the wastes,
      2.   Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the
public sewers,
      3.   Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge, and/or
      4.   Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating the
wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges under the provisions of
section
6-2-6 of this chapter.
   (D)   Each person, owner, operator and establishment that has or is required
to have a grease, oil or sand interceptor, shall provide proof to the Village
office of the annual inspection of all such interceptors by a licensed plumber
that the interceptor(s) or traps are clean and in proper working order so as to
eliminate excessive amounts of grease, oil and sand from entering the public
sewer system.
   (E)   Where preliminary treatment or flow equalizing facilities are provided
for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory
and effective operation by the owner at his expense.
   (F)   When required by the sewer inspector, the owner of any property served
by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control
manhole together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the
building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the
wastes. Such manhole shall be accessibly and safely located and shall be
constructed in accordance with plans approved by the sewer inspector. The
manhole and appurtenances shall be installed by the owner at his expense and
shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times.
   (G)   All measurements, tests and analysis of the characteristics of waters
and wastes to which reference is made in this chapter shall be determined in
accordance with the latest edition of "Standard Methods For The Examination Of
Water And Wastewater", published by the American Public Health Association, and
shall be determined at the control manhole provided, or upon suitable samples
taken at said control manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been
required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream
manhole in the public sewer above which the building sewer is connected.
   (H)   No statement contained in this chapter shall be construed as
preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the village and any
industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character
may be accepted by the village for treatment, subject to any payment therefor,
by the industrial concern. (Ord. 474, 1-14-1997; amd. Ord. 714, 8-8-2017)
6-2-4: POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS:
   (A)   The sewer inspector and other duly authorized employees of the village
shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purpose of inspection,
observation, measurement, sampling and testing in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to
in subsection (A) of this section, the sewer inspector or duly authorized
employees of the village shall observe all safety rules applicable to the
premises established by the company, and the company shall be held harmless for
injury or death to the village employees and the village shall indemnify the
company against loss or damage to its property by village employees and against
liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted
against the company and growing out of the gauging and sampling operation,
except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the company to
maintain safe conditions as required by subsection
6-2-3(F) of this chapter. (Ord. 474, 1-14-1997)
6-2-5: PROTECTION FROM DAMAGE:
No unauthorized person shall maliciously, wilfully or negligently break,
damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenances or
equipment which is a part of the sewage works. Any person violating this
provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under the charge of disorderly
conduct. (Ord. 474, 1-14-1997)
6-2-6: SERVICE SURCHARGE:
   (A)   Any person discharging industrial waste into the public sewerage
system which contains more than three hundred milligrams per liter (300mg/l) of
BOD or more than three hundred fifty milligrams per liter (350mg/l) of
suspended solids shall pay to the village a sewer service surcharge to
compensate the village for the added cost of treating wastes containing greater
than normal concentrations of BOD and suspended solids.
   (B)   The sewage service surcharge shall be based on a cost of five cents
($0.05) per pound of BOD in excess of the amount resulting from a concentration
of three hundred milligrams per liter (300mg/l) of BOD and eight cents ($0.08)
per pound of suspended solids in excess of the amount resulting from a
concentration of three hundred fifty milligrams per liter (350mg/l) of
suspended solids.
   (C)   The sewer service surcharge shall be determined by sampling and
testing.
   (D)   The village shall from time to time sample and analyze the flow
ofindustrialusers and determine the quality of BOD and suspendedsolidsbeing
discharged to the public sewerage system under average conditions and shall
bill the producer of such excess wastes on a quarterly basis. (Ord. 474, 1-14-
1997)
6-2-7: VIOLATION:
   (A)   Any person found to be violating any provision of this chapter except
section
6-2-4 shall be served notice by the village with written notice stating the
nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the
satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time
stated in such notice, permanently cease all violation.
   (B)   Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit
provided for in subsection (A) of this section shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.
   (C)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall
become liable to the village for any expense, loss or damage occasioned the
village by reason of the violation. (Ord. 474, 1-14-1997)
CHAPTER 3
DUTCH ELM DISEASE
SECTION:
6-3-1: Nuisance Declared
6-3-2: Inspection
6-3-3: Owner To Abate
6-3-4: Abatement By Village
6-3-1: NUISANCE DECLARED:
   (A)   Any tree or part thereof, whether living or dead, infected with or
attacked by Ceratocystis ulmi (the Dutch elm disease) is hereby declared to be
a nuisance. It shall be unlawful to permit any tree or part thereof so infected
to remain in the village.
   (B)   Trees or parts thereof of elm in a dead or dying condition and all
other elm material, including woodpiles, that may serve as breeding places for
the European elm bark beetle or that may harbor the Dutch elm disease fungus,
are hereby declared a public nuisance. It shall be unlawful to permit any such
tree or part thereof or any such elm material to remain in the village. (Ord.
198, 8-15-1960)
6-3-2: INSPECTION:
The members of the street, sidewalk and lights committee, or any member
thereof, of the village are hereby authorized to inspect and examine any tree
in the village to determine whether or not it is infected by the Dutch elm
disease and to inspect and examine any woodpiles and other wood materials to
determine if the same contain any dead elm wood. Upon discovering that any such
tree is so infected or upon discovering the existence of any woodpile
containing dead elm wood, the owner or occupant of the premises shall be
notified of this fact. (Ord. 198, 8-15-1960)
6-3-3: OWNER TO ABATE:
It shall be the duty of the owner or occupant of any land upon which such
diseased tree or part thereof, or such elm material, including woodpiles,
exists, to have the same removed and burned within ten (10) days of notice by
the streets, sidewalks and lights committee, or any member thereof, that such
tree or part thereof is so infected or that such elm material is located on his
premises. (Ord. 198, 8-15-1960)
6-3-4: ABATEMENT BY VILLAGE:
When the owner or occupant of the premises concerned does not properly dispose
of such infected trees or of such elm material within ten (10) days after such
notice, or when the owner or occupant cannot be located, the village and its
agents and employees are hereby authorized to remove and destroy any such elm
material, including woodpiles, that may exist on any such property. (Ord. 198,
8-15-1960)
CHAPTER 4
PRIVATE SWIMMING POOLS
SECTION:
6-4-1: Compliance Required
6-4-2: Definition
6-4-3: Location
6-4-4: Permit Required
6-4-5: Drawings, Plans And Permits
6-4-6: Recirculation Pools
6-4-7: Fences
6-4-8: Temporary Fencing
6-4-9: Steps Or Ladders
6-4-10: Electrical Requirements
6-4-11: Operation And Maintenance
6-4-12: Inspection
6-4-13: Penalty
6-4-1: COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
Every private residential swimming pool constructed, installed and maintained
hereafter shall comply with all applicable provisions of this code, and with
the special provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 314, 6-6-1977)
6-4-2: DEFINITION:
PRIVATE RESIDENTIAL SWIMMING POOL: A receptacle for water or an artificial pool
of water having a depth at any point of more than three feet (3') intended for
the purpose of immersion or partial immersion therein of human beings, and
including all appurtenant equipment, constructed, installed and maintained
either above the ground or in the ground outside of a building used for a
single- family dwelling unit. Provided, further, that such private residential
swimming pool is maintained by an individual primarily for the sole use of his
household and guests and not for the purpose of profit or in connection with
any business operated for profit. A private residential swimming pool may be
wholly in the ground, wholly aboveground, or partly in the ground and partly
above the ground, and this is not meant as a mere recital but in further
definition of a regulated pool and shall include, but not be limited to, a hot
tub, a jacuzzi, outside spa and the like.
No out of doors swimming pool intended for the use of members and their guests
of a nonprofit club or organization, or limited to house residents of a
multiple dwelling unit, a block, subdivision, neighborhood, community or other
specified area of residence shall be permitted in a residence district as
defined by the Erie zoning ordinance. Any indoor pool shall only be in a zoning
district permitted by the Erie zoning ordinance. (Ord. 551, 7-9-2002)
6-4-3: LOCATION:
   (A)   Private residential swimming pools shall be permitted in residential
zones only.
   (B)   No portion of a private residential swimming pool shall be located at
a distance less than six feet (6') from any side or rear property line, or
building line. Pumps, filters and pool water disinfection equipment
installations shall be located at a distance not less than six feet (6') from
any side property line. Pools and appurtenant equipment shall not be permitted
in the side yard between dwellings. (Ord. 314, 6-6-1977)
6-4-4: PERMIT REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful to proceed with the construction, installation,
enlargement or alteration of any private residential swimming pool and
appurtenances within the village unless permits therefor shall have first been
obtained from the building official. (Ord. 314, 6-6-1977)
6-4-5: DRAWINGS, PLANS AND PERMITS:
   (A)   All drawings and plans for the construction, installation, enlargement
or alteration of any private residential swimming pool and appurtenances for
which a permit is required shall first be presented to the building official
for examination and approval as to proper location, construction and use.
   (B)   All private residential swimming pools, appurtenances, water supply
and drainage systems shall be constructed in conformity with the approved
plans. If any deviations from such plans are desired, a supplementary plan
covering that portion of the work involved shall be filed for approval and
shall conform to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 314, 6-6-1977)
6-4-6: RECIRCULATION POOLS:
All private residential swimming pools shall be of the recirculation type in
which circulation of the water is maintained through the pool by pumps; the
water drawn from the pool being clarified and disinfected before being returned
to the pool. (Ord. 314, 6-6-1977)
6-4-7: FENCES:
All private residential swimming pools shall be completely enclosed by a fence
erected along the periphery of the pool walks. All fence openings or points of
entry into the pool area enclosure shall be equipped with gates. The fence and
the gates shall be between five feet (5') and six feet (6') in height above the
walk grade level and shall be constructed of a minimum 9-gauge woven wire mesh
corrosion resistant material, or material approved by the building official.
All gates shall be equipped with self-closing and self-latching devices placed
at the top of the gate and made inaccessible to small children.
Notwithstanding, a fence shall not be required around any private residential
swimming pool which is securely covered at all times when not in use with a
walk on and lock down style cover, approved by the building official, and
supervised by an adult when in use and not covered. (Ord. 522, 4-11-2000)
Further notwithstanding, if a pool is a "temporary pool" as defined herein,
only a temporary fence shall be required. All temporary fences around temporary
pools must be constructed of at least 14-gauge welded wire with sturdy fence
posts. The posts must be set not more than eight feet (8') apart and the
temporary fence shall have a height of not less than five feet (5') nor more
than six feet (6'). The temporary fence shall be erected around the periphery
of the pool area. No snow fences shall be permitted as a temporary fence. All
temporary fence openings or points of entry into the pool area enclosure shall
be equipped with a self-locking gate. A "temporary pool" shall be defined as a
pool that is more than thirty six inches (36") tall and designed to be removed
or dismantled each year or to be removed or dismantled after the end of the
swimming season each fall. All inflatable pools shall be defined as a temporary
pool. (Ord. 615, 4-15-2008)
6-4-8: TEMPORARY FENCING:
During the construction and installation of all private residential swimming
pools, the entire construction area shall be completely enclosed by a fence
erected along the periphery thereof. The fence and the gates therein shall be
at least three and one- half feet (31/2') above the walk grade level and shall
be constructed of material commonly known as "snow fencing", or a suitable like
material. Gate latches must be inaccessible to small children. Notwithstanding
anything to the contrary in this Code, the temporary fence required under this
section shall be replaced by a fence in compliance with section
6-4-7 within thirty (30) days after the end of the construction and
installation of the pool, but not later than sixty (60) days after the
commencement of construction and installation of the swimming pool. (Ord. 314,
6-6-1977; amd. Ord. 720, 1-9-2018)
6-4-9: STEPS OR LADDERS:
One means of egress in the form of steps or ladders shall be provided for all
private residential swimming pools. (Ord. 314, 6-6-1977)
6-4-10: ELECTRICAL REQUIREMENTS:
   (A)   No current carrying electrical conductors shall cross private
residential swimming pools, either overhead or underground or within an area to
endanger occupants.
   (B)   All metal, fence, enclosures or railings near or adjacent to private
residential swimming pools, which might become electrically alive as a result
of contact with broken overhead conductors, or from any other cause shall be
effectively grounded. (Ord. 314, 6-6-1977)
6-4-11: OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE:
   (A)   All private residential swimming pools shall be maintained in a clean
and sanitary condition, and all equipment shall be maintained in a satisfactory
operating condition during periods the pool is in use.
   (B)   No private residential swimming pool shall be used, kept,
maintainedoroperated in the village, if such use, keeping, maintaining or
operating shall be the occasion of any nuisance or shall be dangerous to life
or detrimental to health. (Ord. 314, 6-6-1977)
6-4-12: INSPECTION:
The building official periodically may inspect all private residential swimming
pools to determine whether or not the provisions of this code regarding health,
sanitation and safety applicable thereto are being complied with. (Ord. 314, 6-
6-1977)
6-4-13: PENALTY:
   (A)   Limits Of Fine: Any person who shall violate any section of this
chapter shall, on conviction, be fined not less than five dollars ($5.00) nor
more than five hundred dollars ($500.00).
   (B)   Continuing Violations: In any case in which an offense is of a
continuing nature, each day such violation shall continue shall be deemed as a
separate violation and shall subject the person so violating such provision to
be a separate fine for each such day. (Ord. 314, 6-6-1977)
CHAPTER 5
FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
SECTION:
6-5-1: Fireworks
6-5-1: FIREWORKS:
   (A)   Defined: The term "fireworks" shall mean and include any explosive
composition, or any substance or combination of substances, or article prepared
for the purpose of producing a visible or audible effect of a temporary
exhibitional nature by explosion, combustion, deflagration or detonation, and
shall include blank cartridges, toy cannons, in which explosives are used, the
type of balloons which require fire underneath to propel the same,
firecrackers, torpedoes, skyrockets, roman candles, bombs, or other fireworks
of like construction and any fireworks containing any explosive compound, or
any tablets or other device containing any explosive substance, or containing
combustible substances producing visual effects; provided, however, that the
term "fireworks" shall not include snake or glowworm pellets, smoke devices,
trick noisemakers known as "party poppers", "booby traps", "snappers", "trick
matches", "cigarette loads", and "auto burglar alarms", sparklers, toy pistols,
toy canes, toy guns, or other devices in which paper or plastic caps containing
twenty five hundredths (25/100) grain or less of explosive compound are used,
providing they are so constructed that the hand cannot come in contact with the
cap when in place for the explosion, and toy pistol paper or plastic caps which
contain less than twenty hundredths (20/100) grain of explosive mixture, the
sale and use of which shall be permitted at all times.
   (B)   Retail Sale Of Fireworks Forbidden: The sale of fireworks at retail is
forbidden.
   (C)   Exceptions: Nothing in this section shall be construed as prohibiting
the manufacture, storage or use of signals or fuses necessary for the safe
operation of railroads, trucks, aircraft or other instrumentalities of
transportation.
   (D)   Regulation Of Public Display:
      1.   Generally: Except on application and conforming to the following
conditions, it shall be unlawful for any person to discharge, fire, explode, or
in any manner use fireworks. Such a display must conform to the following:
         (a)   Application must be made at least thirty (30) days prior to the
public display by at least three (3) persons representing an individual
venture, partnership, joint venture, corporation, or organization.
         (b)   Every such display must be handled by a competent individual
designated as "display supervisor".
         (c)   Every such display shall be of such a character and so located
so as not to be hazardous to property or endanger any person or persons.
         (d)   Every applicant shall furnish a bond conditioned upon compliance
with this act with his application in an amount of not less than one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00).
         (e)   No fireworks shall be discharged, ignited or exploded at any
point in the village within six hundred feet (600') of any hospital, asylum or
infirmary.
         (f)   The use of what are technically known as fireworks showers or
any mixture containing potassium chlorate and sulphur in theaters or public
halls is hereby prohibited.
         (g)   Each application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable
application fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00).
      2.   Action To Be Taken: Action shall be taken no later than the next
regularly scheduled board meeting of the board of trustees of the village from
the date the application is submitted to him.
      3.   Permit Not Transferable: No permit granted hereunder shall be
transferable.
      4.   Copies Of Permits: One copy of all permits issued hereunder shall be
given to the permittee, the village clerk, and to the office of the state fire
marshal. The original thereof shall be kept by the issuing officer.
      5.   Form Of Application: Every applicant for a public display of
fireworks shall obtain and complete an application in the form of exhibit A on
file in the office of the village clerk.
All applicants shall truthfully answer all questions and conform their displays
to the parameters outlined in the application. All applicants should be
prepared to show proof of any matter contained in the application upon demand
of the issuing officer.
      6.   Form Of Permit: Every permit issued shall be in the form of exhibit
B on file in the office of the village clerk. Every display supervisor shall be
prepared to produce this permit upon demand of any law enforcement officer.
      7.   Issuing Officers: The president of the board of trustees is hereby
designated the "issuing officer". Before issuing a permit, the issuing officer
shall review the completed application and review the site of the display and
ensure that both conform to this section.
      8.   Indemnity: Nothing contained within this section shall be construed
to cause the village officer to be an officer of the safety of the applicant's
use of fireworks. The applicant agrees to indemnify and hold harmless the
village, a municipal corporation, its officers, agents, and employees from any
and all expense, costs, or loss that it, he or she may incur, suffer, or become
obligated for as a result of applicant's use of fireworks. (Ord. 398, 5-10-
1988)
CHAPTER 6
SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL
SECTION:
6-6-1: In General
6-6-1-1: Definitions
6-6-1-2: Open Burning
6-6-1-3: Incinerators
6-6-1-4: Exclusive Rights Of Village Collection
6-6-1-5: Violation; Penalty
6-6-2: Storage And Disposal
6-6-2-1: Containers Required; Specifications
6-6-2-2: Disposal In Containers Required
6-6-2-3: Storage Area Regulations
6-6-2-4: Trash Containers To Be Kept On Premises
6-6-2-5: Interference With Containers
6-6-2-6: Placement And Storage
6-6-2-7: Pollution Of Water, Streets
6-6-2-8: Collection Required
6-6-2-9: Collection Provided By Village
6-6-2-10: Household Refuse Collection
6-6-2-11: Curbside Recycling Service
6-6-2-12: Yard Waste Collection
6-6-2-13: Village Reserves The Right To Refuse Collection
6-6-2-14: Collection Charge Imposed
6-6-2-15: Billing, Revenues, Accounts
6-6-3: Hauler's License
6-6-3-1: Required
6-6-3-2: Application
6-6-3-3: Bond
6-6-3-4: Certificates Of Workers' Compensation Insurance And Public Liability
Insurance Required
6-6-3-5: Fee
6-6-3-6: Term
6-6-4: Service Charge
6-6-1: IN GENERAL:
6-6-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the terms and words used shall have the
following meanings and definitions:
BULKY WASTE: Rubbish such as stoves, refrigerators, water heaters, washing
machines, white goods, furniture and other waste materials other than
construction debris, dead animals, hazardous waste, automobile parts, or stable
matter with weights or volumes greater than those allowed for containers.
BUNDLE: Yard waste such as trees, shrubs and brush trimmings securely tied
together forming an easily handled package not exceeding forty eight inches
(48") in length, four inches (4") in diameter, or fifty (50) pounds in weight.
The diameter of any individual piece must not exceed four inches (4").
COMMERCIAL CONTAINER: Large container of one and one-half (11/2) yards or more
utilized by commercial business for the deposit of commercially generated
refuse.
CONSTRUCTION DEBRIS: Waste building materials resulting from construction,
remodeling, repair or demolition operations.
CONTAINER: A container or containers meeting the requirements of section
6-6-2-1 of this chapter in which recyclable materials can be stored and later
placed for curbside collection as approved by the village.
CONTRACTOR: The person, corporation or partnership performing recycling and
yard waste collection and disposal under contract with the village.
CURBSIDE COLLECTION: The collection of all recyclables, refuse, rubbish,
garbage, yard wastes and bulky items placed in accordance with the village
ordinance regulating the placement of same.
DEAD ANIMALS: Animals or portions thereof equal to or greater than twenty (20)
pounds in weight that have expired from any cause, except those slaughtered or
killed for human use or consumption.
DISPOSAL SITE: A refuse depository including, but not limited to, sanitary
landfills, transfer stations, incinerators, and waste processing/separation
centers licensed, permitted or approved by all governmental bodies and agencies
having jurisdiction and requiring such licenses, permits or approvals to
receive refuse for processing or final disposal.
GARBAGE: All animal and vegetable matter from handling, preparation, cooking,
consumption, storage, decay or decomposition of food (meats, fish, fowl,
fruits, grains) and/or any other animal or vegetable matter whatsoever subject
to decay which may putrefy or generate noxious or offensive odors, be a food
source for rodents, or may be a breeding or feeding place for insects or vermin
and shall include all dead animals of less than twenty (20) pounds in weight;
except yard waste, construction debris, bulky waste, rubbish, stable matter and
hazardous waste.
GARBAGE AND REFUSE COLLECTION (COLLECTION): The taking up and collecting of all
garbage and refuse accumulated in containers at residential dwelling units
within the corporate limits of the village and the transportation to an
approved disposal site by the village.
HAZARDOUS WASTE: Waste, in any amount, which is defined, characterized or
designated as hazardous by the United States environmental protection agency or
appropriate state agency or appropriate state agency by or pursuant to federal
or state law, or waste, in any amount, which is regulated under federal or
state law. The term hazardous waste shall also include motor oil and gasoline.
LITTER: Any discarded, used or unconsumed substance or waste. Also may include,
but is not limited to, any garbage, trash, refuse, debris, rubbish, yard or
garden waste, newspaper, magazines, glass, metal, plastic or paper containers
or other packaging construction material, abandoned vehicle, motor vehicle
parts, furniture, oil, dead animal, any nauseous or offensive matter of any
kind, any object likely to injure any person or create a traffic hazard, or
anything else of an unsightly or unsanitary nature, which has been discarded,
abandoned or otherwise disposed of improperly.
PRODUCER: Occupants of a residential dwelling unit who generate refuse and
residential refuse.
RECEPTACLE: A container which shall be of such size and form as to permit
collection by one man. Garbage cans shall not exceed thirty two (32) gallons in
capacity and shall be fitted with handles and lids. This definition shall
include all recycling containers and dumpsters placed in accordance with
village ordinance.
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS: Newsprint, glass, household metals, plastics and other
materials as determined by the village and the contractor.
RECYCLING: The use (collection, remanufacture, etc.) of secondary materials are
feedstock for the production of new materials or products.
RECYCLING COLLECTION: The collection of all recyclable materials accumulated in
recycling containers at residential dwelling units receiving refuse and garbage
collection.
RECYCLING CONTAINERS: A plastic container stamped with the village logo,
purchased by the village and distributed by the village to residents receiving
residential curbside service.
REFUSE: All wastes which normally result from the operation of a household
including all garbage, rubbish, and bulky wastes.
RESIDENTIAL DWELLING UNIT: Any single- or multi-family dwelling within the
corporate limit of the village occupied by a person or group of persons. A
residential unit shall be deemed occupied when either water or domestic light
and power services are being supplied thereto. Multi-family dwellings and
condominiums, whether of single- or multi-level construction, shall be treated
as a residential dwelling unit, except that each single-family dwelling within
any such residential unit shall be billed separately as a residential unit.
RESIDENTIAL REFUSE: All garbage and rubbish generated by a producer at a
residential dwelling unit.
RUBBISH: All nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible wastes,
including, but not limited to, paper, plastics, bottles, glass, cardboard,
metal, cans, bricks, ashes, sod, dirt, rocks, cement, trees, wood, leather, and
any other like materials small enough for one man to handle. The term rubbish
shall not include yard waste, construction debris, bulky waste, dead animals,
garbage, stable matter, and hazardous wastes.
STABLE MATTER: All manure and other waste matter normally accumulated in or
about a stable, or any animal, livestock or poultry enclosure, and resulting
from the keeping of animals, poultry or livestock.
TRASH: Shall include garbage and rubbish.
TRASH STORAGE FACILITY: A permanent enclosure for the storage of refuse
receptacles.
UNACCEPTABLE RECYCLABLE MATERIALS: Materials not properly prepared, separated
and/or located in accordance with this chapter as generally accepted recycling
practices established by this code.
VILLAGE: The village of Erie or its authorized contractor.
YARD WASTE: Compostible, organic material consisting of dead plants, weeds,
Christmas trees, tree or hedge trimmings, grass clippings and leaves but
excluding tree limbs over four inches (4") in length and fifty (50) pounds in
weight. Yard wastes are further defined as follows:
Bulk Yard Waste: Hard yard waste which exceeds the diameter and length
standards set forth herein.
Hard Yard Waste: Brown stemmed branches and shrub prunings with large diameter
stems/trunks not to exceed forty eight inches (48") in length and four inches
(4") in diameter individually. Evergreen Christmas trees fall under this
definition; however, their collection and disposal will be defined under the
Christmas tree program.
Soft Yard Waste: Grass clippings, leaves, prunings of small diameter green
stemmed shrubs and plant stalks. (Ord. 425, 4-9-1981)
6-6-1-2: OPEN BURNING:
Open burning is defined by the lllinois Environmental Protection Agency and the
Illinois Pollution Control Board is hereby prohibited for all garbage, rubbish,
waste, Landscape. Waste, agricultural waste and commercial or trade waste
except as provided by Section
6-8-1 of this Code and the mies and regulations of the Illinois Pollution
Control Board and the Illinois Environmental Protections Agency regarding open
burning.
(Ord. 425, 4-9-1981; amd. Ord. 788, 5-9-2023)
6-6-1-3: INCINERATORS:
Any commercial establishment desiring to burn any trash shall burn the same in
an incinerator which conforms to the requirements and standards established,
approved and licensed by the state pollution control board. (Ord. 425, 4-9-
1981)
6-6-1-4: EXCLUSIVE RIGHTS OF VILLAGE COLLECTION:
Any garbage, refuse, trash, recyclables or yard waste generated by any
residential dwelling unit and placed at the curb for collection shall be
collected solely and exclusively by the village or its officially designated
solid waste disposal contractor. (Ord. 425, 4-9-1981)
6-6-1-5: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
A violation of section
6-6-2-5,
6-6-2-6,
6-6-2-7, or
6-6-2-10 of this chapter is punishable by a minimum fine of one hundred dollars
($100.00) and a maximum fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00) for any
subsequent offense. A violation of other sections of this chapter shall be
punishable by a maximum fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00). (Ord. 425, 4-9-
1981)
6-6-2: STORAGE AND DISPOSAL:
6-6-2-1: CONTAINERS REQUIRED; SPECIFICATIONS:
   (A)   Trash Containers To Be Provided: Every owner, tenant, lessee or
occupant of every residential dwelling unit or place of business shall provide
or cause to be provided at all times an approved trash container of sufficient
number and capacity to accommodate and contain all trash generated and
accumulated by occupants of the structure.
   (B)   Type Of Approved Containers:
      1.   Containers Used: Containers to be used for the pick up of garbage
and rubbish shall be:
         (a)   Garbage bags not less than 1.4 mil gauge plastic, and not
exceeding a total weight when filled of thirty five (35) pounds; or
         (b)   Tightly covered plastic or metal containers which are
watertight, do not exceed thirty three (33) gallon capacity, and do not exceed
a total weight when filled of thirty five (35) pounds, and lined with a special
prepaid disposable garbage bag/liner. Said containers shall have secure handles
for convenient lifting and carrying.
         (c)   One and one-half (11/2) yard dumpsters, approved by the village,
for commercial accounts.
      2.   Recycling Bin: Eighteen (18) gallon container to be used for the
pick up of recyclable materials made available through the village exclusively.
(Ord. 425, 4-9-1981)
6-6-2-2: DISPOSAL IN CONTAINERS REQUIRED:
It is unlawful to dispose of any garbage and rubbish or yard waste material
anywhere except through placement of such material in the types of approved
containers therein described, and placed for collection as herein prescribed.
(Ord. 425, 4-9-1981)
6-6-2-3: STORAGE AREA REGULATIONS:
   (A)   No trash storage facilities shall be maintained within the front yard
setback area, nor within a minimum of fifteen feet (15') of the side lot line.
   (B)   No trash receptacles shall be maintained in view or in plain sight
except on collection days.
   (C)   For purposes of this section a "day" shall be defined as that period
of time from sundown on the day preceding trash collection to sundown on the
day of trash collection. (Ord. 425, 4-9-1981)
6-6-2-4: TRASH CONTAINERS TO BE KEPT ON PREMISES:
   (A)   No trash containers shall be placed within the limits of any street or
alley but shall be kept by the adjacent property owner upon his own property.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of all persons occupying or controlling any
residential dwelling unit to place trash containers at the curb line of the
premises on the day of collection.
   (C)   All trash containers shall be stored and maintained in a neat manner
complementary to the area and the neighborhood. (Ord. 425, 4-9-1981)
6-6-2-5: INTERFERENCE WITH CONTAINERS:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, other than the owner, occupant or
members of their families, the owner's agent, or the village to deposit,
remove, deface, destroy, or disturb trash containers, recycling containers, or
bulky wastes.
   (B)   From time of placement of recyclables at the curb or in recycling drop
boxes for collection in accordance with the terms hereof, items shall be and
become the property of the village or its authorized agent. It shall be a
violation of this chapter for any person not authorized by the village to
collect or pick up or cause to be collected or picked up any such items. Any
and each such collection in violation hereof from one or more locations shall
constitute a separate and distinct offense punishable as hereinafter provided.
(Ord. 425, 4-9-1981)
6-6-2-6: PLACEMENT AND STORAGE:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to sweep or deposit any refuse or
litter in any public place or public way except in public trash containers
provided for such purposes. Persons owning or occupying property shall keep the
sidewalk and any right of way bordering their property free of litter.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit any residential refuse
in any public place or public trash container.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place or maintain paper,
litter, excelsior, garbage, trash or rubbish of any kind whatever in open
deposits on the ground or in open containers which do not meet the requirements
of this chapter.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful to use any nonapproved container in violation of
the provisions of this chapter. Such containers may be confiscated and disposed
of by the village.
   (E)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place or maintain garbage,
rubbish, recyclables or trash for curbside collection in violation of this
chapter.
   (F)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place or deposit residential
refuse in any commercial container. (Ord. 425, 4-9-1981)
6-6-2-7: POLLUTION OF WATER, STREETS:
   (A)   No person shall throw, place, or deposit or cause to be deposited any
garbage, refuse, litter, manure, carrion, dead animals, offal, putrid, or
unwholesome substance, upon the margin, banks or into any stream or water, or
another within the limits of the village.
   (B)   No person shall allow or permit any litter, other offensive substance,
or noxious matter of any kind to run or fall from or out of any building or
vehicle into or upon any street or public place, nor allow or permit such
litter or other noxious matter to stand or remain on any ground or premises
within the limits of the village. (Ord. 425, 4-9-1981)
6-6-2-8: COLLECTION REQUIRED:
In the interest of community health standards, it shall be required that all
residential, commercial, and industrial properties within the corporate limits
of Erie provide for garbage-refuse collection no less frequently than once per
week. (Ord. 425, 4-9-1981)
6-6-2-9: COLLECTION PROVIDED BY VILLAGE:
   (A)   For purposes of providing village collection services, properties
within the corporate limits shall be classified as follows:
      1.   Residential: Single-family residential properties, multi-family
residential dwellings, or single unit apartment housed on the same property as
a commercial establishment.
      2.   Commercial-Industrial: Properties with the principal use being a
business enterprise, or those properties not being classified as residential.
This classification includes, but is not limited to: restaurants, retail sales
establishments, medical offices, schools, churches, and nonmanufacturing
facilities.
   (B)   The village shall provide once per week collection of solid waste from
residential properties only. No collection service shall be provided to
commercial or industrial properties.
   (C)   The materials to be collected include:
      1.   Garbage and rubbish.
      2.   Bulky waste.
      3.   Yard waste in accordance with the provisions of section
6-6-2-12 of this chapter.
      4.   Recyclable materials, including glass, plastic (HDPE and PET),
newspapers, and cans when packaged in accordance with this chapter.
   (D)   The village will not collect sod, earth, concrete, refuse from
remodeling or construction, automobile parts, hazardous wastes, and large
trees. (Ord. 425, 4-9-1981)
6-6-2-10: HOUSEHOLD REFUSE COLLECTION:
Collection of household refuse will be provided once each week from all
residential properties. Refuse must be placed curbside. All refuse shall be
prepared for collection in the following manner:
   (A)   Any refuse placed in containers for collection shall be drained of all
free liquids and shall be less than thirty five (35) pounds.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any container to be filled with materials
which may cause injury to persons handling the containers including, but not
limited to, explosives, poisons, acids or caustic materials.
   (C)   Fats, oils, and grease shall be placed in sealed containers to prevent
leakage.
   (D)   Containers shall be free of any landscape (yard) waste materials.
(Ord. 425, 4-9-1981)
6-6-2-11: CURBSIDE RECYCLING SERVICE:
   (A)   The village shall cause to be collected and removed all recyclable
materials which are placed in recycling bins at the curbside adjacent to
residential properties and other locations agreed by the village to be enrolled
in the recycling service.
   (B)   The village shall furnish one recycling container for each residential
dwelling unit and to each person, firm, or corporation agreed by the village to
be eligible to participate in the curbside recycling service. The container
shall be owned by the village and shall remain village property at all times.
Any container damaged or lost, except for the fault of the village or its
agent, shall be replaced at the expense of the person, firm, or corporation
using the recycling service. A replacement charge of ten dollars ($10.00) shall
be assessed for any container not returned to village hall when service is
permanently discontinued for any reason. (Ord. 425, 4-9-1981)
   (C)   All recyclable materials shall be prepared for collection and arranged
in the recycling container as may be provided by rules and regulations issued
by the disposal company and approved by a majority vote of the board of
trustees. (Ord. 564, 8-12-2003)
6-6-2-12: YARD WASTE COLLECTION:
The village shall not provide for the collection of yard waste from residential
properties except as may be collected by each individual hauler at the hauler's
sole discretion. (Ord. 425, 4-9-1991)
6-6-2-13: VILLAGE RESERVES THE RIGHT TO REFUSE COLLECTION:
The village may refuse collection of any solid wastes not prepared in
accordance with section
6-6-2-10,
6-6-2-11 or
6-6-2-12 of this chapter. (Ord. 425, 4-9-1981)
6-6-2-14: COLLECTION CHARGE IMPOSED:
The board of trustees may, by resolution, establish "volume based" charges for
the collection services provided in this section
6-6-2. (Ord. 425, 4-9-1991)
6-6-2-15: BILLING, REVENUES, ACCOUNTS:
(Ord. 425, 4-9-1991)
6-6-3: HAULER'S LICENSE:
6-6-3-1: REQUIRED:
No person shall remove or haul any garbage, refuse or recyclable materials from
any lot or tract of real estate or from any street or alley, for hire, without
first procuring a license therefor as provided in this section
6-6-3. (Ord. 425, 4-9-1991)
6-6-3-2: APPLICATION:
Application for a license under this section
6-6-3 shall be made on forms provided by the village clerk's office. (Ord. 425,
4-9-1991)
6-6-3-3: BOND:
Application for a license shall be accompanied by a surety bond in the sum of
five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), conditioned upon the observance of this
chapter. (Ord. 425, 4-9-1991)
6-6-3-4: CERTIFICATES OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION INSURANCE AND PUBLIC LIABILITY
INSURANCE REQUIRED:
Prior to issuance of a license under this section
6-6-3 the applicant shall present a certificate of workers' compensation
insurance and a certificate of public liability insurance in the amount of one
million dollars ($1,000,000.00). (Ord. 425, 4-9-1991)
6-6-3-5: FEE:
Application for a license under this section
6-6-3 shall be accompanied by a license fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00),
which amount is established as the annual license fee. (Ord. 425, 4-9-1991)
6-6-3-6: TERM:
All licenses used under this section
6-6-3 shall be valid until April 30 next succeeding the date of issuance of
such license. The village board of trustees may issue only one license and may
refuse any applicant. Issuance of a license hereunder is in the sole discretion
of the village board. (Ord. 425, 4-9-1991)
6-6-4: SERVICE CHARGE:
A service charge is hereby imposed on each person, firm or corporation
receiving service for the collection of solid waste and curbside recycling in
the Village, by the disposal contractor under a contract with the Village. The
amount of the service charge shall be established from time to time by action
of the affirmative vote of not less than a majority of the Board of Trustees
and shall be payable monthly.
The service charge provided in this section shall be paid by each user of these
disposal services in the same manner as the bimonthly service charge is imposed
on users of water and/or combined water and sewer service in section
7-7-2 of this code.
(Ord. 518, 11-9-1999; amd. Ord. 564, 8-12-2003; Ord. 621, 8-12-2008; Ord. 664,
2-14-2012; Ord. 732, 12-11-2018; Ord. 763, 7-13-2021)
CHAPTER 7
HOME KITCHEN OPERATION
SECTION:
6-7-1: Adoption
6-7-1: ADOPTION:
Kitchen operations as defined and permitted under the food handling regulation
enforcement act, 410 Illinois Compiled Statutes 625/3.6 as amended are hereby
authorized by the village. Said section 3.6 as amended is hereby adopted by
reference and made a part of this chapter with the same force and effect as
though set forth herein verbatim. (Ord. 683, 7-8-2014)
CHAPTER 8
BURNING RESTRICTIONS
SECTION
6-8-1: Prohibited; Nuisance Declared
6-8-2: Exceptions
6-8-3:    Partial Invalidity
6-8-4:    Penalty
6-8-1:  PROHIBITED; NUISANCE DECLARED:
A.   The burning of any garbage, waste, refuse, rubbish, or substance of any
kind other than Landscape Waste, and clean dry paper products, within the
Village limits is hereby declared a nuisance and prohibited. This prohibition
shall also include the burning of any prohibited material in a "burn barrel" or
other container used for the purpose of holding garbage, waste, refuse,
rnbhish, or any other thing for the purpose of burning. "Burn barrel" means any
container of any type used for the containment while burning or any material,
substance, or thing.
B.   Nothing in this chapter shall be constrncd to prohibit the burning of
fuels for cooking purposes, fuels in a domestic fireplace, recreational fires
in a fire pit, campfire, or the like while burning clean wood, ceremonial
bonfires authorized by the corporate authorities and the Fire Department
provided that no garbage shall be burned in any such cases.
C.   Furthermore, the restrictions herein on burning shall not apply to the
Village and nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to prohibit the Village
of Erie from burning any garbage, waste, refuse, rubbish or substance of any
kind within the Village limits as long as such burning has been approved by the
Board of Trustees of the Village of Erie.
D.   Landscape Waste in this Chapter is defined as leaves. grass, tree limbs,
shrubbery cuttings, and other materials accumulated as the result of the care
of lawns, shrubbery, vines and trees. Landscape Waste shall not include
agricultural waste, commercial trade waste or disastrous debris as such tenns
are defined by the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency and the lllinois
Pollution control Board.
(Ord. 788, 5-9-2023)
6-8-2: EXCEPTIONS:
Open burning shall be prohibited within the corporate limits of the Village
except as permitted under the following conditions and subject to any other
laws adopted by the Village:
A.   The burning of Landscape Waste which is the combustion of Landscape Waste
in such a way that the product of the combustion is emitted to the open air,
shall be permitted but only:
   1.   Between the hours of nine o’clock (9:00) AM. prevailing time and six
o'clock (6:00) P.M. on Tuesdays, Thursdays, and Saturdays, and at any time
during the date designated as Halloween or the day designated by the Board of
Trustees to celebrate Halloween each year.
   2.   On the premises on which such waste is generated.
   3.   That the burning does not occur within six feet (6') of any street or
alley, on any street, sidewalk, alley or public ditch;
   4.   When the burning is constantly attended and supervised by a competent
and responsible person over the age of sixteen (16) years until such burning is
completely extinguished;
   5.   When such burning does not create a visibility hazard on streets,
roadways, alleys, public sidewalks or railroad tracks;
   6.   The only Landscape Vlasle that can be burned are trees, leaves, and
brush. No cut grass or weeds; and
   7.   No burn piles on the Village streets or right of ways.
B.   The burning of dead dry patches of grass and weeds to promote new growth
and clear the ground which is the combustion of patches of grass and weeds in
such a way that the product or the combustion is emitted to the open air, shall
be pennitted but only:
   1.   Between the hours of nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00)
P.M. prevailing time on Tuesdays, Timrsdays, and Saturdays;
   2.   When the burning is constantly attended and supervised by a competent
and responsible person over the age of sixteen (16) years until such burning is
completely extinguished; and
   3.   When such burning docs not crea!e a visibility hazard on streets,
roadways, alleys, public sidewalks or railroad tracks.
C.   The burning of cltan cardboard and dean dry paper products which is the
combustion of clean dry paper products in such a way that the product of the
combustion is emitted to the open air, shall be permitted but only:
   1     Between the hours of nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. and six o’clock (6:00)
P.M. prevailing time on Tuesdays, Thursdays, and Saturdays;
   2.   On the premises where such waste is generated;
   3.   That the burning does not occur within six feet (6') of any street or
alley, on any street, sidewalk, alley or public ditch;
   4.   When the burning is constantly attended and supervised by a competent
and responsible person over the age of sixteen (16) years until such burning is
completely extinguished;
   5.   When such burning does not create a visibility hazard on streets,
roadways, alleys, public sidewalks or railroad tracks;
   6.   The only products bumed are clean paper products free of any plastics
or other foreign material; and
   7.   The burning of clean paper products is contained in such a way as to
not constitute an ignition hazard outside of the container.
(Ord. 788, 5-9-2023)
6-8-3: PARTIAL INVALIDITY:
If any section, subdivision, sentence or clause of this chapter is for any
reason, held invalid or to be unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect
the validity of the remaining portion of this Chapter, or the Title, which it
amends.
(Ord. 788, 5-9-2023)
6-8-4: PENALTY:
Any person, finn, or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of
this chapter shall, upon conviction, be fined neither less than fifty dollars
($50.00) or more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense,
and each day on which such a violation occurs or continues shall be considered
to be a separate offense. In addition, the Village may, at its sole discretion,
seek any other remedy at law or in equity to restrain or enjoin violations of
this chapter.
(Ord. 788, 5-9-2023)
TITLE 7
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
CHAPTER 1
SIDEWALKS AND STREETS
SECTION:
7-1-1: Obstructing Public Ways
7-1-2: Chattel Properties
7-1-3: Open Cellars, Vaults
7-1-4: Sidewalk Construction Specifications
7-1-5: Penalty
7-1-6: Declaration Of Necessity
7-1-7: Maintenance Of Sidewalk; Responsibility
7-1-1: OBSTRUCTING PUBLIC WAYS:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, erect, build or cause to
be placed, erected or built, or to suffer to remain in or upon any sidewalk,
street, crossing, lane, alley or highway within the limits of the village, any
fence, enclosure, box, vehicle or other obstruction of any kind or nature.
(1909 Code § 6.18)
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to dig, plow, scrape or remove any
earth, gravel or sand from any of the streets, alleys or sidewalks of the
village so as to make any of them uneven, or to deposit, pour, empty, throw,
pile or place into, on or upon any street, alley, avenue, sidewalk, gutter,
drain or within or upon any public right of way in the village, any water,
dirt, waste, grass, lawn clippings, glass, refuse, waste material, brush,
trees, limbs, leaves, trash, shavings, chips, matter, rubbish, junk, garbage,
or any other materials or personal property or refuse of any kind or nature
whatsoever, whether abandoned or not, or any other article that might cause
injury to any person, animal or property.
   (C)   No person or railroad company shall stop or leave standing any
vehicle, railroad engine, car or cars in any street, sidewalk, crosswalk, road
or other public thoroughfare within the limits of the village in such a manner
as to obstruct the same; and when it shall be necessary to stop any railroad
train, engine, car or cars on any such street or sidewalk for any time
exceeding five (5) minutes, such cars shall be uncoupled and the cars shall be
separated so that the same shall be the least possible obstruction to the
public use of such street, sidewalk or thoroughfare.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any person to burn any material whatsoever
upon any public sidewalk, street, lane, alley, highway, or to burn any material
whatsoever within any publicly dedicated right of way, within the limits of the
village.
   (E)   No person shall deposit, cause to be deposited, release, store, place,
cause to be placed or otherwise allow water, ice, or any liquid to be placed or
remain on or upon any public street, alley, highway, sidewalk or within or upon
all publicly dedicated rights of way within the corporate limits of the
village.
   (F)   United States mailboxes and private newspaper receptacles are
permitted within the publicly dedicated right of way. Garbage cans or garbage
receptacles are permitted upon or within the publicly dedicated right of way
only on the day appointed for garbage collection.
   (G)   Notwithstanding anything to the contrary herein, the provisions of
this section shall not apply to the village and its employees, agents and
contractors while acting on behalf of the village. (Ord. 382, 11-12-1985; amd.
Ord. 617, 5-13-2008; Ord. 637, 10-13-2009; Ord. 781, 12-13-2022)
7-1-2: CHATTEL PROPERTIES:
No person shall deposit or store any chattel property, goods, wares or
merchandise on any public highway, street or alley within the corporate limits
of the village and allow the same to remain upon such public highway, street or
alley for a period of more than eight (8) hours.
No person being the owner or having the possession and control of any chattel
property, goods, wares or merchandise shall suffer the same to be deposited on
any public highway, street or alley within the corporate limits of the village
and suffer the same to remain upon such public highway, street or alley for a
period of more than eight (8) hours.
No person shall deposit any chattel property, goods, wares or merchandise on
any public sidewalk or, being the owner of, or having the possession and
control of, any such chattel property, goods, wares or merchandise shall suffer
the same to be deposited on any such public sidewalk, and permit the same to
remain upon such sidewalk for a period of more than five (5) hours.
The foregoing time limitations are also made applicable to all of the
provisions of section
7-1-1 of this chapter. Any person found to be in violation of section
7-1-1 of this chapter or this section shall first be given a written warning
notice by the village chief of police. (Ord. 126, 11-14-1950; amd. Ord. 382,
11-12-1985; Ord. 781, 12-13-2022)
7-1-3: OPEN CELLARS, VAULTS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to leave open, uncovered or unguarded any
cellar, pit, vault or other subterraneous opening leading from, into or upon
any street, alley or sidewalk within the limits of the village. (1909 Code §
6.6; amd. Ord. 781, 12-13-2022)
7-1-4: SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION SPECIFICATIONS:
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary herein, all sidewalks constructed in
the village shall be ADA compliant cement sidewalks constructed according to
the following specifications:
   (A)   The surface to be covered by the sidewalk shall be brought to subgrade
by excavating or filling, as the case may be. The cross section shall conform
in every respect to the cross section of the sidewalk when completed, and shall
be thoroughly settled and compacted.
   (B)   When the material or soil forming the subgrade is sand or loose sandy
loam the sidewalk may be placed thereon without further foundation course. When
material or soil other than sand or loose sandy loam is developed in the
subgrade, a foundation course of sand, gravel or clean cinders shall be laid
thereon, which shall be thoroughly compacted to a firm even surface.
   (C)   Upon the foundation prepared as above, shall be spread a layer of
concrete four inches (4") thick. The concrete shall be not less than four
thousand (4,000) pounds per square inch. The sidewalk shall be scored not less
than every four feet (4') or more than every six feet (6'). The sidewalk shall
be broom finished. The sidewalk shall be a minimum of forty eight inches (48")
wide. (Ord. 505, 4-13-1999; amd. Ord. 781, 12-13-2022)
7-1-5: PENALTY:
Any person convicted of a violation of any section of this chapter, shall be
fined in an amount not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and not to
exceed seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for any one offense. (Ord. 382,
11-12-1985; amd. Ord. 781, 12-13-2022)
7-1-6: DECLARATION OF NECESSITY:
It is hereby determined by the board of trustees that it is in the best
interests of the public welfare of the residents of the village that damaged
sidewalks or sidewalks which have fallen into disrepair be repaired and that
the cost of repair shall be as established by this chapter. (Ord. 505, 4-13-
1999; amd. Ord. 781, 12-13-2022)
7-1-7: MAINTENANCE OF SIDEWALK; RESPONSIBILITY:
   (A)   It shall be the responsibility of the owner of the abutting property
to keep the sidewalk in a good state of repair so as to ensure safe travel
thereon. (Ord. 505, 4-13-1999; amd. Ord. 781, 12-13-2022)
CHAPTER 2
EXCAVATIONS
SECTION:
7-2-1: Permit Required
7-2-2: Guards; Warning
7-2-3: Restoring Surface Of Street
7-2-4: Application; Conditions Of Permit
7-2-5: Bond
7-2-1: PERMIT REQUIRED:
No person shall deposit materials in or dig, excavate or in any manner break up
any street, highway, avenue or alley in the village unless such person shall
first have obtained a permit therefor from the village as hereinafter provided.
(Ord. 146, 7-13-1954)
7-2-2: GUARDS; WARNING:
Any and all materials temporarily piled or deposited in any street, highway,
avenue or alley or any excavation therein, shall be adequately protected and
guarded at all times in such manner as to prevent injury to any and all persons
lawfully using said street, highway, avenue or alley. During the hours of
darkness any obstruction so created, or any excavation, shall be adequately
lighted by suitable flares or other means so as to give adequate warning to all
persons lawfully in or upon or using said street, highway, avenue or alley.
(Ord. 146, 7-13-1954)
7-2-3: RESTORING SURFACE OF STREET:
Except for such permits as may be granted for work which will result in a
change of a permanent nature in the level or grade of any street, highway,
avenue or alley, any person making any excavation in any street, highway,
avenue or alley, whether or not the same shall be authorized by any permit
issued under the provisions of this chapter, shall promptly refill the same in
a good and workmanlike manner and shall restore the surface of the roadway to
its original condition before the excavation was made and shall maintain the
surface as restored for a period of one year from the date of restoration. ln
backfilling any trench or excavation in the traveled portion of any such
street, highway, avenue or alley, the dirt or materials used in the backfill
shall be deposited in layers not exceeding six inches (6") in depth and each
layer thoroughly compacted by tamping before the succeeding layer is deposited.
No clods, lumps or frozen dirt shall be used in the backfill. (Ord. 146, 7-13-
1954)
7-2-4: APPLICATION; CONDITIONS OF PERMIT:
   (A)   Application For Permit: Any person desiring a permit under the terms
of this chapter shall make written application for the same to the president
and board of trustees of the village or the chairman of the committee on
streets and alleys, on blanks furnished by the village for that purpose. Such
application shall state the place where the work is proposed to be done, the
extent and purpose of such excavation or deposit of materials and when the work
is proposed to be done. ln the event that the proposed work involves an
excavation governed by this chapter, the applicant shall tender with said
application a bond as hereinafter provided, with sureties to be approved by the
president and board of trustees or the chairman of the committee on streets and
alleys, to whom said application is made.
   (B)   Granting Of Permits: Permits shall be granted by the president and
board of trustees or by the chairman of the committee on streets and alleys on
application as herein provided, if it appears from said application that the
applicant has some reasonable need for the work proposed; that the provisions
of this chapter have been fully complied with and that the prosecution of said
work will not unnecessarily or unduly interfere with the public use of the
street, highway, avenue or alley involved. Provided, however, no permit shall
be issued to any person who is in default in the performance of his obligations
under any permit previously issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
In the event that an application is made to the chairman of the committee on
streets and alleys and the application is refused, the applicant may appeal to
the president and board of trustees by filing said application and any
supporting papers required by this chapter with the village clerk who shall
give to the applicant at least twenty four (24) hours' advance notice of the
time and place of the meeting of the president and board of trustees at which
said application will be considered and said applicant shall have the right to
appear before the president and board of trustees and present such additional
evidence as may be deemed pertinent.
   (C)   Permit Fee: The fee for obtaining such permit as is referred to in
this chapter is one hundred dollars ($100.00), which fee shall be deposited
with the officer or board to whom said application shall be presented at the
time of presentation of said application and no application shall be considered
before said fee is tendered. In the event that the application is denied, the
permit fee shall be returned to the applicant. Provided, however, that no fee
shall be charged for a permit or permits for doing whatever work may be
necessary to establish proper drainage in any street, highway, avenue or alley
or the filling of mud holes therein, and no permit shall be required or
additional fee shall be charged in the case of the establishment of sewer or
water connections where the work is done by and under the direction of the
village authorities and the established tapping or connection fee has been paid
to the village.
   (D)   Duration Of Permit: All permits shall extend over a period of not to
exceed fourteen (14) days from date of issue and after such period said permit
shall be null and void, excepting that the president and board of trustees may,
on satisfactory showing of necessity therefor, issue a permit permitting the
piling of materials in parts of streets or highways in such manner as not
unreasonably to restrict the public use of the same, extending over a period of
not to exceed six (6) months, provided the use of the portion of the street or
highway involved is reasonably required for the use applied for in connection
with the improvement of adjoining property. (Ord. 146, 7-13-1954)
   (E)   Village Street Department: The village street department shall be
responsible for sawing all cuts in any of the streets and alleys for
excavation. The permittee shall begin excavation of the street from the edge,
and remove any street surface from the edge of the street to the center of the
street. The permittee shall be solely responsible to remove all debris created
by the excavation and shall be responsible to dispose of said debris at the
permittee's sole expense. The permittee shall also be responsible to jet all
backfill thoroughly until settled, to a minimum of five feet (5'). The village
street department shall replace any blacktop when the backfill is completely
settled, at the expense of the permittee. The village street department in said
replacement shall be responsible to core the excavation twelve inches (12")
deep, replace the excavation with six inches (6") of compacted rock, then
complete the replacement with compacted blacktop to the level of the existing
street. (Ord. 415, 4-10-1990)
7-2-5: BOND:
A new permit shall not be issued to any person to dig or excavate in any
street, highway, avenue or alley unless such person shall first give bond to
the village in the penal sum and condition as hereafter provided. Each such
bond shall be in the penal sum of five hundred dollars ($500.00) excepting that
contractors whose business may require them to make repeated excavations in the
streets and public highways of the village may provide a general contractor's
bond in the penal sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) as hereinafter
provided.
All bonds in the penal sum of five hundred dollars ($500.00) shall be
conditioned on the faithful performance of all duties required by this chapter
and all ordinances, rules and regulations of the village relating to the work
proposed to be done; that the obligor will promptly backfill and close in a
good and workmanlike manner and in compliance with the provisions of this code
all excavations made by him under the authority of the permit, will at all
times maintain proper guards, barricades and lights to safeguard the public
from injury arising out of such excavation; will promptly restore the surface
of such street or highway to its original condition and will maintain the
surface of said street or highway over said excavation for a period of one year
following the date of the closing thereof and will at all times hold and save
harmless the village, its officers and agents, from any and all injury and
damage which may be sustained by any person arising through or by reason of
such excavation having been made or the improper guarding or maintenance
thereof or of the surface of the street, highway, avenue or alley involved in
such activities or which may arise out of neglect or incompetence on the part
of the person to whom such permit may be issued, his servants or agents, in the
performance of the work done or by reason of any other cause whatsoever,
growing out of the negligence or carelessness of the person to whom such permit
may be issued in the prosecution of the work with respect to which permit has
been issued.
In lieu of a bond or bonds conditioned as aforesaid, any person whose business
may require the making of repeated excavations in the streets, avenues,
highways or alleys of the village in connection with work to be done for
others, may file with the village clerk a bond in the penal sum of one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00) with sureties to be approved by the president and board of
trustees of the village, said bond to be conditioned that the obligor will
faithfully perform all of the duties required by this chapter and all
provisions of this code relating to all work done under the authority of any
permit applied for and issued pursuant to the terms and provisions of this
chapter and authorizing an excavation or excavations in any street, highway,
avenue or alley during the fiscal year of the village with respect to which
said bond is filed (which said fiscal year shall be stated in said bond); that
the obligor will promptly backfill and close in a good and workmanlike manner
and in compliance with the provisions of this code all excavations made by him
under the authority of any permit issued during said fiscal year; will at all
times maintain proper guards, barricades and lights to safeguard the public
from injury arising out of any and all such excavations; and will promptly
restore the surface of such street or highway to its original condition and
will maintain the surface of said street or highway over any and all
excavations for a period of one year following the date of the closing thereof
and will at all times hold and save harmless the village, its officers and
agents, from any and all damage which may be sustained by any person arising
through or by reason of any such excavation having been made or of the improper
guarding or maintenance thereof or of surface of the street, highway, avenue or
alley involved in such activities or which may arise out of neglect or
incompetence of the person to whom any such permit may be issued, his servants
or agents, in the performance of the work done or by reason of any other cause
whatsoever growing out of the negligence or carelessness of the person to whom
such permit may be issued in the prosecution of the work with respect to which
any such permit may be issued.
Contractor's bonds in the penal sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) except
with respect to work done and to be done pursuant to permits issued during the
fiscal year of the village for which the bond is given, shall terminate at the
end of the fiscal year for which the bond is given. (Ord. 146, 7-13-1954)
CHAPTER 3
CEMETERY
SECTION:
7-3-1: Cemetery Described
7-3-2: Sexton
7-3-3: Deeds Required
7-3-4: Appraisal Of Lots; Regulations
7-3-5: Perpetual Care Fund
7-3-6: Cemetery Lot Fees
7-3-7: Grave Opening Fees
7-3-8: Interment Of Indigent Persons; Improvements
7-3-9: Damage Property
7-3-10: Consent To Dig Graves
7-3-11: Open, Disturb Graves
7-3-12: Application Of Chapter
7-3-13: Outer Burial Container
7-3-14: Redemption Of Cemetery Lots By Village
7-3-15: Pets Running At Large
7-3-1: CEMETERY DESCRIBED:
The following described real estate situated in the village: commencing at the
center of Section No. Six (6) in Township No. Nineteen (19) North, Range No.
Four (4) east of the 4th P.M. in the Village of Erie in the County of Whiteside
in the State of Illinois, running thence south Seven (7) chains and Seventy
Five (75) links, running thence west Twelve (12) chains and Seventy Five (75)
links to the point of commencing the boundary of said real estate, running
thence south Four (4) chains, running thence east Sixteen (16) chains and
Thirty Five (35) links, thence north Sixteen (16) degrees and Thirty (30)
minutes west along the Erie and Albany Road Four (4) chains and Eighty Two (82)
links, thence west Fifteen (15) chains and Fourteen (14) links to the point of
commencing the boundary of said real estate to close, is hereby declared to be
a cemetery for the burial of the dead and shall be under the management,
supervision and control of the president and board of trustees of the village.
(1909 Code §13.1)
7-3-2: SEXTON:
The president shall appoint, and the board of trustees of the village shall
approve such appointment by a majority vote, a sexton for the cemetery and may
also approve an assistant sexton. If the sexton is temporarily absent, the duly
appointed assistant sexton shall perform the duties and possess all the rights
and powers of the sexton and shall receive compensation as determined from time
to time by the board of trustees. The duties of the sexton shall be to keep a
book and enter therein at every burial listing the name and date of death and
the number of the lot upon which buried, and such other records as the
president and board of trustees may direct the sexton to keep or maintain. The
president and board of trustees, at their sole discretion shall, from time to
time, hire individual(s) or entity(ies) to dig all graves in the cemetery, and
to take charge of the cemetery grounds and to mow and maintain the cemetery
grounds. The president and board of trustees shall, from time to time, further
establish rules and regulations concerning the digging of graves, establish
fees for digging graves and for mowing and maintenance of the grounds of the
cemetery, as long as such rules and regulations are not in direct conflict with
any of the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 673, 12-11-2012)
7-3-3: DEEDS REQUIRED:
Neither the sexton nor any person or entity previously authorized by the
president and board of trustees to dig graves shall dig a grave or permit a
grave to be dug upon any lot in the cemetery unless there shall have been
obtained a deed for such lot or a receipt for the purchase money or, in case of
a stranger or indigent person, a burial permit from the village clerk and the
chairman of the committee on the cemetery. (Ord. 476, 6-10-1997)
The forms used as deeds for cemetery lots shall be as set forth by the
president and board of trustees, and shall be and remain on file in the office
of the village clerk.
Such deeds shall vest in the grantee all of the title of the village in and to
said lot or lots, for cemetery purposes only. Said lot or lots must be used in
strict compliance with the proper regulations governing the use of said
cemetery now promulgated, or which may be promulgated from time to time
hereafter, and in strict compliance with all provisions of this code concerning
the use of the cemetery, as well as those which may be hereafter passed and
those now in force. (Ord. 93, 1942; amd. 1976 Code)
All sellers, grantors, or transferors of any lot or lots in the cemetery shall
be required to notify the village clerk in writing of each and every transfer
of an ownership interest in any lot, lots, or part thereof in the village
cemetery. (Ord. 554, 10-10-2002)
7-3-4: APPRAISAL OF LOTS; REGULATIONS:
The lots in the cemetery shall be appraised in such a manner as the president
and board of trustees of the village shall determine by resolution and any
appraisement so made may be set aside and a new one made at any time by a
resolution passed by the president and board of trustees for lots not sold. A
record of the lots in the cemetery shall be kept by the village clerk in which
shall be entered the number of each lot and the appraised value thereof and,
when any lot or lots shall be sold he shall enter the date of sale, to whom
sold and the amount sold for and the date of the deed conveying the same. Said
lots shall be sold at not less than the appraised value to any person, and upon
payment being made for the same, it shall be the duty of the village clerk
thereupon to execute a deed of conveyance to the purchaser of such lot or lots,
which shall vest in the grantee all of the title of the village in and to said
lot or lots for cemetery purposes only; provided, however, that the purchaser
or purchasers, owner or owners of any lot or lots shall not be permitted to
plant any trees or shrubs thereon, that will, when grown, obstruct the walks or
driveways and, provided further, that no such purchaser or owner shall plant or
otherwise set out on any such lot any tree, bush, plant, moss or other thing
liable to spread, or any species of locust, lilac, flowering currant or
anything likely to be infected with worms. The president and board of trustees
may at any time order and cause to be removed any plant, tree, bush, shrub,
moss or other thing set out upon any lot in the cemetery. (1909 Code §13.4)
7-3-5: PERPETUAL CARE FUND:
There is hereby created a fund to be known as the "cemetery perpetual care
fund" and the village treasurer is hereby directed to set up on his books such
a fund and into said fund shall be paid all money coming into the hands of said
treasurer, whether by gift, devise or otherwise to be used for the perpetual
care of the cemetery. The principal of the cemetery perpetual care fund shall,
by the treasurer, be kept invested in such securities as are recognized by the
laws of the state as proper for the investment of trust funds and in such other
interest bearing securities as the president and board of trustees may from
time to time specially direct. The income from said fund shall be used only for
the proper care and maintenance of the Erie Cemetery and the principal thereof
shall never be expended or in anywise impaired for any purpose. All unexpected
income from said fund on the last day of the fiscal year of the village shall
be automatically transferred from the cemetery perpetual care fund to the
general cemetery fund of the village to be used for the proper care and
maintenance of the Erie Cemetery. (Res. 2-1-27; amd. Ord. 404, 4-11-1989)
7-3-6: CEMETERY LOT FEES:
All lots in the cemetery remaining and now unsold shall be sold for the
appraised prices as follows:
 
                      Price
A full lot (1 burial) $ 250.00
2 lots (2 burials)    500.00
3 lots (3 burials)    750.00
4 lots (4 burials)    1,000.00
 
No fractional lots shall be sold.
From the funds collected for the sale of each lot the clerk shall pay ten
dollars ($10.00) of the amount collected and received into the hands of the
treasurer for the benefit of the cemetery perpetual care fund and the balance
shall be paid into the hands of the treasurer to the credit of the general
cemetery fund. (Ord. 404, 4-11-1989; amd. Ord. 729, 10-9-2018)
7-3-7: GRAVE OPENING FEES:
A fee for each grave opening, burial and closing in the cemetery and the amount
of the charge and fee shall be determined by the licensed funeral home
conducting the burial. (Ord. 688, 12-9-2014)
7-3-8: INTERMENT OF INDIGENT PERSONS; IMPROVEMENTS:
The president and board of trustees of the village shall have the power, by
resolution, to set apart one or more lots or parcels of ground in the cemetery
on which to bury strangers and indigent persons, or to which the body or bodies
of any person or persons occupying any lot or lots which have not been paid
for, may be removed pursuant to a resolution of the president and board of
trustees and in accordance with law. The president and board of trustees shall
also have the power, by resolution, to direct the sexton or a committee to make
or cause to be made improvements or repairs upon the cemetery grounds, and the
sexton or committee may make the improvements or repairs so directed by
resolution and may, when so directed, trim or remove anything growing upon any
lot or other part of the cemetery. (1909 Code §13.5)
7-3-9: DAMAGE PROPERTY:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully destroy, deface or in
any manner soil, disturb or damage any headstone, footstone, tablet, monument
or other thing placed in the cemetery for the purpose of perpetuating the
memory of the dead or of ornamenting the cemetery. The provisions of this
subsection shall not, however, apply to acts forbidden in this subsection when
committed by any person authorized so to do by the president and board of
trustees or by the person owning the lot or lots upon which the same may be
done. (1909 Code §13.7)
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully throw down, open,
injure or destroy the fence around the cemetery grounds or any part thereof or
to cut, fell, box, bore, disfigure or destroy any tree, shrub or plant standing
upon the grounds or which may hereafter be planted thereon, or pluck any flower
growing or planted therein, except the person upon whose lot the same shall be
or who may be directed so to do by the president and board of trustees. It
shall further be unlawful for any person to wilfully displace or destroy any
stake, stone or other landmark or boundary upon the cemetery grounds. It shall
be unlawful for any person to decorate, hang, attach, or fasten any object or
ornament of any kind or nature from any tree, shrub, or any planting growing
from the grounds of the cemetery except as may be directed by the president and
board of trustees. (1909 Code §13.8; amd. Ord. 589, 12-14-2004)
7-3-10: CONSENT TO DIG GRAVES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to dig a grave or vault in any street or
alley in the cemetery grounds, or upon any lot therein without the consent of
the owner thereof or without having first purchased said lot, or in case of a
stranger or indigent person, without having obtained a burial permit. (1909
Code §13.9)
This section shall not in any way effect or change the requirement in section
7-3-2 of this chapter that only the president and board of trustees have the
authority to hire individuals or entities to dig graves in the cemetery and no
person or entity may dig any grave in the cemetery on any lot without the
consent and permission of the village. (Ord. 688, 12-9-2014)
7-3-11: OPEN, DISTURB GRAVES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to open or disturb any grave, vault or
other place for the deposit of the dead within the cemetery, unless such person
shall be the nearest of kin or a near relative to the deceased person, or
legally entitled so to do. (1909 Code §13.9)
7-3-12: APPLICATION OF CHAPTER:
The provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to cemetery grounds which
may be hereafter acquired by the village. (1909 Code §13.11)
7-3-13: OUTER BURIAL CONTAINER:
No person whatsoever shall be buried in the cemetery without an outer burial
container, which outer burial container must be either a concrete vault or a
fiberglass vault. Only a concrete vault or a fiberglass vault constitutes a
legal outer burial container. (Ord. 367, 2-14-1984)
7-3-14: REDEMPTION OF CEMETERY LOTS BY VILLAGE:
Upon written request, the village shall redeem or repurchase any lot in which
no one is buried or no monument or structure has been erected for the following
established redemption price, in exchange for a deed conveying fee simple title
to the village, free and clear of all liens or encumbrances:
 
Single spaces      $12.50
2 adjoining spaces 40.00
3 adjoining spaces 65.00
4 adjoining spaces 90.00
 
(Ord. 554, 10-10-2002)
7-3-15: PETS RUNNING AT LARGE:
Notwithstanding the provisions set forth in title 5, chapter 2, "Animals", of
this code, it shall be unlawful for the owner of any "dog" or "cat" as defined
in section
5-2-2 of this code or any other animal that is domesticated or any pet to be
allowed to enter upon or remain in the cemetery area described in section
7-3-1 of this chapter. It is the intention of this section to ban all dogs,
cats and other pets from entering upon, remaining, running at large, or
otherwise being allowed to be on the village cemetery property.
Any person violating any provision of this section shall be fined twenty five
dollars ($25.00) for the first offense, fifty dollars ($50.00) for a second
offense within ten (10) years, seventy five dollars ($75.00) for a third
offense within ten (10) years and an additional twenty five dollars ($25.00)
for each additional offense within a ten (10) year period, but not to exceed
five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense, and a separate offense shall
be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues. More than one pet or animal running at large at the same time shall
not be separate offenses. (Ord. 622, 8-12-2008)
CHAPTER 4
PLAYGROUNDS
SECTION:
7-4-1: Established; Supervision
7-4-1: ESTABLISHED; SUPERVISION:
Lot Fourteen (14), in the South Half of Section Six (6), in Township Nineteen
(19) North, Range Four (4) East of the Fourth Principal Meridian, in Whiteside
County, Illinois, presently owned by the village be, and the same is hereby set
aside and ordered to be opened as a public playground.
The operation and maintenance of said playground shall be under the supervision
of the committee on streets and sidewalks. (Ord. 226, 5-18-1964)
CHAPTER 5
STREET NAMING; HOUSE NUMBERING
SECTION:
7-5-1: Street Naming System
7-5-2: House Numbering
7-5-1: STREET NAMING SYSTEM:
There is hereby adopted and established a uniform system of street names, the
general plan of which is as hereinafter set forth:
   (A)   All streets which extend in a northeasterly and southwesterly
direction parallel or approximately parallel to what is known as Main Street
shall be known as "streets". Main Street shall continue to be known as and
called Main Street, but all streets parallel thereto shall be designated by
numbers. Fifth Street as shown on the plat of Erie and additions shall continue
to be known as Fifth Street. First, Second, Third and Fourth Streets are
assumed streets to be hereafter laid out to the southeast of and parallel to
said Fifth Street. Proceeding northwesterly from said Fifth Street, the streets
shall be numbered consecutively except that there shall be no Ninth Street or
Tenth Street but said numbers shall be skipped and the first street
northwesterly from the railroad right of way shall be known as Eleventh Street.
   (B)   All streets which extend in a northwesterly or southeasterly direction
approximately at right angles to Main Street shall be known as "avenues". Water
Street as shown on the plat of the original town of Erie shall be known as
Fifth Avenue. First, Second, Third and Fourth Avenues are assumed streets to be
hereafter laid out southwesterly from Water Street and approximately
perpendicular to Main Street. The avenues which are northeasterly from Water
Street shall be numbered consecutively excepting for such short and irregularly
placed streets as may be otherwise specially named from time to time.
   (C)   All streets which because of direction or irregular spacing do not
conform to the plan hereinbefore outlined shall retain their original names as
shown on the plat of Erie and additions.
   (D)   Names of existing streets as changed and fixed by this section and the
name or names of such streets as shown on the plat of Erie and additions are as
follows:
New Name Former Name
New Name          Former Name
Fifth Street      Fifth Street
Sixth Street      Fourth Street
Seventh Street    Third Street
Eighth Street     Second Street
Main Street       Main Street
Eleventh Street   Sand Street
Twelfth Street    Brooks Street
Thirteenth Street Prairie Street
West Street       West Street
Albany Street     Albany Street
East Street       East Street
Henry Street      Henry Street
School Street     School Street
Howland Street    Howland Street
Fifth Avenue      Water Street
Sixth Avenue      Center Street and Collins Street
Seventh Avenue    Boon Street, Church Street and Cordova Street
Eighth Avenue     North Street
Ninth Avenue      River Street
Tenth Avenue      Teats Street
Eleventh Avenue   Pear Street
Twelfth Avenue    Thorn Street
Thirteenth Avenue Olive Street
 
(Ord. 153, 4-25-1955)
7-5-2: HOUSE NUMBERING:
House numbers shall be assigned by allowing one hundred (100) numbers to the
block beginning with First Street and First Avenue respectively. The numbers
shall be assigned consecutively allowing one number for each fifty feet (50')
of lot frontage with the even numbers on the southeasterly side of the streets
and on the southwesterly side of the avenues and the odd numbers on the
opposite side. Where streets or avenues do not extend through a block or for
any other reason the size of the block is irregular, numbers shall be so
assigned as to keep numbers which lie approximately the same distance
northwesterly or southeasterly from Main Street or southwesterly or
northeasterly from Eighth Avenue of approximately the same magnitude. (Ord.
153, 4-25-1955; amd. Ord. 482, 9-23-1997)
CHAPTER 6
WATERWORKS REGULATIONS
SECTION:
7-6-1: Contract With Consumer
7-6-2: Application For Connection Permit
7-6-3: Water Connection Fee
7-6-4: Size And Location Of Taps
7-6-5: Pipes To Supply Several Users
7-6-6: Claims Against Village
7-6-7: Service Disconnected On Request Of Occupant Or Owner
7-6-8: Inspection
7-6-9: Right Of Access
7-6-10: Service Pipes Kept In Repair
7-6-11: Hydrants
7-6-12: Water Meters
7-6-13: Specifications
7-6-1: CONTRACT WITH CONSUMER:
These rules, regulations and rates, together with such others as may hereafter
be adopted, shall be a part of the contract between the village and every
consumer of water for the water system of the village, and in making
application for water, every consumer consents and agrees to be bound thereby.
Whenever any rule or regulation is violated, including, but not limited to,
failure of the consumer to pay the applicable rates charged for the use of and
for the service supplied by the combined waterworks and sewerage system of the
village, the water shall be shut off from the building or place of such
violation, and shall not be turned on again except by order of the public works
director and on payment of the penalty according to the schedule set forth in
this section, plus the full cost to the village incurred by the village in
turning on again the water, and such other terms as the public works director
may determine, and a satisfactory understanding with the party or parties that
no future cause of complaint shall arise, and in case of such violation, the
public works director shall have the right to declare any payment made for
water by the person guilty of such violation, forfeited and the same shall
thereupon be forfeited. The schedule for the penalty referred to in this
section shall be as follows:
 
Number Of Disconnections               Penalty Amount
First shutoff for failure to pay       In an amount as set forth in the
applicable rates charged for water or  schedule of fees maintained on file and
sewer service                          available for public inspection at the
                                       office of the village clerk
Second shutoff for failure to pay      In an amount as set forth in the
applicable rates charged for water or  schedule of fees maintained on file and
sewer service                          available for public inspection at the
                                       office of the village clerk
Third shutoff for failure to pay       In an amount as set forth in the
applicable rates charged for water or  schedule of fees maintained on file and
sewer service                          available for public inspection at the
                                       office of the village clerk
Fourth shutoff for failure to pay      In an amount as set forth in the
applicable rates charged for water or  schedule of fees maintained on file and
sewer service                          available for public inspection at the
                                       office of the village clerk
All subsequent shutoffs for failure to In an amount as set forth in the
pay applicable rates charged for water schedule of fees maintained on file and
or sewer service                       available for public inspection at the
                                       office of the village clerk
 
The number of disconnections set forth in the above schedule shall only include
disconnections that occur after the effective date hereof. No disconnections
occurring prior to the effective date hereof shall be considered in determining
the penalty based upon the above schedule. All determinations by the board of
trustees as to the number of disconnections that have occurred for a consumer
shall be final. "Consumers" shall mean an individual that has applied for the
water or sewer service and shall include their lawful spouse at the time of the
application whether or not the application is jointly made by the husband and
wife. (Ord. 521, 4-11-2000, eff. retroactive to 1-1-2000; amd. Ord. 548, 4-9-
2002; Ord. 782, 12-13-2022)
7-6-2: APPLICATION FOR CONNECTION PERMIT:
Parties desiring to have water from the village waterworks must make
application for such purpose at the office of the village clerk. If no valid
objection exists, the village clerk shall then issue to a state licensed
plumber as may be selected by the applicant a permit authorizing the plumber to
do the work. A special permit must be issued for each service connection and
each building, residence, business place, living unit, commercial unit, or
other similar structures, also for each branch connection when more than one
connection is made from one service pipe. Upon receipt by the village clerk of
said application together with the appropriate fee, as set forth hereinafter,
the village clerk shall thereupon notify the public works director that the
public works director may turn on the service. (Ord. 353, 5-18-1982; amd. Ord.
782, 12-13-2022)
7-6-3: WATER CONNECTION FEE:
Each person making application for permit to connect to the water system of the
village shall pay to the village clerk, at the time of making such application,
a water connection fee in the amount as set forth in the schedule of fees
maintained on file and available for public inspection at the office of the
village clerk. The said fee shall be in addition to, and not as a part of, a
further charge to the applicant for the full cost of a water meter, which meter
shall be procured by the village according to its sole specifications, and
which forever shall remain the property of the village. All water connections
to be installed under any village street, road, highway, or alley, shall be
pushed underneath said street, road, highway, or alley without damaging the
surface of the street, road, highway, or alley. Any excavation required in
order to accomplish the connection of the water service shall not be made on
the surface of the street and shall be according to the permit as required in
this code. All exceptions to the prohibition of excavating the surface of any
street shall be approved by the board of trustees by a majority vote. Each
person making application shall be charged the full cost of a water meter. In
addition to, and not as a part of, the aforesaid fee and meter costs, the
applicant shall also pay all costs of installation howsoever incurred from the
public water main to the private property line, including, but not limited to,
any street repair. The village, in its sole discretion, may waive the aforesaid
fee if the village street abutting the private premises does not have a seal
coat. All fees, charges and costs are due and payable in full before any
service is commenced. (Ord. 416, 4-10-1990; amd. Ord. 782, 12-13-2022)
7-6-4: SIZE AND LOCATION OF TAPS:
Taps of water mains for service connections shall not exceed the size and
spacing as recommended by the manufacturer of the water main. In cases where
larger taps would be required, a tee will be installed in the water main. (Ord.
782, 12-13-2022)
7-6-5: PIPES TO SUPPLY SEVERAL USERS:
One service pipe may be made to supply all parties taking water on either side
of service pipe, in which case each branch must have a service cock. When
service pipes are intended to supply two (2) or more premises, and when only
one service cock is used, the person or persons controlling the same must pay
the water bill of all parties thus supplied as separate water bills will not be
made. (Ord. 56, 8-2-1921; amd. Ord. 782, 12-13-2022)
7-6-6: CLAIMS AGAINST VILLAGE:
No claim shall be made against the village by reason of the breaking of any
main or service pipe or cock or of any other interruption of the supply by
reason of breakage of machinery or stoppage for necessary repairs. (Ord. 56, 8-
2-1921; amd. Ord. 782, 12-13-2022)
7-6-7: SERVICE DISCONNECTED ON REQUEST OF OCCUPANT OR OWNER:
Upon the written request by the occupant or owner of a "building" (as defined
in the zoning code) to the village clerk, the water service to the building
shall be discontinued. A bill will be rendered for the water used during the
quarter in which the service is discontinued at regular rates, the full minimum
charge for the quarter applying. In the event water service has been
disconnected as provided in this section or as otherwise provided for any
reason, water service shall not be reconnected until the owner or occupant has
fully complied with all applicable ordinances and rules and regulations adopted
by the board and a written application has been made to the village clerk for
reconnection and the reconnection application has been approved. The owner or
occupant shall pay a reconnection fee in an amount as set forth in the schedule
of fees maintained on file and available for public inspection at the office of
the village clerk for reconnecting water service. The reconnection fee shall be
paid to the village prior to the approval of the application for reconnection.
Reconnection of the water service shall be completed by the public works
department during its normal business hours and normal working days as
reasonably may be scheduled by the public works department dependent upon its
normal work schedule and within two (2) business days of such approval, except
in the event of a bona fide emergency as determined by the public works
director. During the period of any disconnection of water service, the monthly
charge for solid waste disposal under title 6, chapter 6 of this code shall
continue to be assessed against the occupant or owner of the building and shall
continue to be the responsibility of the owner or occupant unless the water
service is disconnected due to a demolition of the building for which the
service is provided. (Ord. 636, 9-8-2009; amd. Ord. 782, 12-13-2022)
7-6-8: INSPECTION:
Each and every part of the water line shall be inspected and approved by the
public works director before being concealed or backfilled. Plumbers are
strictly prohibited from allowing the water into any service pipe except on the
order or permission of the public works director. This rule shall not be
construed to prevent any plumber admitting the water to test pipes and for that
purpose only. The water will not be allowed to enter into any service pipe,
except on the order of the public works director after inspection, and after
payment of all fees, charges and costs, as aforesaid. (Ord. 342, 3-25-1980;
amd. Ord. 782, 12-13-2022)
7-6-9: RIGHT OF ACCESS:
The public works director and such other person as may be directed by the
public works director, shall be authorized to enter and have free access at all
reasonable hours, to premises, to ascertain the location and condition of all
pipes and fixtures connected with the waterworks, and in case he/she finds that
water is wasted on account of negligence, or for want of repairs, and if such
waste is not immediately remedied, the service leading to such premises shall
immediately be shut off. It shall be the duty of said officer, in case he or
she discovers any defect in a private pipe beyond the service cock, to give
notice in writing, to be left at the premises, and if necessary repairs are not
made within twenty four (24) hours thereafter the water shall be shut off and
shall not be turned on again until said repairs are made and approved and the
fee has been paid to the village in an amount as set forth in the schedule of
fees maintained on file and available for public inspection at the office of
the village clerk. (Ord. 56, 8-2-1921; amd. 1976 Code; Ord. 782, 12-13-2022)
7-6-10: SERVICE PIPES KEPT IN REPAIR:
The village will keep and maintain the service pipe and fixtures from the main
to and including the curb cock and curb box and also all water meters owned by
the village. The consumer shall furnish a suitable place on his/her premises
for the installation of the water meter and shall protect the same from
freezing and all damage other than through ordinary wear and tear. The property
owner will be charged with any damage to the water meter whether by freezing,
accidental breakage or otherwise while the same is upon his/her premises,
excepting for such injury or damage as may be done to said meter by employees
of the village. The place for the installation of said water meter shall be
such as to permit convenient access to said meter for the purpose of
inspecting, repairing and reading the same. (Ord. 147, 11-4-1954; amd. Ord.
782, 12-13-2022)
7-6-11: HYDRANTS:
   (A)   No person except the public works director or some other person
designated by him/her shall take water from any public or private hydrant,
fireplug or other fixture connecting with the water mains, except for fire
purposes or for the use of a fire department in cases of fire, nor in any way
take or use water for private use unless such person shall first make
application to the public works director and comply with the rules set forth by
this chapter.
   (B)   All hydrants constructed by the village for the purpose of
extinguishing fires in the village are hereby declared to be public hydrants,
and no person other than members of the fire department in the village for the
purpose of extinguishing fires, and those especially authorized by the public
works director shall open any of said hydrants, or attempt to draw water from
the same, or in any manner interfere with or injure said hydrants.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully or carelessly break
or injure any of the public hydrants. (Ord. 56, 8-2-1921; amd. Ord. 782, 12-13-
2022)
7-6-12: WATER METERS:
The village will procure a water meter(s) according to specifications which the
village in its sole discretion deems appropriate. The village shall own all
water meters. All meters presently in service on the property of a consumer may
be transferred and assigned to the village. A request that the village repair a
meter shall be considered a transfer and assignment of the title thereto to the
village. The village will repair and maintain all meters owned by it at its own
expense, except for damage on the premises of the consumer arising out of
freezing or something other than ordinary wear and tear in which cases the
expense of necessary repairs arising out of such accidental damage will be
charged to the consumer. (Ord. 342, 3-25-1980; amd. Ord. 534, 2-13-2001; Ord.
782, 12-13-2022)
7-6-13: SPECIFICATIONS:
All water pipes shall be three-fourths inch (3/4") SDR9CTS ASTMD2737 from the
main public water to any dwelling. (Ord. 342, 3-25-1980; amd. Ord. 782, 12-13-
2022)
CHAPTER 7
COMBINED WATERWORKS AND SEWERAGE
SECTION:
7-7-1: Systems Combined
7-7-2: Water And Sewer Rates
7-7-3: Payment Times; Liability
7-7-4: Delinquencies
7-7-5: Service Disconnected
7-7-6: Collector To Render Bills
7-7-7: Money Kept Separate
7-7-8: Waterworks And Sewerage Fund
7-7-9: System Of Accounts
7-7-10: Copy Of Chapter; County Recorder
7-7-11: Right To Shut Off
7-7-12: Water Meters
7-7-13: No Free Service
7-7-14: Meter Out Of Repair
7-7-15: Village Not Liable For Damages
7-7-16: Access To Premises
7-7-17: Right To Change Rates
7-7-18: Authorization Of Use Of Village Streets, Alleys And Property
7-7-1: SYSTEMS COMBINED:
The existing waterworks system in its entirety, including all improvements and
extensions thereto that may hereafter be made, and the entire sewerage system
to be constructed for the village, be and the same are hereby declared to be a
combined system and said waterworks and sewerage system shall be maintained and
operated as a combined waterworks and sewerage system, and a charge or rate
shall be established for the use of such combined system which shall be
reasonable for the use and service of such waterworks and sewerage system and
sufficient to maintain, operate and provide for an adequate depreciation fund
and pay the principal of and interest on any revenue bonds which may be issued,
which by their terms are to be payable solely from the revenues of such
combined system. Any person who shall simultaneously make application for a
permit to connect to the sewer system of the village 1  and application for a
permit to connect to the water system of the village 2 , shall pay only one
hundred dollars ($100.00) as and for a connection fee for both water and sewer
services, but nothing contained herein shall be construed so as to relieve the
applicant from the obligation to pay all other costs, charges, etc., otherwise
provided for in this code. The one hundred dollars ($100.00) as and for a
connection fee for both water and sewer services shall be paid to the village
clerk. (Ord. 159, 7-6-1955; amd. Ord. 342, 3-25-1980; Ord. 353, 5-18-1982)
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  6-1-3  of this code.
2 1. See section
  7-6-3  of this title.
7-7-2: WATER AND SEWER RATES 1 :
(A)   Combined Water and Sewer Service Charge Bimonthly: For each residential,
commercial, industrial and municipal user of the combined waterworks and
sewerage system there shall be a bimonthly charge or rate based upon the amount
of water consumed, as shown by the water meters, as follows:
   1.   A bimonthly service charge in the sum of fifty-five dollars ($55.00),
and
   2.   A bimonthly user charge in the sum of $0.011 cents for each gallon used
or any fraction thereof rounded to the nearest one cent ($0.01). (For example,
the charge for one thousand and two (1,002) gallons used would be the sum of
sixty-one dollars and two cents ($61.02): fifty-five dollars ($55,00) for the
service charge, pins eleven dollars and two cents ($11.02) ($0.011 x 1002) for
the 1002 gallons used)
(B)   Sewer Service Only Charge Bimonthly: For each residential, commercial,
industrial and municipal user of the sewer service only of the combined
waterworks and sewerage system the.re shall be a bimonthly charge or rate as
follows:
   A bimonthly flat rate of sixty-six dollars ($66.00).
   The payment of the bimonthly flat rate charge of sixty-six dollars ($66.00)
for sewer service only users shall cover all reasonable usage, but not any
other usage which the president and board of trustee determines to be
unreasonable. In cases where the character of sewage from any industrial user,
commercial building, residence or other premises shall be such as to impose a
burden upon the sewage treatment plant and system in addition to the burden
imposed by the average sewage entering into the sewerage system, or in cases
where a private water supply is used and returned to the sewerage system, then
the president and board of trustees reserve the right to enter into separate
contracts with such industrial user, commercial building, residence or other
premises for special rates and charges where the particular circumstances under
the regular rate for service inadequate or unjust.
(C)   Bulk Water Sales: Each load of bulk water sold shall be charged twenty-
five dollars ($25.00) sewer charge in addition to the charge for the water.
(D)   Multiple Connections: A "multiple-unit user" is defined as any additional
number of residential or commercial units located on the same premises and
being served through a single water meter where there are no separate water
meters for each unit, such as apartment buildings, trailer courts, or
commercial and residential units located within the same building. In all such
cases, the total amount of water used as shown by the water meter for any two
(2) or more units shall be divided by the number of units in said building and
the rates above provided shall be applied as if each unit had a separate meter
and were using an equal amount of water.
(Ord. 433, 2-11-1992; amd. Ord. 565, 8-12-2003; Ord. 636, 9-8-2009; Ord. 642,
1-12-2010; Ord. 748, 3-10-2020, eff. 5-1-2020; Ord. 790, 9-12-2023)
 
Notes
1 2. See section
  6-6-4 of this code.
7-7-3: PAYMENT TIMES; LIABILITY:
For the purpose of the operation of the combined waterworks and sewerage
system, the fiscal year shall be divided into six (6) bimonthly periods each
containing two (2) calendar months and said bimonthly periods shall begin on
May 1, July 1, September 1, November 1, January 1 and March 1 in each year. The
owner of the premises, the occupant thereof and the user of the service shall
be jointly and severally liable to pay for the service on such premises and the
service is furnished to the premises by the village only upon the condition
that the owner of the premises, occupant and user of the service are jointly
and severally liable therefor to the village. All bills for service shall be
rendered bimonthly as of the first day of the month succeeding the period for
which the service is billed, and shall be payable not later than the close of
business on the twentieth day of the same month. If payment is made after said
twenty (20) day period, then a penalty of ten percent (10%) of the amount of
the bill shall be added thereto. (Ord. 371, 5-22-1984, eff. 9-1-1984)
7-7-4: DELINQUENCIES:
   (A)   Penalty Bill (Yellow): If payment of the full amount of the bill is
not made by the due date of the bill which shall be hereinafter referred to as
the "white bill", then the billing addressee will be notified of the ten
percent (10%) penalty by the mailing of a yellow postcard which will allow an
additional ten (10) days for the bill plus the penalty to be paid. If the
billing addressee is a tenant, the owner will be sent a notice informing the
owner the tenant is overdue on the utility services billing and the
consequences if the bill is not paid. If in the opinion of the village
president or his or her designee, the balance owed is not of a sufficiently
large amount to justify the administrative costs required to collect said
balance, the balance can be retained on the account and will become payable on
rendition of the next bill. Such determination to retain balances on account
will be made following guidelines put forth by the village president in a
standing order. Said standing order may be amended from time to time as is
determined by the village president to be prudent. If upon expiration of the
five (5) day grace period the bill remains unpaid, the owner may provide notice
to the village, upon such form as provided by the village, to suspend service.
   (B)   Termination Warning (Red): If payment of the full amount of the bill
plus penalty is not made by the due date of the yellow postcard bill, then a
red tag will be attached to the front door of the service address warning that
the water service will be shut off if the full amount of the bill including
penalties and the red tag fee, in an amount as set forth in the schedule of
fees maintained on file and available for public inspection at the office of
the village clerk, is not paid in full by twelve o'clock (12:00) noon the next
working day. The village may proceed with termination of water service at one
minute past twelve o'clock (12:01) P.M. the next working day following the
termination warning unless the person so notified shall request a hearing in
writing and shall deliver the written request to the village president or
deliver the written request in person to the village office to an employee of
the village prior to twelve o'clock (12:00) noon the next working day following
the day that the termination warning is attached to the front door of the
service address. The hearing shall be held by the village president or a person
so designated.
Unless the hearing officer determines that the proposed termination is not
justified, or unless other arrangements for payment of the bill are approved by
the village president or his or her designee, the village may proceed with
termination of the water service on the date stated in the termination notice.
(Ord. 548, 4-9-2002)
7-7-5: SERVICE DISCONNECTED:
   (A)   Termination: In the event the charges for utility services, penalties
and fees are not paid as demanded by the red termination warning, such service
shall be immediately terminated and shall not be reinstated until all past due
bills, including the penalties and red tag fee, are paid in full or other
arrangements for the payment of the obligation are approved by the village
president or person so designated. If the premises is occupied by a tenant, the
owner shall be informed in writing that the water has been shut off and that
the past due bill, penalties, fees and the current bill must be paid in ten
(10) days.
   (B)   Shutoff Of One Or More Services: All shutoff provisions in this
chapter shall apply equally to anyone using water only service, anyone using
sewer only service, or anyone using water and sewer service. The village has
the option to shut off either water or sewer service or both in its sole
discretion in the event that utility services may be terminated or shut off
pursuant to the terms of this chapter. If the village elects at its option to
discontinue sewer service, the village may cap the sewer service to the
customer's property and the property owner and user shall be responsible for
all expenses incurred by the village in capping the sewer line.
   (C)   Additional Penalty: In addition to the penalty and cost provided in
section
7-6-1 of this title, there shall be a separate penalty whereby whenever any
rule or regulation is violated, the sewerage service shall be shut off from the
building or place of such violation, and shall not be turned on again except by
order of the village president and on payment of the penalty according to the
schedule set forth in this section plus all costs whatsoever incurred by the
village in connection with reinstating such sewerage service, and upon such
other terms as the village president may determine, and a satisfactory
understanding with the party or parties that no future cause of complaint shall
arise, and in case of such violation, the village president shall have the
right to declare any payment made for sewerage by the person guilty of such
violation forfeited and the same shall thereupon be forfeited. The schedule for
the penalty referred to in this section shall be as follows:
 
Number Of Disconnections               Penalty Amount
First shutoff for failure to pay       In an amount as set forth in the
applicable rates charged for water or  schedule of fees maintained on file and
sewer service                          available for public inspection at the
                                       office of the village clerk
Second shutoff for failure to pay      In an amount as set forth in the
applicable rates charged for water or  schedule of fees maintained on file and
sewer service                          available for public inspection at the
                                       office of the village clerk
Third shutoff for failure to pay       In an amount as set forth in the
applicable rates charged for water or  schedule of fees maintained on file and
sewer service                          available for public inspection at the
                                       office of the village clerk
Fourth shutoff for failure to pay      In an amount as set forth in the
applicable rates charged for water or  schedule of fees maintained on file and
sewer service                          available for public inspection at the
                                       office of the village clerk
All subsequent shutoffs for failure to In an amount as set forth in the
pay applicable rates charged for water schedule of fees maintained on file and
or sewer service                       available for public inspection at the
                                       office of the village clerk
 
The number of disconnections set forth in the above schedule shall only include
disconnections that occur after the effective date hereof. No disconnections
occurring prior to the effective date hereof shall be considered in determining
the penalty based upon the above schedule. All determinations by the board of
trustees as to the number of disconnections that have occurred for a consumer
shall be final. "Consumers" shall mean an individual that has applied for the
water or sewer service and shall include their lawful spouse at the time of the
application whether or not the application is jointly made by the husband and
wife.
   (D)   Reconnection Of Service: In the event that water or sewer services are
terminated for nonpayment of rates or charges for water or sewer services,
there shall be a reconnection fee imposed in an amount as set forth in the
schedule of fees maintained on file and available for public inspection at the
office of the village clerk for reconnecting such service, plus all costs
incurred in filing and recording of any lien upon the real estate.
   (E)   Delinquent Bill: In the event the charges for service are not paid as
required by this chapter, such charges shall be deemed and are hereby declared
to be delinquent, and thereafter such delinquencies shall constitute liens upon
the real estate for which such service was supplied, and the village clerk is
hereby authorized to file sworn statements showing such delinquencies in the
office of the Whiteside County recorder of deeds, and the filing of such
statements in the pertinent office shall be deemed notice for the payment of
such charges for such service. The village clerk may, in lieu of filing a lien
upon the property, refer the delinquent bill to the village attorney for the
purpose of filing a suit in the appropriate court for the collection of said
delinquent bill.
   (F)   Payment Date: All payments made on any obligations required by or
pursuant to the terms of this title shall be deemed paid on the date the
payment is received by the village, except that all payments received after
four o'clock (4:00) P.M., Central time, on a business day, shall be considered
paid on the following business day. A business day is a day in which the
village offices are open for business to the general public. (Ord. 548, 4-9-
2002)
7-7-6: COLLECTOR TO RENDER BILLS:
It is hereby made the duty of the village collector to render bills for service
and for all rates and charges in connection therewith and to collect all monies
due thereon. (Ord. 371, 5-22-1984, eff. 9-1-1984)
7-7-7: MONEY KEPT SEPARATE:
All revenues and monies derived from the operation of the combined waterworks
and sewerage system shall be held by the village collector separate and apart
from private funds and separate and apart from all other funds of the village,
and all of said sums without any deductions whatever shall be delivered to the
village treasurer not more than ten (10) days after receipt of the same, or at
such more frequent intervals as may from time to time be directed by the
president and board of trustees. (Ord. 371, 5-22-1984, eff. 9-1-1984)
7-7-8: WATERWORKS AND SEWERAGE FUND:
The village treasurer shall receive all such revenue from the combined
waterworks and sewerage system and all other funds and monies incident to the
operation of such system as the same may be delivered to him and deposit the
same in a separate fund designated as the "waterworks and sewerage fund of the
village of Erie", and said treasurer shall administer such fund in every
respect in the manner provided by the applicable provisions of the Illinois
municipal code and all laws amendatory thereof and supplementary thereto, and
as provided in the ordinance heretofore adopted authorizing the issuance of
waterworks and sewerage revenue bonds of said village. (Ord. 371, 5-22-1984,
eff. 9-1-1984)
7-7-9: SYSTEM OF ACCOUNTS:
The village treasurer shall establish a proper system of accounts and shall
keep proper books, records and accounts in which complete and correct entries
shall be made of all transactions relative to the combined waterworks and
sewerage system and at regular annual intervals he shall cause to be made an
audit by an independent auditing concern of the books to show the receipts and
disbursements of the combined waterworks and sewerage system. (Ord. 162, 8-5-
1955)
7-7-10: COPY OF CHAPTER; COUNTY RECORDER:
A copy of this chapter, properly certified by the village clerk, shall be filed
in the office of the recorder of deeds of Whiteside County, and shall be deemed
notice to all owners of real estate of their liability for service supplied to
any user of the service of the combined waterworks and sewerage system of the
village on their property. (Ord. 162, 8-5-1955)
7-7-11: RIGHT TO SHUT OFF:
The village reserves the right to shut off water or sewerage at any time in the
mains or sewers for the purpose of repairing, cleaning, making connections with
or extensions to same, or for the concentrating of water in any part of the
village in case of fire; and for restricting the use of the water in case of
deficiency in supply. No claim shall be made against the village by reason of
the breaking of any service pipe, main, sewer or service cock or damage arising
from the shutting off of water or sewerage for repairing, laying or relaying
mains, sewers, hydrants or other connections of the combined water and sewerage
system, or from failure of the water supply or of the sewerage system, or by
increasing the water pressure at any time, or from concentration or restrictive
use of water as above provided. (Ord. 162, 8-5-1955)
7-7-12: WATER METERS:
All water consumers supplied by the village shall be supplied through meters
only and shall pay for the water at the rate and in the manner hereinbefore
specified.
The rate for a meter supplying more than one distinct premises, house or
tenement, but not including apartments, shall be determined by multiplying the
minimum rate, the number of gallons which the minimum rate permits to be used
and the number of gallons in each rate bracket as above set forth, by the
number of distinct premises, houses or tenements (but not including apartments)
to be supplied through said meter.
The rate for a meter supplying a single apartment building shall be the rate
for a meter supplying not more than one distinct premises, house or tenement.
(Ord. 178, 3-6-1958)
7-7-13: NO FREE SERVICE:
No free combined waterworks and sewerage services shall be supplied by the
village to the village itself, nor to any person, firm, organization or
corporation, public or private. (Ord. 371, 5-22-1984, eff. 9-1-1984)
7-7-14: METER OUT OF REPAIR:
Whenever any meter, by reason of its being out of repair, or for any cause
fails promptly to register the water passing through the same, the consumer
shall be charged a rate based on his average quarterly consumption as shown by
the meter when in order. (Ord. 162, 8-5-1955)
7-7-15: VILLAGE NOT LIABLE FOR DAMAGES:
All connections for services hereunder shall be upon the express condition that
the village shall not be liable, nor shall any claim be made against it, for
damages or injury caused by reason of the breaking of any main, sewers,
branches, service pipes, apparatus or appurtenances connected with said
combined waterworks and sewerage system or plant, or any part or portion of
said plant, or for any interruption of the service by reason of the breakage of
machinery, or by reason of stoppage, alterations, extensions or renewals. (Ord.
162, 8-5-1955)
7-7-16: ACCESS TO PREMISES:
The village and its employees and authorized agents shall have ready access to
the premises, places, residences, rooms, basements, and buildings where a meter
is located for the purpose of reading, examining, testing, replacing,
repairing, restoring, maintaining, reconstructing and any other purpose that is
deemed necessary by the public works director and for the purpose of examining
and testing the consumption, use and flow of water and it shall be unlawful for
any person to interfere with, deny entry, refuse to allow access, prevent or
obstruct the village or its employees or duly authorized agents to perform its
duties as provided and allowed under this section and chapter. Every consumer
of water in the village and user of the village water system shall take the use
of the water and be allowed to be a consumer of the water upon the conditions
set forth in this section and this chapter.
The owner of the premises, the occupant thereof and the user of the service
shall be jointly and severally responsible for all water meters installed upon
the premises and shall be liable for all damage and injury thereto, other than
ordinary wear and tear, whether the same occurs by reason of accidental
breakage, freezing or other means. (Ord. 162, 8-5-1955; amd. Ord. 754, 10-13-
2020)
7-7-17: RIGHT TO CHANGE RATES:
The village reserves the right to make such reasonable changes in rates and in
conditions herein established and to establish further rules and regulations
from time to time as may be found expeditious or necessary. (Ord. 162, 8-5-
1955)
7-7-18: AUTHORIZATION OF USE OF VILLAGE STREETS, ALLEYS AND PROPERTY:
The village grants and authorizes the combined waterworks and sewage system of
the village to use at any time all and any part of the village streets, alleys,
rights-of- way, easements, facilities and any and all other property of any
kind or nature whatsoever owned by the village for the village waterworks and
sewage department for any purpose, without restriction or exception. (Ord. 721,
3-13-2018)
CHAPTER 8
REGULATION OF CROSS CONNECTIONS
SECTION:
7-8-1: Compliance With Plumbing Code
7-8-2: Private Water Supply Prohibited
7-8-3: Surveys And Investigations
7-8-4: Control Device Inspections
7-8-5: Discontinuance Of Water Service
7-8-6: Consumer Responsibility
7-8-7: Regulations
7-8-1: COMPLIANCE WITH PLUMBING CODE:
All plumbing installed within the village shall be installed in accordance with
the Illinois plumbing code, 77 Illinois administrative code 890. If in
accordance with the Illinois plumbing code or in the judgment of the
superintendent of public works, an approved backflow prevention device is
necessary for the safety of the public water supply system, the superintendent
of public works will give notice to the water customer to install such an
approved device immediately. The water customer shall, at his own expense,
install such an approved device at a location and in a manner in accordance
with the Illinois plumbing code and all applicable local regulations, and shall
have inspections and tests made of such approved devices upon installation and
as required by the Illinois plumbing code and local regulations. (Ord. 504, 4-
13-1999)
7-8-2: PRIVATE WATER SUPPLY PROHIBITED:
No person shall establish or permit to be established or maintain or permit to
be maintained any connection whereby a private, auxiliary or emergency water
supply other than the regular public water supply of the village enter the
supply or distribution system of said municipality, unless such private,
auxiliary or emergency water supply and the method of connection and use of
such supply shall have been approved by the superintendent of public works and
the Illinois environmental protection agency. (Ord. 504, 4-13-1999)
7-8-3: SURVEYS AND INVESTIGATIONS:
It shall be the duty of the superintendent of public works to cause surveys and
investigations to be made of industrial and other properties served by the
public water supply to determine whether actual or potential hazards to the
public water supply may exist. Such surveys and investigations shall be made a
matter of public record and shall be repeated at least every two (2) years, or
as often as the superintendent of public works shall deem necessary. Records of
such surveys shall be maintained and available for review for a period of at
least five (5) years. (Ord. 504, 4-13-1999)
7-8-4: CONTROL DEVICE INSPECTIONS:
The superintendent of public works or the president and board of trustees may
hire the services of an approved cross connection control device inspector. All
costs of the approved cross connection control device inspector shall be paid
by the village and the village shall have the right to impose such costs upon
any customer served by the village public water supply if the board of trustees
determine that it is appropriate, in their sole discretion, to impose such
costs upon the customer. Such costs shall be added to the bimonthly water
charge of the customer and any delinquency in payment of such charges shall be
collected in the same manner as the bimonthly (every other month) charges for
water pursuant to this code. That the approved cross connection control device
inspector shall have the right to enter at any reasonable time any property
served by a connection to the public water supply or distribution system of the
village for the purpose of verifying the presence or absence of cross
connections, and that the superintendent of public works or his authorized
agent shall have the right to enter at any reasonable time any property served
by a connection to the public water supply or distribution system of the
village for the purpose of verifying information submitted by the customer
regarding the required cross connection control inspection. On demand the
owner, lessees or occupants of any property so served shall furnish to the
superintendent of water any information which he may request regarding the
piping system or systems or water use on such property. The refusal of such
information, when demanded, shall, within the discretion of the superintendent
of water, be deemed evidence of the presence of improper connections as
provided in this chapter. (Ord. 504, 4-13-1999)
7-8-5: DISCONTINUANCE OF WATER SERVICE:
The superintendent of public works of the village is hereby authorized and
directed to discontinue, after reasonable notice to the occupant thereof, the
water service to any property wherein any connection in violation of the
provisions of this chapter is known to exist, and to take such other
precautionary measures as he may deem necessary to eliminate any danger of
contamination of the public water supply distribution mains. Water service to
such property shall not be restored until such conditions have been eliminated
or corrected in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, and until a
reconnection fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00) is paid to the village.
Immediate disconnection with verbal notice can be effected when the
superintendent of public works is assured that imminent danger of harmful
contamination of the public water supply systems exists. Such action shall be
followed by written notification of the cause of disconnection. Immediate
disconnection without notice to any party can be effected to prevent actual or
anticipated contamination or pollution of the public water supply, provided
that, in the reasonable opinion of the superintendent of public works or the
Illinois environmental protection agency, such action is required to prevent
actual or potential contamination or pollution of the public water supply.
Neither the public water supply, the superintendent of public works or its
agents or assigns shall be liable to any customer for any injury, damages or
lost revenues which may result from termination of said customer's water supply
in accordance with the terms of this chapter, whether or not said termination
was with or without notice. (Ord. 504, 4-13-1999)
7-8-6: CONSUMER RESPONSIBILITY:
The consumer responsible for back siphoned material or contamination through
backflow, if contamination of the potable water supply system occurs through an
illegal cross connection or an improperly installed, maintained or repaired
device, or a device which has been bypassed, must bear the cost of cleanup of
the potable water supply system. (Ord. 504, 4-13-1999)
7-8-7: REGULATIONS:
The board of trustees of the village shall also have the right at any time to
establish regulations on cross connection control and all customers or users of
the public water supply of the village shall comply with all such regulations,
as amended, from time to time in the sole discretion of the board of trustees.
(Ord. 504, 4-13-1999)
CHAPTER 9
WATER WELLS
SECTION:
7-9-1: Regulation Of Private Water Wells
7-9-2: Permitted Private Wells
7-9-3: Requirement To Connect To Public Water System
7-9-4: Permit Requirement
7-9-5: Enforcement
7-9-1: REGULATION OF PRIVATE WATER WELLS:
No new noncommunity, semiprivate or private water system wells (including sand
point wells) (herein collectively "private wells") of any kind or nature
whatsoever shall be constructed or used within the jurisdiction of the village
in violation of any of the terms or regulations of this chapter. (Ord. 581, 10-
12-2004)
7-9-2: PERMITTED PRIVATE WELLS:
Private wells shall only be allowed in the village of Erie if the construction
and use of the private well is permitted under one of the following exceptions:
   (A)   A private well may be constructed and used for land irrigation
purposes only. The public works department shall have the right to inspect the
well to verify its use only for irrigation purposes and to verify that it is
not used for any other purpose and to verify it is not in violation of any
ordinances or laws relating to cross connections. All requests for a private
well to be used for land irrigation purposes and not constructed or in use
prior to the effective date hereof shall be granted only by approval of the
board of trustees or president after a written application has been submitted
to the public works director. No private well permitted for land irrigation
purposes shall be used for drinking, culinary or domestic purposes or for any
other purpose other than irrigation of land.
   (B)   A private well used for industrial purposes only. The public works
department shall have the right to inspect the use of any such well. All
requests for a private well to be used for industrial purposes not constructed
or in use prior to the effective date hereof shall be granted only by approval
of the board of trustees or the president after a written application has been
submitted to the public works director. No private well permitted for
industrial purposes shall be used for drinking, culinary or domestic purposes
or for any other purpose other than industrial use.
   (C)   All private wells that have been constructed and are in use on the
effective date hereof which do not conform to the provisions of this chapter
shall be allowed to continue in use. However, if the use of any nonconforming
private well is discontinued for any reason, the owner shall be required to
connect to the public water system if connection would be required under the
terms of this chapter.
   (D)   No owner or user of a private well permitted by this chapter shall be
permitted to disconnect from the public water system for the purpose of
constructing or using a private well for drinking, culinary or domestic
purposes. The owner of any "structure" as defined in the zoning chapter who is
connected to the public water system on the effective date of this chapter
shall not be permitted to disconnect from the public water system with the
intent to use a private well. (Ord. 581, 10-12-2004)
7-9-3: REQUIREMENT TO CONNECT TO PUBLIC WATER SYSTEM:
The owners of all houses, dwellings, buildings or other structures situated
within the village, which are not using a private well permitted under this
chapter, shall be required to make connection to the public water system,
unless a connection is not feasible in the determination of the board of
trustees. (Ord. 581, 10-12-2004)
7-9-4: PERMIT REQUIREMENT:
No one shall construct any private well of any kind or nature whatsoever,
without first obtaining a permit from the public works director and providing
all the information requested by the public works director. A fee of five
dollars ($5.00) shall be paid by the applicant at the time the application is
filed. (Ord. 581, 10-12-2004)
7-9-5: ENFORCEMENT:
The village, through the public works department, shall issue an order
compelling any person who is in violation of this chapter to remedy the
violation. The order shall specify the violations and a date by which the
violations shall be remedied. Failure to remedy the violations by the date
specified in the order shall constitute an offense punishable by a fine of not
less than fifty dollars ($50.00) and not more than seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00), with each day subsequent to such date that the violations remain
uncorrected constituting a separate offense. (Ord. 581, 10-12-2004)
CHAPTER 10
SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL
SECTION:
7-10-1: Definitions
7-10-2: Removal From Sidewalks
7-10-3: Restrictions
7-10-4: Prohibition Of Deposit Of Snow Or Ice Upon A Roadway
7-10-5: Penalty
7-10-1: DEFINITIONS:
OWNER: The person holding legal or equitable title to the land. There shall be
a presumption that the name appearing on the previous year's tax bill issued by
Whiteside County is the legal or equitable titleholder of the land.
ROADWAY: That portion of a street improved, designed, or ordinarily used for
vehicular travel, exclusive of the berm or shoulder.
SIDEWALK: That portion of a street between the curb lines or the lateral lines
of a roadway and the adjacent property lines intended for the use of
pedestrians.
STREET: The entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly
maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for the
purposes of vehicular travel.
VILLAGE TRIANGLE: The area of the village business district consisting of the
following area: Albany Street from its intersection with the railroad tracks
south to its intersection with Main Street, Eighth Avenue from its intersection
with the railroad tracks south to its intersection with Eighth Street, Main
Street from its intersection with Seventh Avenue to its intersection with Ninth
Avenue. (Ord. 590, 2-8-2005)
7-10-2: REMOVAL FROM SIDEWALKS:
   (A)   Responsibility Of Owner: Every owner and every person in charge or
control of any building or lot of land within the village triangle fronting or
abutting on a paved sidewalk, shall remove and clear away or cause to be
removed and cleared away all snow, ice, sleet, or freezing rain from the entire
width along the entire length of the sidewalk which fronts or abuts their
property and the roadway.
   (B)   Time Limit For Removal: Except as provided in subsection (C) of this
section, snow, ice, sleet, or freezing rain shall be removed as provided in
subsection (A) of this section within forty eight (48) hours after the
cessation of any fall of snow, sleet, or freezing rain.
   (C)   Maintain Sidewalk In Safe Condition: In the event snow, ice, sleet, or
freezing rain on a sidewalk has become so hard that it cannot be reasonably
removed without damage to the sidewalk, the owner shall cause enough sand or
other abrasive material to be put on the sidewalk to make travel thereon
reasonably safe and shall maintain the sidewalk in such condition until weather
permits the owner to comply with subsection (A) of this section. (Ord. 590, 2-
8-2005)
7-10-3: RESTRICTIONS:
No person shall deposit or cause to be deposited any snow and ice on or against
a fire hydrant. (Ord. 590, 2-8-2005)
7-10-4: PROHIBITION OF DEPOSIT OF SNOW OR ICE UPON A ROADWAY:
   (A)   Removal Of Snow: No owner, tenant or person in charge or control of
any building or lot of land within the village shall plow or remove or cause to
be plowed or removed ice or snow from any parking lot, driveway, sidewalk or
any land of the owner and deposit such ice or snow upon a roadway or along the
shoulder or edge of a roadway or to such a height as to materially obstruct or
impair the view of the roadway of a driver of a motor vehicle on a roadway or
driveway. 605 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/9-130, entitled "deposit of snow or
ice upon public highway; prohibition", is hereby adopted by reference and made
a part of this section, except as in direct conflict herewith.
   (B)   Exceptions: Notwithstanding anything to the contrary herein, this
section shall not apply to: 1) snow and ice that may be windrowed on public
roadways incident to the cleaning thereof or windrowed on curbs incident to the
cleaning of sidewalks in a business district, 2) permitted at the specific
direction of the superintendent of public works. (Ord. 629, 4-14-2009)
7-10-5: PENALTY:
Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter or who fails to comply
with its requirements, shall be fined not less than twenty five dollars
($25.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). Each day such
violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate
offense and shall be punishable as such. (Ord. 590, 2-8-2005; amd. Ord. 629, 4-
14-2009)
CHAPTER 11
AGGREGATION OF ELECTRICAL LOAD
SECTION:
7-11-1: Electric Aggregation Program
7-11-1: ELECTRIC AGGREGATION PROGRAM:
   (A)   The corporate authorities of the village of Erie hereby are authorized
to aggregate in accordance with the terms of the act residential and small
commercial retail electrical loads located within the corporate limits of the
village of Erie, and for that purpose may solicit bids and enter into service
agreements to facilitate for those loads the sale and purchase of electricity
and related services and equipment.
   (B)   The corporate authorities of the village of Erie are granted the
authority to exercise such authority jointly with any other municipality or
county and, in combination with two (2) or more municipalities or counties, may
initiate a process jointly to authorize aggregation by a majority vote of each
particular municipality or county as required by the act.
   (C)   The aggregation program for the village shall operate as an opt out
program for residential and small commercial retail customers.
   (D)   The aggregation program shall be approved by a majority of the members
of the corporate authority of the village of Erie.
   (E)   The corporate authorities of the village with the assistance from the
Illinois power agency shall develop a plan of operation and governance for the
aggregation program and shall conduct such public hearings and provide such
public notice as required under the act. The load aggregation plan shall
provide for universal access to all applicable residential customers and
equitable treatment of applicable residential customers, shall describe demand
management and energy efficiency services to be provided to each class of
customers and shall meet any requirements established by law concerning
aggregated service offered pursuant to the act.
   (F)   As an opt out program, the corporate authorities of the village shall
fully inform residential and small commercial retail customers in advance that
they have the right to opt out of the aggregation program. The disclosure and
information provided to the customers shall comply with the requirements of the
act.
   (G)   The electric aggregation shall occur automatically for each person
owning, occupying, controlling, or using an electrical load center proposed to
be aggregated in the corporate limits of the village, subject to a right to opt
out of the program as described under this chapter and the act. (Ord. 657, 5-
10-2011)
CHAPTER 12
SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES REGULATIONS
SECTION:
7-12-1: Purpose And Scope
7-12-2: Definitions
7-12-3: Regulation Of Small Wireless Facilities
7-12-4: Dispute Resolution
7-12-5: Indemnification
7-12-6: Insurance
7-12-1: PURPOSE AND SCOPE:
   (A)   Purpose: The purpose of this chapter is to establish regulations,
standards and procedures for the siting and collocation of small wireless
facilities on rights-of-way within the Village's jurisdiction, or outside the
rights-of-way on property zoned by the Village exclusively for commercial or
industrial use, in a manner that is consistent with the Act.
   (B)   Conflicts With Other Ordinances: This chapter supersedes all
ordinances or parts of ordinances adopted prior hereto that are in conflict
herewith, to the extent of such conflict.
   (C)   Conflicts With State And Federal Laws: In the event that applicable
federal or state laws or regulations conflict with the requirements of this
chapter, the wireless provider shall comply with the requirements of this
chapter to the maximum extent possible without violating federal or state laws
or regulations. (Ord. 725, 7-10-2018)
7-12-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
ANTENNA:       Communications equipment that transmits or receives electromagnetic radio
               frequency signals used in the provision of wireless services.
APPLICABLE     Uniform building, fire, electrical, plumbing, or mechanical codes adopted by
CODES:         a recognized national code organization or local amendments to those codes,
               including the National Electric Safety Code.
APPLICANT:     Any person who submits an application and is a wireless provider.
               A request submitted by an applicant to the Village for a permit to collocate
APPLICATION:   small wireless facilities, and a request that includes the installation of a
               new utility pole for such collocation, as well as any applicable fee for the
               review of such application.
COLLOCATE OR   To install, mount, maintain, modify, operate, or replace wireless facilities
COLLOCATION:   on or adjacent to a wireless support structure or utility pole.
               Cable service, as defined in 47 USC §522(6), as amended; information
COMMUNICATIONS service, as defined in 47 USC §153(24), as amended; telecommunications
SERVICE:       service, as defined in 47 USC §153(53), as amended; mobile service, as
               defined in 47 USC §153(53), as amended; or wireless service other than
               mobile service.
COMMUNICATIONS A cable operator, as defined in 47 USC §522(5), as amended; a provider of
SERVICE        information service, as defined in 47 USC §153(24), as amended; a
PROVIDER:      telecommunications carrier, as defined in 47 USC §153(51), as amended; or a
               wireless provider.
FCC:           The Federal Communications Commission of the United States.
FEE:           A one-time charge.
               A building, property, or site, or group of buildings, properties, or sites
               that are either (i) listed in the National Register of Historic Places or
               formally determined eligible for listing by the Keeper of the National
               Register, the individual who has been delegated the authority by the federal
HISTORIC       agency to list properties and determine their eligibility for the National
DISTRICT OR    Register, in accordance with section VI.D.1.a.i through Section VI.D.1.a.v
HISTORIC       of the Nationwide Programmatic Agreement codified at 47 CFR Part 1, Appendix
LANDMARK:      C; or (ii) designated as a locally landmarked building, property, site, or
               historic district by an ordinance adopted by the Village pursuant to a
               preservation program that meets the requirements of the Certified Local
               Government Program of the Illinois State Historic Preservation Office or
               where such certification of the preservation program by the Illinois State
               Historic Preservation Office is pending.
LAW:           A federal or state statute, common law, code, rule, regulation, order, or
               local ordinance or resolution.
               A small wireless facility that is not larger in dimension than twenty four
MICRO WIRELESS inches (24") in length, fifteen inches (15") in width, and twelve inches
FACILITY:      (12") in height and that has an exterior antenna, if any, no longer than
               eleven inches (11").
MUNICIPAL      A utility pole owned or operated by the Village in public rights-of-way.
UTILITY POLE:
PERMIT:        A written authorization required by the Village to perform an action or
               initiate, continue, or complete a project.
PERSON:        An individual, corporation, limited liability company, partnership,
               association, trust, or other entity or organization.
               The functional division of the federal government, the state, a unit of
PUBLIC SAFETY  local government, or a special purpose district located in whole or in part
AGENCY:        within this state, that provides or has authority to provide firefighting,
               police, ambulance, medical, or other emergency services to respond to and
               manage emergency incidents.
RATE:          A recurring charge.
               The area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway, street, public
RIGHT-OF-WAY:  sidewalk, alley, or utility easement dedicated for compatible use. Right-of-
               way does not include Village-owned aerial lines.
               A wireless facility that meets both of the following qualifications: (i)
               each antenna is located inside an enclosure of no more than six (6) cubic
               feet in volume or, in the case of an antenna that has exposed elements, the
               antenna and all of its exposed elements could fit within an imaginary
               enclosure of no more than six (6) cubic feet; and (ii) all other wireless
SMALL WIRELESS equipment attached directly to a utility pole associated with the facility
FACILITY:      is cumulatively no more than twenty five (25) cubic feet in volume. The
               following types of associated ancillary equipment are not included in the
               calculation of equipment volume: electric meter, concealment elements,
               telecommunications demarcation box, ground-based enclosures, grounding
               equipment, power transfer switch, cut-off switch, and vertical cable runs
               for the connection of power and other services.
               A pole or similar structure that is used in whole or in part by a
UTILITY POLE:  communications service provider or for electric distribution, lighting,
               traffic control, or a similar function.
               Equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless communications between
               user equipment and a communications network, including: (i) equipment
               associated with wireless communications; and (ii) radio transceivers,
               antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup power supplies,
WIRELESS       and comparable equipment, regardless of technological configuration.
FACILITY:      Wireless facility includes small wireless facilities. Wireless facility does
               not include: (i) the structure or improvements on, under, or within which
               the equipment is collocated; or (ii) wireline backhaul facilities, coaxial
               or fiber-optic cable that is between wireless support structures or utility
               poles or coaxial, or fiber-optic cable that is otherwise not immediately
               adjacent to or directly associated with an antenna.
               Any person authorized to provide telecommunications service in the state
WIRELESS       that builds or installs wireless communication transmission equipment,
INFRASTRUCTURE wireless facilities, wireless support structures, or utility poles and that
PROVIDER:      is not a wireless services provider but is acting as an agent or a
               contractor for a wireless services provider for the application submitted to
               the Village.
WIRELESS       A wireless infrastructure provider or a wireless services provider.
PROVIDER:
               Any services provided to the general public, including a particular class of
WIRELESS       customers, and made available on a nondiscriminatory basis using licensed or
SERVICES:      unlicensed spectrum, whether at a fixed location or mobile, provided using
               wireless facilities.
WIRELESS
SERVICES       A person who provides wireless services.
PROVIDER:
WIRELESS       A freestanding structure, such as a monopole; tower, either guyed or self-
SUPPORT        supporting; billboard; or other existing or proposed structure designed to
STRUCTURE:     support or capable of supporting wireless facilities. Wireless support
               structure does not include a utility pole. (Ord. 725, 7-10-2018)
 
7-12-3: REGULATION OF SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES:
   (A)   Permitted Use: Small wireless facilities shall be classified as
permitted uses and subject to administrative review, except as provided in
subsection (C)9 regarding Height Exceptions or Variances, but not subject to
zoning review or approval if they are collocated (i) in rights-of-way in any
zoning district, or (ii) outside rights-of-way in property zoned exclusively
for commercial or industrial use.
   (B)   Permit Required: An applicant shall obtain one or more permits from
the Village to collocate a small wireless facility. An application shall be
received and processed, and permits issued shall be subject to the following
conditions and requirements:
      1.   Application Requirements: A wireless provider shall provide the
following information to the Village, together with the Village's small cell
facilities permit application, as a condition of any permit application to
collocate small wireless facilities on a utility pole or wireless support
structure:
         (a)   Site specific structural integrity and, for a municipal utility
pole, make-ready analysis prepared by a structural engineer, as that term is
defined in section 4 of the Structural Engineering Practice Act of 1989;
         (b)   The location where each proposed small wireless facility or
utility pole would be installed and photographs of the location and its
immediate surroundings depicting the utility poles or structures on which each
proposed small wireless facility would be mounted or location where utility
poles or structures would be installed. This should include a depiction of the
completed facility;
         (c)   Specifications and drawings prepared by a structural engineer,
as that term is defined in section 4 of the Structural Engineering Practice Act
of 1989, for each proposed small wireless facility covered by the application
as it is proposed to be installed;
         (d)   The equipment type and model numbers for the antennas and all
other wireless equipment associated with the small wireless facility;
         (e)   A proposed schedule for the installation and completion of each
small wireless facility covered by the application, if approved; and
         (f)   Certification that the collocation complies with the collocation
requirements and conditions contained herein, to the best of the applicant's
knowledge.
         (g)   In the event that the proposed small wireless facility is to be
attached to an existing pole owned by an entity other than the Village, the
wireless provider shall provide legally competent evidence of the consent of
the owner of such pole to the proposed collocation,
      2.   Application Process: The Village shall process applications as
follows:
         (a)   The first completed application shall have priority over
applications received by different applicants for collocation on the same
utility pole or wireless support structure.
         (b)   An application to collocate a small wireless facility on an
existing utility pole or wireless support structure, or replacement of an
existing utility pole or wireless support structure shall be processed on a
nondiscriminatory basis and shall be deemed approved if the Village fails to
approve or deny the application within ninety (90) days after the submission of
a completed application.
However, if an applicant intends to proceed with the permitted activity on a
deemed approved basis, the applicant shall notify the Village in writing of its
intention to invoke the deemed approved remedy no sooner than seventy five (75)
days after the submission of a completed application.
The permit shall be deemed approved on the latter of the ninetieth day after
submission of the complete application or the tenth day after the receipt of
the deemed approved notice by the Village. The receipt of the deemed approved
notice shall not preclude the Village's denial of the permit request within the
time limits as provided under this chapter.
         (c)   An application to collocate a small wireless facility that
includes the installation of a new utility pole shall be processed on a
nondiscriminatory basis and deemed approved if the Village fails to approve or
deny the application within one hundred twenty (120) days after the submission
of a completed application.
However, if an applicant intends to proceed with the permitted activity on a
deemed approved basis, the applicant shall notify the Village in writing of its
intention to invoke the deemed approved remedy no sooner than one hundred five
(105) days after the submission of a completed application.
The permit shall be deemed approved on the latter of the one hundred twentieth
day after submission of the complete application or the tenth day after the
receipt of the deemed approved notice by the Village. The receipt of the deemed
approved notice shall not preclude the Village's denial of the permit request
within the time limits as provided under this chapter.
         (d)   The Village shall deny an application which does not meet the
requirements of this chapter.
If the Village determines that applicable codes, ordinances or regulations that
concern public safety, or the collocation requirements and conditions contained
herein require that the utility pole or wireless support structure be replaced
before the requested collocation, approval shall be conditioned on the
replacement of the utility pole or wireless support structure at the cost of
the provider.
The Village shall document the basis for a denial, including the specific code
provisions or application conditions on which the denial is based, and send the
documentation to the applicant on or before the day the Village denies an
application.
The applicant may cure the deficiencies identified by the Village and resubmit
the revised application once within thirty (30) days after notice of denial is
sent to the applicant without paying an additional application fee. The Village
shall approve or deny the revised application within thirty (30) days after the
applicant resubmits the application or it is deemed approved. Failure to
resubmit the revised application within thirty (30) days of denial shall
require the application to submit a new application with applicable fees, and
recommencement of the Village's review period.
The applicant must notify the Village in writing of its intention to proceed
with the permitted activity on a deemed approved basis, which may be submitted
with the revised application.
Any review of a revised application shall be limited to the deficiencies cited
in the denial. However, this revised application does not apply if the cure
requires the review of a new location, new or different structure to be
collocated upon, new antennas, or other wireless equipment associated with the
small wireless facility.
         (e)   Pole Attachment Agreement: Within thirty (30) days after an
approved permit to collocate a small wireless facility on a municipal utility
pole, the Village and the applicant shall enter into a master pole attachment
agreement, provided by the Village for the initial collocation on a municipal
utility pole by the application. For subsequent approved permits to collocate
on a small wireless facility on a municipal utility pole, the Village and the
applicant shall enter into a license supplement of the master pole attachment
agreement.
      3.   Completeness Of Application: Within thirty (30) days after receiving
an application, the Village shall determine whether the application is complete
and notify the applicant. If an application is incomplete, the Village must
specifically identify the missing information. An application shall be deemed
complete if the Village fails to provide notification to the applicant within
thirty (30) days after all documents, information and fees specifically
enumerated in the Village's permit application form are submitted by the
applicant to the Village.
Processing deadlines are tolled from the time the Village sends the notice of
incompleteness to the time the applicant provides the missing information.
      4.   Tolling: The time period for applications may be further tolled by:
         (a)   An express written agreement by both the applicant and the
Village; or
         (b)   A local, state or federal disaster declaration or similar
emergency that causes the delay.
      5.   Consolidated Applications: An applicant seeking to collocate small
wireless facilities within the jurisdiction of the Village shall be allowed, at
the applicant's discretion, to file a consolidated application and receive a
single permit for the collocation of up to twenty five (25) small wireless
facilities if the collocations each involve substantially the same type of
small wireless facility and substantially the same type of structure.
If an application includes multiple small wireless facilities, the Village may
remove small wireless facility collocations from the application and treat
separately small wireless facility collocations for which incomplete
information has been provided or that do not qualify for consolidated treatment
or that are denied. The Village may issue separate permits for each collocation
that is approved in a consolidated application.
      6.   Duration Of Permits: The duration of a permit shall be for a period
of not less than five (5) years, and the permit shall be renewed for equivalent
durations unless the Village makes a finding that the small wireless facilities
or the new or modified utility pole do not comply with the applicable Village
codes or any provision, condition or requirement contained in this chapter.
If the Act is repealed as provided in section 90 therein, renewals of permits
shall he subject to the applicable Village code provisions or regulations in
effect at the time of renewal.
      7.   Means Of Submitting Applications: Applicants shall submit
applications, supporting information and notices to the Village by personal
delivery at the Village's designated place of business, by regular mail
postmarked on the date due or by any other commonly used means, including
electronic mail.
   (C)   Collocation Requirements And Conditions:
      1.   Public Safety Space Reservation. The Village may reserve space on
municipal utility poles for future public safety uses, for the Village's
electric utility uses, or both, but a reservation of space may not preclude the
collocation of a small wireless facility unless the Village reasonably
determines that the municipal utility pole cannot accommodate both uses.
      2.   Installation And Maintenance: The wireless provider shall install,
maintain, repair and modify its small wireless facilities in safe condition and
good repair and in compliance with the requirements and conditions of this
chapter. The wireless provider shall ensure that its employees, agents or
contracts that perform work in connection with its small wireless facilities
are adequately trained and skilled in accordance with all applicable industry
and governmental standards and regulations,
      3.   No Interference With Public Safety Communication Frequencies: The
wireless provider's operation of the small wireless facilities shall not
interfere with the frequencies used by a public safety agency for public safety
communications.
A wireless provider shall install small wireless facilities of the type and
frequency that will not cause unacceptable interference with a public safety
agency's communications equipment.
Unacceptable interference will be determined by and measured in accordance with
industry standards and the FCC's regulations addressing unacceptable
interference to public safety spectrum or any other spectrum licensed by a
public safety agency.
If a small wireless facility causes such interference, and the wireless
provider has been given written notice of the interference by the public safety
agency, the wireless provider, at its own expense, shall remedy the
interference in a manner consistent with the abatement and resolution
procedures for interference with public safety spectrum established by the FCC
including 47 CFR 22.970 through 47 CFR 22.973 and 47 CFR 90.672 through 47 CFR
90.675.
The Village may terminate a permit for a small wireless facility based on such
interference if the wireless provider is not in compliance with the Code of
Federal Regulations cited in the previous paragraph. Failure to remedy the
interference as required herein shall constitute a public nuisance.
      4.   The wireless provider shall not collocate small wireless facilities
on Village utility poles that are part of an electric distribution or
transmission system within the communication worker safety zone of the pole or
the electric supply zone of the pole.
However, the antenna and support equipment of the small wireless facility may
be located in the communications space on the Village utility pole and on the
top of the pole, if not otherwise unavailable, if the wireless provider
complies with applicable codes for work involving the top of the pole.
For purposes of this subparagraph, the terms "communications space",
"communication worker safety zone", and "electric supply zone" have the
meanings given to those terms in the National Electric Safety Code as published
by the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers.
      5.   The wireless provider shall comply with all applicable codes and
local code provisions or regulations that concern public safety.
      6.   The wireless provider shall comply with written design standards
that are generally applicable for decorative utility poles, or reasonable
stealth, concealment and aesthetic requirements that are set forth in a Village
ordinance, written policy adopted by the Village, a comprehensive plan or other
written design plan that applies to other occupiers of the rights-of-way,
including on a historic landmark or in a historic district.
      7.   Alternate Placements: Except as provided in this collocation
requirements and conditions section, a wireless provider shall not be required
to collocate small wireless facilities on any specific utility pole, or
category of utility poles, or be required to collocate multiple antenna systems
on a single utility pole. However, with respect to an application for the
collocation of a small wireless facility associated with a new utility pole,
the Village may propose that the small wireless facility be collocated on an
existing utility pole or existing wireless support structure within one hundred
feet (100') of the proposed collocation, which the applicant shall accept if it
has the right to use the alternate structure on reasonable terms and
conditions, and the alternate location and structure does not impose technical
limits or additional material costs as determined by the applicant.
If the applicant refuses a collocation proposed by the Village, the applicant
shall provide written certification describing the property rights, technical
limits or material cost reasons the alternate location does not satisfy the
criteria in this paragraph.
      8.   Height Limitations: The maximum height of a small wireless facility
shall be no more than ten feet (10') above the utility pole or wireless support
structure on which the small wireless facility is collocated.
New or replacement utility poles or wireless support structures on which small
wireless facilities are collocated may not exceed the higher of:
   a.   Ten feet (10') in height above the tallest existing utility pole, other
than a utility pole supporting only wireless facilities, that is in place on
the date the application is submitted to the Village, that is located within
three hundred feet (300') of the new or replacement utility pole or wireless
support structure and that is in the same right-of-way within the
jurisdictional boundary of the Village, provided the Village may designate
which intersecting right-of-way within three hundred feet (300') of the
proposed utility pole or wireless support structures shall control the height
limitation for such facility; or
   b.   Forty five feet (45') above ground level.
      9.   Height Exceptions Or Variances: If an applicant proposes a height
for a new or replacement pole in excess of the above height limitations on
which the small wireless facility is proposed for collocation, the applicant
shall apply for a special use permit or variance in conformance with
procedures, terms and conditions set forth in title 19 entitled Zoning
Regulations.
      10.   Contractual Design Requirements: The wireless provider shall comply
with requirements that are imposed by a contract between the Village and a
private property owner that concern design or construction standards applicable
to utility poles and ground-mounted equipment located in the right-of-way.
      11.   Ground-Mounted Equipment Spacing: The wireless provider shall
comply with applicable spacing requirements in applicable codes and ordinances
concerning the location of ground-mounted equipment located in the right-of-way
if the requirements include a waiver, zoning or other process that addresses
wireless provider requests for exception or variance and do not prohibit
granting of such exceptions or variances.
      12.   Undergrounding Regulations: The wireless provider shall comply with
local code provisions or regulations concerning undergrounding requirements
that prohibit the installation of new or the modification of existing utility
poles in a right-of-way without prior approval if the requirements include a
waiver, zoning or other process that addresses requests to install such new
utility poles or modify such existing utility poles and do not prohibit the
replacement of utility poles.
      13.   Collocation Completion Deadline: Collocation for which a permit is
granted shall be completed within one hundred eighty (180) days after issuance
of the permit, unless the Village and the wireless provider agree to extend
this period or a delay is caused by make-ready work for a municipal utility
pole or by the lack of commercial power or backhaul availability at the site,
provided the wireless provider has made a timely request within sixty (60) days
after the issuance of the permit for commercial power or backhaul services, and
the additional time to complete installation does not exceed three hundred
sixty (360) days after issuance of the permit. Otherwise, the permit shall be
void unless the Village grants an extension in writing to the applicant.
   (D)   Application Fees: Application fees are imposed as follows:
      1.   Applicant shall pay an application fee of six hundred fifty dollars
($650.00) for an application to collocate a single small wireless facility on
an existing utility pole or wireless support structure, and three hundred fifty
dollars ($350.00) for each small wireless facility addressed in a consolidated
application to collocate more than one small wireless facility on existing
utility poles or wireless support structures.
      2.   Applicant shall pay an application fee of one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) for each small wireless facility addressed in an application that
includes the installation of a new utility pole for such collocation.
      3.   Notwithstanding any contrary provision of state law or local
ordinance, applications pursuant to this section shall be accompanied by the
required application fee. Application fees shall be non-refundable.
      4.   The Village shall not require an application, approval or permit, or
require any fees or other charges, from a communications service provider
authorized to occupy the rights-of-way, for:
         (a)   Routine maintenance;
         (b)   The replacement of wireless facilities with wireless facilities
that are substantially similar, the same size, or smaller if the wireless
provider notifies the Village at least ten (10) days prior to the planned
replacement and includes equipment specifications for the replacement of
equipment consistent with subsection (B)1d; or
         (c)   The installation, placement, maintenance, operation or
replacement of micro wireless facilities suspended on cables that are strung
between existing utility poles in compliance with applicable safety codes.
      5.   Wireless providers shall secure a permit from the Village to work
within rights-of-way for activities that affect traffic patterns or require
lane closures.
   (E)   Exceptions To Applicability: Nothing in this chapter authorizes a
person to collocate small wireless facilities on:
      1.   Property owned by a private party or property owned or controlled by
the Village or another unit of local government that is not located within
rights-of-way, or a privately owned utility pole or wireless support structure
without the consent of the property owner;
      2.   Property owned, leased, or controlled by a park district, forest
preserve district, or conservation district for public park, recreation or
conservation purposes without the consent of the affected district, excluding
the placement of facilities on rights-of-way located in an affected district
that are under the jurisdiction and control of a different unit of local
government as provided by the Illinois Highway Code; or
      3.   Property owned by a rail carrier registered under section 18c-7201
of the Illinois Vehicle Code, Metra Commuter Rail or any other public commuter
rail service, or an electric utility as defined in section 16-102 of the Public
Utilities Act, without the consent of the rail carrier, public commuter rail
service, or electric utility. The provisions of this chapter do not apply to an
electric or gas public utility or such utility's wireless facilities if the
facilities are being used, developed and maintained consistent with the
provisions of subsection (i) of Section 16-108.5 of the Public Utilities Act.
For the purposes of this subsection, "public utility" has the meaning given to
that term in section 3-105 of the Public Utilities Act. Nothing in this chapter
shall be construed to relieve any person from any requirement (a) to obtain a
franchise or a state-issued authorization to offer cable service or video
service or (b) to obtain any required permission to install, place, maintain,
or operate communications facilities, other than small wireless facilities
subject to this chapter.
   (F)   Pre-Existing Agreements: Existing agreements between the Village and
wireless providers that relate to the collocation of small wireless facilities
in the right-of-way, including the collocation of small wireless facilities on
Village utility poles, that are in effect on June 1, 2018, remain in effect for
all small wireless facilities collocated on the Village's utility poles
pursuant to applications submitted to the Village before June 1, 2018, subject
to applicable termination provisions contained therein. Agreements entered into
after June 1, 2018, shall comply with this chapter.
A wireless provider that has an existing agreement with the Village on the
effective date of the Act may accept the rates, fees and terms that the Village
makes available under this chapter for the collocation of small wireless
facilities or the installation of new utility poles for the collocation of
small wireless facilities that are the subject of an application submitted two
(2) or more years after the effective date of the Act by notifying the Village
that it opts to accept such rates, fees and terms. The existing agreement
remains in effect, subject to applicable termination provisions, for the small
wireless facilities the wireless provider has collocated on the Village's
utility poles pursuant to applications submitted to the Village before the
wireless provider provides such notice and exercises its option under this
paragraph.
   (G)   Annual Recurring Rate: A wireless provider shall pay to the Village an
annual recurring rate to collocate a small wireless facility on a Village
utility pole located in a right-of-way that equals (i) two hundred dollars
($200.00) per year or (ii) the actual, direct and reasonable costs related to
the wireless provider's use of space on the Village utility pole.
If the Village has not billed the wireless provider actual and direct costs,
the fee shall be two hundred dollars ($200.00) payable on the first day after
the first annual anniversary of the issuance of the permit or notice of intent
to collocate, and on each annual anniversary date thereafter.
   (H)   Abandonment: A small wireless facility that is not operated for a
continuous period of twelve (12) months shall be considered abandoned, The
owner of the facility shall remove the small wireless facility within ninety
(90) days after receipt of written notice from the Village notifying the
wireless provider of the abandonment.
The notice shall be sent by certified or registered mail, return receipt
requested, by the Village to the owner at the last known address of the
wireless provider. If the small wireless facility is not removed within ninety
(90) days of such notice, the Village may remove or cause the removal of such
facility pursuant to the terms of its pole attachment agreement for municipal
utility poles or through whatever actions are provided for abatement of
nuisances or by other law for removal and cost recovery.
A wireless provider shall provide written notice to the Village if it sells or
transfers small wireless facilities within the jurisdiction of the Village.
Such notice shall include the name and contact information of the new wireless
provider. (Ord. 725, 7-10-2018)
7-12-4: DISPUTE RESOLUTION:
The Circuit Court of Whiteside County shall have exclusive jurisdiction to
resolve all disputes arising under the Small Wireless Facilities Deployment
Act. Pending resolution of a dispute concerning rates for collocation of small
wireless facilities on municipal utility poles within the right-of-way, the
Village shall allow the collocating person to collocate on its poles at annual
rates of no more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) per year per municipal
utility pole, with rates to be determined upon final resolution of the dispute.
(Ord. 725, 7-10-2018)
7-12-5: INDEMNIFICATION:
A wireless provider shall indemnify and hold the Village harmless against any
and all liability or loss from personal injury or property damage resulting
from or arising out of, in whole or in part, the use or occupancy of the
Village improvements or right-of-way associated with such improvements by the
wireless provider or its employees, agents, or contractors arising out of the
rights and privileges granted under this chapter and the Act. A wireless
provider has no obligation to indemnify or hold harmless against any
liabilities and losses as maybe due to or caused by the sole negligence of the
Village or its employees or agents. A wireless provider shall further waive any
claims that they may have against the Village with respect to consequential,
incidental, or special damages, however caused, based on the theory of
liability. (Ord. 725, 7-10-2018)
7-12-6: INSURANCE:
The wireless provider shall carry, at the wireless provider's own cost and
expense, the following insurance:
   (A)   Property insurance for its property's replacement cost against all
risks;
   (B)   Workers' compensation insurance, as required by law; or
   (C)   Commercial general liability insurance with respect to its activities
on the Village improvements or rights-of-way to afford minimum protection
limits consistent with its requirements of other users of Village improvements
or rights-of-way, including coverage for bodily injury and property damage.
The wireless provider shall include the Village as an additional insured on the
commercial general liability policy and provide certification and documentation
of inclusion of the Village in a commercial general liability policy prior to
the collocation of any wireless facility.
A wireless provider may self-insure all or a portion of the insurance coverage
and limit requirement required by the Village. A wireless provider that self-
insures is not required, to the extent of the self-insurance, to comply with
the requirement for the name of additional insureds under this section. A
wireless provider that elects to self-insure shall provide to the Village
evidence sufficient to demonstrate its financial ability to self-insure the
insurance coverage limits required by the Village. (Ord. 725, 7-10-2018)
TITLE 8
MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
CHAPTER 1
TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
SECTION:
8-1-1: Definitions
8-1-2: Traffic Administration
8-1-3: Signs And Signals
8-1-4: Unauthorized Signs; Interference With Signs
8-1-5: Exemptions
8-1-6: Reckless Driving
8-1-7: Speed
8-1-8: Method Of Turning
8-1-9: Traction Engines; Metal Tires
8-1-10: Unnecessary Noise
8-1-11: Driving While Intoxicated
8-1-12: Vehicle Code Adopted By Reference
8-1-13: Maximum Weight Limitations On Certain Streets
8-1-14: Passing School Buses
8-1-15: Restricted Weight Limitations On Certain Streets
8-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
ENCROACHMENT: Any building, fence, sign, or any other structure or object of
any kind (with the exception of utilities and public road signs), which is
placed, located or maintained in, on, or over any portion of the roadway right
of way.
MOTOR VEHICLE: Whenever the term "motor vehicle" is used in this title, it
shall be construed to include automobiles, motorcycles, tractors, traction
engines and all other vehicles propelled otherwise than by muscular power, and
including also vehicles or trailers, or semitrailers, pulled or towed by a
motor vehicle, but excluding cars of electric and steam railways and other
motor vehicles running only upon fixed rails or tracks, or propelled by
electric power obtained from overhead trolley wires. Nothing in this title
shall be construed to apply to or affect bicycles or tricycles or such other
vehicles as are propelled exclusively by muscular pedal power, unless so
indicated in the context herein.
ROADWAY RIGHT OF WAY: Those areas existing or acquired by dedication or by fee
simply for highway purposes; also, the areas acquired by temporary easement
during the time the easement is in effect.
STREET: Whenever the term "street" is used in this title it shall be construed
to include streets, alleys and public highways of any and all descriptions.
(Ord. 107, 8-13-1946; amd. Ord. 410, 3-13-1990)
8-1-2: TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION:
It shall be the general duty of the chief of police to cooperate with other
village officials in the development of ways and means to improve traffic
conditions and to carry out any additional powers and duties provided by
village ordinance or state law. (Ord. 143, 2-10-1954; amd. 1976 Code)
8-1-3: SIGNS AND SIGNALS:
It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to disobey the instructions
of any traffic sign or signal placed in view by authority of an ordinance
passed by the board of trustees or in accordance with the laws of the state.
All signs established by direction of the governing body shall conform with and
to the state standards for traffic signs. (Ord. 143, 2-10-1954; amd. 1976 Code)
8-1-4: UNAUTHORIZED SIGNS; INTERFERENCE WITH SIGNS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, maintain or display any device,
other than an official warning or direction sign or signal authorized by
statute or ordinance, upon or in view of any street, if such device purports to
be or is an imitation of an official warning or direction signal or sign, or
directs or purports to direct the movement of traffic. Any such unauthorized
device is hereby declared to be a nuisance, and may be removed by the village
chief of police. (Ord. 143, 2-10-1954; amd. 1976 Code)
8-1-5: EXEMPTIONS:
The provisions of this title regulating the parking of vehicles shall not apply
to emergency vehicles while the driver thereof is engaged in the performance of
emergency duties. Nor shall such provisions apply to persons actually engaged
in repairing or otherwise improving the streets under authority of the
governing body of the village or of the state. (Ord. 143, 2-10-1954; amd. 1976
Code)
8-1-6: RECKLESS DRIVING:
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any vehicle in the village in a
negligent or careless manner, or in a manner that would endanger person or
property. (Ord. 143, 2-10-1954; amd. 1976 Code)
8-1-7: SPEED:
The speed restrictions in the village shall be the same as provided by the laws
of the state governing speed regulations in municipalities.
The prima facie speed limitations set forth above shall not apply to authorized
emergency vehicles when responding to emergency calls and the driver thereof
sound audible signal by bell, siren or exhaust whistle. This provision shall
not relieve the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to
drive with due regard for the safety of all persons using the streets, nor
shall it protect the driver of any such vehicle from the consequences of a
reckless disregard for the safety of others. (Ord. 107, 8-13-1946; amd. 1976
Code)
8-1-8: METHOD OF TURNING:
At all street intersections, vehicles when turning to the right shall keep to
the right of the intersections of the center of such street, and when turning
to the left shall pass to the right of such intersections. (Ord. 36, 11-6-1917)
8-1-9: TRACTION ENGINES; METAL TIRES:
No metal tired vehicles, including tractors, motor trucks, traction engines and
other similar vehicles, shall be operated or drawn over any public street of
the village which has been improved with a paved, macadam or oiled dirt
surface, if such vehicle has on the periphery of any of the road wheels, any
block, stud, flange, cleat, ridge, lug or any projection of metal or wood which
projects radially beyond the tread or traffic surface of the tire excepting
that this prohibition shall not apply to wagons, tractors or other vehicles of
the track laying type when such track does not contain any projections of any
kind likely to injure the surface of the street.
No vehicle, object or device of any kind or character which does, or is likely
to, scarify, dig, plow up or produce holes in the surface of any street shall
be used, operated or drawn over any public street in the village which has been
improved with a paved, macadam or oiled dirt surface, excepting in the proper
maintenance or construction of such street under authority from, and under the
direction of the proper officers of the village. (Ord. 57, 7-2-1935)
8-1-10: UNNECESSARY NOISE:
An increase in speed of a motor vehicle from a stopped or moving position,
which causes the wheels of said vehicle to make disturbingly loud noises, is
prohibited. Further, no person shall operate a motor vehicle, except in cases
of emergency, in such a manner that horns or other warning devices be sounded
unnecessarily. (Ord. 340, 8-28-1979)
8-1-11: DRIVING WHILE INTOXICATED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or be in actual physical control
of any motor vehicle while under the influence of intoxicating liquor or
narcotic drugs. (1976 Code)
8-1-12: VEHICLE CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE:
The Illinois vehicle code, 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes, as amended, is
hereby adopted in its entirety, by reference, as though fully and completely
set forth. Any other section of this code, in conflict with the Illinois
vehicle code, as amended, is hereby declared void and ineffective and is hereby
repealed. The general penalty provisions contained in section
1-4-1 of this code are hereby adopted as the general penalty provision for any
violation of the Illinois vehicle code, unless otherwise specifically provided
in this title. (Ord. 412, 4-10-1990)
8-1-13: MAXIMUM WEIGHT LIMITATIONS ON CERTAIN STREETS:
   (A)   Pursuant to the authority granted the village, in 625 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/15-111, the maximum weight limitations on the following
streets and highways in the village shall be the same weight limitations stated
in 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/15-111(g):
Albany Street from its intersection with Tenth Street to the village limits.
Main Street from its intersection with Seventh Avenue to its intersection with
Moline Road, or 12th Street, or what was formerly known as Illinois Route 2.
Seventh Avenue.
10th Street from its intersection with Albany Street north to its intersection
with Main Street.
   (B)   Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in any section of this Code,
the maximum weight limitations on the following streets and highways in the
village shall not exceed twenty thousand (20,000) pounds at all times and on
all dates:
Albany Street from its intersection with Main Street to its intersection with
Tenth Street.
Eight Avenue from its intersection with Main Street to its intersection with
Tenth Street. (Ord. 413, 4-10-1990; amd. Ord. 707, 5-9-2017)
8-1-14: PASSING SCHOOL BUSES:
   (A)   As required in the intergovernmental agreement entered into between
the board of trustees of the village and the board of education of the Erie
community unit district 1, the village hereby adopts a regulation concerning
the improper passing of a stopped school bus by adopting by reference 625
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-1414 of the Illinois vehicle code, as amended,
and all related provisions of the Illinois vehicle code, as amended.
   (B)   The penalty for committing a violation of the regulations stated above
shall be the same penalty as provided in the Illinois vehicle code, as amended.
(Ord. 469, 10-8-1996)
8-1-15: RESTRICTED WEIGHT LIMITATIONS ON CERTAIN STREETS:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate any motor
vehicle having a gross weight in excess of ten (10) tons on the following
street(s) or avenue(s) in the village (collectively herein "streets"):
Sixth Avenue from its intersection of Seventh Avenue to its intersection with
12th Street.
   (B)   Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this section, vehicles
having a gross weight in excess of ten (10) tons shall be permitted to drive or
operate on such streets under the following exceptions:
      1.   Written permission granted from the chief of police of the village
of Erie,
      2.   A motor home or the like owned or operated by an individual who
resides in a residence located along a street or a visitor to a residence
located along a street.
   (C)   The village shall erect a sign at each end of the street indicating
that the gross weight of vehicles is restricted by ordinance.
   (D)   The general penalty provision under this code shall apply. (Ord. 612,
12-11-2007)
CHAPTER 2
PARKING RULES
SECTION:
8-2-1: No Parking Places
8-2-2: Parking At Curb
8-2-3: Double Parking
8-2-4: Alleys
8-2-5: Parking Stalls
8-2-6: All Night Parking Prohibited
8-2-7: Overnight Parking Of Vehicles Weighing Over Three Tons Prohibited
8-2-8: Parking Of Vehicles On Certain Streets Prohibited
8-2-9: Persons With Disabilities Parking
8-2-10: Parking Of Certain Vehicles Prohibited
8-2-1: NO PARKING PLACES:
It shall be unlawful at any time to permit any vehicle to stand in any of the
following places, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or
in compliance with the directions of a village police officer or traffic signs
or signals:
   (A)   In any intersection.
   (B)   In a crosswalk.
   (C)   Within thirty feet (30') of a traffic sign or a through street sign on
the approaching side.
   (D)   Within twenty feet (20') of any intersection.
   (E)   At any place where the standing of a vehicle will reduce the usable
width of the roadway for moving traffic to less than eighteen feet (18').
   (F)   At any curb within five feet (5') of a fire hydrant, unless such
vehicle is in charge of some person capable of driving and is in the vehicle.
   (G)   At any place where the vehicle would block the use of a driveway.
   (H)   Within fifty feet (50') of the nearest rail of a railroad grade
crossing.
   (I)   Within twenty feet (20') of the driveway entrance to any fire
department station and on the side of the street opposite the entrance to any
such station within seventy five feet (75') of such entrance.
   (J)   On any sidewalk or parkway.
   (K)   At any place where official signs prohibit parking.
   (L)   Continuous standing of a vehicle on a highway or any parking area for
a period of twenty four (24) hours shall be prima facie evidence of abandonment
and the village police shall have power to remove same to some garage. (Ord.
143, 2-10-1954)
8-2-2: PARKING AT CURB:
No vehicle shall be parked with the left side of such vehicle next to the curb,
except on one-way streets where parking is permitted on both sides thereof, and
it shall be unlawful to stand or park any vehicle in a street other than
parallel with the curb and with the two (2) right wheels of the vehicle within
twelve inches (12") of the regularly established curb line, except that upon
those streets that have been marked for angle parking, vehicles shall be parked
at the angle to the curb indicated by such marks with the front wheels at the
curb. Except that trucks may back to curb for the purpose of loading or
unloading for actual periods of time necessary for loading or unloading, but in
no case shall interfere with the movement of traffic. (Ord. 143, 2-10-1954)
8-2-3: DOUBLE PARKING:
It shall be unlawful to double park any vehicle in the village at any time.
(Ord. 143, 2-10-1954)
8-2-4: ALLEYS:
No person shall park a vehicle within an alley except for the purposes of
loading or unloading freight and shall then park only in such manner or under
such conditions as to leave available not less than ten feet (10') of the width
of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic, and no person shall
stop, stand or park a vehicle within an alley in such position as to block the
driveway entrance to any abutting property. (Ord. 143, 2-10-1954)
8-2-5: PARKING STALLS:
   (A)   At any place where parking stalls are marked for either angle or
parallel parking, it shall be unlawful for any owner or operator of a vehicle
to park said vehicle so as to encroach upon adjoining parking stalls.
   (B)   At any place where parking stalls are marked for angle parking, it
shall be unlawful for any owner or operator of a vehicle to park said vehicle
with the back to the curb. (Ord. 289, 1-25-1972)
8-2-6: ALL NIGHT PARKING PROHIBITED:
   (A)   No person shall park or leave parked any vehicle within the area
designated as follows:
The Village Triangle area bounded as follows: Albany Street from its
intersection with the railroad tracks south to its intersection with Main
Street; Eighth Avenue from its intersection with the railroad tracks south to
its intersection with the westerly edge of the alley between Main Street and
Eighth Street; Main Street commencing at a point 195 feet south of the
southerly line of Ninth Avenue at its intersection with Main Street to its
intersection with the northerly line of an alley running from Main Street to
the railroad tracks in the block bordered by Seventh Avenue to the south and
Eighth Avenue to the north;
after one thirty o'clock (1:30) A.M. and before four thirty o'clock (4:30) A.M.
Any person violating any provision of this section shall be fined not less than
twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than fifty dollars ($50.00) for each
offense.
   (B)   No person shall park or leave any vehicle within the area designated
as follows after one thirty o’clock (1:30) A.M. and before four thirty o’clock
(4:30) A.M. at any time when two inches (2") or more of snow have fallen in the
Village of Erie:
      1.   Main Street commencing at the southerly line of its intersection
with Ninth Avenue to a point 195 feet south of the southerly line of Ninth
Avenue at its intersection with Main Street.
      2.   Eighth Avenue from its intersection with Eighth Street to the
southeasterly line of the alley between Eighth Street and Main Street. (Ord.
368, 2-14-1984; amd. Ord. 735, 6-11-2019; Ord. 755, 12-8-2020; Ord. 759, 1-12-
2021)
8-2-7: OVERNIGHT PARKING OF VEHICLES WEIGHING OVER THREE TONS PROHIBITED:
   (A)   Prohibition:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for the driver or operator to park or the owner
to allow the driver or operator to park any vehicle having a weight in excess
of three (3) tons on any day of the week between the hours of seven o'clock (7:
00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. on any portion of the following named
streets, avenues or public ways within the village:
Albany Street
East Street
Highland Avenue
Highway Court
Lake Side Drive
Main Street
Moline Road
Oak Street
Pine Street
School Court
Short Street
Walnut Street
West Street
Fourth Street
Fifth Avenue
Fifth Street
Fifth Street Court
Sixth Avenue
Sixth Street
Seventh Avenue
Seventh Street
Eighth Avenue
Eighth Street
Ninth Avenue
Tenth Avenue
Tenth Street
Eleventh Avenue
Eleventh Street
Twelfth Avenue
Twelfth Avenue A
Twelfth Avenue B
Twelfth Street
Thirteenth Avenue
Thirteenth Street
Sixteenth Avenue
      2.   The village shall erect signs giving reasonable notice of the
parking prohibition stated herein at each entrance to the village and at such
further locations as may be determined necessary by the chief of police.
      3.   Whenever the enforcement of the provisions of this section
temporarily causes substantial and unreasonable hardship in the case of any
particular operation, the chief of police or his authorized agent shall have
the power to grant a temporary permit for such operation, and when so doing,
the chief of police or such authorized agent shall designate the location where
such vehicle shall park. Such temporary permit shall be for a time period not
in excess of forty eight (48) hours.
      4.   Each day shall be considered a separate offense.
   (B)   Definition: The word "vehicle" shall have the definition as contained
in the Illinois vehicle code, 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-217.
   (C)   Penalty: Any person, firm, copartnership, association or corporation
found to be an operator, driver or owner of a vehicle who has violated this
section shall be subject to a fine of not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor
more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each offense, notwithstanding the
general penalty section of this code. (Ord. 443, 7-13-1993)
8-2-8: PARKING OF VEHICLES ON CERTAIN STREETS PROHIBITED:
   (A)   Prohibition:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for the driver or operator to park or the owner
to allow the driver or operator to park any vehicle at any time or on any day
on the stated portion of the following named streets, avenues or public ways
within the village:
The south side of Fifth Avenue from the easterly boundary of the corporate
limits of the village to the intersection of Fifth Avenue and Eighth Street.
      2.   The village shall erect signs giving reasonable notice of the
parking prohibition stated herein at the streets where parking is prohibited
and at such further locations as may be determined necessary by the chief of
police.
      3.   Whenever the enforcement of the provisions of this section
temporarily causes substantial and unreasonable hardship in the case of any
particular operation, the chief of police or his authorized agent shall have
the power to grant a temporary permit for such operation, and when so doing,
the chief of police or such authorized agent shall designate the location where
such vehicle shall park. Such temporary permit shall be for a time period not
in excess of forty eight (48) hours.
      4.   Each day shall be considered a separate offense.
   (B)   Definition: The word "vehicle" shall have the definition as contained
in the Illinois vehicle code, 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-217.
   (C)   Penalty: Any person, firm, copartnership, association or corporation
found to be an operator, driver or owner of a vehicle who has violated this
section shall be subject to a fine of not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor
more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each offense, notwithstanding the
general penalty section of this code. (Ord. 547, 10-9-2001)
8-2-9: PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES PARKING:
   (A)   Persons with disabilities parking places shall be at the following
locations within the village with specific locations to be determined by the
chief of police:
Albany Street:                                                        
 On Albany Street, between railroad tracks and business district    1 space
Main Street:                                                          
 In business district on Main Street                                2 spaces
Village property                                                      
  On property owned by the Village located south of the railroad
 tracks and east of Albany Street and west of the property commonly 1 space
  known as 921 8th Avenue
7th Avenue:                                                           
 Between Main Street and 8th Street on 7th Avenue                   2 spaces
8th Avenue:                                                           
 Between Main Street and 8th Street on 8th Avenue                   1 space
8th Street:                                                           
 On the corner of 8th Street and 8th Avenue (between 8th Avenue and 2 spaces
  9th Avenue on 8th Street)
 Between 8th Avenue and 7th Avenue on 8th Street                    1 space
 
   (B)   These locations as determined by the board of trustees shall be
designated by proper signage as required by the Illinois vehicle code and the
Illinois environmental barriers act, 410 Illinois Compiled Statutes 25/1 et
seq., and all other applicable laws and regulations.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for anyone to park in the designated area on
public property unless the motor vehicle bears registration plates issued to a
person with disabilities, as defined by 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-
159.1 as amended, of the Illinois vehicle code as adopted by the village, or by
a special decal or device issued pursuant to 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/
3-616, as amended, or pursuant to 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-1301.2,
as amended, of the Illinois vehicle code, as adopted by the village, or motor
vehicle registered in another jurisdiction upon which is displayed a
registration plate, special decal or device issued by the other jurisdiction
designating the vehicle as operated by or for a person with disabilities.
   (D)   Any person, firm, copartnership, association or corporation found to
be an operator, driver or owner of a vehicle who has violated this section,
relating to persons with disabilities parking, shall be subject to a fine of
not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than two hundred fifty
dollars ($250.00) for each offense. Violations of this section as evidenced by
a parking ticket in a form established by the chief of police shall be
punishable by fine as follows:
      1.   One hundred dollars ($100.00) if paid on or before ten (10) days
from the date and time of issuance of the parking ticket.
      2.   One hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) if paid more than ten (10) days
after the date and time of issuance of the parking ticket.
      3.   If the fine in the amount set forth above shall not have been paid
to the office of the village clerk or to the police department within sixty
(60) days from the date and time of issuance of the parking ticket, a complaint
shall be filed in the circuit court of Whiteside County and a notice to appear
shall be issued to the person in whose name the offending vehicle is
registered, notifying that person to appear before the circuit court to answer
the charge of violating this section. The minimum fine for each offense upon a
finding of guilty or plea of guilty before the circuit court on a charge under
this section shall be two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). Proceedings shall
follow as in all other ordinance violations of the village. (Ord. 690, 6-9-
2015; amd. Ord. 756, 12-8-2020)
8-2-10: PARKING OF CERTAIN VEHICLES PROHIBITED:
   (A)   No person shall park any camping trailer, trailer, mobile home,
commuter van, house trailer, motor home, minihome, recreational vehicle, van
camper, travel trailer, truck camper or recreational vehicle or boat or any
utility trailer or trailer used for hauling, including, but not limited to,
trailers designed to haul equipment, snowmobiles, motorcycles or boats on a
street in any district, except as provided for in this subsection. Such
vehicles bearing the license plate designations of RV, RT, or TA shall be
irrebuttably presumed to be a vehicle prohibited from parking on a street in
any district by this subsection, except that such a vehicle may be parked on a
street in any district under the following circumstances:
      1.   For a temporary period not to exceed forty eight (48) consecutive
hours.
      2.   Pursuant to a permit issued by the chief of police.
   (B)   No person shall attempt to circumvent the requirements of this
restriction by temporarily moving such vehicle or trailer for the purpose of
extending the time available for an additional forty eight (48) hour period and
any temporary movement or attempt to circumvent the restrictions shall not
extend the forty eight (48) hour temporary parking period allowed under this
section. (Ord. 698, 3-8-2016)
CHAPTER 3
PEDESTRIANS
SECTION:
8-3-1: Right Of Way
8-3-2: Pedestrians Using Roadway
8-3-1: RIGHT OF WAY:
It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to drive into any crosswalk
without the exercise of due and proper care in view of the special use made
thereof by pedestrians.
It shall be unlawful to drive any vehicle into any crosswalk while there is in
such crosswalk upon the half of the roadway upon which such vehicle is
traveling any pedestrian engaged in crossing the roadway until such pedestrian
shall have passed beyond the path of such vehicle, when the pedestrian shall
indicate his intention to cross. (Ord. 143, 2-10-1954)
8-3-2: PEDESTRIANS USING ROADWAY:
At no place shall a pedestrian cross any roadway other than by the most direct
route to the opposite curbing and when crossing at any place other than a
crosswalk he shall yield the right of way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
No person shall stand or loiter in any roadway other than in a safety zone, if
such act interferes with the lawful movement of traffic. It shall be unlawful
for any person to stand in a roadway for the purpose of soliciting a ride from
the driver of any vehicle. (Ord. 143, 2-10-1954)
CHAPTER 4
VIOLATIONS; ARRESTS
SECTION:
8-4-1: Penalty
8-4-2: Arrests
8-4-1: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this title shall be fined not less than
ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each
offense. (Ord. 143, 2-10-1954; amd. 1976 Code)
8-4-2: ARRESTS:
Any person arrested for a violation of this title shall be released upon proper
bail being furnished as required by statute. (Ord. 143, 2-10-1954; amd. 1976
Code)
CHAPTER 5
BICYCLE REGULATIONS
SECTION:
8-5-1: Definitions
8-5-2: Adoption Of State Law
8-5-3: Operation Of Bicycles And Skateboards Restricted
8-5-4: Parking
8-5-5: Penalty
8-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
Whenever in this chapter the following terms are used, they shall have the
meanings respectfully ascribed to them in this section.
BICYCLE: Shall mean and include every device propelled by human power upon
which any person may ride, having two (2) tandem wheels either of which is more
than sixteen inches (16") in diameter.
OPERATE: Any form or tense thereof shall mean and refer to the use, putting
into action or causing to function of a bicycle or skateboard by a person
mounted thereon.
SIDEWALK: That portion of a street between the curb lines, or the lateral lines
of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines, intended for use of pedestrians.
SKATEBOARD: Shall mean and include any object consisting of a solid top
connected to roller skate type wheels intended to carry or propel a person
while standing or situated on the top. (Ord. 395, 11-10-1987)
8-5-2: ADOPTION OF STATE LAW:
Pursuant to the authority granted the village of Erie by 625 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/20-204, the village of Erie hereby adopts article 15 of chapter 11
of the Illinois vehicle code by reference, and all village ordinances or parts
thereof in conflict with such code are hereby repealed. (Ord. 395, 11-10-1987)
8-5-3: OPERATION OF BICYCLES AND SKATEBOARDS RESTRICTED:
No person shall operate a bicycle or skateboard on any of the sidewalks in the
business district or square of the village as defined in section
8-5-4 of this chapter except at the street and alley crossings. (Ord. 395, 11-
10-1987)
8-5-4: PARKING:
No person shall park a bicycle in the business district or square of the
village in certain zones or public places designated and marked for that
particular purpose. It shall be unlawful to park any bicycle along buildings in
such a manner as to interfere with pedestrians, or along roadways where they
may interfere with traffic. No person other than the owner or operator shall
move, or in any manner interfere with, any bicycle properly parked. The
business district or square shall consist of Main Street from 9th Avenue to the
alley between 7th Avenue and Albany Street, 8th Avenue from the railroad tracks
to the alley between 8th Street and Main Street, and Albany Street to the
railroad tracks. (Ord. 395, 11-10-1987)
8-5-5: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter relating to bicycles and
skateboards shall be fined not less than three dollars ($3.00) nor more than
one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each and every offense. (Ord. 395, 11-10-
1987)
CHAPTER 6
NONHIGHWAY VEHICLE OPERATION
SECTION:
8-6-1: Definitions
8-6-2: Requirements
8-6-3: Permits
8-6-4: Penalty
8-6-5: Signage
8-6-1: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the definitions as
set forth herein:
CODE: The Illinois vehicle code in 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5.
NONHIGHWAY VEHICLES: A motor vehicle authorized by state law in 625 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/11-1426.1 and defined as follows:
All-Terrain Vehicle: Any motorized off highway device designed to travel
primarily off highway, fifty inches (50") or less in width, having a
manufacturer's dry weight of one thousand five hundred (1,500) pounds or less,
traveling on three (3) or more nonhighway tires, designed with a seat or saddle
for operator use, and handlebars or steering wheel for steering control, except
equipment such as lawn mowers.
Golf Cart: A vehicle specifically designed and intended for the purposes of
transporting one or more persons and their golf clubs or maintenance equipment
while engaged in the playing of golf, supervising the play of golf, or
maintaining the condition of the grounds on a public or private golf course.
Off Highway Motorcycle: Any motorized device designed to travel primarily off
highway on two (2) wheels, having a seat or saddle for the use of the operator,
upon or by which any person, persons or property may be transported or drawn.
Recreational Off Highway Vehicle: Any motorized off highway device designed to
travel primarily off highway, sixty four inches (64") or less in width, having
a manufacturer's dry weight of two thousand (2,000) pounds or less, traveling
on four (4) or more nonhighway tires, designed with a nonstraddle seat and a
steering wheel for steering control, except equipment such as lawn mowers.
VILLAGE STREETS: The portion of any street, alley or roadway, improved,
designed, or ordinarily used for vehicle travel or parking, located within the
boundaries of the village of Erie, Illinois, excluding any highway under the
jurisdiction of the state of Illinois or county of Whiteside. (Ord. 672, 12-11-
2012)
8-6-2: REQUIREMENTS:
A person may operate a nonhighway vehicle on the village streets if the person
and nonhighway vehicle comply with all the following requirements and
conditions:
   (A)   All nonhighway vehicles shall be certified by the chief of police
after inspection by a village designated representative. If the vehicle is
certified by the chief, a permit shall be issued by the chief evidenced by a
decal which shall be affixed to the rear of the vehicle.
   (B)   All permits shall expire on January 1 of each year, unless renewed.
   (C)   Comply with the published "Rules Concerning Operation Of Non-Highway
Vehicles On Village Streets" as determined by the board of trustees.
   (D)   Must have current, valid driver's license issued to the operator.
   (E)   No nonhighway vehicles shall be operated on any village street unless
equipped with all of the following in good operating condition:
      1.   Brakes and brake lights;
      2.   Turn signals;
      3.   Steering wheel apparatus;
      4.   Tires;
      5.   Rearview mirror;
      6.   "Slow moving vehicle" emblem on the rear of the vehicle as required
by 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/12-709;
      7.   Headlight that emits a white light visible from a distance of five
hundred feet (500') to the front which will illuminate when in operation;
      8.   Taillamp that emits red light visible from at least one hundred feet
(100') from the rear which must illuminate when in operation;
      9.   Red reflectorized warning devices on each rear side and one in the
center rear of the vehicle.
   (F)   Comply with the mandatory insurance requirements under 625 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/7-601 et seq.
   (G)   Any other applicable requirements of the code as may be amended from
time to time.
   (H)   Yield to the right of way to all other vehicles and pedestrians at all
times.
   (I)   All operators and passengers of a non-highway vehicle shall wear a
seatbelt if the vehicle is equipt with a seatbelt except for children under the
age of eight (8) years. All children under the age of eight (8) years shall be
restrained at all times with a seatbelt or appropriate child restraint device
and adhere to the Illinois Vehicle Code Child Restraint laws and regulations.
   (J)   Obey all traffic laws of the state of Illinois and the village of
Erie.
   (K)   All operators of a nonhighway vehicle shall be eighteen (18) years of
age or older.
   (L)   Operation is prohibited on sidewalks or village parks other than
parking areas.
   (M)   A nonhighway vehicle may not be operated in excess of twenty five (25)
miles per hour or the posted speed limit, whichever is lower.
   (N)   (Rep. by Ord. 679, 9-10-2013)
   (O)   The operator and the nonhighway vehicle shall be subject to inspection
by the chief of police or a representative of the police department at any
time.
   (P)   A nonhighway vehicle shall not be operated during inclement weather or
when visibility is impaired by weather, smoke, fog or other condition, or at
any time when light is insufficient to clearly see persons or vehicles on the
village streets at a distance of five hundred feet (500'), in an unsafe or
reckless manner, or in violation of any provision of this chapter.
   (Q)   The operator and passengers shall not use or operate the vehicle in an
unsafe manner as determined by the Erie Police Department. (Ord. 672, 12-11-
2012; amd. Ord. 700, 9-13-2016; Ord. 736, 6-11-2019; Ord. 797, 7-8-2024)
8-6-3: PERMITS:
   (A)   No person shall operate a nonhighway vehicle without first obtaining a
permit from the chief of police as provided herein. Permits shall be granted
for a period of one year. The cost of a permit shall be determined by the board
of trustees and set forth in a schedule of fees which shall be maintained on
file and available for public inspection in the office of the village clerk and
which may be established and changed from time to time by a majority vote of
the board of trustees. Insurance coverage shall be verified by the police
department when issuing or renewing a permit. (Ord. 672, 12-11-2012; amd. Ord.
674, 5-14-2013)
   (B)   Every application for a permit shall be made on a form supplied by the
village and shall contain the following information:
      1.   Name and address of applicant;
      2.   Name of liability insurance carrier and policy number;
      3.   The serial number, make, model and description of the nonhighway
vehicle;
      4.   Signed waiver of liability by applicant releasing the village of
Erie anditsofficers, president, trustees and employees and agreeing to
indemnifyandhold the village harmless from any and all future claims resulting
from the operation of their nonhighway vehicle on the village streets;
      5.   Photocopy of applicable liability insurance coverage card for the
vehicle to be operated pursuant to the permit;
      6.   Such other information as the village may require.
   (C)   No permit shall be granted unless the following conditions are met:
      1.   The vehicle must be inspected by the village chief of police (or
designee) to ensure that the nonhighway vehicle is safe to operate on village
streets and is in compliance with this chapter and the Illinois Compiled
Statutes;
      2.   A physically handicapped applicant must submit a certificate signed
by a physician, certifying that the applicant is able to safely operate a
qualified nonhighway vehicle on village streets;
      3.   The applicant must provide evidence of insurance in compliance with
the provisions of all applicable Illinois statutes regarding minimum liability
insurance for passenger motor vehicles to be operated on the roads of the state
of Illinois.
   (D)   The village may suspend or revoke a permit granted hereunder upon a
determination by the chief of police in his or her sole discretion, that the
holder thereof has violated any provision of this chapter or the Illinois
Compiled Statutes or that the holder cannot safely operate a qualified
nonhighway vehicle on village streets. (Ord. 672, 12-11-2012)
8-6-4: PENALTY:
Any person who violates any provisions of this chapter or any person who
operates a nonhighway vehicle in violation of any provisions of this chapter
shall be punished by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor
more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense. Any second or
subsequent offense shall result in a revocation of the authority to operate a
nonhighway vehicle on village streets for a period of not less than three (3)
years. The length of the revocation shall be determined by the board of
trustees. In addition, all court costs, which shall include all costs incurred
by the village in prosecuting the case, shall be recoverable from anyone
convicted of a violation of this chapter. (Ord. 672, 12-11-2012)
8-6-5: SIGNAGE:
The village shall erect appropriate signs required by any applicable law or
regulation and such other signs the village determines appropriate. Operators
shall obey all signage. (Ord. 672, 12-11-2012)
CHAPTER 7
SEIZED AND IMPOUNDED VEHICLES
SECTION:
8-7-1: Purpose
8-7-2: Construction
8-7-3: Definitions
8-7-4: Vehicles Subject To Seizure And Impoundment
8-7-5: Administrative Fee For Towed And Impounded Vehicles
8-7-6: Procedure For Seizure And Impoundment Of Vehicles
8-7-7: Notice And Opportunity For Hearing
8-7-8: Release Of Vehicle
8-7-9: Administrative Review
8-7-10: Enforcement
8-7-11: Abandoned Vehicles
8-7-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this Chapter is to offset the costs incurred in the preparing,
prosecuting, hearing, and disposing of criminal and traffic cases, and recover
the costs associated with the towing, impounding, or seizing of motor vehicles
used during the commission of criminal, traffic, or other offenses within the
corporate limits of the Village of Erie. (Ord. 806, 10-14-2025)
8-7-2: CONSTRUCTION:
The following shall apply in construction of this Chapter:
   (A)   Words used in the present tense shall include the future tense; words
used in the singular number shall include the plural number; words used in the
masculine gender shall include the female gender; and such inclusive words
shall be reciprocal.
   (B)   The word “may” is permissive or discretionary.
   (C)   The word “shall” is mandatory and not discretionary. (Ord. 806, 10-14-
2025)
8-7-3: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this Chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
Hie meaning designated below, except when a particular context clearly requires
a different meaning:
LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER: Every officer authorized to make arrests and issue
citations for criminal and traffic offenses occurring with the Village.
LESSEE: The person authorized by a written lease agreement to possess the
vehicle and as properly registered with the Illinois Secretary of State, or if
registered in a state other than Illinois, as properly registered with the
administrative agency responsible for registration in that state.
PERSON: An individual, firm, organization, public or private corporation,
government, partnership or unincorporated association.
REGISTERED OWNER: The record title holder(s) of the vehicle as properly
registered with the Illinois Secretary of State, or if registered in a state
other than Illinois, record title holder as properly registered with the
administrative agency responsible for registration in that state.
VILLAGE: The Village of Erie, Whiteside County, Illinois. (Ord. 806, 10-14-
2025)
8-7-4: VEHICLES SUBJECT TO SEIZURE AND IMPOUNDMENT:
A motor vehicle used in the commission of any of the following violations or
offenses may be seized and impounded by the Village:
   (A)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in the
attempt to commit, an offense for which a motor vehicle may be seized and
forfeited pursuant to Chapter 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes, Act 5 Section
36.1; or
   (B)   Driving Under the Influence of Alcohol, another drug or drugs, an
intoxicating compound or compounds, or any combination thereof, in violation of
Chapter 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes, Act 5 Section 11-501, as now enacted
and as amended from time to time (unless the law enforcement officer, in his
discretion, determines that said vehicle may be released to a sober passenger
or co-owner); or
   (C)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in the
attempt to commit, a felony or in violation of the Cannabis Control Act; or
   (D)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in the
attempt to commit, an offense in violation of the Illinois Controlled
Substances Act; or
   (E)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in the
attempt to commit, an offense in violation of Chapter 720 Illinois Compiled
Statutes, Act 5 Section 24-1, 24-1.5, 24-3.1; or
   (F)   Driving while a driver’s license, permit, or privilege to operate a
motor vehicle is suspended or revoked pursuant to Chapter 625 Illinois Compiled
Statutes, Act 5 Section 6-303 of the Illinois Vehicle Code; except that
vehicles shall not be subjected to seizure or impoundment if the suspension is
for an unpaid citation (parking or moving) or due to failure to comply with
emission testing; or
   (G)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle while soliciting, possessing, or
attempting to solicit or possess cannabis or a controlled substance, as defined
by the Cannabis Control Act or the Illinois Controlled Substances Act; or
   (H)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle with an expired driver’s license,
in violation of Chapter 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes, Act 5 Section 6-101 of
the Illinois Vehicle Code, if the period of expiration is greater than one
year; or
   (I)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle without ever having been issued a
driver’s license or permit, in violation of Chapter 625 Illinois Compiled
Statutes, Act 5 Section 6-101 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, or operating a
motor vehicle without ever having been issued a driver’s license or permit due
to a person’s age; or
   (J)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle by a person against whom a warrant
has been issued by a circuit clerk in Illinois for failing to answer charges
that the driver violated Chapter 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes, Act 5 Section
6-101, 6-303, or 11 - 501 of the Illinois Vehicle Code; or
   (K)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in the
attempt to commit, an offense in violation of Article 16 of the Criminal Code
of 2012; or
   (L)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in the
attempt to commit, any other misdemeanor or felony offense in violation of the
Criminal Code of 2012. (Ord. 806, 10-14-2025)
8-7-5: ADMINISTRATIVE FEE FOR TOWED AND IMPOUNDED VEHICLES:
The registered owner or the agent or agents of the owner shall be liable to the
Village for an administrative fee of $200.00, in addition to any and all
applicable fines, costs, towing, and storage fees. The administrative fee shall
be collected by and paid to the Village. Additional towing or storage fees, or
both, shall be collected by and paid to the person, firm, or entity that tows
and stores the vehicle impounded under this chapter or to the Village for
payment to the appropriate person or entity, The administrative fee provided
for in this section shall be waived by the Village upon submission of
verifiable proof that the vehicle was stolen at the time that the vehicle was
impounded. (Ord. 806, 10-14-2025)
8-7-6: PROCEDURE FOR SEIZURE AND IMPOUNDMENT OF VEHICLES:
Whenever a Village police officer reasonably believes that the driver of a
motor vehicle has committed an eligible offense as enumerated in this Chapter,
the officer may provide for the to wing of the motor vehicle to the Village
impound lot or a Village-approved private lot. (Ord. 806, 10-14-2025)
8-7-7: NOTICE AND OPPORTUNITY FOR HEARING:
At the time that a motor vehicle is towed pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter, the Village shall notify or make a reasonable attempt to notify the
owner, lessee, agent or agents, or person identifying himself or herself as the
owner or lessee of the vehicle, or any person who is found to be in control of
the vehicle at the time of the alleged offense, of the following:
   (A)   The fact of the seizure and of the vehicle owner’s or the lessee’s
right to an administrative hearing.
   (B)   The notice shall also provide that the seized motor vehicle will
remain impounded pending the completion of an administrative hearing, unless
the owner or lessee of the vehicle, or a lienholder, posts with the Village a
bond equal to the administrative fee as set forth in this chapter and pays all
towing and storage charges.
   (C)   The registered owner or lessee of the vehicle and any lienholder of
record shall also be provided with a written notice of administrative hearing.
The notice shall (1) be served upon the owner, lessee, and any lienholder of
record either by personal service or by first class mail to the interested
party’s address as registered with the Secretary of State; (2) be served upon
such interested parties within ten days after impoundment of a vehicle by the
Village; and (3) contain a date, time and location of the administrative
hearing. An initial hearing shall be scheduled and convened no later than 45
days after the date of die mailing of the notice of hearing.
   (D)   All administrative hearings conducted pursuant to this chapter shall
be conducted by a hearing officer who is an attorney licensed to practice law
in the State of Illinois for a minimum of three years. At the conclusion of the
administrative hearing, the hearing officer shall issue a written decision
either sustaining or overruling the vehicle impoundment.
      1.   If the basis for the vehicle impoundment is sustained by the
administrative hearing officer, any administrative fee posted to secure the
release of the vehicle as set forth below shall be forfeited to the Village.
      2.   Unless the administrative hearing officer overturns the basis for
the vehicle impoundment, no vehicle shall be released to the owner, lessee, or
lienholder of record until all administrative fees and towing and storage
charges are paid.
      3.   Vehicles not retrieved from the towing facility or storage facility
within 30 days after the administrative hearing officer issues a written
decision shall be deemed abandoned and may be disposed of in accordance with
the provisions of Article 2 of Chapter 4, Chapter 625 Illinois Compiled
Statues, Act 5 Section 4-201 et seq. of the Illinois Vehicle Code, or as
elsewhere provided for in this Code.
      4.   Unless stayed by a court of competent jurisdiction, any fee imposed
under this chapter which remains unpaid in whole or in part after the
expiration of the deadline for seeking judicial review under the Administrative
Review Law may be enforced in the same manner as a judgment entered by a court
of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 806, 10-14-2025)
8-7-8: RELEASE OF VEHICLE:
Motor vehicles seized and impounded under this chapter shall remain impounded
until all costs associated with the towing and storage of the motor vehicle are
paid and:
   (A)   The registered owner, lessee, or lienholder of the vehicle remits the
administrative fee to the Village police department. The Village police
department shall have the right to hold the vehicle until the costs associated
with towing, storage, and the administrative fee have been paid in full or
until the motor vehicle is released as a result of the administrative review
process, or as otherwise provided by state law. (Ord. 806, 10-14-2025)
8-7-9: ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW:
All final decisions of the administrative hearing officer shall be subject to
review under the provisions of the Administrative Review Law. (Ord. 806, 10-14-
2025)
8-7-10: ENFORCEMENT:
Unless stayed by a court of competent jurisdiction, any Administrative Fee
imposed under this Chapter which remains unpaid in whole or in part after the
expiration of the deadline for seeking judicial review under the Administrative
Review Law may be enforced in the same manner as a judgment entered by a court
of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 806, 10-14-2025)
8-7-11: ABANDONED VEHICLES:
Vehicles not retrieved from the towing facility or storage facility within 60
days after the Administrative Hearing Officer issues a written decision shall
be deemed abandoned and disposed of in accordance with the provisions of
Article II of Chapter 4 of the Illinois Vehicle Code. (Ord. 806, 10-14-2025)
TITLE 9
ZONING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
DEFINITIONS; GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
9-1-1: Definitions
9-1-2: Occupancy Permits
9-1-3: Enforcement
9-1-4: Violation
9-1-5: Flood Hazard Area Provisions Applicable
9-1-6: Defaulter To Village
9-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this title, certain terms and words are hereby defined.
Words used in the present tense shall include the future; the singular number
shall include the plural and the plural the singular; the word "building" shall
include the word "structure" and the word "shall" is mandatory and not
directory.
ACCESSORY BUILDING OR USE:
   (A)   An accessory building or use is one which:
      1.   Is subordinate to and serves a principal building or principal use;
      2.   Is subordinate in area, extent or purpose to the principal building
or principal use served;
      3.   Contributes to the comfort, convenience or necessity of the occupant
of the principal building or principal use served; and
      4.   Is located on the same zoning lot as the principal building or
principal use served, with the single exception of such accessory off street
parking facilities as are permitted to locate elsewhere than on the same zoning
lot with the building or use served.
   (B)   An accessory use includes, but is not limited to, the following:
      1.   A children's playhouse, garden house and private greenhouse.
      2.   A shed, garage or building or domestic storage.
      3.   Incinerators incidental to residential use.
      4.   Storage of merchandise normally carried in stock on the same lot
with any retail service or business use, unless such storage is excluded by the
district regulations.
      5.   Storage of goods used in or produced by manufacturing activities on
the same lot or parcel of ground with such activities, unless such storage is
excluded by the district regulations.
      6.   Swimming pool, private, for use by the occupant and his guest.
      7.   Off street motorcar parking areas, and loading and unloading
facilities.
      8.   Signs, other than advertising signs, as permitted and regulated in
each district incorporated in this chapter.
      9.   Carports.
      10.   Public utility facilities, including telephone, electric, gas,
water and sewer lines, their supports and incidental equipment.
   (C)   Notwithstanding anything to the contrary herein, an accessory building
or use shall not include a building intended and used as a playhouse for minor
children if the building is not greater than five feet (5') wide and seven feet
(7') long as buildings are typically measured according to the terms of village
ordinances.
ALLEY: A public or private thoroughfare which affords only a secondary means of
access to property abutting thereon.
APARTMENT: A room or suite of rooms in a multiple- or two-family dwelling, or
where more than one living unit is established above nonresidential uses,
intended or designed for use as a residence by a single family.
APARTMENT HOUSE: See definition of Dwelling, Multiple.
BASEMENT: A story having part but not more than one-half (1/2) of its height
below grade. A basement shall not be counted as a story for the purpose of
height regulation.
BOARDING HOUSE: A building other than a hotel where, for compensation, meals or
lodging and meals, are provided for three (3) but not more than twelve (12)
persons.
BUILDING: Any structure designed or intended for the support, enclosure,
shelter or protection of persons, animals, chattels or property. When a
structure is divided into separate parts by unpierced walls extending from the
ground up, each part is deemed a separate building.
BUILDING, HEIGHT OF: The vertical distance from the grade to the highest point
of the coping of a flat roof or to the deck line of a mansard roof, or to the
mean height level between eaves and ridge, for gable, hip and gambrel roofs.
CELLAR: A story having more than one-half (1/2) of its height below grade. A
cellar is not included in computing the number of stories for the purpose of
height measurement.
DISTRICT: A section or sections of the village for which the regulations
governing the use of buildings and premises, the height of buildings, the size
of yards, and intensity of use are uniform.
DWELLING: Any building or portion thereof, but not a trailer, which is designed
and used exclusively for residential purposes.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE: A building designed for or occupied exclusively by more
than two (2) families.
DWELLING, ONE-FAMILY ATTACHED: A dwelling unit having its own ground floor
entrance and joined to one or more one-family attached dwellings by party
walls.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY: A building designed for or occupied exclusively by one
family.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY: A building designed for or occupied exclusively by two
(2) families.
FAMILY: One or more persons occupying a premises and living as a single
housekeeping unit, whether or not related to each other by birth, adoption or
marriage, but no unrelated group shall consist of more than five (5) persons,
as distinguished from a group occupying a "boarding house", "lodging house" or
"hotel", as herein defined.
FARM: An area which is used for the growing of the usual farm products such as
vegetables, fruit, trees and grain, and their storage on the area, as well as
for the raising thereon of the usual farm poultry and farm animals for the use
or consumption of the person or persons operating the farm. The term "farming"
includes the operating of such an area for one or more of the above uses,
including the necessary accessory uses for treating or storing the produce;
provided, however, that the operation of any such accessory uses shall be
secondary to that of the normal farming activities, and provided further, that
farming does not include the feeding of garbage or offal to swine or other
animals.
FENCE AND WALL: Includes any barrier structure, wall of posts, rails,gates and
any other members, not part ofabuilding or natural screening, constructed
ofwood, metal, wire, masonry, plastic, stone,chainlink, wire mesh and any other
materials,placed or used in whole or in part as aboundary or as an ornamental
feature or as means of protection, security, screening, privacy or confinement,
or otherwise serving the functions commonly ascribed to a fence or wall, but
shall not include any wall constructed timbers, masonry or other materials for
the principal purpose of maintaining a terrace or controlling erosion; or any
natural growing hedge, shrub or other plant life.
FILLING STATION: Any building or premises used for the dispensing, sale or
offering for sale at retail of any automobile fuels or oils. When the
dispensing, sale or offering for sale is incidental to the conduct of a public
garage, the premises are classified as a public garage.
FRONTAGE: All property on one side of a street between two (2) intersecting
streets (crossing or terminating), measured along the line of the street, or if
the street is dead ended, then all of the property abutting on one side between
an intersecting street and the dead end of the street.
GARAGE:
Class I: An accessory building housing motor driven vehicles which are the
property of and for the private use of the occupants of the lot on which the
private garage is located. Not more than one of the vehicles may be a
commercial vehicle and none shall be of more than three (3) tons' capacity.
Class II: Any building or premises used for housing only of motor driven
vehicles, other than trucks and commercial vehicles, pursuant to previous
arrangements and not to transients, and at which automobile fuels and oils are
not sold and motor driven vehicles are not equipped, repaired, hired or sold.
Class III: Any building or premises used for the housing, hiring, storing,
equipping or repairing of motor driven trucks, commercial or other vehicles
owned, leased or operated by the occupant of the premises in the conduct of or
as accessory to a business or occupation.
Class IV: Any building or premises except those used as a private or storage
garage, used for equipping, repairing, hiring, selling or storing motor driven
vehicles.
GRADE:
   (A)   For buildings having walls adjoining one street only, the established
elevation of the sidewalk at the center of the wall adjoining the street.
   (B)   For buildings having walls adjoining more than one street, the average
of the established elevation of the sidewalk at the centers of all walls
adjoining the streets.
   (C)   For buildings having no wall adjoining the street, the average level
of the finished surface of the ground adjacent to the exterior walls of the
building.
   (D)   Any wall approximately parallel to and not more than twenty feet (20')
from the street line is to be considered as adjoining the street.
HOME OCCUPATION: Any occupation or profession carried on by a member of the
immediate family, residing on the premises, in connection with which there is
used no sign other than a nameplate nor more than one square foot in area or no
display that will indicate from the exterior that the building is being
utilized in whole or in part for any purpose other than that of a dwelling;
there is no commodity sold upon the premises; no person is employed there other
than a member of the immediate family residing on the premises; and no
mechanical equipment is used except such as is permissible for purely domestic
or household purposes.
HOTEL: A building in which lodging is provided and offered to the public for
compensation, and which is open to transient guests, in contradistinction to a
boarding house or lodging house.
INSTITUTION: A building occupied by a nonprofit corporation or a nonprofit
establishment for public use.
LODGING HOUSE: A building or place where lodging is provided (or which is
equipped regularly to provide lodging) by prearrangement for a definite period,
for compensation, for three (3) or more, but not exceeding twelve (12)
individuals, not open to transient guests, in contradistinction to hotels open
to transients.
LOT: A parcel of land occupied or intended for occupancy by a use permitted in
this title, including one main building together with its accessory buildings,
the open spaces and parking spaces required by this title, and having its
principal frontage upon a street or upon an officially approved place.
LOT, CORNER: A lot abutting upon two (2) or more streets at their intersection.
LOT, DEPTH OF: The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot
lines.
LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE: A lot having a frontage on two (2) nonintersecting
streets, as distinguished from a corner lot.
LOT OF RECORD: A lot which is a part of a subdivision, the map of which has
been recorded in the office of the recorder of deeds or a parcel of land, the
deed to which was recorded in the office of the recorder of deeds prior to the
date of the adoption of this title.
MANUFACTURING OR INDUSTRY: Any use in which the major activity is the
treatment, processing, rebuilding, repairing or wholesale storage of materials,
products or items and where the finished product is not acquired by the
ultimate user on the premises, as distinguished from a retail use where the
treatment, processing, repairing or storage is secondary to the sale, exchange
or repairing of materials or products on the premises.
NONCONFORMING USE: Any building or land lawfully occupied by a use at the time
of passage of the original zoning ordinance or any amendment thereto, which
does not conform after the passage of the zoning ordinance or amendments
thereto with the use regulations of the district in which it is situated.
PARKING SPACE: A durably surfaced area, enclosed in the main building, in an
accessory building, or unenclosed, sufficient in size to store one standard
automobile, and if the space is unenclosed comprising an area of not less than
one hundred forty (140) square feet, exclusive of a durably surfaced driveway
connecting the parking space with a street or alley and permitting satisfactory
ingress and egress of an automobile.
PLACE: An open unoccupied space other than a street or alley permanently
reserved as the principal means of access to abutting property.
ROOMING HOUSE: See definition of Lodging House.
ROW HOUSE: A group of two (2) or more but not exceeding four (4) single-family
dwellings separated by walls without openings, not more than two (2) rooms
deep.
SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS: Shops wherein the major activities are the repair and
maintenance of wearing apparel, sporting goods and articles for use in the home
including household appliances.
STABLE: A building accommodating one or more horses.
STORY: That portion of a building, other than a cellar, included between the
surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it or, if there be
no floor above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above
it.
STORY, HALF: A space under a sloping roof which has the line of intersection of
roof decking and wall space not more than three feet (3') above the top floor
level, and in which space not more than sixty percent (60%) of the floor area
is finished off for use.
STREET: All property dedicated or intended for public or private street,
highway, freeway or roadway purposes or subject to easements therefor.
STREET LINE: A dividing line between a lot, tract or parcel of land and a
contiguous street.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS: Any change in the supporting members of a building,
such as bearing walls or partitions, columns, beams or girders, or any
substantial change in the roof or in the exterior walls.
STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires permanent
location on the ground or attached to something having a permanent location on
the ground, including, but without limiting the generality of the foregoing,
advertising signs, billboards, backstops for tennis courts and pergolas.
TOURIST OR TRAILER CAMP: An area containing one or more structures, designed or
intended to be used as temporary living facilities of two (2) or more families,
and intended primarily for automobile transients or providing spaces where two
(2) or more tents or auto trailers can be or are intended to be parked.
TRAILER: Any structure used for living, sleeping, business or storage purposes
having no foundation other than wheels, blocks, skids, jacks, horses or
skirtings and which is, has been, or reasonably can be, equipped with wheels or
other devices for transporting the structure from place to place, whether by
motive power or other means. The term "trailer" shall include camp car and
house car.
YARD: An open space on the same lot with a building, unoccupied and
unobstructed by any portion of a structure from the ground upward, except as
otherwise provided herein. In measuring a yard for the purpose of determining
the width of a side yard, the depth of the front yard, or the depth of a rear
yard, the mean horizontal distance between the lot line and the main building
shall be used.
YARD, FRONT: A yard extending across the front of a lot between the side yard
lines, and being the minimum horizontal distance between the street line and
the main building or any projection thereof other than the projection of the
usual steps.
YARD, REAR: A yard extending across the rear of a lot, measured between the
side lot lines, and being the minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot
line and the rear of the main building or any projections other than steps. On
corner lots the rear yard shall be considered as parallel to the street upon
which the lot has its least dimension. On both corner lots and interior lots
the rear yard shall in all cases be at the opposite end of the lot from the
front yard.
YARD, SIDE: A yard between the main building and the side line of the lot, and
extending from the front lot line to the rear yard line. (Ord. 215, 9-17-1962;
amd. Ord. 574, 3-9-2004; Ord. 750, 10-14-2014; Ord. 697, 1-12-2016)
9-1-2: OCCUPANCY PERMITS:
   (A)   Certificate Of Occupancy: Subsequent to the effective date of
thistitlenochange in the use or occupancy of land, nor any change
ofuseoroccupancy in an existing building shall be made, nor shall
anynewbuildingbe occupied for any purpose, until a certificate of
occupancyhasbeen issued by the building official. Every certificate of
occupancy shall state that the new occupancy complies with all provisions of
this title.
No permit for excavation for, or the erection, construction or alteration of
any building shall be issued before the application has been made and approved
for a certificate of occupancy and compliance, but no occupancy permit shall be
issued until the erection, construction or alteration has been completed,
inspected and approved by the building official and no building or premises
shall be occupied until that certificate and permit is issued.
A record of all certificates of occupancy shall be kept on file in the office
of the building official, and copies shall be furnished on request to any
person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in land or in a building
affected by such certificate of occupancy.
   (B)   Nonconforming Uses: A certificate of occupancy shall be required of
all nonconforming uses of land or buildings created by the passage of this
title. Application for such certificate of occupancy for nonconforming uses
shall be filed with the building official by the owner or lessee of the land or
building occupied by such nonconforming use within two (2) years from the
effective date of this title. It shall be the duty of the building official to
issue a certificate of occupancy for nonconforming use.
Any nonconforming use for which an occupancy permit has not been obtained in
conformity with the requirements of this section shall be presumed to be
operating in violation of this title and such use shall thereupon be abated.
(Ord. 215, 9-17-1962)
9-1-3: ENFORCEMENT:
It shall be the duty of the building official to enforce this title. It shall
also be the duty of all officers and employees of the village and especially of
all members of the police department to assist the building official by
reporting to him upon new construction, reconstruction or land uses, or upon
seemingly violations. The building official shall send a description of any
violations of the zoning regulations to the zoning committee within fifteen
(15) days after he discovers such violation.
Appeal from the decision of the building official may be made to the board of
appeals, as provided in title 2, chapter 2 of this code. (Ord. 215, 9-17-1962)
9-1-4: VIOLATION:
   (A)   Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses the
enforcement of any of the provisions of this title shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and subject to penalty.
   (B)   In case any building or structure is erected, constructed,
reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted or maintained, or any building,
structure or land is used in violation of this title, the village attorney, in
addition to other remedies, may institute any proper action or proceedings in
the name of the village to prevent such unlawful erection, construction,
reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance or use, to
restrain, correct or abate such violation, to prevent the occupancy of said
building, structure or land, or to prevent any illegal act, conduct, business
or use in or about said premises. (Ord. 215, 9-17-1962)
9-1-5: FLOOD HAZARD AREA PROVISIONS APPLICABLE:
This title is fully subject to the provisions of title 4, chapter 3 of this
code. (Ord. 376, 2-12-1985; amd. Ord. 578, 5-11-2004)
9-1-6: DEFAULTER TO VILLAGE:
No person or entity shall be eligible to apply for building permits, any other
permits, variance, special use, rezoning, exceptions, subdivision approval, or
any approvals of any kind or nature whatsoever under this title, if the person
or entity is in arrears in the payment of any tax or any other indebtedness
that may be due of any kind or nature whatsoever to the village. Such person or
entity shall be immediately eligible for any such relief upon the payment of
any such arrearage of a tax or other indebtedness due to the village. (Ord.
508, 7-13-1999)
CHAPTER 2
DISTRICTS AND BOUNDARIES
SECTION:
9-2-1: Districts Established
9-2-2: Rules Where Uncertainty May Arise
9-2-3: District Map
9-2-4: Annexed Property
9-2-5: Vacated Streets
9-2-6: Restrictions
9-2-1: DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED:
In order to classify, regulate and restrict the locations of trades, industries
and the location of buildings designed for specified uses, to regulate and
limit the height and bulk of buildings hereafter erected or structurally
altered, to regulate and limit the intensity of the use of the lot areas, and
to regulate and determine the areas of yards, courts and other open spaces
within and surrounding such buildings, the village is hereby divided into
districts, of which there shall be four (4) in number, known as:
A Residence district
B Outlying business district
C Central business district
D Industrial district
(Ord. 215, 9-17-1962)
9-2-2: RULES WHERE UNCERTAINTY MAY ARISE:
Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of the various
districts as shown on the district map referred to herein and adopted by
reference, the following rules apply:
   (A)   The district boundaries are either streets or alleys unless otherwise
shown and where the districts designated on the said district map are bounded
approximately by street or alley lines, the street or alley shall be construed
to be the boundary of the district.
   (B)   Where the district boundaries are not otherwise indicated, and where
the property has been or may hereafter be divided into blocks and lots, the
district boundaries shall be construed to be the lot lines, and where the
districts designated on the district map are bounded approximately by lot
lines, the lot lines shall be construed to be the boundary of the districts
unless the boundaries are otherwise indicated on the map.
   (C)   In unsubdivided property the district boundary lines on the district
map shall be determined by use of the scale appearing on the map. (Ord. 215, 9-
17-1962)
9-2-3: DISTRICT MAP:
The boundaries of the districts are shown upon the district map which is made a
part of this title by reference. The district map and all notations, references
and other information shown thereon are a part of this title and have the same
force and effect as if the district map and all the notations, references and
other information shown thereon were all fully set forth or described herein,
the original of which district map is properly attested and is on file with the
clerk of the village. (Ord. 215, 9-17-1962)
9-2-4: ANNEXED PROPERTY:
Any and all property which may hereafter be annexed to the village shall, prior
to the election at which the question of such annexation is to be submitted to
the citizens of the village, be studied by the zoning board of appeals and
tentatively classified into one or more of the several districts. Such
property, when such annexation shall become final, shall be in the district as
designated by the said zoning board of appeals. Within six (6) months of the
date of such annexation, the zoning board of appeals shall call a public
hearing for the purpose of zoning said annexed property, and within thirty (30)
days after such hearing shall recommend to the village president and board of
trustees that this title be amended so as to classify such property in
accordance with such recommendations. All property hereafter annexed to the
village and which has not before such annexation been otherwise tentatively
classified pursuant to the provisions of this section, shall be classified as a
class A district until this classification is changed by amendment to this
title. (Ord. 215, 9-17-1962)
9-2-5: VACATED STREETS:
Whenever any street, alley or other public way is vacated, the zoning district
adjoining each side of such street, alley or public way shall be automatically
extended to the center of such a vacation, and all area included in the
vacation shall then and henceforth be subject to all appropriate regulations of
the extended districts. (Ord. 215, 9-17-1962)
9-2-6: RESTRICTIONS:
Except as hereinafter provided:
   (A)   No building shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed or
structurally altered, nor shall any building or land be used except for a
purpose permitted in the district in which the building or land is located.
   (B)   No building shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed or
structurally altered to exceed the height limit herein established for the
district in which the building is located.
   (C)   No building shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed or
structurally altered except in conformity with the area regulations of the
district in which the building is located.
   (D)   The minimum yards and other open spaces, including lot area per
family, required by this title for each and every building existing at the time
of passage of this title or for any building hereafter erected shall not be
encroached upon or considered as yard or open space requirements for any other
building.
   (E)   Every building hereafter erected or structurally altered shall be
located on a "lot" as herein defined and in no case shall there be more than
one main building on one lot unless otherwise provided in this title.
   (F)   The front yard requirements on both streets of a corner lot shall be
observed for all buildings and structures, including accessory buildings. (Ord.
215, 9-17-1962)
CHAPTER 3
A RESIDENCE DISTRICT
SECTION:
9-3-1: Scope
9-3-2: Use Regulations
9-3-3: Parking Regulations
9-3-4: Height Regulations
9-3-5: Area Regulations
9-3-6: Intensity Of Use
9-3-1: SCOPE:
The regulations set forth in this chapter, or set forth elsewhere in this title
when referred to in this chapter, are the district regulations in the A
residence district. (Ord. 215, 9-17-1962)
9-3-2: USE REGULATIONS:
A building or premises shall be used only for the following purposes:
Boarding and lodging houses.
Churches.
Farms, excluding the raising of livestock except on adequately fenced tracts
containing not less than ten (10) acres and having an average width of not less
than three hundred feet (300') and excluding the raising of poultry except when
on a tract which is adequately fenced and which contains not less than three
(3) acres, but in no event shall such livestock or poultry be housed or
confined within two hundred feet (200') of a tract of one acre or less
containing a residence.
Fraternities, sororities, private clubs and lodges, excepting those the chief
activity of which is a service customarily carried on as a business.
Golf courses and private clubs, except miniature golf courses and practice
driving tees and similar commercial enterprises.
Hospitals and clinics, except animal hospitals, animal clinics or mental
hospitals.
Institutions of a religious, educational, eleemosynary or philanthropic, but
not penal or mental institutions.
Multiple-family dwellings.
Parks and playgrounds owned by public agencies.
Public and private forests and wildlife reservations or similar conservation
projects.
Public libraries.
Row houses.
Single-family dwellings.
Truck and flower garden, nurseries, orchards and greenhouses.
Two-family dwellings.
Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to any of the above uses
including class II garages, where the lot is occupied by a multiple dwelling,
hospital or institutional building. Any class II garage or accessory building
that is not a part of the main building shall be located not less than sixty
feet (60') from the front line and not less than five feet (5') from any side
lot line.
Zero lot line single-family attached dwellings not to exceed two (2) dwelling
units. (Ord. 215, 9-17-1962; amd. Ord. 750, 10-14-2014)
9-3-3: PARKING REGULATIONS:
Any use that is constructed or reconstructed in the A residence district shall
provide and maintain adequate parking space, either upon the lot or tract or
within three hundred feet (300') thereof.
In case of premises to be used in whole or in part for dwelling purposes, at
least one parking space shall be provided for each family unit.
In case of nondwelling uses the number of parking spaces to be provided shall
be determined on the basis of the character of the use, the parking and traffic
problems likely to be associated with such use, the availability of land for
and the probable cost of acquiring land for such use, to the end that
sufficient parking spaces shall be provided to prevent any probable traffic
congestion likely to arise in connection with the intended use, insofar as that
purpose can be accomplished without imposing an undue financial burden on the
person proposing the construction or reconstruction of structures involved. The
financial burden shall be given great weight in connection with reconstruction
of existing uses but little weight in connection with proposed new uses where
other more adaptable premises are available. (Ord. 215, 9-17-1962)
9-3-4: HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
No building shall exceed two and one-half (21/2) stories nor shall it exceed
thirty five feet (35') in height. (Ord. 215, 9-17-1962)
9-3-5: AREA REGULATIONS:
   (A)   Front Yard:
      1.   There shall be a front yard having a depth of not less than twenty
five feet (25'), unless thirty percent (30%) or more of the frontage is
improved with buildings that have observed a greater or less depth of front
yard in which instance no new building or portion thereof shall project beyond
a straight line drawn between the point closest to the street line of the
residence upon either side of the proposed structure, or, if there be
residences upon only one side, then beyond the straight line projected from the
front of the two (2) nearest residences, but this regulation shall not be
interpreted to require a front yard of more than sixty feet (60'), nor to
permit a front yard of less depth than that of the nearest building.
      2.   Where lots have a double frontage, the required front yard shall be
provided on both streets.
      3.   On a corner lot there shall be a front yard on each street side of
such lot, except that the buildable width of such a lot need not be reduced to
less than thirty two feet (32'). No accessory building shall project beyond the
front yard line on either street.
   (B)   Side Yard:
      1.   Except as hereinafter provided and unless otherwise stated in this
code, there shall be a side yard on each side of a building, having a width of
not less than six feet (6').
      2.   Whenever a lot of record has a width of less than fifty feet (50'),
the side yard on each side of a building may be reduced to a width of not less
than twelve percent (12%) of the width of the lot, but in no instance shall it
be less than five feet (5').
   (C)   Rear Yard: Except as may be otherwise provided in this code, there
shall be a rear yard from any building having a depth of not less than thirty
feet (30') or twenty percent (20%) of the depth of the lot, whichever amount is
smaller.
   (D)   Single-Family Attached Dwellings:
      1.   Every zero lot line or common wall development shall be on a zoning
lot having a minimum area of not less than seven thousand two hundred (7,200)
square feet and a minimum width of sixty feet (60') at the building line; where
each single-family attached dwelling hereafter erected shall be on a zoning lot
having a minimum area of not less than three thousand six hundred (3,600)
square feet and a minimum width of thirty feet (30') at the building line.
      2.   For zero lot line single-family attached development, a dwelling
unit may be placed on one interior side property line, giving it one zero side/
interior setback.
      3.   Single-family attached dwellings hereafter erected shall have a
total floor area of not less than one thousand (1,000) square feet for each
dwelling unit, measured from the outside walls, including utility rooms, but
excluding all other areas not used for living or sleeping purposes. (Ord. 215,
9-17-1962; amd. Ord. 501, 12-8-1998; Ord. 750, 10-14-2014)
9-3-6: INTENSITY OF USE:
Every lot upon which a building is erected shall have an area of not less than
seven thousand two hundred sixty (7,260) square feet and an average width of
not less than fifty feet (50'). In the case of a dwelling use the lot shall
have an additional area of not less than one thousand five hundred (1,500)
square feet for each family dwelling unit over two (2). In case of the repair
or remodeling (but not rebuilding) of structures existing at the time this
title becomes effective, front and side yard requirements may be modified in
accordance with the provisions of this code. (Ord. 215, 9-17-1962)
CHAPTER 4
B OUTLYING BUSINESS DISTRICT
SECTION:
9-4-1: Scope
9-4-2: Use Regulations
9-4-3: Parking Regulations
9-4-4: Height Regulations
9-4-5: Area Regulations
9-4-6: Intensity Of Use
9-4-1: SCOPE:
The regulations set forth in this chapter, or set forth elsewhere in this title
when referred to in this chapter, are the regulations in the B outlying
business district. (Ord. 215, 9-17-1962)
9-4-2: USE REGULATIONS:
A building or premises shall be used only for the following purposes:
Any use permitted in the A residence district.
Bakery whose products are sold at retail on the premises.
Bank.
Barbershop or beauty parlor.
Business or commercial school, or dancing or music academy.
Catering establishment.
Class IV garage, except that the repair or storage portion of such building
shall occupy not more than fifty percent (50%) of the total floor area and
shall not be less than thirty feet (30') from the front of the building, and no
lot or portion thereof shall be used for the display of used cars, except that
the display of not to exceed ten (10) used cars on premises used primarily for
the sale of new automobiles shall be permitted.
Electric and shoe repair shops.
Filling stations.
Hospitals and clinics for animals, but not open kennels.
Messenger or telegraph service station.
Office.
Painting and decorating shop.
Photograph gallery.
Recreation or amusement building.
Restaurant.
Sales or show room.
Service establishments.
Store for the collection and distribution of laundry and dry cleaning articles,
but not for the treatment, cleaning or processing of such articles.
Store or shop for the conduct of a retail business.
Tailor shop.
Theater, except open air drive-in theaters; provided, however, that no theater
shall be erected or reconstructed unless there is provided on the same lot, or
within three hundred feet (300') thereof, parking space which contains an area
adequate to accommodate one automobile for every five (5) seats in the theater.
Tire repair shop.
Undertaking establishment.
Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to the above uses, including
a sign or a bulletin board relating only to services, articles and products
offered within the building to which the sign is attached.
Any building used primarily for any of the above enumerated purposes may have
not more than forty percent (40%) of the floor area devoted to industry or
storage purposes incidental to such primary use; provided, that not more than
five (5) employees shall be engaged at any time on the premises in such
incidental use. (Ord. 215, 9-17-1962)
9-4-3: PARKING REGULATIONS:
The parking regulations for uses permitted in the A residence district shall
apply to such uses when located in the B outlying business district.
Whenever a structure is erected or reconstructed for any of the other purposes
permitted in this district, there shall be provided parking spaces in the ratio
of not less than one parking space for each two hundred (200) square feet of
floor space in the building which is used for commercial purposes, and except
that any recreation or amusement building or any restaurant or establishment
whose primary use is to serve meals, lunches or drinks to patrons, either in
their cars or in the building, shall provide parking spaces on the lot in the
ratio of not less than one parking space for each one hundred (100) square feet
of floor space in the building. Such parking space may be located on the same
lot as the building or in an area within three hundred feet (300') of the
building. Two (2) or more owners of buildings may join together in providing
this parking space, provided that the minimum requirements of this section are
maintained. (Ord. 215, 9-17-1962)
9-4-4: HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
No building shall exceed two and one-half (21/2) stories, nor shall it exceed
thirty five feet (35') in height, except as otherwise provided. (Ord. 215, 9-
17-1962)
9-4-5: AREA REGULATIONS:
   (A)   Front Yard: The front yard regulations are the same as those in the A
residence district.
   (B)   Side Yard: The side yard regulations for uses permitted in the A
residence district when located in the B outlying business district are the
same as those in the A residence district. Where a corner lot is used for any
of the commercial purposes permitted in this district the yard on the side of a
lot adjacent to the street shall not be less than ten feet (10') in width,
except that the building width of the lot shall not be reduced to less than
twenty five feet (25'). In all other cases a side yard is not required except
on the side of a lot abutting on a dwelling district, in which case there shall
be a side yard of not less than five feet (5').
   (C)   Rear Yard: Except as otherwise provided in this code, there shall be a
rear yard having a depth of not less than twenty five feet (25'), unless the
lot is less than one hundred twenty five feet (125'), in which case the rear
yard need not exceed twenty percent (20%) of the depth of such lot. (Ord. 215,
9-17-1962)
9-4-6: INTENSITY OF USE:
When a lot is improved with a dwelling the intensity of use regulations shall
be the same as those required in the A residence district. When living
facilities are erected above stores there shall be a lot area per family of not
less than three thousand (3,000) square feet. Where a lot of record contains
less than three thousand (3,000) square feet it may contain living facilities
for not more than one family. (Ord. 215, 9-17-1962)
CHAPTER 5
C CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT
SECTION:
9-5-1: Scope
9-5-2: Use Regulations
9-5-3: Parking Regulations
9-5-4: Height Regulations
9-5-5: Area Regulations
9-5-6: Intensity Of Use
9-5-1: SCOPE:
The regulations set forth in this chapter, or set forth elsewhere in this title
when referred to in this chapter, are the regulations in the C central business
district. (Ord. 215, 9-17-1962)
9-5-2: USE REGULATIONS:
A building or premises shall be used only for the following purposes:
Any use permitted in the B outlying business district.
Accessory uses and structures incidental to the permitted uses.
Automobile service and tire stores.
Bars and taverns, provided that no establishment is located closer than five
hundred feet (500') from any residential district, religious institution, or
school.
Body art establishments, licensed under the tattoo and body piercing
establishment regulation act.
Business and advertising signs when attached to a building pertaining to the
use of the property in which the sign is located. The signs must conform to the
provisions set forth in this code.
Business and professional services, including, but not limited to, medical and
dental offices and clinics, law offices, insurance and real estate offices,
banks, finance, and utility company offices, currency exchange stores, pet
stores, animal grooming stores, animal hospitals and clinics with no open
kennels.
Class III and class IV garages and automobile salesrooms.
Convenience retail stores, pharmacies, drugstores, liquor stores, meat markets,
bakeries, delicatessens and grocery stores.
Entertainment and amusement uses: movie theaters, dance studios, and bowling
alleys.
Hotels and motels.
Personal services, including, but not limited to, laundromats, jewelry shops,
dry cleaning and laundry establishments, plumbing shop, repair shops, barber,
beauty, and shoe repair shops, photography studios, and printing and publishing
establishments.
Physical fitness center.
Public and semipublic uses such as buildings used by any department of the
village, school district, township, county, state, or federal governments;
except for vehicle maintenance, raw material storage, and other similar type
facilities.
Public utilities.
Radio, television, and recording studios.
Railroad right of way and passenger stations.
Residential uses located above the ground floor.
Restaurants.
Retail and wholesale stores, including, but not limited to, hardware, clothing,
and furniture stores.
Specialty shops, including, but not limited to, antiques, gift shops,
magazines, book and stationery outlets, office supply stores, florist shops,
musical instrument stores, sporting goods stores, video sales and rentals and
printing shop.
Used car sales or storage lots but excluding salvage of automobiles or of
automobile parts. (Ord. 693, 12-8-2015)
9-5-3: PARKING REGULATIONS:
The parking regulations for uses permitted in the A residence district shall
apply to such uses when located in the C central business district. No parking
space shall be required in the C central business district in any other
instances. (Ord. 215, 9-17-1962)
9-5-4: HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
No building shall exceed three (3) stories nor shall it exceed forty five feet
(45') in height, except as otherwise provided in chapter 9 of this title. (Ord.
215, 9-17-1962)
9-5-5: AREA REGULATIONS:
   (A)   Front Yard: No front yard is required except where the frontage on one
side of a street between two (2) intersecting streets is partly in the C
central business district and partly in a dwelling district, in which event the
front yard regulations of the dwelling district shall apply.
   (B)   Side Yard: No side yard shall be required except that for dwellings,
the side yard regulations are the same as those in the A residence district.
   (C)   Rear Yard: The rear yard regulations for dwellings are the same as in
the A residence district. In all other cases, a rear yard is not required
except where a lot abuts upon a dwelling district, in which case there shall be
a rear yard with a depth of not less than fifteen feet (15'). (Ord. 215, 9-17-
1962)
9-5-6: INTENSITY OF USE:
When a lot is improved with a single-family dwelling, two-family dwelling or a
multiple dwelling or when living facilities are erected above the other uses,
the intensity of use regulations are the same as those required in the A
residence district. (Ord. 215, 9-17-1962)
CHAPTER 6
D INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
9-6-1: Scope
9-6-2: Use Regulations
9-6-3: Height Regulations
9-6-4: Parking Regulations
9-6-5: Area Regulations
9-6-6: Intensity Of Use
9-6-1: SCOPE:
The regulations set forth in this chapter, or set forth elsewhere in this title
when referred to in this chapter, are the district regulations in the D
industrial district. (Ord. 215, 9-17-1962)
9-6-2: USE REGULATIONS:
A building or premises shall be used only for the following purposes:
Any use permitted in the C central business district.
Blacksmith shop.
Bottling works.
Coal yards.
Dyeing and cleaning establishments.
Industrial and manufacturing plants, where the operations are conducted in one
or more buildings and not more than ten percent (10%) of the lot or tract is
used for the open storage of products, materials or equipment.
Lumber or building materials yard.
Milk distributing station.
Printing plants.
Public utility substations and facilities.
Warehouses and storage plants.
Wholesale establishments.
Wholesale storage of oil, gasoline or other petroleum products. (Ord. 215, 9-
17-1962)
9-6-3: HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
No building shall exceed three (3) stories nor shall it exceed forty five feet
(45') in height. (Ord. 215, 9-17-1962)
9-6-4: PARKING REGULATIONS:
The parking regulations for uses permitted in the B outlying business district
shall apply to such uses when located in the D industrial district. Parking
space shall be provided on the lot or in a building on the lot adequate to
accommodate the cars of the employees of any of the uses permitted in this
district, as well as the trucks and other vehicles owned by or in the custody
of the establishment. (Ord. 215, 9-17-1962)
9-6-5: AREA REGULATIONS:
   (A)   Front Yard: The front yard regulations are the same as those in the C
central business district.
   (B)   Side Yard: The side yard regulations for dwellings are the same as
those in the A residence district. In all other cases a side yard is not
required except on the side of a lot adjoining a dwelling district, in which
case there shall be a side yard of not less than ten feet (10').
   (C)   Rear Yard: The rear yard regulations for dwellings are the same as in
the A residence district. In all other cases a rear yard is not required except
where a lot abuts upon a dwelling district, in which case there shall be a rear
yard of not less than twenty feet (20'). (Ord. 215, 9-17-1962)
9-6-6: INTENSITY OF USE:
When a lot is improved with a dwelling the intensity of use regulations shall
be the same as those required in the A residence district. When living
facilities are erected above stores there shall be a lot area per family of not
less than three thousand (3,000) square feet. Where a lot of record contains
less than three thousand (3,000) square feet it may contain living facilities
for not more than one family. (Ord. 215, 9-17-1962)
CHAPTER 7
NONCONFORMING USES
SECTION:
9-7-1: Lawful Use
9-7-2: Special Permits
9-7-1: LAWFUL USE:
The lawful use of land for storage purposes (where such use is not an adjunct
of any structure) and for advertising signs and billboards which does not
conform to the provisions of this title shall be discontinued within five (5)
years from the effective date of this title, and the same uses of land which
become nonconforming by reason of a subsequent change in this title shall also
be discontinued within five (5) years from the date of the change.
The lawful use of a building existing at the time of the adoption of this title
may be continued, subject to the provisions of this title, although such use
does not conform with the provisions hereof. If no structural alterations are
made, a nonconforming use of a building may be changed to another nonconforming
use of the same or more restricted classification. The foregoing provisions
shall also apply to nonconforming uses in districts hereafter changed. Whenever
a nonconforming use of a building has been changed to a more restricted use or
to a conforming use such shall not thereafter be changed to a less restricted
use.
No building which has been damaged by fire, explosion, act of God or the public
enemy, to the extent of more than fifty percent (50%) of its value, shall be
restored except in conformity with the regulations of this title.
In the event that a nonconforming use of any building or premises is
discontinued or its normal operation stopped for a period of one year, the use
of the same shall thereafter conform to the regulations of the district in
which it is located.
Except as hereinafter provided, all nonconforming commercial or industrial
buildings located within any dwelling district shall be removed or converted,
and the building thereafter devoted to a use permitted in the district in
accordance with the following schedule:
   (A)   In the case of buildings erected before January 1, 1925, on or before
January 1, 1975.
   (B)   In the case of buildings erected between January 1, 1935 and January
1, 1940, on or before January 1, 1980.
   (C)   In the case of buildings erected between January 1, 1940 and January
1, 1945, on or before January 1, 1985.
   (D)   In the case of buildings erected since January 1, 1945, within forty
(40) years from the date of the erection of said building. (Ord. 215, 9-17-
1962)
9-7-2: SPECIAL PERMITS:
The president and board of trustees may, by special permit, after public
hearing held by the zoning board of appeals and notice given as provided in
title 2, chapter 2 of this code and subject to such protective restrictions
that it deems necessary authorize the location, extensions or structural
alteration of any of the following buildings or uses, or an increase in their
height, in any district from which they are prohibited or limited by this
title; provided, that such buildings or uses will not have any serious and
depreciating effect upon the value of surrounding property:
Airport, landing field or landing strip.
Any public building erected and used by any department of a municipal, county,
state or federal government.
Any use which is generally similar to the uses permitted in the district in
which such proposed use is sought to be located by special permit which
conforms to the regulations for such district.
Areas for the dumping or disposal of trash or garbage.
Cemetery or mausoleum.
Extraction of gravel, sand or other raw materials.
Greenhouses, provided that any such structures shall not be less than one
hundred feet (100') from all property lines.
Hospitals, clinics and institutions, except institutions for criminals and
those for persons who are mentally ill or have contagious diseases; provided,
however, that such buildings may occupy not over fifty percent (50%) of the
total area of the lot or tract and, provided further, that the buildings shall
be set back from all yard lines heretofore established an additional distance
of not less than two feet (2') for each foot of building height, and that
adequate off street parking space will be provided.
Hotels where the primary purpose is to provide seasonal or year round living
facilities, but only when they are located upon large tracts and would not
adversely affect surrounding residential development.
Nurseries and truck gardens.
Parking lots on land not more than three hundred feet (300') from the boundary
of any commercial, business or industrial district, under such conditions as
will protect the character of surrounding property.
Radio towers and radio broadcasting stations.
Riding stables.
Roadside stands, commercial amusement or recreational development for temporary
or seasonal periods.
Applications for special permits shall be made in writing to the president and
board of trustees who may forthwith reject the same or refer the same to the
zoning board of appeals for a public hearing and report. Before the issuance of
any special permit for any of the above buildings or uses, the zoning board of
appeals shall report to the president and board of trustees of the village
regarding the public hearing thereon and also upon the effect of such proposed
building or use upon the character of the neighborhood, traffic conditions,
public utility facilities and other matters pertaining to the public health,
public safety or general welfare. No action shall be taken granting any
application for a proposed building or use above referred to until and unless
the report of the zoning board of appeals has been filed, but such report shall
be made within sixty (60) days after the matter has been referred to the zoning
board of appeals by the president and board of trustees. If the zoning board of
appeals recommends against the issuance of the special permit, then it may be
issued only by an affirmative two-thirds (2/3) vote of the president and board
of trustees of the village. (Ord. 215, 9-17-1962)
CHAPTER 8
MOBILE HOMES, RECREATIONAL VEHICLES AND MOBILE HOME PARKS
SECTION:
9-8-1: Definitions
9-8-2: Location Of Mobile Homes
9-8-3: Use And Occupancy Permit
9-8-4: Flood Hazard Area Provisions Applicable
9-8-5: Use Of Recreational Vehicles Outside Park
9-8-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall for purposes
of this chapter have the meanings respectively ascribed to them, except where
the context otherwise requires and except where another definition set forth in
another chapter of this code and applicable to this chapter or a designated
part thereof is applicable:
MOBILE HOME: A structure designed for permanent habitation and so constructed
as to permit its transport on wheels, temporarily or permanently attached to
its frame, from the place of its construction to the location or subsequent
locations at which it is intended to be a permanent habitation and designed to
permit the occupancy thereof as a dwelling place of one or more persons,
provided that any such structure served by individual utilities and resting on
a permanent foundation, with wheels, tongue and hitch permanently removed, has
no current certificate of title issued by the Illinois secretary of state and
is not taxed as a mobile home by Whiteside County, shall not be construed as a
mobile home.
MOBILE HOME PARK OR PARK: An area of land or lands upon which five (5) or more
independent mobile homes are harbored for rent.
PERSON: Any legal entity, including, but not limited to, an individual, firm,
partnership, associations, trust, joint stock company, corporation or successor
of any of the foregoing.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: Every camping trailer, motor home, mini-motor home,
travel trailer, truck camper or van camper used primarily for recreational
purposes and not used commercially nor owned by a commercial business. All the
words set forth in this definition having a definition set forth in the
Illinois vehicle code shall be defined as set forth in the Illinois vehicle
code, as may be hereinafter amended. (Ord. 641, 12-8-2009)
9-8-2: LOCATION OF MOBILE HOMES:
It shall be unlawful to use any land in the village for the parking of mobile
homes, either occupied as temporary or permanent living facilities or
unoccupied as living facilities unless specific approval is granted by the
zoning board of appeals after due application. Each mobile home shall be
considered as a separate unit and a separate application is to be made for each
and every one. No application shall be approved unless accompanied by an
agreement of consent signed by every property owner within a radius of three
hundred feet (300') of each proposed location of a mobile home. Mobile home
parks will be considered upon application in accordance with this chapter.
(Ord. 641, 12-8-2009)
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary herein, an existing mobile home may be
replaced, whether located in or out of a mobile home park, with a newer model
mobile home in the same physical location within six (6) months from the date
of removal of the existing mobile home if the replacement mobile home is
approved by the building permit director in his sole discretion, and no other
approvals shall be required as set forth in this chapter. If the replacement
mobile home is not approved by the building permit director, then all the
requirements stated herein shall be complied with before the replacement mobile
home may be located in or out of a mobile home park. (Ord. 651, 8-10-2010; amd.
Ord. 803, 5-13-2025)
9-8-3: USE AND OCCUPANCY PERMIT:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to use any land for the parking of any mobile
home, or any camp car, house car or motor bus which has been so modified as to
facilitate its use for camping purposes, or tent trailer, whether used and
occupied as temporary or permanent living facilities or unoccupied unless a use
and occupancy permit specifically permitting the proposed use has first been
obtained.
   (B)   Application for such permit shall be made in writing to the building
official and shall specify with particularity the particular mobile home
proposed to be parked and contain an accurate description of the land to be so
used and of the particular location on the land where the mobile home is
proposed to be parked. It may be accompanied by a consent in writing of all
owners of adjoining property. If accompanied by such consent, the person making
the application shall at that time pay to the building official an application
fee in an amount determined from time to time by the board of trustees and set
forth in a schedule of fees to be maintained by the village clerk.
   (C)   If the application is accompanied by the consents above mentioned, the
building official shall proceed at once to inspect the proposed site and view
the mobile home proposed to be parked thereon and if the mobile home is not
available for inspection, the applicant shall provide the building official
such plans, specifications and pictures as may be requested by the building
official, and if the building official finds that said mobile home is in a good
state of repair, fully operable and has the appearance of being well
maintained, he shall grant the permit. Otherwise he shall deny the permit and
the applicant shall have the right to appeal to the board of appeals as
provided by title 2, chapter 2 of this code.
   (D)   If the application is not accompanied by the consents above mentioned,
the applicant shall pay to the building official a fee in an amount determined
from time to time by the board of trustees and set forth in a schedule of fees
to be maintained by the village clerk. On receipt of the application and
required fee, the building official shall proceed at once to make the
inspections above directed to be made, write a report of his findings with
specific recommendations and deliver the same, with said application to the
board of appeals who shall proceed to give notice and hold a hearing as in the
case of other appeals. If the board of appeals finds that the application is in
form and the proposed location and mobile home conforms to the requirements
above set forth for the granting of a permit by the building official and
further finds that the parking of the mobile home proposed at the location
proposed will not produce any fire hazard, cause undue congestion, tend to
produce a deterioration in the character of the neighborhood or tend to reduce
the value of the adjoining property, they shall grant the permit, otherwise the
same shall be denied. (Ord. 641, 12-8-2009)
9-8-4: FLOOD HAZARD AREA PROVISIONS APPLICABLE:
This chapter is fully subject to the provisions of title 4, chapter 3 of this
code, and where title 4, chapter 3 of this code imposes the more stringent
restrictions, then it shall prevail. (Ord. 641, 12-8-2009)
9-8-5: USE OF RECREATIONAL VEHICLES OUTSIDE PARK:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to use a recreational vehicle for
human habitation and unlawful for any person to use the recreational vehicle
for living, sleeping, or other residential purposes when parked or stored
anywhere in the village except in a licensed mobile home park as may be
permitted under village ordinances and the Illinois mobile home park act, as
may be amended. Notwithstanding, a recreational vehicle intended for portable
temporary housing may be used for living, sleeping or other residential
purposes when parked or stored in the village for the housing of the owners,
occupants or guests of a lot improved with a principal residence if: 1) the
occupancy does not exceed fifteen (15) total calendar days per calendar year,
each calendar year, and 2) when no charge is made for such occupancy.
Notwithstanding, the board of trustees shall have the sole discretion to
increase the number of calendar days for occupancy to more than fifteen (15)
total calendar days per calendar year upon written request to the village board
of trustees. In no event shall any use of a recreational vehicle be allowed on
a street, alley, avenue, or public right of way of the village. An occupancy
notice shall be submitted to the village office upon arrival or the first
business day thereafter, of location of a temporarily parked recreational
vehicle for the purpose of fire and safety.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to occupy for living, sleeping or other residence
purposes any recreational vehicle which has been rendered immobile by the
removal of wheels or placing it on a foundation or on the ground. (Ord. 641,
12-8-2009)
CHAPTER 9
EXCEPTIONS AND VARIATIONS
SECTION:
9-9-1: Scope
9-9-2: Height And Area
9-9-3: Accessory Buildings
9-9-4: Yards
9-9-5: Fences 1  (Rep. by Ord. 500, 12-8-1998)
9-9-6: Fire Escapes; Rear Yard Projections
9-9-7: Multiple-Family Dwellings
9-9-8: Building Near Airport
9-9-9: Storage Buildings
9-9-10: Temporary Buildings
9-9-11: Industrial Buildings
9-9-12: Contiguous Lots
 
Notes
1    See chapter 11 of this title.
9-9-1: SCOPE:
The district regulations hereinafter set forth in this chapter qualify or
supplement, as the case may be, the district regulations appearing elsewhere in
this title. (Ord. 215, 9-17-1962)
9-9-2: HEIGHT AND AREA:
   (A)   Public, semipublic or public service buildings, hospitals,
institutions or schools, when permitted in a district, may be erected to a
height not exceeding sixty feet (60'), and churches and temples may be erected
to a height not exceeding seventy five feet (75') if the building is set back
from each yard line at least one foot (1') for each foot of additional building
height above the height limit otherwise provided in the district in which the
building is located.
   (B)   Single-family and two-family dwellings may be increased in height by
not more than ten feet (10') when the side and rear yards are increased over
the yard requirements of the district in which they are located by not less
than ten feet (10'), but they shall not exceed three (3) stories in height.
   (C)   Chimneys, cooling towers, elevator bulkheads, fire towers, monuments,
stacks, stage towers or scenery lofts, tanks, water towers, ornamental towers
and spires, church steeples, radio towers or necessary mechanical appurtenances
may be erected to a height in accordance with existing or hereafter adopted
ordinances of the village. (Ord. 215, 9-17-1962)
   (D)   An accessory building or combination of accessory buildings may be
built in a required rear yard, but such accessory building or combination of
accessory buildings shall not occupy more than forty percent (40%) of the
required rear yard. (Ord. 607, 6-12-2007)
   (E)   Whenever a lot abuts upon an alley, one-half (1/2) of the width of the
alley may be considered as a portion of the required rear yard. (Ord. 215, 9-
17-1962)
9-9-3: ACCESSORY BUILDINGS:
   (A)   Location Generally: When a side yard is required, no part of an
accessory building shall be located closer than five feet (5') to the side lot
line along such side yard. When a rear yard is required, no part of an
accessory structure shall be located closer than five feet (5') to the rear lot
line or closer than five feet (5') to a side lot line abutting a required rear
yard. In a residential district, no detached accessory building shall be closer
than ten feet (10') to any other building. Except as provided in this chapter,
no accessory building or structure shall be located in any required front yard
or between the front line of the principal building and the required building
setback line, or front lot line.
   (B)   Time Of Construction: No accessory building or structure shall be
constructed on any lot prior to the start of construction of the principal
building to which it is accessory.
   (C)   Size: All accessory buildings shall comply with the following:
      1.   No accessory building, or combination of accessory buildings, shall
occupy more than forty percent (40%) of the area of a required rear yard. (Ord.
574, 3-9-2004)
      2.   An accessory building shall not exceed a total of nine hundred (900)
square feet of floor area, except accessory buildings or combination of
accessory buildings for multi-family uses shall not exceed four hundred fifty
(450) square feet of floor area per residential unit. (Ord. 607, 6-12-2007)
      3.   For purposes of determining floor area, all stories with structural
headroom measuring seven feet six inches (7'6") or more will be included.
   (D)   Height: All accessory buildings shall comply with the following:
      1.   Shall not exceed one story or twenty feet (20') in height if
constructed as a type 5-B construction in accordance with section 606 of the
BOCA national building code 1999, or shall not exceed two (2) stories or thirty
feet (30') in height, if constructed as a type 5-A construction.
      2.   Any accessory building greater than fourteen feet (14') in height
shall have a frost footing of sufficient design to safely support the loads
imposed.
      3.   All heated accessory buildings shall have frost footings.
      4.   The height of an accessory building shall not exceed the height of
the principal structure except where the principal structure is less than
twenty feet (20') in height, in which case an accessory building may be up to
twenty feet (20') in height.
   (E)   Location On Corner Lots: On a corner lot in a residential district no
accessory building or portion thereof located in a required rear yard shall be
closer to the side lot line abutting the street than a distance equal to sixty
percent (60%) of the least depth which would be required under this chapter for
the front yard on such adjacent property to the rear.
   (F)   Use: In addition to the restrictions on use set forth in the
definition for accessory building, no accessory building shall be used for
dwelling purposes.
   (G)   Occupancy Permits And Enforcement: Under sections
9-1-2, "Occupancy Permits";
9-1-3, "Enforcement"; and
9-1-4, "Violation" of this title; the word "building" shall be further defined
to include the term accessory building whenever the word building is used in
said sections. (Ord. 574, 3-9-2004)
9-9-4: YARDS:
Every part of a required yard shall be open to the sky, unobstructed, except
for accessory buildings in a rear yard, and except for the ordinary projections
of sills, belt courses, cornices and ornamental features projecting not to
exceed twelve inches (12"). (Ord. 215, 9-17-1962)
9-9-5: FENCES 1 :
(Rep. by Ord. 500, 12-8-1998)
 
Notes
1    See chapter 11 of this title.
9-9-6: FIRE ESCAPES; REAR YARD PROJECTIONS:
Open or lattice enclosed fire escapes, fireproof outside stairways and
balconies opening upon fire towers projecting into rear yard not more than five
feet (5'), and the ordinary projections of chimneys and flues into the rear
yard may be permitted by the building official. (Ord. 215, 9-17-1962)
9-9-7: MULTIPLE-FAMILY DWELLINGS:
For the purpose of the side yard regulations, a two-family, a group house, or a
multiple dwelling shall be considered as one building occupying one lot. (Ord.
215, 9-17-1962)
9-9-8: BUILDING NEAR AIRPORT:
No building exceeding two and one-half (21/2) stories or thirty five feet (35')
shall be erected within seven hundred fifty feet (750') of any airport, landing
field or landing strip. (Ord. 215, 9-17-1962)
9-9-9: STORAGE BUILDINGS:
Buildings that are to be used for storage purposes only may exceed the maximum
number of stories that are permitted in the district in which they are located,
but such buildings shall not exceed the number of feet of the building height
permitted in such districts. (Ord. 215, 9-17-1962)
9-9-10: TEMPORARY BUILDINGS:
Temporary buildings that are used in conjunction with construction work only
may be permitted in any district during the period that the building is being
constructed but such temporary buildings shall be removed upon completion of
the construction work. (Ord. 215, 9-17-1962)
9-9-11: INDUSTRIAL BUILDINGS:
More than one industrial, commercial, multiple dwelling, or institutional
building may be erected upon a single lot or tract provided they are developed
as a unit, but the yards and open spaces required around the boundaries of the
lot or tract shall not be encroached upon by any such buildings, nor shall
there be any change in the intensity of use regulations. (Ord. 215, 9-17-1962)
9-9-12: CONTIGUOUS LOTS:
Two (2) or more contiguous nonconforming lots of record may be resubdivided
into the same or lesser number of lots provided that none of such lots after
such resubdivision will have an area less than that which any of said lots so
resubdivided had prior to such resubdivision. (Ord. 215, 9-17-1962)
CHAPTER 10
SUBDIVISIONS
SECTION:
9-10-1: Territorial Limits
9-10-2: Definitions
9-10-3: Procedure
9-10-4: Preliminary Plat
9-10-5: Improvements
9-10-6: Final Or Record Plat
9-10-7: Modifications And Exceptions
9-10-8: Design; Layout
9-10-9: Installation Of Improvements
9-10-10: Flood Hazard Area Provisions Applicable
9-10-1: TERRITORIAL LIMITS:
   (A)   Territorial Limits: The suggested rules and standards governing plats
and subdivisions of land contained in this chapter shall apply to all land
within the corporate limits of the village, and also within one and one-half (1
½) miles of said limits. In the event of overlapping jurisdiction, the extent
of jurisdiction hereinunder shall be determined and agreed upon between the
county and the village officials.
   (B)   Effect: Within the territorial limits of this chapter, no person shall
change, resubdivide, or rearrange the boundary or division line of any lot or
parcel of land, or divide the same by any means into lots for any purpose. Nor
shall any such person begin with any construction work in a proposed
subdivision, including grading, without complying with the provisions of this
chapter and before obtaining the tentative approval of the preliminary plat of
the proposed subdivision as hereinafter provided.
Unless approved as a final plat as provided herein, no subdivision shall be
entitled to be recorded in the county auditor's or recorder's office or have
any validity; the building official shall not issue building or repair permits
for any structure on a lot in any subdivision built in violation of this
chapter; the village board shall not accept any public improvements or services
in such subdivision.
   (C)   Violations: Any person who violates, omits, neglects or refuses to
comply with or resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of this chapter
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 296, 10-24-1972; amd. Ord. 779,
12-13-2022)
9-10-2: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, certain terms are defined as follows:
ALLEY OR SERVICE DRIVE:     A passage or way affording generally a secondary
                            means of vehicular access to abutting properties.
BOARD:                      Village board.
COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT PLAN: A plan adopted by the Village for orderly growth of
                            the municipality.
CUL-DE-SAC:                 A residential street with a turnaround.
                            A parcel of land intended for transfer of ownership
LOT:                        or building development, whether immediate or
                            future. A lot shall have frontage on a public
                            street.
PLATS OFFICER:              The person or agency designated by the village
                            board to administer this chapter.
                            A street which connects principal traffic
STREET:                     generations or connects such areas with other
                            systems and provides access to neighborhoods.
                            The division or resubdivision of a tract or parcel
                            of land into two (2) or more lots, plots, sites or
                            other divisions of land; or the consolidation of
SUBDIVISION:                parcels, for the purpose, whether immediate or
                            future, of transfer of ownership or building
                            development. A resubdivision of land or lots shall
                            also be considered a subdivision. (Ord. 296, 10-24-
                            1972; amd. Ord. 779, 12-13-2022)
 
9-10-3: PROCEDURE:
In planning and developing a subdivision, the general principles and
requirements set forth in section
9-10-8 of this chapter shall be observed except otherwise provided in
9-10-7. In every case the following procedure should be pursued:
   (A)   Sketch Plan: The subdivider or his engineer shall first submit the
proposed plat in sketch form to the plats officer at a village board meeting to
ascertain the location of proposed streets, parks or other planned
improvements.
   (B)   Preliminary Plat:
      1.   The subdivider, after submitting the plat in sketch form to the
plats officer shall prepare a preliminary plat of the proposed subdivision and
construction plans for improvements adequate to determine that sewer, water and
street construction can be installed conforming with the requirements set forth
in section
9-10-9 of this chapter. The subdivider shall supply black or blue line prints
to all public utilities. The subdivider shall file with the plats officer an
application in writing seeking the approval of said plat, accompanied by four
(4) black line or blue line prints.
      2.   The plats officer will check the preliminary plat as to its
conformity with the adopted community development plan, ordinances of the
community, and principles, standards and requirements set forth in this
chapter. The plats officer will check the construction plans of proposed
improvements.
      3.   The village board, upon receipt of the recommendations and advice
from the plats officer concerning matters above, will approve as presented,
approve with modifications, or disapprove the preliminary plat within thirty
(30) days of receipt of the plat. If the preliminary plat is disapproved by the
village board, the subdivider shall be furnished with a letter and copy of the
plat stating the reason for disapproval and where the plat does not conform to
village code provisions including the community development plan. Such
notification shall take place within the thirty (30) day period. Upon approval
of the preliminary plat, one copy of the approved or conditionally approved
plat shall be returned to the subdivider within ten (10) days following the
village board action, one copy of the approved plat transmitted to the county
superintendent of highways, and the final copy retained in the board's files.
   (C)   Improvements: The subdivider, after approval of the preliminary plat,
may: 1) secure from the plats officer the necessary permits to proceed with the
street and sanitary improvements after approval of final construction drawings;
or in lieu of this, 2) shall, to ensure the satisfactory installation of said
improvements in accordance with this chapter post with the village clerk a
surety bond, in form prescribed by the village board sufficient to cover the
full cost of said improvements based upon estimate approved by the village
board.
   (D)   Final Plat:
      1.   The subdivider, upon completion of all improvements required by this
chapter, or upon posting of a bond, shall file with the plats officer the final
or record plat for final approval. The plat must conform in every respect with
the requirements specified in section
9-10-6 of this chapter. The subdivider shall submit the final plat not later
than one year after approval of the preliminary plat. A final or record plat
may be a portion of a larger subdivision for which a preliminary plat had been
previously approved. However, improvements shall be made for all parts of the
subdivision to be submitted for final approval.
      2.   The subdivider shall file with the plats officer five (5) black line
or blue line prints, the original tracing, and a formal request for approval,
along with two (2) copies of all covenants or restrictions pertaining to the
final plat.
The plats officer will check the final plat and plans and specifications for
improvements. If found satisfactory, the original tracing shall be forwarded to
the village board, with a certificate showing that: a) the technical details of
the plat itself have been checked and found satisfactory, b) all required
improvements have been satisfactorily completed or, in lieu thereof, a surety
bond has been posted, assuring their installation.
      3.   After receiving notification from the plats officer that
improvements are in order and after being satisfied that the final plat is in
conformity with the approved preliminary plat and this chapter, the village
board shall approve and certify the final plat. The village board shall have
sixty (60) days from the date of submission in which to take action on the
final plat.
      4.   After approval of the plat by the board, four (4) approved prints
and original tracing of the final plat shall be returned to the plats officer.
The plats officer shall transmit copies of the approved plat to the county
superintendent of highways and such other agencies as deemed necessary and
retain one for the board's files. The original tracing shall be transmitted to
the subdivider for recording.
      5.   The subdivider shall post a maintenance bond covering any
improvement to be accepted for maintenance by the village. Such bond shall be
held by the village clerk and shall become effective upon acceptance of the
final plat by the village board, unless otherwise stipulated. Maintenance bonds
shall run for two (2) years on sewer and water improvements.
   (E)   Fees:
      1.   At the time of filing of a plat or replat for approval, the
subdivider shall pay to the village clerk a fee according to the schedule of
fees maintained on file and available for public inspection at the office of
the village clerk.
      2.   All fees shall be deposited in the general fund. No fees shall be
charged for processing preliminary plats. (Ord. 296, 10-24-1972; amd. Ord. 779,
12-13-2022)
9-10-4: PRELIMINARY PLAT:
   (A)   Plat To Accompany Application: The preliminary plat of the proposed
subdivision, four (4) black line or blue line prints prepared by a registered
land surveyor, shall accompany an application in writing to the plats officer
for preliminary approval of the subdivision in order that permits may be
secured for the installation of improvements and processing for final approval
of the plat may proceed thereafter. All public utilities shall be supplied with
copies of the preliminary plat.
   (B)   Vicinity Sketch: A vicinity sketch at a scale of four hundred feet
(400') or less to the inch shall accompany the preliminary plat. Such vicinity
sketch shall show all adjacent existing subdivisions and their names, the tract
lines of acreage parcels of land together with the names of record owners of
such parcels, and all street and alley lines immediately adjoining the proposed
subdivision and between it and the nearest existing highways or thoroughfares.
   (C)   Horizontal Scale: The horizontal scale of the preliminary plat shall
be one hundred feet (100') or less to the inch.
   (D)   Features And Information: The preliminary plat should clearly show and
include the following features and information:
      1.   The proposed name of the subdivision, which shall not duplicate or
closely approximate the name of any other subdivision in the county.
      2.   An accurate description of the property involved according to the
real estate records of the county.
      3.   The names and addresses of the owners of record, the subdivider and
the registered surveyor who prepared the plat.
      4.   The names of adjoining subdivisions and the names of record owners
of adjoining parcels of unplatted land.
      5.   The boundary lines, accurate in scale, of the tract to be
subdivided.
      6.   The location, widths and names of all existing or platted streets or
other public ways and easements within or immediately adjacent to the tract,
corporation lines, section and quarter section lines, and other important
features such as existing permanent buildings, watercourses, railroad lines,
etc.
      7.   Existing sewers, water mains, culverts and other underground
structures within the tract and immediately adjacent thereto, with pipe sizes
and grades indicated.
      8.   Contours, with intervals of two feet (2') referenced to United
States geological North American datum - mean sea level elevation datum.
      9.   The layout, proposed names and widths of proposed streets, alleys
and easements; the location and approximate sizes of proposed catch basins,
culverts and other drainage structures; the layout, numbers and approximate
dimensions of proposed lots.
      10.   Proposed front yard setback or other setback lines.
      11.   The width and approximate dimensions of all parcels of land
intended to be dedicated or reserved for public use, or to be reserved in the
deeds for the common use of property owners in the subdivision, with the
purpose, conditions or limitations of such dedication or reservation indicated.
      12.   North point, scale and date.
      13.   Copies of any proposed restrictions or covenants.
      14.   Notation stating "Preliminary Plat - Not for Record".
   (E)   Construction Drawings: The subdivider's engineer shall prepare
preliminary plans for all proposed improvements in such form as to enable the
plats officer to determine that sewers, water and streets may be constructed
according to section
9-10-9 of this chapter. (Ord. 296, 10-24-1972; amd. Ord. 779, 12-13-2022)
9-10-5: IMPROVEMENTS:
Minimum improvements shall be installed, unless a surety bond is filed, prior
to request for final approval of the plat, in accordance with the requirements
of section
9-10-9 of this chapter. (Ord. 296, 10-24-1972; amd. Ord. 779, 12-13-2022)
9-10-6: FINAL OR RECORD PLAT:
After improvements have been installed, or a surety bond filed, in accordance
with section
9-10-9 of this chapter, four (4) black line or blue line prints and the
original tracing shall be submitted to the plats officer with a formal request
for approval. The final plat shall be drawn at the scale of one hundred feet
(100') or less to the inch, and shall clearly show the following features and
information:
   (A)   Legal description of the property, including reference to the section,
township and range; section lines and corners; quarter section lines.
   (B)   All plat boundary lines with lengths of course to hundredths of a foot
and bearings or angles based on an accurate survey in the field.
   (C)   The exact locations and the widths along the property lines of all
existing or recorded streets or roads intersecting or paralleling the
boundaries of the tract.
   (D)   Bearings and distances to nearest established street or road bounds,
other established survey lines, or other official monuments, which monuments
shall be located or accurately described on the plat. Any established survey or
corporation lines shall be accurately monument marked and located on the plat,
and their names shall be lettered on them.
   (E)   The accurate location and material of all permanent reference
monuments. Such monuments shall be concrete cylinders or rectangular prisms,
not less than four inches (4") in diameter or square, and twenty-four inches
(24") long, located at extreme corners of the subdivision. Other markers shall
be steel rods not less than three-fourths inch (3/4") in diameter and twenty-
four inches (24") long, located at all street corners, at all points where
street lines intersect the plat boundary lines and at angle points and points
of curve in each street; and shall be one-half inch (1/2") square iron pins,
twenty-four inches (24") in length, at all lot corners. Any pins disturbed by
construction or grading shall be reset.
   (F)   The exact layout including: 1) street and alley lines, their names,
bearings, angles of intersection and widths (including widths along the line of
any obliquely intersecting street); 2) the lengths of all arcs, radii, points
of curvature and tangent bearings; 3) all easements or rights of way, when
provided for or owned by public services (with the limitation of easement
rights definitely stated on the plat); 4) all lot lines with dimensions in feet
and hundredths, and bearings or angles if other than right angles to the street
and alley lines.
   (G)   Lots numbered in numerical order, and blocks also numbered in
numerical order.
   (H)   The accurate outline of all property which is offered for dedication
for public use, and of all property that may be reserved by covenant in the
deeds for the common use of the property owners in the subdivision, with the
purpose indicated thereon.
   (I)   Front yard setback lines need not be shown. Lines of future streets or
roads as shown on the adopted community development plan.
   (J)   Private restrictions, if any: 1) boundaries of each type of use
restriction; 2) other private restrictions for each restricted section of the
subdivision.
   (K)   Name of the subdivision and name or number of the largest subdivision
or tract of which the tract being subdivided forms a part.
   (L)   Names and locations of adjoining subdivisions.
   (M)   Names and addresses of the owner or owners of record, the subdivider,
and of the registered land surveyor who prepared the plat.
   (N)   North point, scale and date.
   (O)   Certification by the registered land surveyor who prepared the plat to
the effect that the plat represents a survey made by the surveyor, that all
monuments indicated thereon actually exist and that their location, size and
material are correctly shown.
   (P)   Other certificates, required by law, including certificate of title
showing ownership of the tract of land included in the subdivision, also
certificate showing that all taxes have been paid. (Ord. 296, 10-24-1972; amd.
Ord. 779, 12-13-2022)
9-10-7: MODIFICATIONS AND EXCEPTIONS:
   (A)   The general principles of design and minimum requirements for the
laying out of subdivisions, set forth in section
9-10-8 of this chapter, may be varied by the village board in the case of a
subdivision large enough to constitute a more or less self-contained
neighborhood which is to be developed in accordance with a comprehensive plan
safeguarded by appropriate restrictions, and which, in the judgment of the
board makes adequate provision for all essential community requirements;
provided, however, that no modification shall be granted by the board which
would conflict with the proposals of an existing community redevelopment plan,
if any, or with the intent and purposes of said general principles of design
and minimum requirements.
In any particular case where the subdivider can show that by reason of
exceptional topographic or other physical conditions, strict compliance with
any requirements of this chapter could cause practical difficulty or
exceptional and undue hardship, the village board may modify such requirement
to the extent deemed just and proper, so as to relieve such difficulty or
hardship; provided such relief may be granted without detriment to the public
good and without impairing the intent and purposes of this chapter or the
desirable general development of the community.
Any modification thus granted shall be entered in the minutes of the village
board setting forth the reasons which, in the opinion of the board, justified
the modification.
   (B)   In the case of a subdivision of less than five (5) lots and where all
lots can be adequately served by existing streets, situated in a locality where
conditions are well defined, the village board may exempt the subdivider from
complying with requirements stipulated in section 9-10-4 of this chapter
pertaining to the preparation of the preliminary plat. (Ord. 296, 10-24-1972;
amd. Ord. 779, 12-13-2022)
9-10-8: DESIGN; LAYOUT:
In laying out a subdivision, the subdivider shall comply with the following
general principles and requirements:
   (A)   General:
      1.   The layout must conform to a transportation plan adopted by the
village, other parts of the adopted community development plan and other
adopted regulations of the village. Where a proposed park, playground or other
recreational area, proposed school site or public ground, shown on the adopted
community development plan, is located in whole or in part within the proposed
subdivision, such proposed public ground or part, if not dedicated to the board
of education or other public agency, must be reserved and no action taken on
the subdivision for a period of not less than ninety (90) days to allow the
village board or other public agency the opportunity to consider and take
action toward acquisition of such public ground or park by purchase or other
means. If the responsible agency does not take action to acquire such land, the
subdivider may then use the land for any purpose permitted.
      2.   Where considered desirable by the subdivider and held appropriate by
the village board, open spaces suitably located and of adequate size for parks,
playgrounds or other recreational purposes for local or neighborhood use may be
provided for in the design of the proposed subdivision, and if not dedicated to
the public and accepted by the appropriate public body, may be reserved for the
common use of all property owners in the proposed subdivision by covenant in
the deeds.
   (B)   The Street And Block Layout:
      1.   The street layout of the subdivision shall be in general conformity
with a plan for the most advantageous development of adjoining and nearby
areas.
         (a)   Where appropriate to the design, proposed streets shall be
continuous and in alignment with existing, planned or platted streets with
which they are to connect.
         (b)   Proposed streets shall be extended to the boundary lines of the
tract to be subdivided, unless prevented by topography or other physical
conditions, or unless, in the opinion of the village board, such extension is
not necessary or desirable for the coordination of the layout of the
subdivision with existing layouts or the most advantageous future development
of adjacent tracts. Cul-de-sacs of reasonable length will be approved where
topography necessitates or where they appropriate for the type of development
contemplated.
         (c)   Proposed streets shall intersect one another as nearly at right
angles as topography and other limiting factors of good design permit.
         (d)   Wherever there exists adjoining the tract to be subdivided a
dedicated or platted and recorded half width street or alley, the other half
width of such street or alley shall be platted.
         (e)   Alleys shall ordinarily be platted: 1) in the rear of all lots
to be used for business; and 2) in the rear of residential lots fronting on
primary thoroughfares (unless service roads are provided in front thereof) as a
means of safe access to such lots.
      2.   Blocks shall have sufficient width to provide for two (2) tiers of
lots at least one hundred feet (100') in depth, unless, in the opinion of the
board, prevented by exceptional topography or other physical conditions.
         (a)   The lengths of blocks shall be such as are appropriate, in the
opinion of the village board, for the locality and the type of development
contemplated, but shall not exceed one thousand two hundred feet (1,200').
         (b)   In any block over seven hundred feet (700') in length, the board
may require that a crosswalk or pedestrianway, not less than ten feet (10')
wide, be provided near the center and entirely across such block.
         (c)   Cul-de-sacs shall not exceed five hundred feet (500') in length
measured along the centerline from the intersection at origin through the end
of the circle to the end of the right of way.
   (C)   Minimum Right Of Way Widths Of Streets, Alleys And Easements For
Utilities:
      1.   Street: Not less than sixty feet (60') wide in any case.
      2.   Street And Cul-De-Sac: The village board in its discretion may
permit a street with curb and gutter and fifty feet (50') in width. All dead-
end streets shall terminate in a circular turnaround having a minimum right of
way diameter of one hundred feet (100').
      3.   Alleys And Service Drives: Twenty feet (20') wide.
      4.   Easements for utilities, where required, should be at least ten feet
(10') wide centered on rear or side lot lines.
   (D)   Minimum Surface Widths: The portion of the surface required to be
installed at the subdivider's expense shall be as follows:
      1.   Streets designated on an adopted transportation plan or approved by
the village board. Overall surface widths shall be as designated by an adopted
transportation plan or by the village board, and the differences, if any,
between the cost of the portion to be provided at the expense of the subdivider
and that of the total width designated by the transportation plan or the
village board shall be borne by the municipality, unless it shall be determined
by the village board that such greater width will benefit the subdivider in
proportion to its cost. The surface of a turning circle at the end of a cul-de-
sac shall have a minimum outside diameter of eighty feet (80'). A "T" or "Y"
shaped surfaced space, when approved by the board may be used as a temporary
measure at the end of a dead-end street until such time as the street is
continued.
      2.   Alleys and service drives shall be surfaced to a width of sixteen
feet (16').
   (E)   Street Grades, Curves And Sight Distances:
      1.   The grades of streets shall not be less than five-tenths percent
(0.5%) nor exceed the following:
         (a)   Streets, designated as such on an adopted transportation plan or
as approved by the village board: Five percent (5%) unless prevented by
topography.
         (b)   Service drives and alleys: Ten percent (10%).
         (c)   Pedestrianways or crosswalks: Twenty percent (20%), unless steps
of an acceptable design are to be constructed.
      2.   All changes in street grades above one percent (1%) shall be
connected by vertical curves of a minimum length equal to thirty (30) times the
algebraic difference in the rate of grade for subsection (E)1(a) of this
section and one-half (1/2) of this minimum for all other streets.
      3.   The radii of curvature on the centerline shall not be less than the
following:
         (a)   Streets: Three hundred fifty feet (350').
         (b)   Service drives and alleys: One hundred fifty feet (150').
   (F)   Intersections: Streets shall intersect as close to a ninety degree
(90°) angle as possible.
   (G)   Lots:
      1.   The size, shape and orientation of lots shall be appropriate for the
location of the proposed subdivision and for the type of development
contemplated.
      2.   Excessive depth in relation to width ordinarily shall be avoided.
      3.   Every lot shall abut on a public right of way dedicated for street
purposes.
      4.   Lots for residential purposes shall be at least thirty-seven and
five-tenths feet (37.5') wide at the front lot line and shall be adequate for a
building of practicable width.
      5.   Lots larger than the minimum called for by health and land use
regulations may be required where topographic or other considerations may limit
the buildable or usable portion of such lots.
      6.   Corner lots for residential use ordinarily should be platted wider
than interior lots in order to permit conformance with the required setbacks.
      7.   Residential lots fronting on highways, thoroughfares and parkways
should have extra depth to permit deep setbacks for the buildings.
      8.   Double frontage lots and reversed frontage lots ordinarily should be
avoided.
      9.   Side lot lines shall be approximately at right angles to the right
of way line of the street on which the lot fronts.
      10.   Side lot lines on curved streets shall be radial to the right of
way line of the street on which the lot fronts.
      11.   Lots not served by public sewer systems and/or public water systems
shall meet all requirements established to protect public health.
         (a)   Lots lacking both services shall ordinarily be at least twenty
thousand (20,000) square feet in size and at least one hundred twenty-five feet
(125') wide at the building line.
         (b)   Lots having either public water or sewer shall be at least
fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet in size and at least one hundred feet
(100') wide at the building line.
         (c)   Lots having both services shall be at least seven thousand five
hundred (7,500) square feet in size and at least seventy-five feet (75') wide
at the building line.
         (d)   Percolation tests and related public health measures shall be
used in all cases and the above stated minimum requirements may be modified
upon report of appropriate state or county agencies.
         (e)   Lot sizes as stated in this chapter are subject to requirements
of the zoning district in which they are located. (Ord. 296, 10-24-1972; amd.
Ord. 779, 12-13-2022)
9-10-9: INSTALLATION OF IMPROVEMENTS:
Improvements shall be installed in accordance with the following minimum
requirements and regulations prior to the filing of the final plat for final
approval:
   (A)   General:
      1.   All of the improvements required under this chapter shall be
constructed under contract approved by the village engineer in respect to
construction details and proper inspection of the improvements to be installed,
and shall be completed in accordance with the specifications and under the
supervision of the village's engineer or his duly designated representative
prior to the filing with the board of the final or record plat and request for
final approval.
      2.   In lieu of completing all the improvements as required in subsection
(A)1 of this section, the subdivider shall furnish the village board with a
surety bond, sufficient to cover the cost of any or all of the improvements
required to be installed by the subdivider, based on estimates approved by the
village engineer. The intent is to secure the actual construction and
installation of such improvements within one year after the approval of the
final plat, subject to extension by the board.
   (B)   Streets, Sidewalks And Alleys:
      1.   Construction plans for improvements to be installed shall be
prepared by a registered professional engineer, whose seal shall appear
thereon. Two (2) prints shall be furnished. Improvements shall be in accordance
with specifications adopted by the board. Construction details shall be revised
as may be necessary and receive approval of the village engineer and other
agencies having jurisdiction before improvements are installed. Details shall
include:
         (a)   Plan and profile of each street, with tentative grades
indicated, including plans and profiles of proposed sanitary sewers, also
stormwater sewers if required, with grades and sizes indicated.
         (b)   Typical cross section of each proposed street, at a horizontal
and vertical scale of five feet (5') or less to the inch, showing the width of
surfacing, the location and width of any sidewalks and the location of utility
mains.
         (c)   Complete grading plan.
         (d)   Plan of the proposed water distribution system, showing pipe
sizes and location of valves and fire hydrants.
      2.   Streets shall be graded to full right of way width. The surfacing
shall be eight inches (8") of compacted rock, with hot mix asphalt. Such
surfacing shall not be less than twenty five feet (25') wide, or as otherwise
required under subsection
9-10-8(D)1 of this chapter, all in accordance with the specifications and
meeting the approval of the village.
      3.   Sidewalks shall be required to be installed on the village held
easement parallel to the street in any subdivision constructed within village
limits. They shall be constructed of portland cement concrete four inches (4")
in thickness, four thousand (4,000) PSI, and not less than four feet (4') in
width.
      4.   Alleys and service drives shall be graded to the full width of the
right of way and shall be provided with an all weather surface satisfactory to
the village engineer. Such surfaced width shall be four feet (4') less than the
dedicated right of way unless otherwise specified.
   (C)   Water Supply And Sewerage:
      1.   Every subdivision shall be provided with a complete water
distribution system adequate to serve the area being platted, and appropriately
spaced fire hydrants to be provided at the cost of the village, and the entire
water system designed to meet the approval of the village engineer and
appropriate state agencies.
      2.   In every subdivision, provision shall be made for the satisfactory
disposal of sanitary sewage:
         (a)   Where Public Sanitary Sewer Main Is Accessible: Where a public
sanitary sewer main is, in the opinion of the village board, reasonably
accessible, the subdivision shall be provided with a complete sanitary sewer
system connected with such sewer main, including a service connection fifteen
feet (15') from the sewer main for each lot. Such system shall be approved by
the village engineer and the state of Illinois.
         (b)   Where Public Sanitary Sewer Main Is Not Reasonably Accessible:
Where, in the opinion of the board, a public sanitary sewer main is not
reasonably accessible, proper provisions shall be made for the disposal of
sanitary waste subject to approval of the village engineer and the county
health department. Absorption capacity of the soil, surface drainage and
topography shall be criteria for determining whether or not the installation of
individual septic tank disposal systems is feasible. Feasibility shall be
ascertained by the subdivider before individual systems are proposed. At least
two (2) percolation tests shall be made on each lot at the approximate location
of the septic system absorption field. Such tests shall be performed in accord
with the state of Illinois. The results of these tests shall be certified by a
registered professional engineer and made known to the county health
department, the board and the state and are required to comply with all County,
State, and any other applicable codes and regulations.
         (c)   Backfilling Of Trenches: Wherever excavations for storm sewer,
sanitary sewer, and/or water mains and appurtenances thereto may lie beneath
existing or proposed pavement, sidewalks or drive areas, such excavation shall
be backfilled by a method and with trench fill of a type approved by the
village engineer.
   (D)   Utilities, Monuments:
      1.   Poles or underground conduits for electric lights, telephone lines
or other utilities shall be placed in easements provided along rear or side lot
lines, wherever this is practicable.
      2.   Monuments shall be placed in accordance with the requirements of
subsection
9-10-6(E) of this chapter.
   (E)   "As Built" Construction Drawings: Where the construction as performed
varies from the plans filed and approved as hereinbefore required, "as built"
construction drawings shall be filed with the village board. If such
construction does not vary from said plans, an affidavit executed by a
registered professional engineer so certifying shall be filed prior to
acceptance of a final plat or acceptance of improvements for maintenance.
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary herein, the village board, by a two-
thirds (2/3) vote, may relax the requirements herein to the extent deemed just
and proper to relieve a practical difficulty or exceptional and undue hardship
which may result by a strict compliance with the requirements of this
particular subsection. The village board may not relax such requirement to any
extent which may grant relief which would be detrimental to the public good and
which may impair the intent and purpose of this chapter or the desirable
general development of the community. At the time the village board may
authorize a modification pursuant to this section, the board shall set forth
the specific reasons for justifying the modification in the minutes of the
village board of trustees meeting. If any exception or relaxation of the
requirement herein is allowed, such exception or relaxation of the requirement
shall be conditioned upon the builder, developer or all owners, present or
future, of the property agreeing and it shall hereby be required that any
builder, developer or owner, present or future, must use every reasonable
effort and due diligence to attempt to locate any lateral by digging anywhere
but the village street or alley or public way prior to asking for a permit to
dig anywhere in a village street, alley or a public way to determine the
location of any lateral. (Ord. 296, 10-24-1972; amd. Ord. 411, 4-10-1990; Ord.
418, 8-14-1990; Ord. 779, 12-13-2022)
9-10-10: FLOOD HAZARD AREA PROVISIONS APPLICABLE:
This chapter is fully subject to the provisions of title 4, chapter 3,
“Development In Floodplain Areas”, of this code. (Ord. 376, 2-12-1985; amd.
Ord. 578, 5-11-2004; Ord. 779, 12-13-2022)
CHAPTER 11
FENCES AND WALLS
SECTION:
9-11-1: Permit Required
9-11-2: Fence Exemptions
9-11-3: General Restrictions And Prohibitions
9-11-4: Height And Setback Restrictions
9-11-5: Special Restrictions By Location Of Fence
9-11-6: Definitions
9-11-1: PERMIT REQUIRED:
No person shall erect or substantially alter a fence or wall in the village
without having first obtained a building permit from the building official.
(Ord. 500, 12-8-1998)
9-11-2: FENCE EXEMPTIONS:
   (A)   Fences and walls legally in existence at the time of adoption of this
chapter and which are not in violation of subsections
9-11-3(C) and (H) of this chapter, which do not prevent accessibility by
emergency vehicles, may continue to be maintained and to exist, but may not be
replaced if fifty percent (50%) or more of the fence or wall is either
destroyed or removed and if the replacement would continue the existence of a
violation of these regulations.
   (B)   Fences required as a part of athletic facilities such as, but not
limited to, softball diamonds or tennis courts may be permitted at heights in
conformance with established recreation standards. (Ord. 500, 12-8-1998)
9-11-3: GENERAL RESTRICTIONS AND PROHIBITIONS:
   (A)   No private fence or wall shall be erected within the public right of
way, and the village shall have the right to require the removal of any fence
on a public right of way at no cost to the village. All improvements made by
residents shall be made on that resident's own property and shall be maintained
by the resident.
   (B)   Snow fences shall not be placed in front yards except as specifically
permitted by the village. Such fences shall be constructed of winter neutral
colors such as brown or green. Snow fences shall only be permitted during the
period beginning November 1 and ending March 30.
   (C)   No fence or wall shall be maintained or erected if it is constructed
with any material which is likely to inflict bodily harm should a person or
animal come in contact with the fence or wall. Materials covered by this
prohibition include sharp or ragged metal spikes or spears.
   (D)   No wall which interrupts, impedes or otherwise alters the natural flow
of water shall be erected in any residential district.
   (E)   No electric fence, barbed wire or barbed wire fences shall be erected
in the village.
   (F)   Chainlink fences shall be permitted provided that, if visible from the
street, they are one hundred percent (100%) screened by evergreen vegetation
and are constructed of a dark, neutral colored, nonreflective material, as
approved by the building official.
   (G)   All fences shall be erected so that their finished side faces out, and
the unfinished side faces the property of the person who has caused said fence
to be erected.
   (H)   All fences, walls, hedges, and landscaped screening shall be
maintained in good, structurally sound repair, and in neat, clean and
attractive condition.
   (I)   With respect to fences, the rear yard shall include the side yard up
to the rear building line of the principal building.
   (J)   All fences other than chainlink fences, when located in the front yard
or when visible from the street, shall be visually softened with landscaped
screening as follows:
      1.   The amount of landscaped screening shall be proportional to the
amount of solid fencing, as described in figure 9-11 A, "Required Landscape
Screening For Fences", of this section.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/a111ee76a86366326eb9b7a7fc6d46a3dea62bfb/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1119.png]
      2.   The amount of screening shall apply to the fullness of the
landscaping material at its maturity, which shall occur a maximum of five (5)
years from the time of planting.
      3.   The screening shall be approved by the building official. (Ord. 500,
12-8-1998)
9-11-4: HEIGHT AND SETBACK RESTRICTIONS:
   (A)   Fences shall not exceed six feet (6') in height at any location.
Notwithstanding, the height restrictions for fences erected around the
periphery of swimming pools shall be further defined and regulated under
section
6-4-7 of this code.
   (B)   Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in any other provisions of
this code, no fence shall be constructed less than three feet (3') from the lot
line. (Ord. 523, 4-11-2000; amd. Ord. 628, 12-9-2008; Ord. 728, 8-23-2018)
9-11-5: SPECIAL RESTRICTIONS BY LOCATION OF FENCE:
   (A)   Interior Side Yards: The following shall apply to fences located in
the interior side yard of all districts:
      1.   Fences shall only be permitted in interior side yards provided that
the principal buildings on both the applicant's lot and the adjacent lot
maintain a side yard setback of at least ten feet (10').
      2.   Fences in interior side yards shall not extend in front of the
principal building setback line.
      3.   Fences in interior side yards may be built up to the principal
building setback line for the purpose of providing a return, but only if
screened pursuant to subsection
9-11-3(J) of this chapter.
   (B)   Corner Side Yards: Fences located in corner side yards shall not
extend in front of the setback line of the principal building on the adjacent
lot.
   (C)   Rear Yards:
      1.   Fences in rear yards which exceed the height of side yard fences
shall extend no further than the rear of the principal building.
      2.   Fences located in the rear yard of any lot in any district may be
increasedto eight feet (8') in height if such yard abuts a B outlying business
district, C central business district or D industrial district. (Ord. 500, 12-
8-1998)
9-11-6: DEFINITIONS:
FENCE AND WALL: Includes any barrier structure, wall of posts, rails, gates and
any other members, not part of a building or natural screening, constructed of
wood, metal, wire, masonry, plastic, stone, chainlink, wire mesh and any other
materials, placed or used in whole or in part as a boundary or as an ornamental
feature or as means of protection, security, screening, privacy or confinement,
or otherwise serving the functions commonly ascribed to a fence or wall, but
shall not include any wall constructed timbers, masonry or other materials for
the principal purpose of maintaining a terrace or controlling erosion; or any
natural growing hedge, shrub or other plant life. (Ord. 697, 1-12-2016)
CHAPTER 12
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES
SECTION:
9-12-1: Definitions
9-12-2: Application For Wireless Communication Facilities
9-12-3: Support Structure Construction Requirements
9-12-4: Support Structure And Antenna Array Design Requirements
9-12-5: Requirements For Use Of Public Facilities And Sites For Location Of
Wireless Communications Facilities
9-12-6: Zoning Permits Required
9-12-7: Lighting
9-12-8: Signs And Advertising
9-12-9: Equipment Facility
9-12-10: Abandoned Or Unused Support Structures Or Portions Of Support
Structures
9-12-11: Interference With Public Safety Telecommunications
9-12-12: Application Materials
9-12-13: Conflict And Severability
9-12-14: Penalties
9-12-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the following
definitions and meanings:
ANTENNA ARRAY: One or more rods, panels, disks or similar devices used for the
transmission or reception of radio frequency signals, which may include
omnidirectional antenna (rod), directional antenna (panel) and parabolic
antenna (disk). The antenna array does not include the support structure.
ATTACHED WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITY (ATTACHED WCF): An antenna array that
is attached to an existing building or structure (attachment structure), which
structures shall include, but not be limited to, utility poles, signs, water
towers, with any accompanying pole or device (attachment device) which attaches
the antenna array to the existing building or structure and associated
connection cables, and an equipment facility which may be located either inside
or outside of the attachment structure.
COLLOCATION/SITE SHARING: Use of a common WCF or common site by two (2) or more
wireless license holders or by one wireless license holder for more than one
type of communications technology and/or placement of a WCF on a structure
owned or operated by a utility or other public entity.
EQUIPMENT FACILITY: Any structure used to contain ancillary equipment for a WCF
which includes cabinets, shelters, a build out of an existing structure,
pedestals, and other similar structures.
HEIGHT: When referring to a WCF, height shall mean the distance measured from
ground level to the highest point on the WCF, including the antenna array.
SETBACK: The required distance from the property line of the parcel on which
the WCF is located to the support structure.
SUPPORT STRUCTURE: A structure designed and constructed specifically to support
an antenna array, and may include a monopole, self-supporting (lattice) tower,
guywire support tower and other similar structures or towers. Any device
(attachment device) which is used to attach an attached WCF to an existing
building or structure (attachment structure) shall be excluded from the
definition of and regulations applicable to support structures.
TEMPORARY WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITY (TEMPORARY WCF): A WCF to be placed
in use for ninety (90) or fewer days.
VILLAGE: The president and board of trustees of the village of Erie.
WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITY (WCF): Any unstaffed facility for the
transmission and/or reception of wireless telecommunications services, usually
consisting of an antenna array, connection cables, an equipment facility, and a
support structure or attachment structure to achieve the necessary elevation.
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS: Any personal wireless services as defined in the
telecommunications act of 1996, as may be amended, which includes FCC licensed
commercial wireless telecommunications services including cellular, personal
communication services (PCS), specialized mobile radio (SMR), enhanced
specialized mobile radio (ESMR), paging, and similar services that currently
exist or that may in the future be developed. (Ord. 538, 8-14-2001)
9-12-2: APPLICATION FOR WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITIES:
Any person desiring to construct, install, develop, attach or otherwise connect
a WCF or antenna array in the village or within one and one-half (11/2) miles
of the corporate limits of the village shall complete an application in the
form approved by the village and submit the completed application to the
village building official and must obtain a building permit. No new support
structure shall be permitted unless the applicant demonstrates to the
reasonable satisfaction of the village that no existing support or structure
can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna array. Collocation/site
sharing shall be preferred instead of construction of a new support structure.
Evidence submitted to demonstrate that no existing support or structure can
accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna array may consist of any of the
following:
   (A)   No existing support structures are located within the geographic area
required to meet applicant's engineering requirements.
   (B)   Existing support structures are not of sufficient height to meet
applicant's engineering requirements.
   (C)   Existing support structures do not have sufficient structural strength
to support applicant's proposed antenna and related equipment.
   (D)   The applicant's proposed antenna array would cause electromagnetic
interference with the antenna array on the existing support structures, or the
antenna array on the existing support structures would cause interference with
the applicant's proposed antenna array.
   (E)   The fees, costs, or contractual provisions required by the owner in
order to share an existing support structure or to adapt an existing support
structure for sharing are unreasonable. Costs exceeding new support structure
development and construction are presumed to be unreasonable.
   (F)   The applicant demonstrates that there are other limiting factors that
render existing support structures unsuitable. (Ord. 538, 8-14-2001)
9-12-3: SUPPORT STRUCTURE CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS:
   (A)   Permits:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to erect,
construct, place, reerect, replace or repair any support structure without
first making application to the village and securing a permit therefor as
hereinafter provided.
      2.   The applicant shall provide, at the time of application, sufficient
information to indicate that construction, installation and maintenance of the
antenna array and support structure will not create a safety hazard or damage
to the property of other persons.
   (B)   Fee: The applicant shall pay a building permit fee in the amount of
two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00).
   (C)   Construction Requirements: All antenna array and support structures
erected, constructed or modified within the village and all wiring therefor,
shall comply with the following requirements:
      1.   All applicable provisions of this code.
      2.   The support structure shall be certified by a qualified and licensed
professional engineer to conform to the latest structural standards and wind
loading requirements of the national building code (BOCA) and the Electronics
Industry Association.
      3.   With the exception of necessary electric and telephone service
connection lines, no part of any antenna array or support structure, nor any
lines, cable, equipment or wires or braces in connection with either shall at
any time extend across or over any part of the right of way, public street,
highway, sidewalk, or property line.
      4.   Support structure and associated antenna array shall be designed to
conform with accepted electrical engineering methods and practices and to
comply with the provisions of the national electrical code.
      5.   All signal and remote control conductors of low energy extending
substantially horizontally above the ground between a support structure and
antenna array and a structure, or between support structures, shall be at least
eight feet (8') above the ground at all points unless buried underground.
      6.   Every support structure affixed to the ground shall be protected to
discourage climbing of the support structure by unauthorized persons.
      7.   All support structures shall be constructed to conform with the
requirements of the occupational safety and health administration.
      8.   Antenna array and support structures shall not be erected in
residential zoning districts in violation of the following restrictions:
         (a)   Notwithstanding the general provisions of this code, the
required setback for an antenna array or support structure attached directly to
the ground shall be equal to the height of the antenna array and support
structure. Those antenna array and support structures attached to a building
and whose base is not on the ground, may be constructed if set back a distance
equal to the height of the support structures less the distance from the point
of attachment on the building to the ground.
         (b)   No support structure shall exceed a height equal to the distance
from the base of the antenna array and support structure to the nearest
overhead electrical power line which serves more than one dwelling or place of
business. Those antenna array and support structures originally attached to a
building, and whose base is not on the ground, shall not exceed an overall
height from the point of attachment to the top of support structure which is
greater than the distance from the point of attachment to the nearest overhead
electrical power line serving more than one dwelling or business.
         (c)   Metal support structures shall be constructed of, or treated
with, corrosive resistant material. Wood poles shall be impregnated with rot
resistant substances.
         (d)   The applicant will provide a written statement from a licensed
engineer certifying that the applicant will be prohibited from providing
commercial wireless telecommunication services unless a support structure is
constructed in a residential zoning district.
   (D)   Accommodation Of Additional Antenna Array: Any proposed commercial
wireless telecommunication service support structure shall be designed,
structurally, electrically, and in all respects, to accommodate both the
applicant's antenna array and comparable antenna array for at least two (2)
additional users if the support structure is over one hundred feet (100') in
height, or for at least one additional user if the support structure is over
sixty feet (60') in height. Support structures must be designed to allow for
future rearrangement of antenna array upon the support structure and to accept
antenna array mounted at varying heights. (Ord. 538, 8-14-2001)
9-12-4: SUPPORT STRUCTURE AND ANTENNA ARRAY DESIGN REQUIREMENTS:
Proposed or modified support structure and antenna array shall meet the
following design requirements:
   (A)   Support structure and antenna array shall be designed to blend into
the surrounding environment through the use of color and camouflaging
architectural treatment, except in instances where the color is dictated by
federal or state authorities, such as the federal aviation administration. For
the purpose of this subsection, camouflaging architectural treatment shall
consist of disguising the applicable support structure as an object which would
otherwise be fully consistent with the surrounding area, such as a tree, church
steeple, or building spire, as appropriate. The camouflaging shall disguise the
existence of the support structure, while retaining the natural or improved
appearance of the surrounding area, to the maximum extent possible.
   (B)   Commercial wireless telecommunication service support structures shall
be of a monopole design unless the village board determines that an alternative
design would better blend into the surrounding environment. (Ord. 538, 8-14-
2001)
9-12-5: REQUIREMENTS FOR USE OF PUBLIC FACILITIES AND SITES FOR LOCATION OF
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES:
The following sites shall be considered by applicants as the preferred order
for location of proposed wireless facilities including antenna array,
equipment, and equipment shelters. As determined feasible, and in order of
preference, the sites are:
   (A)   Publicly used structures and sites, attached to existing public
facilities such as water towers, utility structures, fire stations, bridges,
and other public buildings within all zoning districts,
   (B)   Collocation/site sharing on existing broadcast and relay towers or
support structures,
   (C)   Industrial district sites,
   (D)   Outlying business district sites,
   (E)   Central business district site,
   (F)   Residential district sites. (Ord. 538, 8-14-2001)
9-12-6: ZONING PERMITS REQUIRED:
For village owned properties and industrial districts, attached WCFs and
support structures are allowable with approved building permit and necessary
agreements. All other districts require a special use permit as provided under
the village's zoning code. (Ord. 538, 8-14-2001)
9-12-7: LIGHTING:
Support structures shall not be illuminated by artificial means and shall not
display any strobe or flashing lights unless such lighting is required by the
federal aviation administration or other federal or state authority for a
particular support structure. (Ord. 538, 8-14-2001)
9-12-8: SIGNS AND ADVERTISING:
Signs displaying warning or equipment information and meeting reasonable size
limitations may be placed on support structures. All other signs, including
signs used for advertising purposes, are prohibited. (Ord. 538, 8-14-2001)
9-12-9: EQUIPMENT FACILITY:
All equipment facilities and structures accessory to a support structure shall
be architecturally designed to blend in with the surrounding environment.
Further, such buildings shall meet minimum setback requirements of the
underlying zoning district. Ground mounted equipment shall be screened from
view by suitable vegetation and/or landscaping, except where a design of
nonvegetative screening better reflects and complements the architectural
character of the surrounding area, in which case, such nonvegetative screening
shall be utilized. (Ord. 538, 8-14-2001)
9-12-10: ABANDONED OR UNUSED SUPPORT STRUCTURES OR PORTIONS OF SUPPORT
STRUCTURES:
Abandoned or unused support structures or portions of support structures shall
be removed as follows:
   (A)   All abandoned or unused support structures, equipment facility, and
associated facilities shall be removed within six (6) months of the cessation
of operations at a site unless a time extension is required, in writing, by the
person or entity owning such support structure and/or facility, in which case
such person or entity shall be allowed an additional six (6) months to remove
the applicable support structure and/or facility. A copy of the relevant
portions of a signed lease which requires the applicant to remove the support
structure and associated facilities upon cessation of operations at the site
shall be submitted at the time of application. In the event that a support
structure is not removed in a timely manner as provided herein, the support
structure and associated facilities may be removed by the village and the cost
of removal assessed against the property.
   (B)   Unused portions of antenna array above utilized communications or
other electrical equipment shall be removed within six (6) months of the time
of antenna array relocation. The replacement of portions of a support structure
previously removed requires the issuance of a new building permit and special
use permit as applicable. (Ord. 538, 8-14-2001)
9-12-11: INTERFERENCE WITH PUBLIC SAFETY TELECOMMUNICATIONS:
No new or existing telecommunication service shall interfere with public safety
telecommunications. All applications for new service shall be accompanied by an
intermodulation study which provides a technical evaluation of existing and
proposed transmissions and indicates all potential interference problems.
Before the introduction of new services or changes in existing service,
telecommunication providers shall notify the village at least ten (10) calendar
days in advance of such changes and allow the village to monitor interference
levels during the testing process. (Ord. 538, 8-14-2001)
9-12-12: APPLICATION MATERIALS:
Development applications for support structures shall include written
documentation evidencing compliance with each provision of this code as well as
the applicable zoning regulations in addition to the following supplemental
information:
   (A)   A report from a qualified and licensed professional engineer which:
      1.   Describes the support structure height and design, including a cross
section in elevation;
      2.   Documents the height above grade for all potential mounting
positions for collocated antenna array and the minimum separation distances
between antenna array;
      3.   Describes the support structure's capacity, including the number and
type of antenna array that it can accommodate;
      4.   Documents what steps the applicant will take to avoid interference
with established public safety telecommunications;
      5.   Includes an engineer's stamp and registration number;
      6.   Includes other information necessary to evaluate the request.
   (B)   Architectural drawings depicting the constructed support structure
with camouflaging treatment set in the surrounding area. These drawings shall
include at least one perspective from the north, south, east and west.
   (C)   An overhead map of the village showing the subject support structure's
location as well as the location of each of the applicant's existing and
planned future support structure sites.
   (D)   A letter of intent committing the support structure owner and his or
her successors to allow the shared use of the support structure if an
additional user agrees in writing to meet reasonable terms and conditions for
shared use. (Ord. 538, 8-14-2001)
9-12-13: CONFLICT AND SEVERABILITY:
   (A)   Conflict: If any portion of this code is found to be in conflict with
any other provision of any zoning, building, fire safety, or other ordinance of
the village, the provision which establishes the higher standard shall prevail.
   (B)   Severability: If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase
of this code or its application to any person or circumstance is held invalid
by the decision of any court or administrative tribunal of competent
jurisdiction, the remainder of this code, or the application of the provision
to other persons or circumstances is in effect and shall remain in full force
and effect. (Ord. 538, 8-14-2001)
9-12-14: PENALTIES:
Violation of or failure to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter is
declared to be a misdemeanor. Any person violating any provisions of this
chapter, shall, upon conviction, be fined not less than two hundred dollars
($200.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense.
Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. (Ord.
538, 8-14-2001)
CHAPTER 13
OUTDOOR FURNACE
SECTION:
9-13-1: Definitions
9-13-2: Regulations For Outdoor Furnaces
9-13-3: Substantive Requirements
9-13-4: Appeals; Variances
9-13-5: Violations And Penalties
9-13-6: Civil Proceedings
9-13-1: DEFINITIONS:
CHIMNEY: Flue or flues that carries off exhaust from an outdoor furnace firebox
or burn chamber.
EPA OWHH PHASE 1 PROGRAM: EPA OWHH (outdoor wood fired hydronic heater program)
phase 1 program administered by the United States environmental protection
agency.
EPA OWHH PHASE 1 PROGRAM QUALIFIED MODEL: An outdoor wood fired hydronic heater
that has been EPA OWHH phase 1 program qualified. The model has met the EPA
OWHH phase 1 emission level and has the proper qualifying label and hangtag.
EXISTING OUTDOOR FURNACE: An outdoor furnace that was purchased and installed
prior to the effective date of this local law.
NATURAL WOOD: Wood, which has not been painted, varnished or coated with a
similar material, has not been pressure treated with preservatives and does not
contain resins or glues as in plywood or other composite wood products.
NEW OUTDOOR FURNACE: An outdoor furnace that is first installed, established or
constructed after the effective date of this local law.
OUTDOOR FURNACE: Any equipment, device, appliance or apparatus, or any part
thereof, which is installed, affixed or situated outdoors for the primary
purpose of combustion of fuel to produce heat or energy used as a component of
a heating system providing heat for any interior space or water source. An
outdoor furnace may also be referred to as an outdoor wood boiler or outdoor
wood fired hydronic heater. (Ord. 649, 6-8-2010)
9-13-2: REGULATIONS FOR OUTDOOR FURNACES:
   (A)   No person shall, after the effective date of this chapter, construct,
install, establish, operate or maintain an outdoor furnace other than in
compliance with the applicable sections of this chapter.
   (B)   No person shall, after the effective date of this chapter operate an
outdoor furnace unless such operation conforms with the manufacturer's
instructions regarding such operation and the requirements of this chapter
regarding fuels that may be burned in an outdoor furnace and chimney height as
set forth in section
9-13-3 of this chapter.
   (C)   All new outdoor furnaces shall be constructed, established, installed,
operated and maintained in conformance with the manufacturer's instructions and
the requirements of this chapter. In the event of a conflict, the requirements
of this chapter shall apply unless the manufacturer's instructions are
stricter, in which case the manufacturer's instructions shall apply.
   (D)   The owner of any new outdoor furnace shall produce the manufacturer's
owner's manual or installation instructions to the building permit director to
review prior to installation.
   (E)   All new outdoor furnaces shall be laboratory tested and listed to
appropriate safety standards such as UL, CAN/CSA, ANSI or other applicable
safety standards.
   (F)   If an existing outdoor furnace is, through the course of a proper
investigation by any federal, state or local authority, creating a verifiable
nuisance, as defined by a local, state or federal law, the following steps may
be taken by the owner and the appropriate federal, state or local department
having jurisdiction:
      1.   Modifications made to the unit to eliminate the nuisance such as
extending the chimney, or relocating the outdoor furnace or both.
      2.   Cease and desist operating the unit until reasonable steps can be
taken to ensure that the outdoor furnace will not be a nuisance. (Ord. 649, 6-
8-2010; amd. Ord. 803, 5-13-2025)
9-13-3: SUBSTANTIVE REQUIREMENTS:
Outdoor furnaces shall be constructed, established, installed, operated and
maintained pursuant to the following conditions:
   (A)   Permitted Fuels: Fuel burned in any new or existing outdoor furnace
shall be only natural untreated wood, wood pellets, corn products, biomass
pellets or other listed fuels specifically permitted by the manufacturer's
instructions such as fuel oil, natural gas or propane backup.
   (B)   Prohibited Fuels: The following fuels are strictly prohibited in new
or existing outdoor furnaces:
      1.   Wood that has been painted, varnished or coated with similar
material and/or has been pressure treated with preservatives and contains
resins or glues as in plywood or other composite wood products.
      2.   Rubbish or garbage including, but not limited to, food wastes, food
packaging, food wraps.
      3.   Any plastic materials including, but not limited to, nylon, PVC,
ABS, polystyrene or urethane foam, and synthetic fabrics, plastic films and
plastic containers.
      4.   Rubber including tires or other synthetic rubberlike products.
      5.   Newspaper, cardboard, or any paper with ink or dye products.
      6.   Any other items not specifically allowed by the manufacturer or this
provision.
   (C)   Setback Requirements: Setbacks for any new outdoor furnace for models
not EPA OWHH phase 1 program qualified:
      1.   The outdoor furnace shall be located at least twenty five feet (25')
from the property line.
      2.   The outdoor furnace shall be located on the property in compliance
with manufacturer's recommendations and/or testing and listing requirements for
clearance to combustible materials.
      3.   The outdoor furnace shall be located at least one hundred feet
(100') from any dwelling that is not served by the outdoor furnace.
   (D)   Chimney Heights For New And Existing Outdoor Furnaces:
      1.   The chimney of any new outdoor furnace shall extend at least two
feet (2') above the peak of any dwelling not served by the outdoor furnace
located within three hundred feet (300') of such outdoor furnace.
      2.   If there is an existing outdoor furnace already installed and a new
dwelling not served by the outdoor furnace is installed within three hundred
feet (300') of such outdoor furnace then the owner of such outdoor furnace
shall conform to the stack height requirements of this regulation within thirty
(30) days of the date such construction is complete and upon written notice
from the building permit director.
   (E)   Setbacks For EPA OWHH Phase 1 Program Qualified Models:
      1.   The outdoor furnace shall be located at least twenty five feet (25')
from the property line.
      2.   The outdoor furnace shall be located on the property in compliance
with manufacturer's recommendations and/or testing and listing requirements for
clearance to combustible materials.
   (F)   Chimney Heights For EPA OWHH Phase 1 Program Qualified Models:
      1.   The EPA OWHH phase 1 program qualified model chimney shall extend at
least two feet (2') above the peak of the dwelling for which it serves if
neighboring dwellings not served by the furnace are located within three
hundred feet (300') or the chimney shall extend at least two feet (2') above
the peak of any dwelling not served by the furnace within one hundred feet
(100'), whichever is greater.
   (G)   Palletized Biomass Requirements: Outdoor furnaces that use corn, wood
pellets or other palletized biomass shall meet the same setback and stack
height requirements as EPA OWHH phase 1 program qualified models. (Ord. 649, 6-
8-2010; amd. Ord. 803, 5-13-2025)
9-13-4: APPEALS; VARIANCES:
Appeals from any actions, decisions, or rulings of the building permit director
or for a variance from the strict application of the specific requirements in
section
9-13-2 or
9-13-3 of this chapter may be made to the board of appeals.
   (A)   Appeals Fees: Appeals fees shall be established by the board of
trustees on a schedule of fees to be maintained at the village clerk's office
and available for public inspection.
   (B)   Public Hearing: Within sixty (60) days after receiving the written
request, the board of appeals shall hold a public hearing on the appeal, with
prior notice published in accordance with this code.
   (C)   Decision Of The Board Of Appeals: Within sixty (60) days of the final
adjournment of a public hearing, the board of appeals shall affirm, modify, or
deny the action, decision, or ruling of the building permit director or correct
any omission by the building permit director, or approve, approve with
conditions, or disapprove the application. The decision of the board of appeals
shall be in writing and shall contain findings and the factual basis for each
finding from the record of the hearing, which shall support the decision of the
board of appeals. As part of any decision, the board of appeals shall direct
the building permit director to issue any appropriate permit in conformity with
its ruling and shall state a time by which such permit shall be issued, in
conformity with this code.
   (D)   Criteria For Variances: In making its determination, the board of
appeals shall take into consideration the benefit to the applicant if the
variance is granted, as weighted against the detriment of the neighborhood or
community by such grant. In making such determination the board shall also
consider:
      1.   Whether an undesirable change will be produced in the character of
the neighborhood or a detriment to nearby properties will be created by the
granting of the variance;
      2.   Whether the benefit sought by the applicant can be achieved by some
method, feasible for the applicant to pursue, other than a variance;
      3.   Whether the requested variance is substantial;
      4.   Whether the alleged difficulty was self-created, which consideration
shall be relevant to the decision of the board of appeals, but shall not
necessarily preclude the granting of the variance;
      5.   All other criteria allowed by Illinois law. (Ord. 649, 6-8-2010;
amd. Ord. 803, 5-13-2025)
9-13-5: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be subject to
a penalty under the general penalty provision of title 1, chapter 4 of this
code. Each week's continued violation shall constitute a separate and distinct
offense. (Ord. 649, 6-8-2010)
9-13-6: CIVIL PROCEEDINGS:
Compliance with this law may also be compelled and violations restrained by
order or by injunction of a court of competent jurisdiction. Any person who
violates any provision of this law shall also be subject to a penalty of not
more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00), to be recovered by the village
of Erie, and each day's continued violation shall be for this purpose a
separate and distinct violation and subject to an additional penalty each day
of not more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). In the event the
village of Erie is required to take legal action to enforce this chapter, the
violator shall be responsible for any and all necessary costs relative thereto,
including attorney fees. (Ord. 649, 6-8-2010)
CHAPTER 14
SOLAR AND WIND ENERGY
SECTION:
9-14-1: Intent And Purpose
9-14-2: Definitions
9-14-3: Wind And Solar Renewable Energy Systems
9-14-1: INTENT AND PURPOSE:
Providing zoning regulations to guide the installation and operation of wind
and solar renewable energy systems to be used primarily on site and to
accommodate sustainable energy production from renewable energy sources. (Ord.
747, 2-11-2020)
9-14-2: DEFINITIONS:
                                      An arrangement by which excess energy
NET METERING:                         generated by a renewable energy system is
                                      distributed back to the electrical
                                      utility grid.
                                      A system that generates energy from
                                      natural resources such as sunlight, wind,
RENEWABLE ENERGY SYSTEM:              and geothermal heat. As used herein, the
                                      term "Renewable Energy System" refers to
                                      wind energy systems and solar energy
                                      systems only.
                                      A system that uses the power of the sun
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM:                  to capture, distribute or store energy
                                      for on-site consumption of utility power.
                                      A solar energy system that is an integral
                                      part of a principal or accessory
SOLAR ENERGY BUILDING- INTEGRATED:    building, rather than a separate
                                      mechanical device, replacing or
                                      substituting for an architectural or
                                      structural component of a building.
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM BUILDING-MOUNTED: A solar energy system affixed to either
                                      the principal or accessory structure.
                                      A solar energy system that is not
                                      attached to another structure and is
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM GROUND-MOUNTED:   affixed to the ground, or that is
                                      attached to an antenna, light pole or
                                      other utility facility.
                                      A commercial solar energy system that is
                                      used to convert sunlight to electricity
SOLAR FARM ENERGY SYSTEM:             for on-site or off-site use with the
                                      primary purpose being to provide or sell
                                      wholesale or retail electricity.
                                      A wind energy conversion system
                                      consisting of a wind turbine, a tower or
WIND ENERGY SYSTEM:                   mounting, and associated control or
                                      conversion electronics, which is intended
                                      primarily to reduce on-site consumption
                                      of utility power. (Ord. 747, 2-11-2020)
 
9-14-3: WIND AND SOLAR RENEWABLE ENERGY SYSTEMS:
   (A)   General Requirements: The requirements set forth in this chapter shall
govern the construction or installation of all renewable energy systems
governed by this chapter.
      1.   Applicability: The provisions of this chapter are intended to
establish parameters by which solar energy systems may be installed in the
Village. Wind energy systems and solar farm energy systems are not permitted.
Additional renewable energy installations not addressed explicitly herein may
be authorized, subject to compliance with the applicable building codes and
standards of the Village.
      2.   Use: Except as authorized by the Board of Trustees for public
utility purposes, a renewable energy system shall be accessory to the principal
permitted use of a lot.
      3.   Approvals: Approval granted to an individual lot owner for a
renewable energy system under the provisions of this chapter shall not be
construed to bar owners or tenants of any adjacent property from ordinary or
permitted building, landscaping or other accessory improvements, even if such
improvements may diminish the function of a renewable energy system.
      4.   Permitting And Installation:
         (a)   A Village building permit is required prior to the installation
of any renewable energy system. Before a building permit is issued, the
following shall be submitted to the Village Building Official for review:
            (1)   A site plan showing:
               A.   Name, address and phone number of the lot owner;
               B.   Lot lines;
               C.   All structures;
               D.   Septic field;
               E.   Setback lines;
               F.   Location of all solar panels and associated equipment; and
               G.   Location of the electrical disconnect for the solar energy
system.
            (2)   Evidence that the local electric utility has been informed of
the customer's intent to install a customer-owned solar energy system.
            (3)   Evidence that the site plan has been submitted to the Erie
fire protection district.
         (b)   The owner of a renewable energy system shall ensure that it is
installed and maintained in compliance with applicable building and safety
codes adopted by the Village and any other state or federal agency of
applicable jurisdiction.
         (c)   All wiring associated with a renewable energy system shall be
underground or contained within a raceway that complements the building
materials of the principal structure.
      5.   Interconnection With Public Utilities - Electric:
         (a)   Energy produced by a renewable energy system shall be utilized
on site, except for net metering as authorized by the Village and other
applicable regulatory agencies required by law.
         (b)   The interconnection of any renewable energy system to the
electric distribution grid shall be in accordance with applicable regulatory
agencies required by law.
      6.   Illumination of a renewable energy system shall be prohibited.
      7.   No signage or attention-getting device is permitted on any renewable
energy system.
      8.   There shall be no required physical screening for renewable energy
systems installed on roofs.
   (B)   Solar Energy Systems:
      1.   Authorization Of Use:
         (a)   Building-integrated and building-mounted solar energy systems
may be authorized administratively in all zoning districts in accordance with
the requirements of this chapter by the Board of Trustees. Ground-mounted solar
energy systems are not permitted.
      2.   Height:
         (a)   Building-Mounted Solar Energy System: A building-mounted solar
energy system may not extend above the peak roof height of the building to
which the solar energy systems is affixed.
   (C)   Maintenance And Removal Of Renewable Energy Systems:
      1.   Renewable energy systems must be maintained in good repair and
operable condition at all times, including compliance with all standards in
applicable building and technical codes to ensure structural and technical
integrity of such facilities, except for maintenance and repair outages. If a
system becomes inoperable or damaged, operations must cease and be promptly
remedied.
      2.   If the Village determines that a renewable energy system fails to
comply with the applicable provisions of this Code, the Village shall provide
written notification to the property owner. The property owner shall have a
period of ninety (90) days from the date of notification to either restore the
renewable energy system to operation or remove the system.
      3.   In the event such renewable energy system is not brought into
compliance with this Code within the specified time period, the Village may
remove or cause the removal of said facility at the property owner's expense.
      4.   The Village may pursue any and all available legal remedies to
ensure that a renewable energy system to complies with this Code.
      5.   Any delay by the Village in taking enforcement action against the
owner of a renewable energy system and the owner of the property if such owner
is different from the owner of such facility, shall not waive the Village's
right to take any action at a later time.
      6.   The Village may seek to have the renewable energy system removed
regardless of the owner's or operator's intent for said facility, and
regardless of any permits that may have been issued or granted.
      7.   After the renewable energy system is removed, the owner of the
property on which the system was located shall promptly restore the property to
its condition prior to the installation of the system.
   (D)   Severability: If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or
portion of this chapter is held invalid or unconstitutional for any reason by a
court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate,
distinct and independent provision, and such judgment shall not affect the
validity of the remaining portions hereof.
   (E)   Conflicts Resolved: This chapter supersedes all chapters or parts of
ordinances adopted prior hereto which are in conflict herewith, to the extent
of such conflict. (Ord. 747, 2-11-2020)
CHAPTER 15
PORTABLE STORAGE CONTAINERS
SECTION:
9-15-1: Definition
9-15-2: Permit Required
9-15-3: Application
9-15-4: Permit Fee
9-15-5: Location
9-15-6: Placement, Appearance And Maintenance Of Portable Storage Containers
9-15-7: Industry District And Commercial Use
9-15-8: Penalties
9-15-1: DEFINITION:
A portable storage container is any container that is not considered a building
or structure under this title and used for the storage or collection of
personal property including but not limited to what are commonly referred to as
cargo containers or portable on demand storage containers, conveyances/
structures constructed for purposes of the transportation of people or goods,
including, but not limited to, truck trailers, railroad cars, rail piggy-back
container units, travel trailers, mobile or manufactured homes and other
similar units, shall not be placed on any lot or parcel of land as an
accessory, on-site storage structure ("Container") but shall not include a
container used only for the removal of garbage, refuse, and waste under this
Code relating to solid waste. (Ord. 734, 4-9-2019)
9-15-2: PERMIT REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to place or maintain a portable storage
container on private or public property (except for use in an Industrial
District and commercial use set forth in section
9-15-7) unless a permit for temporary use is obtained in advance pursuant to
this section. No permit may be granted for a portable storage container more
than eight feet (8') wide or more than twenty feet (20') in length. (Ord. 734,
4-9-2019)
9-15-3: APPLICATION:
An application for a permit shall be made to the Village Office providing such
information as the building permit director shall require by rules adopted by
the building permit director and approved by the Board of Trustees. A permit
issued by the building permit director shall allow the temporary use of a
portable storage container for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days. The
building permit director shall have the right to grant one extension for an
additional thirty (30) day period upon application to and approval by the
building permit director of such extension. If an extension is granted an
additional permit fee must be paid by the applicant. The building permit
director may require insurance or security if the permit provides for placement
of the portable storage container on public property. Permits shall be limited
to one permit per zoning lot per year and no applicant shall be granted another
permit within a period of one year after the application date for a permit
granted hereunder. (Ord. 734, 4-9-2019; amd. Ord. 803, 5-13-2025)
9-15-4: PERMIT FEE:
A permit fee shall be paid in the amount provided according to the fee schedule
on file and available for public inspection in the office of the Village Clerk.
(Ord. 734, 4-9-2019)
9-15-5: LOCATION:
No portable storage container shall be placed in any of the following
locations:
   (A)   Within the front yard as defined in this title;
   (B)   On any parkway or sidewalk; or
   (C)   In violation of the setback requirements for the side yard or back
yard as set forth in this title. (Ord. 734, 4-9-2019)
9-15-6: PLACEMENT, APPEARANCE AND MAINTENANCE OF PORTABLE STORAGE CONTAINERS:
It shall be the responsibility of the person issued the permit to place the
portable storage container in the appropriate location granted by the permit,
to maintain the portable storage container free of graffiti and to ensure that
no spillage of materials or materials escape from the container and litter any
property in the Village. No person or entity granted a permit for a portable
storage containers shall rent or sublet the container to a third party. (Ord.
734, 4-9-2019)
9-15-7: INDUSTRY DISTRICT AND COMMERCIAL USE:
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary herein, portable storage containers
shall be permitted without regard to the regulations stated in this chapter on
any property zoned as an Industrial District under this title and the
provisions of this chapter regulating portable storage containers shall not
apply to property located in an Industrial District as defined in this title.
Furthermore, portable storage containers may be used for commercial uses as
approved by the Board of Trustees. (Ord. 734, 4-9-2019)
9-15-8: PENALTIES:
Any person violating this chapter shall be subject to a fine in an amount not
less than fifty dollars ($50.00) and not more than seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00) for each offense. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist
shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 734, 4-9-2019)
CHAPTER 16
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
SECTION:
9-16-1: Purpose
9-16-2: Applicability
9-16-3: Stormwater Management Plans
9-16-4: Other Pre-Ordinance Drainage Conditions
9-16-5: General Provisions
9-16-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this Chapter is to reduce or eliminate the hazards to the public
health and safety caused by excessive stormwater runoff, reduce the effects of
soil erosion and sedimentation caused by development, reduce economic losses to
individuals and the community at large, enhance broader social and economic
objectives, and protect, conserve and promote the orderly development of land
and water resources. The provisions of this Chapter shall be deemed as
additional requirements to standards required by other provisions of the Erie
Municipal Code and an applicant must comply with all other applicable laws. In
cases of conflicting requirements, the most restrictive shall apply. (Ord. 778,
12-13-2022)
9-16-2: APPLICABILITY:
A stormwater management plan shall be required for any new residential
developments resulting in a gross aggregate impervious lot coverage of fifty
percent (50%) or more; new residential developments having two (2) or more
dwelling units; and for any new commercial, industrial, institutional or
utility developments. No final subdivision plat shall be approved and no zoning
certificates shall be issued until and unless the stormwater management plan
has been reviewed and approved by the Board of Trustees (“Board”) of the
Village of Erie (“Village”). (Ord. 778, 12-13-2022)
9-16-3: STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLANS:
The required stormwater management plan shall identify means for controlling
the stormwater runoff release rate (the rate of stormwater runoff released from
dominant to servient land) from the development and providing storage potential
for the excess stormwater runoff (where required). All computations, plans and
specifications related to the implementation of this Chapter must be prepared
and sealed by a professional engineer, registered in Illinois. The stormwater
management plan shall contain, but not be limited to, the following
information, unless specifically excluded by the Board:
   (A)   A topographic map of the project site and adjacent areas, of suitable
scale and contour interval, which shall define the location of streams, the
extent of floodplains and calculated high water elevations, the shoreline of
lakes, ponds, swamps and detention basins including their inflow and outflow
structures, if any.
   (B)   The location and flowline elevation of all existing sanitary, storm,
or combined sewers.
   (C)   Detailed determination of runoff anticipated for the entire project
site following development, indicating design volumes and rates of proposed
runoff for each portion of the watershed tributary to the storm drainage
system, the calculations used to determine said runoff volumes and rates and
restatement of the criteria which have been used by the project engineer
throughout his calculations.
   (D)   A layout of the proposed stormwater management system including the
location and size of all drainage structures, storm sewers, channels and
channel sections, detention basins, and analyses regarding the effect said
improvements shall have upon the receiving channel and its high-water
elevation.
   (E)   The slope, type, and size of all existing and proposed storm sewers
and other waterways.
   (F)   For all stormwater management facilities (which shall include any
structure designated to collect or store surface water), a plot or tabulation
of storage volumes, for the design capacity, with corresponding water surface
elevations and the facility outflow rates for those water surface elevations.
   (G)   An erosion and sedimentation control plan showing: All erosion and
sedimentation control measures necessary to meet the objectives of this Chapter
and the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) throughout all
phases of construction and permanently after completion of development of the
site. Provisions for maintenance of temporary and permanent control facilities,
including easements. Identification of the person(s) or entity which shall have
legal and financial responsibility for maintenance of permanent, erosion
control structures and measures after development is completed, and such
identification and/or any subsequent changes thereto should be provided to the
Board. Provisions shall be made to revise this information, upon any change in
related ownership and/or cited responsibility.
   (H)   A reference elevation benchmark (which shall be a permanent, frost-
proof monument approved by the Village) shall be established in the near
vicinity to the stormwater management facility and shall be referenced on the
plan. (Ord. 778, 12-13-2022)
9-16-4: OTHER PRE-ORDINANCE DRAINAGE CONDITIONS:
Upon passage of this Chapter, drainage conditions in residential, commercial
and industrial areas, in the Village shall be considered established as
existing drainage conditions. Changes to these existing, drainage conditions,
through improvements, which have an adverse effect on adjoining or neighboring
properties, shall be considered as a violation of this Chapter. The Zoning
Enforcing Officer shall have the authority to investigate such changes when
complaints are filed with the Village. The Zoning Enforcing Officer shall
require that pre-ordinance drainage conditions be re-established. (Ord. 778,
12-13-2022)
9-16-5: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
   (A)   The Board may require the applicant to post a performance security
instrument, as approved by the Village Attorney, in an amount sufficient to
ensure the execution of the stormwater management plan.
   (B)   Maintenance of stormwater management facilities located on private
property shall be the responsibility of the owner(s) in that development and
the Board may require the applicant to execute a maintenance agreement.
   (C)   A fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00), plus five dollars ($5.00) per
acre over five (5) acres, shall accompany the submittal of each Stormwater
Management Plan for review.
   (D)   The interpretation and application of the provisions of this Chapter
shall be held to be the minimum requirements and shall be liberally construed
in favor of the Village and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any
other powers granted by the State statutes.
   (E)   Upon completion of the stormwater management project, the developer’s
engineer and the President shall affix their signatures to a set of the
stormwater management plans which has been annotated to show any approved
changes made to the plan during construction. This set of plans will constitute
the final stormwater management plans for the project and will be used for
future determinations regarding maintenance needs.
   (F)   A professional engineer, hired by the developer, shall be responsible
for determining whether the stormwater management plan is in conformance with
this Chapter and the approved stormwater management plan, and whether
development is proceeding in accordance with the approved stormwater management
plan. Periodic inspection of the development site shall be made by the
developer’s engineer to ensure compliance. All Village employees or agents
shall be permitted to enter upon all properties for the purpose of inspection,
observation, and measurement, in accordance with the provisions of this
Chapter.
   (G)   The Village shall have the power to enforce this Chapter and the
approved stormwater management plan and specifications. If a violation is noted
during constructive activity, the Village reserves the right to issue a stop
work order until the violation is corrected. No zoning certificate or building
permit shall be issued for improvements on any property which is found to be in
violation of this Chapter or a stormwater management plan until the violation
is corrected to the satisfaction of the Board.
   (H)   The Village shall have the right to require an applicant or any person
or entity found to be in violation of this Chapter to reimburse or pay to the
Village any reasonable costs or expenses incurred by the Village including
engineer fees, inspection costs and attorney fees. This provision shall be
liberally construed. (Ord. 778, 12-13-2022)
