VILLAGE OF EVERGREEN PARK, IL
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2026 S-25 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through 9-30-25
 
Published by:
AMERICAN LEGAL PUBLISHING
525 Vine Street * Suite 310 * Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-800-445-5588 www.amlegal.com
OFFICIALS
OF THE
VILLAGE OF EVERGREEN PARK, ILLINOIS
2024
______________
Kelly Burke
Mayor
______________
Norman Anderson
Carol E. Kyle
Mark Marzullo
James A. McQuillan
Jeannie Olson
Mark T. Phelan
Trustees
______________
Kelly Duffy
Village Clerk
______________
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 1-1. How Code designated and cited.
The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute
and be designated the "Evergreen Park Municipal Code," and may be so cited.
(Code 1965, § 1-1)
Sec. 1-2. Rules of construction and definitions.
In the construction of this Code, and of all ordinances, the rules and
definitions set out in this section shall be observed, unless such construction
would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the board of trustees. The
rules of construction and definitions set out herein shall not be applied to
any section of this Code which shall contain any express provision excluding
such construction, or where the subject matter or context of such section may
be repugnant thereto.
   Generally. All general provisions, terms, phrases and expressions contained
in this Code shall be liberally construed in order that the true intent and
meaning of the board of trustees may be fully carried out. In the
interpretation and application of any provision of this Code, it shall be held
to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health,
safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any provision of the
Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than the general
provision imposed by the Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction
or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling.
   Board, board of trustees, village board. Whenever the term "board," "board
of trustees" or "village board" are used, they shall be construed to mean the
board of trustees of the Village of Evergreen Park, Illinois, which shall
consist of the mayor and trustees.
   State law reference—Board of trustees to be composed of president and
trustees, 65 ILCS 5/3-12-5.
   Circuit court or court. The term "circuit court" or "court" shall refer to
the Circuit Court of Cook County, Illinois.
   State law reference—Cook County to be one (1) judicial circuit, 705 ILCS 35/
1.
   Code. The term "Code" or "this Code" shall mean the Evergreen Park Municipal
Code designated in section
1-1 above.
   Computation of time. The time within which any act provided by this Code is
to be done shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last,
unless the last day is Saturday or Sunday or is a legal holiday, in which case
it shall also be excluded. If the day succeeding such Saturday, Sunday or
holiday is also a holiday or a Saturday or Sunday, then such succeeding day
shall also be excluded.
   Corporate authorities. The term "corporate authorities" shall mean the board
of trustees.
   State law reference—Similar provisions, 65 ILCS 5/1-1-2(2).
   Corporate or village limits. The term "corporate limits" or "village limits"
shall mean the legal boundaries of the Village of Evergreen Park.
   County. The words "the county" or "this county" shall mean Cook County,
Illinois.
   Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring the head of
a department or some other village officer to do some act or make certain
inspections, it is to be construed to authorize the head of the department or
other officer to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the
required act or make the required inspection unless the terms of the provision
or section designate otherwise.
   Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be
applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to
males.
   Joint authority. All words giving a joint authority to three (3) or more
persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority
of such persons or officers.
   Keeper and proprietor. The words "keeper" and "proprietor" shall mean and
include persons, firms, associations, corporations, clubs and partnerships,
whether acting by themselves or a servant, agent or employee.
   May. The word "may" shall be construed as being permissive.
   May not. The words "may not" shall have a prohibitory effect and state a
prohibition.
   Mayor. The word "mayor" means the president of the village.
   State law reference—Village president may be referred to as mayor, 65 ILCS
5/1-1-2.1.
   Month. The word "month" shall mean a calendar month.
   Must. The word "must" shall be construed as being mandatory.
   Nontechnical and technical words. Words and phrases shall be construed
according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words
and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate
meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning.
   Number. A word importing the singular number only may extend and be applied
to several persons and things as well as to one (1) person and thing.
   Oath. The word "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all
cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in
such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words
"affirm" and "affirmed."
   Officers generally. Whenever any officer is referred to by title, such as
"clerk," "chief of police," etc., such reference shall be construed as if
followed by the words "of the Village of Evergreen Park."
   Owner. The word "owner," applied to a building or land, shall include any
part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant,
or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or of a part of such building or land.
   Person. The word "person" shall extend and be applied to associations,
clubs, societies, firms, partnerships and bodies politic and corporate as well
as to individuals.
   Personal property. The words "personal property" shall include every species
of property except real property, as herein described.
   Preceding, following. The words "preceding" and "following" mean next before
and next after, respectively.
   Property. The word "property" shall include real and personal property.
   Real property. The words "real proeprty" shall include lands, tenements and
hereditaments.
   Shall. The word "shall" is mandatory.
   Sidewalk. The word "sidewalk" shall mean any portion of a street between the
curbline and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians,
excluding parkways.
   Signature or subscription. The word "signature" or "subscription" shall
include a mark when the person cannot write.
   State. The words "the state" or "this state" shall be construed to mean the
State of Illinois.
   Street. The word "street" shall be construed to embrace streets, avenues,
boulevards, roads, alleys, lanes, viaducts and all other public highways in the
village, and shall include all areas thereof embraced between the property
lines and dedicated to the public use.
   Tenant or occupant. The word "tenant" or "occupant," applied to a building
or land, shall include any person holding a written or oral lease or who
occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, either alone or with
others.
   Time. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as
the past and present. If a time is given in a.m. or p.m. it shall mean Central
Standard Time except that when the village is on daylight saving time it shall
mean Central Daylight Time.
   Trustee. The word "trustee" shall mean a member of the board of trustees of
the Village of Evergreen Park.
   Village. The words "the village" or "this village" shall mean the Village of
Evergreen Park, Cook County, Illinois.
   Wholesale, wholesaler, etc. In all cases where the words "wholesale,"
"wholesaler," and "wholesale dealer" are used in this Code, unless otherwise
specifically defined, they shall be understood and held to relate to the sale
of goods, merchandise, articles or things in quantity to persons who purchase
for purposes of resale, as distinguished from a retail dealer who sells in
smaller quantities direct to the consumer.
   Written or in writing. The words "written" or "in writing" shall be
construed to include any representation of words, letters or figures, whether
by printing or otherwise.
   Year. The word "year" shall mean a calendar year. (Code 1965, § 1-2)
Sec. 1-3. Code an exercise of home rule power.
This Code shall be construed to be an exercise of the home rule powers granted
by art. VII, sec. 6 of the Illinois Constitution of 1970.
Sec. 1-4. Catchlines of sections; history notes, etc.; references to Code.
   (a)   The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in
boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the
section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as
any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so
deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or
reenacted.
   (b)   The history or source notes appearing in parentheses after sections in
this Code are not intended to have any legal effect but are merely intended to
indicate the source of matter contained in the section. Cross references and
state law references which appear after sections or subsections of this Code or
which otherwise appear in footnote form are provided for the convenience of the
user of this Code and have no legal effect.
   (c)   All references to chapters, articles, or sections are to the chapters,
articles, and sections of this Code unless otherwise specified.
(Code 1965, § 1-3)
Sec. 1-5. Effect of repeal of ordinances.
   (a)   When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause or provision
shall be itself repealed, such repeal shall not be construed to revive such
former ordinance, clause or provision unless it shall be therein so expressly
provided.
   (b)   The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty
incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding
pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed or cause of action
arising under the ordinance repealed. (Code 1965, § 1-6)
Sec. 1-6. Amendments to Code.
All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way
affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of
this Code and printed for inclusion therein, or in the case of repealed
chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof, by subsequent
ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission
from reprinted pages affected thereby and the subsequent ordinances as numbered
and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of
such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code and subsequent
ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new Code by the board of
trustees.
Sec. 1-7. Aiding, abetting, encouraging offense.
It shall be unlawful for any person, in any way or manner, to aid, abet,
counsel, advise or encourage any other person in the commission of any of the
acts mentioned herein or in any manner encourage the commission of an offense
defined in this Code.
Sec. 1-8. Unauthorized alteration or tampering with Code.
It shall be unlawful for any person in the village to change or amend, by
additions or deletions, any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or
delete pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any
manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the village to be misrepresented
thereby.
Sec. 1-9. General penalty.
   (a)   General penalty for violation of Code. Whenever in this Code or in any
ordinance of the village any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be
unlawful or an offense, or whenever in such Code or ordinance the doing of any
act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, where
no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision
of this Code or any ordinance shall be punished by a fine of not less than
$75.00 nor more than $750.00. Each day any violation of any provision of this
Code or of any ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense.
   (b)   Imprisonment. No complaint shall be filed under any section of this
Code punishable by incarceration in a penal institution other than the
penitentiary of not to exceed 6 months, unless the section of this Code
provides for that imprisonment. All such complaints shall state that a
conviction may result by incarceration of not to exceed 6 months and shall
require the prosecution to establish the guilt beyond a reasonable doubt.
   (c)   Citations ("P" tickets). Before a complaint in court is filed, a
citation ("P" ticket) may be issued advising the defendant of a violation of
any section of this Code and requesting payment for the amounts set forth in
this Code (such as in section
13-388 or in section
12-216), and if no amount is set forth in this Code, then in accordance with a
schedule of fines to be approved by the Mayor and made public at the Village
Hall, but the schedule of fines shall not exceed $500 for each separate
offense. For non vehicular violations, the procedures set forth in Article X of
Chapter 12 of this Code (sections
12-370 through
12-378) shall be implemented. For vehicular violations, the procedures set
forth in Article X of
Chapter 13 of this Code (sections
13-380 through
13-392) shall be implemented.
   (d)   Responsibility of corporation; joint liability. A corporation may be
prosecuted for the commission of an offense performed by any officer, agent, or
employee of the corporation where the offense is committed while the person is
acting within the scope of his office, employment or agency; the commission of
the offense is authorized, requested, commanded, performed, permitted, allowed;
or by neglect of the corporation. Am officer or any other agent who has a
position of comparable authority for the formulation of corporate policy or the
supervision of subordinate employees in a managerial capacity is legally
accountable for any offense committed in the name of or in behalf of the
corporation to the same extent as if it were performed in his own name and
behalf and may be prosecuted for violations of this chapter.
   Prosecutions for violations may be jointly, severally or in the alternative
against any of the above-named persons. Persons jointly liable for any
violations may be prosecuted under one (1) complaint.
   (e)   Cumulative remedies. The remedies or penalties enumerated in this
section are cumulative and the village may prosecute in the alternative and, in
the case of a nuisance, subject the person committing such nuisance to an
immediate arrest without the notice to abate or other procedure and may, in
addition, proceed for any other violation of any other section of this Code,
the federal and state statutes, or the common law.
(Ord. No. 32-2009 § 1, 12-7-09; Am. Ord. No. 29-2018 § 1, 11-5-18; Am. Ord. No.
15-2025 § 1, 6-16-25)
Sec. 1-10. Reserved.
Sec. 1-11. Severability of parts of Code.
The sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are
severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this
Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of a
court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any
of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this
Code.
(Code 1965, § 1-9)
Sec. 1-12. Ordinances, etc., not affected by Code.
   (a)   Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect
any of the following:
      (1)   Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment
of money for the village or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the
village or any evidence of the village's indebtedness.
      (2)   Any appropriation ordinance or ordinance providing for the levy of
taxes or for an annual budget.
      (3)   Any ordinance annexing territory to the village or excluding
territory as a part of the village.
      (4)   Any ordinance granting any franchise, permit or other right.
      (5)   Any ordinance authorizing or otherwise relating to any contract,
agreement, lease, deed or other instrument.
      (6)   Any ordinance rezoning property.
      (7)   Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision.
      (8)   Any ordinance levying special assessments or providing for local
improvements.
      (9)   Any ordinance relating to the salaries of village officers or
employees.
      (10)   Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating,
relocating, opening, closing, paving or vacating any street or public way.
      (11)   Any ordinance providing regulations for cable television.
      (12)   Any ordinance relating to railroads or railroad crossings with
streets or other public ways or relating to the conduct, duties, service or
rates of public utilities not codified.
      (13)   Any ordinance whose purpose has been accomplished.
      (14)   Any ordinance which is special although permanent in effect.
      (15)   Any ordinance which is temporary although general in effect.
   (b)   All such ordinances are recognized as continuing in full force and
effect to the same extent as if set out at length herein.
Sec. 1-13. Code does not affect prior offenses, rights, etc.
   (a)   Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect
any offense or act committed or done, or any penalty or forfeiture incurred, or
any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this
Code.
   (b)   The adoption of this Code shall not be interpreted as authorizing or
allowing any use or the continuance of any use of a structure or premises in
violation of any ordinance of the village in effect on the date of adoption of
this Code.
Sec. 1-14. Provisions as continuation of existing ordinances.
The provisions of this Code, insofar as they are substantially the same as
ordinance provisions previously adopted by the village relating to the same
subject matter, shall be construed as restatements and continuations thereof
and not as new enactments.
Chapter 2
ADMINISTRATION
Art. I.   In General, §§ 2-1-2-25
Art. II.   Mayor and Board of Trustees, §§ 2-26-2-150
   Div. 1. Generally, §§ 2-26-2-45
   Div. 2. Mayor, §§ 2-46-2-70
   Div. 3. Rules of Order and Procedure, §§ 2-71-2-125
   Div. 4. Legislation, §§ 2-126-2-150
Art. III.   Officers and Employees, §§ 2-151-2-320
   Div. 1. Generally, §§ 2-151-2-180
   Div. 2. Village Attorney, §§ 2-181-2-200
   Div. 3. Village Prosecutor, §§ 2-201-2-215
   Div. 4. Village Clerk, §§ 2-216-2-240
   Div. 5. Village Treasurer, §§ 2-241-2-260
   Div. 6. Village Collector, §§ 2-261-2-285
   Div. 7. Director of Citizens' Services, §§ 2-286-2-300
   Div. 8. Recreation Director, §§ 2-301-2-309
   Div. 9. Intergovernmental and Community Relations Advisor, §§ 2-310-2-320
Art. IV.   Finance, §§ 2-321-2-345
Art. V .   Boards and Commissions, §§ 2-346-2-419
   Div. 1. Generally, §§ 2-346-2-360
   Div. 2. Board of Fire and Police Commissioners, §§ 2-361-2-380
   Div. 3. Board of Local Improvements, §§ 2-381-2-400
   Div. 4. Emergency Telephone System Board, §§ 2-401-2-410
   Div. 5. Historical Commission, §§ 2-411-2-412
Art. VI.   Sale of Property, §§ 2-420-2-429
Art. VII.   Emergency Powers, §§ 2-430 - 2-439
Art. VIII.   Ethical Conduct, §§ 2-450 - 2-453
Art. IX.   Public Safety Employee Benefits Act, §§ 2-460 - 2-463
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 2-1. Corporate seal of village.
The corporate seal of the village shall be kept by the village clerk and shall
be designed to bear the words "Village of Evergreen Park".
Sec. 2-2. Elections.
All elections shall be held in compliance with the provisions of the Election
Code [10 ILCS 5/1-1, et seq.].
Sec. 2-3. Terms of elected office.
The terms of elected office shall commence at the second regular meeting in the
month of May following the consolidated election in April and shall continue
until a successor is elected and qualified.
Sec. 2-4. Meetings.
All meetings shall be held in compliance with the provisions of the Open
Meetings Act [5 ILCS 120/1, et seq.].
Sec. 2-5. Records.
All records shall be subject to public inspection and copying only as required
by the provisions of the Freedom of Information Act [5 ILCS 140/1, et seq.].
ARTICLE II. MAYOR AND BOARD OF TRUSTEES
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 2-26. Composition; election.
The legislative and governing body of the village shall consist of the mayor
and 6 trustees, who shall possess qualifications for office, be elected by the
legal voters of the village, take the oath of office and perform the duties as
provided by law.
Sec. 2-27. Compensation of village trustees.
The village trustee shall receive as annual compensation the sum of $14,023.80
effective with the commencement of the term of office following the 2013
consolidated election. On May 1, 2015, and on each succeeding May 1 thereafter,
the compensation to be paid to the village trustee shall be increased by 2.0%
over that paid in the previous period. Compensation shall be paid in
installments in the same manner as for other employees of the village. The
above rate of compensation does not include benefits or expenses currently
provided to village trustees.
(Am. Ord. 25-2012 § 1, 9-4-12)
Sec. 2-28. Committees.
   (a)   The board of trustees shall be organized into the following standing
committees:
      (1)   Public Safety, Police, Fire, Emergency Services.
      (2)   Public Works, Environmental, Waste Recycling.
      (3)   Finance, Capital Planning, Economic Development.
      (4)   Zoning, Village Plan, Code Enforcement.
      (5)   Citizen Services, Recreation, Youth, Senior.
      (6)   Laws, Ordinances, Village Properties, Community Engagement.
   (b)   Every committee shall concern itself with the subject matter under its
respective jurisdiction. If jurisdiction may be exercised by more than one
committee, the mayor shall decide which committee shall exercise jurisdiction.
   (c)   Each committee shall consist of 3 trustees appointed by the mayor,
with the advice and consent of the board of trustees. The mayor shall appoint
the chairman of each committee, with the advice and consent of the board of
trustees.
   (d)   Each committee shall meet at least twice per year to review the
budget, personnel and planning for future requirements, and at other such times
as are necessary.
   (e)   The board of trustees may establish special committees to handle
extraordinary matters.
(Am. Ord. 2-2022, § 1, 1-18-22)
DIVISION 2. MAYOR
Sec. 2-46. Bond.
The mayor of the village shall, before he enters upon the duties of his office,
execute a bond payable to the village as provided by law.
Sec. 2-47. Compensation of mayor.
The mayor shall receive as annual compensation the sum of $106,544.72 effective
with the commencement of the term of office following the 2013 consolidated
election. On May 1, 2015, and on each succeeding May 1 thereafter, the
compensation to be paid to the Mayor shall be increased by 2.0% over that paid
in the previous period. Compensation shall be paid in installments in the same
manner as for other employees of the village. The above rate of compensation
does not include benefits or expenses currently provided to mayor.
(Am. Ord. 25-2012 § 2, 9-4-12)
Sec. 2-48. Mayor pro tempore.
   (a)   In the event the mayor becomes incapacitated or otherwise unable to
perform the duties of his office for a period of at least 2 weeks, the board of
trustees shall elect one of its members to act as mayor pro tempore who, during
his incapacity or disability shall possess the powers of the mayor.
   (b)   During the absence or disability of the mayor, the board of trustees
shall elect one of its number mayor pro tem of the board of trustees, and he
shall act as presiding officer of the board of trustees. Where the absence of
or disability of the mayor is to be of a very short duration and no individual
is required to be granted the powers of the mayor, the board of trustees shall
elect one of its members temporary chairman. The mayor pro tern or the
temporary chairman, when acting as the presiding officer, shall vote on all
questions on which the vote is taken by " yes" and "no," his name being called
last. The mayor pro tem shall have all the powers and duties of the mayor; the
temporary chairman shall not have such powers and duties.
Sec. 2-49. Duties generally.
   (a)   The mayor shall supervise the conduct of all appointed officers and
see that they faithfully and efficiently discharge the duties of their
respective offices.
   (b)   He shall inquire into all reasonable complaints made against them and
cause all their neglects or violations of duties to be promptly corrected.
   (c)   He shall, from time to time, give the board of trustees such
information relative to the affairs of the village as he may deem proper.
   (d)   He shall recommend to their consideration any measure he may deem
expedient, tending to the well-being, security and improvement of the village.
Sec. 2-50. Sign all papers in regard to litigation.
The mayor shall sign, and is hereby authorized to sign in behalf of the
village, all instruments necessary to the prompt prosecution or defense of any
or all actions brought by or against the village, including bonds for
injunction.
Sec. 2-51. Sign licenses, commissions, warrants, etc.
The mayor shall sign all commissions, licenses, permits and warrants granted,
issued or ordered by the board of trustees, or authorized by the ordinances of
the village, except as otherwise provided herein, and may revoke any such
licenses as hereafter provided.
Sec. 2-52.    Executive clemency.
   (a)   The mayor may for good and sufficient reasons release any person
imprisoned for violation of any section of this Code or of any village
ordinance. The mayor shall cause a proper record thereof to be made, and shall
report such release with the cause therefor to the board of trustees at its
first session thereinafter.
   (b)   The mayor may compromise, settle, or nonsuit any ticket or quasi-
criminal complaint.
Sec. 2-53. Appointment power, procedure.
The mayor, by and with the advice and consent of the board of trustees, shall
appoint all officers of the village. Whenever a vacancy shall occur in any
office which the mayor is authorized to fill, he shall submit to the board of
trustees the name of his appointee to such office; pending the approval or
rejection by the board of trustees as to such appointment, he may designate
some suitable person to discharge the duties of the office if it appears that
the office had been abandoned.
(Code 1965, § 2-31)
Secs. 2-54-2-70. Reserved.
DIVISION 3. RULES OF ORDER AND PROCEDURE
Sec. 2-71. Generally.
The rules of order for conduct of village business by the mayor and board of
trustees of the village are as set out in this division.
(Code 1965, § 2-54)
Sec. 2-72. Failure to comply.
Failure to comply with this division does not invalidate any action of the
board of trustees.
Sec. 2-73. Adoption of "Robert's Rules."
The rules of parliamentary practice included in the last published edition of
"Robert's Rules of Order, Newly Revised" shall govern the board of trustees in
all cases in which they are applicable and in which they are not inconsistent
with the special rules of this board of trustees or the statutes or laws of the
state.
(Code 1965, § 2-54(rule 44))
Sec. 2-74. Meetings generally.
The regular meetings of the board of trustees shall be held on the first and
third Mondays in each month of the year at the hour of 7:30 p.m. in the village
hall or at such other times and places as directed by the board of trustees.
(Code 1965, §§ 2-28, 2-54(rule 1))
   State law reference—Notice of regular meetings, 5 ILCS 120/2.02, 120/2.03.
Sec. 2-75. Special meetings.
Special meetings of the board of trustees may be held at any time on the call
of the mayor or any three (3) or more trustees. Such call shall be in writing,
duly signed, and shall be presented to the clerk, who shall proceed immediately
to cause notice of the same to be served upon the mayor and trustees in person.
Such notice shall describe in brief the nature and purpose of such meeting. If
the notice states an emergency exists, a one-hour notice must be given if the
notice is served in person; otherwise, a thirty-six-hour notice from the time
of mailing must be given.
(Code 1965, §§ 2-29, 2-54(rule 2))
   State law reference—Special meetings and notice thereof, 65 ILCS 5/3-11-13,
5 ILCS 120/2.03.
Secs. 2-76, 2-77. Reserved.
Sec. 2-78. Opening of meeting.
Each meeting of the board of trustees shall convene at the time appointed for
such meeting. The clerk, or someone appointed to fill his place by the
presiding officer, shall thereupon immediately call the roll of the members. If
no quorum is present, the board of trustees shall not thereby stand adjourned,
but the members present shall be competent to adjourn or recess the board of
trustees by a majority vote.
(Code 1965, § 2-54(rule 3))
Sec. 2-79. Quorum; adjourned meetings.
A quorum to do business shall consist of the mayor and three (3) trustees, or
four (4) trustees in the absence of the mayor.
(Code 1965, §§ 2-30, 2-54(rule 6))
   State law reference—Quorum, etc., 65 ILCS 5/3-11-12.
Sec. 2-80. Presiding officer.
The mayor shall preside at all meetings of the board of trustees but shall only
have the right to vote where the vote of the trustees has resulted in a tie; or
where one-half of the trustees have voted in favor of an ordinance, resolution,
or motion even though there is no tie vote; or where a vote greater than the
majority is required by state statute or this Code.
(Code 1965, § 2-54(rule 3))
   State law reference—Similar provisions, 65 ILCS 5/3-12-2, 5/3-11-14.
Sec. 2-81. Order of business.
   (a)   When a quorum is present, the board of trustees shall proceed to the
business before it, which shall be conducted in the order shown on the agenda
of the meeting prepared by the mayor. All questions relating to the priority of
business shall be decided by the chair, without debate, subject to appeal.
   (b)   The agenda shall be prepared before the meeting. Matters, including
those wishing to be heard at the citizen's hearing, not listed on the agenda
may be considered unless there is an objection raised by the mayor or a
trustee, in which case the matter shall be considered at the next meeting.
(Code 1965, § 2-54(rule 6))
Sec. 2-82. Order and decorum.
   (a)   The mayor shall preserve order and decorum and may speak to points of
order in preference to other members, and shall decide all questions or order
subject to appeal.
   (b)   In the case of any disturbances or disorderly conduct, the mayor shall
have the power to require the chamber to be cleared.
(Code 1965, § 2-54(rule 7))
Sec. 2-83. Duties of members.
   (a)   While the mayor is putting the question, no trustee shall walk across
or out of the council chamber.
   (b)   Every trustee previous to his speaking, making a motion, or seconding
the same shall address himself to the mayor and say: "Mr. Mayor," and shall not
proceed with his remarks until recognized and named by the chair. He shall
confine himself to the question under debate, avoiding personalities and
refraining from impugning the motives of any other trustee's argument or vote.
   (c)   When two (2) or more trustees address the chair at the same time, the
mayor shall name the trustee who is first to speak.
(Code 1965, § 2-54(rule 8))
Sec. 2-84. Participation by department heads and staff.
Except for the time allowed for public discussion and comment, no person other
than a member of the board of trustees shall address that body, except
department heads and staff when recognized by the chair.
(Code 1965, § 2-54(rule 9))
Sec. 2-85. Presentation of new business and deferment.
When a trustee wishes to present a communication, petition, order, resolution,
ordinance, or other original matter, he shall send it to the desk of the clerk,
who shall read such matter when reached in its proper order. Upon the request
of any two (2) trustees present, any report of a committee of the board of
trustees shall be deferred for final action thereon to the next regular meeting
of the board of trustees after the report is made.
(Code 1965, § 2-54(rule 10))
Sec. 2-86. Debate.
   (a)   No trustee shall speak more than once on the same question, except by
unanimous consent, and then not until every other member desiring to speak
shall have had an opportunity to do so; provided, however, that the proponent
of the matter under consideration or the chairman of the committee whose report
is under consideration, as the case may be, shall have the right to open and
close debate. No member shall speak longer than five (5) minutes at any one (1)
time, except by consent of the board of trustees; and in closing debate on any
question, as above provided, the speaker shall be limited to five W minutes,
except by special consent of the board of trustees.
   (b)   While a trustee is speaking, no trustee shall hold any private
discussion, or pass between the speaker and the chair.
(Code 1965, § 2-54(rule 11))
Sec. 2-87. Call of trustee to order.
A trustee, when called to order by the chair, shall thereupon discontinue
speaking and take his seat, and the order of the ruling of the chair shall be
binding and conclusive, subject only to the right of appeal.
(Code 1965, § 2-54(rule 12))
Sec. 2-88. Appeals from decisions of the chair.
Any member may appeal to the board of trustees from a ruling of the chair, and,
if the appeal is seconded, the trustee making the appeal may briefly state his
reason for the same, and the chair may briefly explain his ruling; but there
shall be no debate on the appeal and no other trustee shall participate in the
discussion. The chair shall then put the question, "Shall the decision of the
chair be sustained?" If a majority of the trustees present vote "no," the
decision of the chair shall be overruled; otherwise, it shall be sustained.
(Code 1965, § 2-54(rule 13))
Sec. 2-89. Question of personal privilege.
The right of a trustee to address the board of trustees on a question of
personal privilege shall be limited to cases in which his integrity, character
or motives are assailed, questioned or impugned.
(Code 1965, § 2-54(rule 14))
Sec. 2-90. Precedence of motions.
   (a)   When a question is under debate, the following motions shall be in
order and shall have precedence over each other in order, as listed:
      (1)   To adjourn to a day certain.
      (2)   To adjourn.
      (3)   To take a recess.
      (4)   To lay on the table.
      (5)   The previous question.
      (6)   To refer.
      (7)   To amend.
      (8)   To defer or postpone to a time certain.
      (9) To defer or postpone without reference to time.
   (b)   Subsections (a)(2), (4) and (5) of this section shall be decided
without debate. (Code 1965, § 2-54(rule 24))
Sec. 2-91. When motion to adjourn in order.
A motion to adjourn the board of trustees shall always be in order except:
      (1)   When a voting member is in possession of the floor.
      (2)   When the trustees are voting.
      (3)   When adjournment was the last preceding motion.
      (4)   When it has been decided that the previous question shall be taken.
(Code 1965, § 2-54(rule 25))
Sec. 2-92. Amending motion to adjourn.
A motion to adjourn shall not be subject to amendment, but a motion to adjourn
to a time certain shall be.
(Code 1965, § 2-54(rule 26))
Sec. 2-93. Previous question.
When the previous question is moved on the main question, it shall be put in
this form: "Shall the main question now be put?" If such motion is carried by a
majority of all the trustees authorized by law to be elected, no further
amendment, motion or debate shall be allowed, and the question shall be put
without delay upon the pending amendments or motion in inverse order of
presentation, and then upon the main question.
(Code 1965, § 2-54(rule 27))
Sec. 2-94. Motion to lay on the table—Generally.
A motion to lay a question on the table shall not be debatable; but a motion to
lay on the table with any other condition shall be subject to amendment and
debate.
(Code 1965, § 2-54(rule 28))
Sec. 2-95. Same—Effect, amendments.
A motion to lay any particular motion or proposition on the table shall apply
to that motion or proposition only. An amendment to the main question or other
pending question may be laid on the table, and neither the main question nor
such other pending question shall be affected thereby.
(Code 1965, § 2-54(rule 29))
Sec. 2-96. Motion to take from the table.
A motion to take any motion or other proposition from the table may be proposed
at the same meeting at which such motion or proposition was laid upon the
table, provided two-thirds of the trustees vote therefor.
(Code 1965, § 2-54(rule 28))
Sec. 2-97. Postponement of action.
Subject to the provisions of section
2-94, considerations of a motion or other proposition may not be postponed
indefinitely. Unless a definite time is set for its subsequent consideration
and final action, a motion to defer or postpone, without any reference to time,
shall be construed as a motion to postpone to the next succeeding regular
meeting.
(Code 1965, § 2-54(rule 30))
Sec. 2-98. Motion to refer.
A motion to refer to a standing committee shall take precedence over a similar
motion to refer to a special committee.
(Code 1965, § 2-54(rule 31))
Sec. 2-99. Motion to amend.
   (a)   A motion to amend an amendment shall be in order, but one to amend an
amendment to an amendment shall not be entertained.
   (b)   An amendment modifying the intention of a motion shall be in order,
but an amendment relating to a different subject shall not be in order.
   (c)   On an amendment to "strike out and insert," the paragraph to be
amended shall first be read as it stands, then the words to be stricken out,
then those to be inserted, and finally the paragraph as it will stand if so
amended shall be read.
   (d)   An amendment to the main question or other pending question may be
referred to a committee and neither the main question nor such other pending
question shall be affected thereby.
(Code 1965, § 2-54(rule 32))
Sec. 2-100. Filling of blanks.
When a blank is to be filled, and different sums or times proposed, the
question shall be taken first on the least sum or the longest time.
(Code 1965, § 2-54(rule 33))
Sec. 2-101. Motion to substitute.
A substitute for any motion under debate or for any pending amendment to such
proposition may be entertained and notwithstanding that at such time future
amendment is admissible. If accepted by the board of trustees by vote, such
substitute shall entirely supersede such original proposition or amendment, as
the case may be, and cut off all amendments appertaining thereto.
(Code 1965, § 2-54(rule 34))
Sec. 2-102. Reconsideration.
   (a)   A vote or question may be reconsidered at any time during the same
meeting or at the first regular meeting held thereafter. A motion for
reconsideration, once having been made and decided in the negative, shall not
be renewed, nor shall a motion to reconsider be reconsidered.
   (b)   A motion to reconsider must be made by the trustee who voted on the
prevailing side of the question to be reconsidered, unless otherwise provided
by law; provided, however, that where a motion has received a majority vote in
the affirmative, but is declared lost solely on the grounds that a greater
number of affirmative votes is required by statute for the passage or adoption
of such motion, then in such case, a motion to reconsider may be made and
seconded only by those who voted in the affirmative on such question to be
considered, so long as the issue presented is the same.
(Code 1965, § 2-54(rule 35))
   State law reference—Restrictions on motions to reconsider, 65 ILCS 5/3-11-
20.
Sec. 2-103. Voting.
Every trustee who shall be present when a question is stated from the chair
shall vote thereon, unless excused by the board of trustees or unless he is
personally interested in the question, in which cases he shall not vote, or if
he refrains from voting and answers "present," in which case the effect will be
the same as if he voted on the prevailing side.
(Code 1965, § 2-54(rule 15))
   State law reference—Pecuniary interests in contracts prohibited, 65 ILCS 5/
3-14-4.
Sec. 2-104. Seconding of motions required; written motions.
No motion shall be put or debated in the board of trustees unless it be
seconded. When a motion is seconded, it shall be stated by the mayor before
debate. Every motion in the board of trustees, except motions of procedure,
shall be reduced to writing, if required by a trustee, and the trustee who
proposed the motion shall be entitled to the floor.
(Code 1965, § 2-54(rule 18))
Sec. 2-105. Withdrawal of motions.
After a motion or resolution is stated by the mayor, it shall be deemed to be
in possession of the board of trustees, but may be withdrawn by the movants at
any time before decision. (Code 1965, § 2-54(rule 19))
Sec. 2-106. Division of questions.
If any question under consideration contains several distinct propositions, the
board of trustees by a majority vote of the trustees present may divide such
question. (Code 1965, § 2-54(rule 20))
Sec. 2-107. Record of motions.
In all cases where a resolution or motion is entered in the minutes, the name
of the trustee moving and seconding the same shall be entered.
(Code 1965, § 2-54(rule 21))
Sec. 2-108. Taking, entering of votes.
The "yes" or "no" or "present" upon any question shall be taken and entered in
the minutes. When the clerk has commenced to call the roll of the board of
trustees or the taking of a vote by "yes" or "no" or "present," all debate on
the question before the board of trustees shall be deemed concluded, and during
the taking of the vote, no trustee shall be permitted to explain his vote, but
shall respond to the calling of his name by the clerk by answering "yes" or
"no" or "present" as the case may be.
(Code 1965, § 2-54(rule 22))
Sec. 2-109. Announcement and changes of votes.
The results of all votes by "yes" or "no" or "present" shall not be announced
by the clerk, but shall be handed by him to the mayor for announcement. No vote
shall be changed after the tally list has passed from the hands of the clerk.
(Code 1965, § 2-54(rule 23))
Secs. 2-110-2-125. Reserved.
DIVISION 4. LEGISLATION*
   *State law reference—Ordinances generally, 65 ILCS 5/1-2-1.
Sec. 2-126. Vote required; when mayor required to vote.
   (a)   All ordinances for whatever purposes, and any resolution or motion, to
create any liability against the village, or for the expenditure or
appropriation of its money, shall require the concurrence of four (4) votes,
unless specifically otherwise provided for by law in special cases.
   (b)   The mayor shall be required to vote on three (3) occasions:
      (1)   Where the vote of the trustees has resulted in a tie;
      (2)   Where one-half of the trustees elected have voted in favor of an
ordinance, resolution or motion, even though there is no tie vote; or
      (3)   Where a vote greater than a majority of the corporate authorities
is required by state law and/or by local ordinance to adopt an ordinance,
resolution or motion.
   (c)   In the latter situation, however, the mayor may not vote when a vote
is being taken to override his veto. The mayor can vote to break a tie when the
issue is the confirmation of an appointment made by him.
Sec. 2-127. Approval or veto.
   (a)   All ordinances passed by the board of trustees, before they take
effect, shall be deposited with the village clerk; and if the mayor approves
thereof, he shall sign the same; and such as he shall not approve, he shall
return to the board of trustees with his objections thereto in writing at the
next regular meeting of the board of trustees occurring not less than 5 days
after their passage. Such veto may extend to any one or more items or
appropriations contained in any ordinance making an appropriation, or to the
entire ordinance; and in case the veto only extends to a part of such
ordinance, the residue thereof shall take effect and be in force. In the case
the mayor shall fail to return any ordinance with his objections thereto by the
time aforesaid, he shall be deemed to have approved such ordinances, and the
same shall take effect accordingly.
   (b)   Upon the return of any ordinance by the mayor, the vote by which the
same was passed shall be reconsidered by the board of trustees. If, after such
reconsideration, two-thirds of all the trustees elected to the board of
trustees shall agree by "yes" and "no" to pass the same, it shall go into
effect notwithstanding the mayor may refuse to approve thereof.
Sec. 2-128. When publication required.
All ordinances imposing a penalty for any violation thereof, or making any
appropriation, shall be published as required by statute, either in the
newspaper or in pamphlet form (in which case, the ordinance and its pamphlet
shall be displayed for a reasonable period in a public place in the village
hall).
Sec. 2-129. Time of taking effect.
No ordinance which must be published to comply with section
2-128 shall go into effect until 10 days after it is so published unless a
statement of the urgency of the ordinance is contained in it, and it achieves
passage by a two-thirds vote of the members of the corporate authorities then
holding office. In all other cases, the ordinances shall go into effect upon
the passage thereof, as provided by law, even though the operation of the
ordinance may not take effect until a later date.
Sec. 2-130. Record of ordinances; publication.
   (a)   All ordinances passed by the mayor and board of trustees shall be kept
by the clerk in an ordinance book.
   (b)   If the ordinance requires publication, the clerk shall cause the same
to be duly published.
Secs. 2-131-2-150. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
DIVISION I. GENERALLY
Sec. 2-151. Appointive offices specified; suspension, removal; filling
vacancies.
   (a)   The following appointive offices of the village are hereby created and
established:
      (1)   Village treasurer.
      (2)   Village collector.
      (3)   Water collector.
      (4)   Village prosecutor.
      (5)   Village engineer.
      (6)   Director of Public Works.
      (7)   Street department foreman.
      (8)   Building commissioner.
      (9)   Deputy building commissioner.
      (10)   Deputy code official.
      (11)   Registrar.
      (12)   Recycling director.
      (13)   Youth director.
      (14)   Chief of police.
      (15)   Deputy chief of police.
      (16)   Fire chief.
      (17)   Assistant fire chief.
      (18)   Recreation director.
      (19)   Director of citizen services.
      (20)   Deputy Director of Public Works/Streets.
      (21)   Animal control warden.
      (22)   Health officer.
      (23)   Community center facilities coordinator.
      (24)   Inspectors in all departments.
      (25)   Deputy Director of Public Works/Sewer & Water.
   (b)   All appointees may be suspended or removed from office by the mayor
and board of trustees, and all vacancies may be filled in the same manner as
original appointments.
Sec. 2-152. Qualifications of officers.
No person shall be eligible to hold any appointed village office unless he is a
resident of the village, unless waived by the board of trustees. These
requirements do not apply to the village treasurer, village engineer, village
attorney, village prosecutor, health officer or other officers who require
professional or technical training and certification.
Sec. 2-153. Qualifications of employees.
All village employees shall have the qualifications provided by law.
Sec. 2-154. Residency.
   (a)   All employees of the Village hired after March 1, 1998 shall establish
domicile within the Village no later than 24 months following their initial
employment. All employees of the Village hired after March 1, 1998 shall
continuously maintain domicile within the Village after establishing domicile
therein. Domicile within the Village must be continuously maintained after the
date 24 months following initial employment at the Village.
   (b)   All employees of the Village promoted after March 1, 1998 shall have
domicile within the Village. All employees of the Village promoted after March
1, 1998 shall continuously maintain domicile within the Village.
   (c)   All present employees of the Village who maintain domicile in the
Village on March 1, 1998 shall continuously maintain such domicile within the
Village.
   (d)   Failure of any employee to establish or maintain required domicile in
the Village shall constitute grounds for discharge.
   (e)   Domicile shall be established and maintained under the following
principles:
      (1)   a person can have only one domicile;
      (2)   once a domicile is established, it continues until a new one is
acquired;
      (3)   there must be actual abandonment of a former domicile with no
intent to return; and
      (4)   the new domicile must be acquired with the intent of making it a
true and permanent home.
   (f)   For the purpose of this section "employee" shall mean any officer or
employee of the Village except those requiring professional or technical
training such as the Village Treasurer, Village Engineer, Village Attorney,
Village Prosecutor; and except part-time employees in the Fire Department and
Police Department, and except employees covered by a collective bargaining
agreement which contains a provision on residency (however, promotion to a
supervisory position not covered by the collective bargaining agreement shall
require residency under the provisions of this section) or employees for whom a
collective bargaining agreement is being negotiated.
   (g)   In cases of special need of the Village, the Board of Trustees by
motion at a meeting may waive the requirements of this section.
(Ord. No. 18-2006 § 1, 4-17-06)
Sec. 2-155. Term of appointed officers.
All appointed officers of the village shall hold their offices until the first
Monday of May in each year following their appointments and until their
successors shall have been appointed and qualified.
Sec. 2-156. Oaths of officers.
Before entering upon the duties of their respective offices, all officers of
the village shall take the oath of office prescribed by law.
Sec. 2-157. Bonds of officers.
   (a)   The officers of the village shall give bonds in the sums and within
the time as provided by law. In all cases not specifically provided for, the
officers of the village shall give such bonds and within such time as the mayor
and board of trustees may require, or as may be required by law. Should good
cause exist in the judgment and discretion of the board of trustees, any
officer may be required from time to time to give additional bonds in such sum
and within such time as the board may by resolution direct.
   (b)   The bond of each officer shall be executed to the village with 2 or
more sureties conditioned for the faithful performance of the duties of his
office and the payment to the proper officer of all moneys coming into his
hands by virtue of his office. Each of such sureties shall be freeholders of
the county, and shall schedule real estate herein, clear of all encumbrances
and other legal obligations, in value not less than the penal sum of such bond,
which schedule shall be made separately by such sureties and sworn to before an
officer authorized to administer oaths, and attached to such bond. Any officer
of the village may procure as surety upon any bond he may be required to give
any responsible surety company or corporation. No member of the board of
trustees shall sign any bond in any case wherein the village is interested.
   (c)   The bonds of all village officers shall be subject to the approval of
the mayor and board of trustees. Upon approval, the clerk shall endorse thereon
the date thereof and file the same in his office, excepting, however, the bond
of the clerk, which shall be filed with the treasurer.
Sec. 2-158. Reserved.
Sec. 2-159. Officer or employee to surrender village property upon termination
of service.
Every officer or employee of the village, upon the termination of his term or
service for any cause whatsoever, shall deliver to the mayor or the department
head all property, equipment, badges, uniforms, identification cards, and
records within 5 days after termination.
Sec. 2-160. Inspection of records kept by officers and employees; reports.
All books, papers, vouchers, warrants, entries, accounts and memoranda of each
and every officer and employee of the village may be examined at any time by
the mayor. The mayor and board of trustees may, by resolution, call upon any
officer to make a report in writing of any subject matter which the board may
designate in such resolution and within such time as such resolution may
prescribe.
(Code 1965, § 2-12)
   State law reference—Authority of mayor to examine records, 65 ILCS 5/3-12-2,
5/3-11-3.
Sec. 2-161. Indemnification.
   (a)   The village shall, under the conditions imposed herein:
      (1)   Appoint counsel to appear and defend, or reimburse the fees of an
attorney who appears and defends; and
      (2)   Pay all judgments, verdicts, claims and costs resulting from any
claim or lawsuit;
on behalf of any officer or employee of the village or any former officer or
employee of the village.
   (b)   The appointment of counsel, reimbursement for costs of counsel, and
payment of all judgments, shall be a matter of right, but shall cover only
those duties or actions committed by the employee or officer within the course
of employment within the scope of his duties, or by the nature of the office or
employment held if all conditions herein are met. The appoint. ment of counsel
to defend or the reimbursement of other counsel shall be at the option of the
board of trustees.
   (c)   Any person desiring to avail themselves of the provisions of this
section must within five (5) days after receiving a notice of claim, or
summons, whichever occurs first, notify the mayor, board of trustees, and
attorney in writing of the possible claim. Only claims by individuals other
than village employees or officers are covered by this section. Without
limitation, this section does not cover any claim against the village by an
officer or employee, by the village against any officer or employee, or by any
fellow employee or officer against any officer or employee.
   (d)   No person shall be entitled to any of the benefits of this section if
any action or inaction on his part was done with malice or willful misconduct,
where there is a finding of "guilty" against him in a criminal or quasicriminal
action, or where there is a finding of malice or willful misconduct in any
civil action or civil rights action.
   (e)   The provisions of this section do not apply where there is insurance
coverage or where an insurance carrier appears and defends an action.
   (f)   No reimbursement for any attorney's fees shall be paid until the board
of trustees is satisfied that the action being defended falls within the
provisions of this section. Should attorney's fees he reimbursed and the
subsequent decision of a court result in the employee or officer not being
eligible under the conditions of this section, then such monies shall be paid
back to the village within thirty (30) days of a demand by the village. Any
rate or fees paid to an attorney shall have prior approval of the village, and
reimbursement shall only be made at such rate or fees as is approved by the
village.
   (g)   No person who makes any settlement, compromise or statement without
the knowledge of the village shall be eligible for any of the benefits of this
section.
   (h)   The provisions of this section shall apply to any lawsuit instituted
after the date of passage, or any claim or investigation instituted after the
date of its passage.
   (i)   Notwithstanding any of the above provisions, should the mayor or any
trustee be sued on account of any vote they have or have not made on any
action, motion, item, resolution or ordinance, then the official shall be
entitled to either hire counsel and have those attorneys' fees reimbursed at a
rate approved by the board of trustees or have the village attorney appear on
his behalf. That official shall also be entitled to the right of having the
village pay any and all judgments, verdicts, claims and costs provided there is
no court or jury finding that the official acted with malice or intentional
misconduct.
(Code 1965, § 2-91)
   State law reference—Local Governmental and Governmental Employees Tort
Immunity Act, 745 ILCS 10/1-101.
Secs. 2-162-2-180. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. VILLAGE ATTORNEY*
Sec. 2-181. Duties generally.
The village attorney shall be responsible for all legal matters pertaining to
the village and draw such ordinances, deeds, leases and other papers as may be
required of him by the mayor and board of trustees or any committee thereof.
(Code 1965, § 2-88)
Sec. 2-182. Legal opinions.
The village attorney shall give his opinion in writing to the board of trustees
or any committee thereof or the mayor, when requested, on legal questions
arising under or concerning any section of this Code or any ordinance of the
village, and on questions and subjects in which the village shall be legally
interested.
(Code 1965, § 2-89)
Secs. 2-183-2-200. Reserved.
*State law reference—Appointment of village attorney, 65 ILCS 5/3-7-3.
DIVISION 3. VILLAGE PROSECUTOR
Sec. 2-201. Office created.
There is hereby created the office of village prosecutor.
Sec. 2-202. Duties.
The duties of the village prosecutor shall include the prosecution of all
matters appearing on the regularly scheduled village court call.
DIVISION 4. VILLAGE CLERK
Sec. 2-216. Compensation of village clerk.
   (a)   The village clerk shall receive as annual compensation the sum of
$80,000.00 effective with the commencement of the term of office following the
2025 consolidated election. On May 1, 2026, and on each succeeding May 1
thereafter, the compensation to be paid to the village clerk shall be increased
by 2.0% over that paid in the previous period.
   (b)   The base salary of the village clerk shall also be increased for each
of the following certifications: (i) by the sum of $5,000.00 for Registered
Municipal Clerk, (ii) by the sum of $5,000.00 for Certified Municipal Clerk,
and (iii) by the sum of $7,500.00 for Master Municipal Clerk.
   (c)   Compensation shall be paid in installments in the same manner as for
other employees of the village. The above rate of compensation does not include
benefits or expenses currently provided to village clerk.
(Am. Ord. 25-2012 § 3, 9-4-12; Am. Ord. 8-2024 § 1, 2-5-24)
Sec. 2-217.    Duties.
The village clerk shall, in addition to the duties now imposed upon that
officer by statute, perform the following duties:
      (1)   Keep office in the village hall for the transaction of village
business during usual daily business hours.
      (2)   Issue notices of meetings to the mayor and members of the village
board, and when directed by that body, to the members of the different
committees of that body and to all persons whose attendance will be required
before that body or any such committee when so directed; he shall also issue
and cause to be served notices of such meetings.
      (3)   Attest all the licenses granted under the provisions of this Code
or ordinances of the village.
      (4)   Deliver to the officers of the village and to the various
committees, all bills, resolutions, communications and other documents
referring to such officers and committees.
      (5)   Deliver to the mayor all ordinances or resolutions which may
require approval or other action by the mayor with all papers and information
on which the same were founded.
      (6)   Perform such other duties as may be legally required.
      (7)   Keep the corporate seal and affix the seal to all papers which
require it.
      (8)   Keep all records and papers belonging to the village and attend all
meetings of the mayor and board of trustees, and keep a full record of its
proceedings in the journal.
      (9)   Make proper copies of all papers duly filed and make transcripts
from the journal and other records and files, certified under the corporate
seal.
Sec. 2-218. Notice to elected and appointed officers.
It shall be the duty of the village clerk, within 5 days after the canvass of
an election is
completed, to notify in writing all persons elected to office.
Sec. 2-219. Publication of annual treasurer's report.
The village clerk shall, within 6 months after the end of each fiscal year and
after having received a copy of the annual treasurer's report, publish a notice
in a newspaper advising of the availability of the annual report, and that the
same may be inspected or copied at the office of the village clerk.
Sec. 2-220. Petitions; communications.
All petitions, remonstrances, bids, bills or other communications addressed to
the village or board of trustees shall be received by the village clerk and
forwarded to the mayor and trustees for appropriate action.
DIVISION 5. VILLAGE TREASURER
Sec. 2-241. Compensation.
The compensation of the village treasurer shall be as prescribed by the mayor
and board of trustees from time to time.
Sec. 2-242. Duties generally.
   (a)   The village treasurer shall receive all moneys belonging to the
village and shall render at the end of each and every month, to the board of
trustees, showing the state of the treasury at the date of such account, and
the balance of the money in the treasury. Such statement shall set forth all
the moneys received by him, from whom, and on what account they shall have been
received; also all moneys paid out by him, and on what account they shall have
been paid. Such monthly report shall be under oath.
   (b)   The village treasurer shag keep by double entry a full and detailed
account of all village funds, general tax receipts and receipts from other
sources. He shall also keep a bond account, sinking fund account and forfeit
account in the village ledger. He shall keep auxiliary accounts with the clerk,
collector and with the county collector, showing all moneys received and
disbursed by the treasurer.
   (c)   He shall also keep books of account, in such manner as to accurately
show all moneys received by him, from whom, and on what account they shall have
been received; also all moneys paid out by him and on what account they have
been paid. Such books shall be kept in such manner as to be readily understood
and investigated; which books and all papers and files of the office shall at
all times be open to the examination of the mayor and board of trustees or any
member thereof.
Sec. 2-243. Special fund ledger.
The village treasurer shall keep a "special fund" ledger in which all special
funds shall be kept separately by numbers and names of the special funds,
showing the total amount of each fund and installment of same to be collected
and each account to show the total collections and disbursements on account of
same.
Sec. 2-244. Deposit of funds.
   (a)   All funds and money belonging to the village in the custody of the
village treasurer shall be kept on deposit with such bank as shall be
designated by ordinance as a depository for such funds and money. Such bank
shall not be qualified to receive funds or money of the village until it has
furnished the corporate authorities with two (2) copies of the last two (2)
sworn statements of resources and liabilities which the bank is required to
furnish to the commissioner of banks and trust companies or to the comptroller
of the currency, and such bank while acting as such depository shall furnish
the corporate authorities with a copy of all statements of resources and
liabilities which it is required to furnish to the commissioner of banks and
trust companies or to the comptroller of currency. The village treasurer shall
be discharged from responsibility for all funds or money which he deposits in
such bank while the funds and money are so deposited; provided, however, that
the amount of such deposits shall not exceed seventy-five (75) percent of such
bank's capital stock and surplus and the village treasurer shall be responsible
for funds or money deposited in such bank in excess of this limitation.
   (b)   Such funds or money shall be subject to withdrawal from time to time
upon checks or combination voucher-checks signed in person or by facsimile by
the village treasurer, the mayor of the board of trustees, and the village
clerk.
Secs. 2-245-2-260. Reserved.
DIVISION 6. VILLAGE COLLECTOR
Sec. 2-261. Village collector.
The village collector shall be appointed by the mayor with the advice and
consent of the board of trustees. The village clerk may hold the office of
village collector.
Sec. 2-262. Compensation of village collector.
The village collector shall receive as compensation the sum of $18,000 per year
effective May 1, 1997. Compensation shall be paid in installments in the same
manner as for employees of the village. If the village clerk is appointed the
village collector, the compensation for the village collector shall not be
increased or decreased during the term of office.
Sec. 2-263. Duties of village collector.
The village collector shall preserve all warrants and shall keep books and
accounts in the manner prescribed by the board of trustees. All of the village
collector's warrants, books and vouchers, and all papers pertaining to the
office, may be examined at any time by the mayor, village clerk or any member
of the board of trustees. Weekly, and oftener if required by the board of
trustees, the village collector shall pay over to the treasurer all money
collected from any source, taking the treasurer's receipt in duplicate and
filing one of the receipts immediately with the village clerk. At that time, or
on demand, the village clerk shall give the village collector a copy of any
receipts so filed.
Sec. 2-264. Reports of village collector.
The village collector shall make a written report to the board of trustees of
all money collected and the account on which collected.
Sec. 2-265. Possession of money by village collector.
The village collector is prohibited from keeping the money of the village in
his possession, or in the possession of any person for his use, beyond the time
prescribed for its payment to the village treasurer.
Sec. 2-266. Delinquent assessments; collection, receipt.
   (a)   The village collector shall have power and authority to collect all
special assessments, including delinquent installments.
   (b)   Upon receiving payment for such delinquent installments of special
assessments, interest, costs and penalties, the village collector shall issue
to the person paying the same a receipt of deposit for redemption, according to
law.
Sec. 2-267. Examination of books.
All the village collector's papers, books and vouchers may be examined at any
time by the mayor or any member of the board of trustees.
Secs. 2-268-2-285. Reserved.
DIVISION 7. DIRECTOR OF CITIZENS' SERVICES
Sec. 2-286. Position created.
There is hereby created the office of director of citizens' services.
Sec. 2-287. General duties.
It shall be the duty of the director of citizens' services to investigate such
programs as information services, transportation arrangements, nutrition
centers, discounts, social clubs, and specific village facilities for usage by
and in behalf of the senior citizens and the disabled in the village. After
such investigation and study, the director of citizens' services shall
recommend for adoption to the mayor and board of trustees such of the above
programs as he feels may be suitable for the senior citizens and the disabled
in the community.
Secs. 2-288-2-300. Reserved.
DIVISION 8. RECREATION DIRECTOR
Sec. 2-301. Office created.
There is hereby created the office of recreation director.
Sec. 2-302. Duties.
The recreation director shall be directly responsible to the mayor and board of
trustees of the village and shall, on a regular basis, submit reports to them
on the conduct of existing recreational and entertainment programs and the
proposal of new programs, which proposal shall contain his recommendation
regarding implementation, cost, feasibility, etc.
Secs. 2-303-2-309. Reserved.
DIVISION 9. INTERGOVERNMENTAL AND COMMUNITY RELATIONS ADVISOR
Sec. 2-310. Office created.
There is hereby established the office of Intergovernmental and Community
Relations Advisor which shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and
consent of the Board of Trustees.
Sec. 2-311. Duties.
The Intergovernmental and Community Relations Advisor shall have the following
duties:
      (1)   Represent the Village with respect to matters delegated by the
Mayor which involve other municipalities including the Southwest Conference of
Local Governments.
      (2)   Represent the Village with respect to matters delegated by the
Mayor which involve Cook County and the Metropolitan Water Reclamation District
of Greater Chicago.
      (3)   Represent the Village with respect to matters delegated by the
Mayor which involve legislation of the General Assembly of the State of
Illinois which have an effect on the Village.
      (4)   Represent the Village with respect to matters delegated by the
Mayor which involve legislation of the United States Congress which have an
effect on the Village.
      (5)   Represent the Village with respect to matters delegated by the
Mayor which involve residents and businesses, including the Chamber of Commerce
and EPSA, in the Village and the effect of Village ordinances and policies
thereon.
      (6)   Represent the Village with respect to matters delegated by the
Mayor which involve roads and highways within the Village under the
jurisdiction of the Illinois Department of Transportation.
Sec. 2-312. Reports.
The Intergovernmental and Community Relations Advisor shall act under the
jurisdiction of the Mayor and shall prepare such reports as requested by the
Mayor.
Secs. 2-313-2-320. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. FINANCE
Sec. 2-321. Fiscal year.
The fiscal year of the village shall begin on the first day of November of each
year and end on the thirty-first day of October of the year following.
Sec. 2-322. Annual independent audit of village accounts.
At the close of each fiscal year, the mayor and board of trustees shall cause
an independent audit of all accounts of the village to be made by an accountant
or accountants authorized to practice accounting under the laws of the state.
Sec. 2-323. Form of warrants; payment of checks, signatures.
The payment of village debts shall be authorized by resolution of the mayor and
board of trustees. Upon such authorization, the village treasurer shall cause
payment to be made thereof by checks upon the village treasury with the
signatures of any two (2) of the following three (3) officials: the mayor,
village clerk and village treasurer, the particular fund and appropriation to
which the same is chargeable and the person to whom the same is payable clearly
shown thereon. The signatures required may be made by the use of an approved
check-signing machine.
Sec. 2-324. Bidding of contracts.
All public improvement construction contracts not paid for by special
assessment or special taxation in the amount of one hundred thousand dollars
($100,000) or more shall be constructed by a contract let to the lowest
responsible bidder unless two-thirds (2/3) of the Mayor and Board of Trustees
waive any public bidding requirements. The provisions of this section shall not
apply to contracts constructed pursuant to an agreement with a federal, state,
or other governmental agency.
(Am. Ord. No. § 1, 4-4-11)
Sec. 2-325.    Emergency contracts.
The Mayor may authorize any contract or expenditure of funds in an amount not
to exceed one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000) in case of emergency where
the public health, safety and welfare is in immediate danger. If such power is
exercised then the Mayor shall report the nature of the emergency wand the
contract at the next meeting of the Board of Trustees.
(Am. Ord. No. § 2, 4-4-11)
Secs. 2-326-2-345. Reserved.
ARTICLE V. BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Secs. 2-346-2-360. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. BOARD OF FIRE AND POLICE COMMISSIONERS
Sec. 2-361. Adoption of state law, modifications.
   (a)   There is hereby adopted for the purpose of establishing the Board of
Fire and Police Commissioners, and the regulations and laws controlling such
Board, Article 10, Division 2.1 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/10-
2.1, et seq.). Notwithstanding the foregoing, the following provisions shall
not apply to the Board or the members of the Fire and Police Departments:
65 ILCS 5/10-2.1-4
65 ILCS 5/10-2.1-6
65 ILCS 5/10-2.1-7
65 ILCS 5/10-2.1-8 through 65 ILCS 5/10-2.1-11
65 ILCS 5/10-2.1-13 through 65 ILCS 5/10-2.1-18
65 ILCS 5/10-2.1-23 through 65 ILCS 5/10-2.1-27
65 ILCS 5/10-2.1-29 through 65 ILCS 5/10-2.1-30
   (b)   The Board is hereby authorized to establish such rules as it
determines necessary in the performance of its duties concerning the
examination of applicants for original appointments, promotional examinations,
and discipline of members of the Fire and Police Departments.
   (c)   Any provision in Article 10, Division 2.1 of the Illinois Municipal
Code which is in conflict with the express or implied powers conferred on the
Board of Fire and Police Commissioners under the Evergreen Park Municipal Code,
including any rules adopted by the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners, is
hereby declared to be of no force and effect in the Village.
Sec. 2-362 Original Employment - Police Department.
   (a)   Appointment. All original appointments of full-time sworn employees of
the Police Department shall be made by the Board of Fire and Police
Commissioners from the original eligibility register.
   (b)   Original Examination. All applicants for employment as a full-time
sworn patrol officer shall be subject to an original entrance examination by
the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners. The examination shall be public,
competitive, and subject to limitations as to age, health, habits, moral
character, and qualifications to perform the duties of the position of patrol
officer. Examinations may be written and oral; and shall include tests of
physical qualifications. The Board of Fire and Police Commissioners shall
determine the method, manner and weight of examination and shall determine a
minimum passing grade for each component and the total examination. Upon
conclusion of the original entrance examination, the Board of Fire and Police
Commissioners shall prepare an original eligibility register of candidates who
have attained the minimum passing grade for each component and the total
examination. Candidates shall be ranked by score. The original eligibility
register shall expire 2 years from its date subject to extension as provided
for in Sec. 2-367.
   (c)   Appointment Procedure. The Mayor and Board of Trustees shall determine
that a vacancy exists in the rank of patrol officer such that an appointment
shall be made. In such event the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners shall
make an appointment from the top 3 names then on the original eligibility
register. Once an appointment is made, the applicant must pass a medical,
physical, background and drug test. In the event of failure, the applicant
shall be disqualified (without notice, hearing or appeal) and the Board of Fire
and Police Commissioners shall appoint another person from the original
eligibility register.
   (d)   Lateral Hire. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this
Section, the Mayor and Board of Trustees may appoint any person to the Police
Department who is certified under the Illinois Police Training Act as a full-
time law enforcement officer and has a minimum of two years' experience on a
municipal police department, or its equivalent, in the rank of patrol officer.
The applicant may be given preference in appointment over candidates on the
original eligibility roster established by the Board of Fire and Police
Commissioners. In such event, the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners may
conduct a background investigation, medical examination, psychological
examination, oral interview, polygraph examination and any other examination to
determine fitness for duty. The Board of Fire and Police Commissioners is
authorized, to adopt rules governing the qualification, application process and
examination process for applicants under this subsection. No candidate shall be
appointed until the Mayor and Board of Trustees determine that there is a
vacancy in the rank of patrol officer. The Mayor and Board of Trustees shall
establish the level of compensation for the lateral hire.
(Am. Ord. No. 16-2022, § 1, 8-15-22)
Sec. 2-362.1. Promotions - Police Department.
   (a)   Appointment. All promotions of full-time sworn employees of the Police
Department shall be made by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the Board
of Trustees from a roster of eligible candidates provided by the Board of Fire
and Police Commissioners. Promotions shall be made from the rank next below to
which the promotion is made except for the ranks of Chief and Deputy Chief.
   (b)   Promotional Examination. All applicants for promotion shall be subject
to a promotional examination by the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners.
Promotional examinations shall be competitive among such members of the next
lower rank as desire to submit to examination. Promotional examinations shall
test the ability, qualifications, judgment, and character of the applicant to
perform the duties of the rank. Examinations may be written and oral; and may
include tests of physical qualifications. The Board of Fire and Police
Commissioners shall determine the method, manner and weight of examination and
shall determine a minimum passing grade for each component and the total
examination. Upon conclusion of the promotional examination, the Board of Fire
and Police Commissioners shall prepare an promotional eligibility register of
candidates who have attained the minimum passing grade for each component and
the total examination. Candidates shall not be ranked by score. All candidates
listed on the promotional eligibility register shall be considered available
for placement on the promotion roster. The promotional eligibility register
shall expire 3 years from its date subject to extension as provided for in Sec.
2-367.
   (c)   Appointment Procedure. The Mayor and Board of Trustees shall determine
that a vacancy exists in any rank such that a promotion shall be made. In such
event the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners shall provide a promotion
roster of 5 names from the promotional eligibility register and the Mayor shall
make an appointment of one of the names from that roster. The Board of Fire and
Police Commissioners may place any 5 names on the roster.
Sec. 2-362.2.   Police Chief, Deputy Chief of Police, Fire Chief, and Assistant
Fire Chief.
   (a)   Appointment. The Police Chief, Deputy Chiefs of Police, Fire Chief and
the Assistant Fire Chiefs shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and
consent of the Board of Trustees. Appointments to these positions shall not be
limited to the next lower rank.
   (b)   Discipline. The Police Chief, Deputy Chiefs of Police, Fire Chief and
the Assistant Fire Chiefs are subject to suspension, demotion, removal,
reappointment and discipline (except that a person holding a classified service
rank can only be discharged through a hearing before the Board of Fire and
Police Commissioners) by the Mayor and Board of Trustees without notice and
hearing, and whose decision is final. In the event that the appointee is not
reappointed or demoted and also holds a classified service rank, the person
shall revert back to that rank.
Sec. 2-363. Demotions.
The board of fire and police commissioners shall have the power to demote a
person one (1) step in rank upon written charges and for cause, or upon its
finding that the performance of the person is not satisfactory and acceptable,
or upon its finding that there is some substantial shortcoming which renders
continuance in that specific rank detrimental to the discipline and efficiency
of the fire and police departments. It shall have no power to demote or remove
the chief in each department in that rank. It may, however, demote, remove or
suspend them in permanent rank.
Sec. 2-364. Probationary periods.
   (a)   Fire. All new members of the fire department shall serve a
probationary period of two (2) years of active duty for all new members whether
or not they have previously been certified by the state fire marshal as having
successfully completed an approved training course.
   (b)   Police. All new members of the police department shall serve the
following probationary period:
      (1)   One (1) year of active duty for all new members who were former
members of a regular police department of a municipality and who have been
certified by the Illinois Local Government Law Enforcement Officers Training
Board as having successfully completed an approved basic training course.
      (2)   Two (2) years of active duty for all other new members.
   (c)   All members. All new members are subject to discharge in the
probationary period by the board without a hearing and without assigning cause.
All persons who are promoted in rank shall serve a probationary period in the
promoted rank for one (1) year, subject to demotion to the former rank by the
board without a hearing and without assigning cause in that period. No member
shall be eligible for promotions until he has completed his full probationary
period.
   (d)   Full-time employment. The board of fire and police commissioners shall
have the power to make rules requiring training of members before appointment
or full-time employment is commenced, and to maintain the same during
employment.
Sec. 2-365. Rules; regulations.
   (a)   The board of fire and police commissioners may make rules to carry out
the purposes of this division, and for discipline and removals in accordance
with the provisions of the law as made and provided. All rules, regulations and
changes shall be published or printed in pamphlet form. All members of the fire
and police departments are entitled to a copy of the rules, regulations and
changes upon request.
   (b)   The fire and police chiefs shall have the power to make rules and
regulations governing the day-to-day operations and the internal affairs of the
departments, as long as such rules do not conflict with the ordinances of the
village or any applicable rule of the board. (Code 1965, § 2-182(d))
Sec. 2-366. Compensation of members.
Each member of the board of fire and police commissioners shall receive such
compensation as the mayor and board of trustees shall fix by ordinance or
resolution for each meeting he attends, but such compensation shall not be paid
for more than twelve (12) meetings in any given year.
(Code 1965, § 2-183)
Sec. 2-367. Expiration of eligibility lists.
If the board of fire and police commissioners has not prepared a new
eligibility list before the expiration of the prior eligibility list, the
original entrance eligibility list and the promotional eligibility list may be
extended by the mayor past their expiration dates for a period not to exceed
nine (9) months.
(Ord. No. 13-1991, 5-6-91)
Secs. 2-368-2-380. Reserved.
DIVISION 3. BOARD OF LOCAL IMPROVEMENTS
Sec. 2-381. Construction of division.
It is the intention of this division that after July 1, 1971, the effective
date of the Constitution of the State of Illinois, that the procedures set
forth in the Illinois Municipal Code, division 2 of article 9 [65 ILCS 5/9-2-
1 et seq.], for the making of local improvements by special assessment, shall
be the procedures for the board of local improvements on and after July 1,
1971.
(Code 1965, § 2-178)
Sec. 2-382. Board created.
There is hereby created a board of local improvements, pursuant to the Illinois
Municipal Code, article 9 [65 ILCS 5/9-1-1 et seq.], and all amendments
thereto, and article VII, section 6(1) of the Constitution of the State of
Illinois effective July 1, 1971, with the powers, duties, and authority therein
and herein conferred and as may hereafter be conferred upon such board by
statute or by ordinance. The board shall have power to make local improvements
by special assessment and shall operate under the procedures set forth in
division 2 of article IX of the Illinois Municipal Code [65 ILCS 5/9-2-1 et
seq.].
(Code 1965, § 2-168)
Sec. 2-383. How composed.
The board of local improvements shall consist of eight (8) members, namely the
mayor, the superintendent of streets, if one shall be appointed, and the six
(6) duly elected and acting trustees of the village.
(Code 1965, § 2-169)
   State law reference—Board of local improvements, 65 ILCS 5/9-2-1.
Sec. 2-384. Compensation of members.
No member of the board of local improvements shall receive compensation for
acting as such member.
(Code 1965, § 2-174)
Sec. 2-385. Officers of the board.
The mayor shall be the president of the board of local improvements. (Code
1965, § 2-176)
   State law reference—Similar provisions, 65 ILCS 5/9-2-7.
Sec. 2-386. Secretary.
The village clerk shall be the secretary of the board of local improvements.
(Code 1965, § 2-170)
Sec. 2-387. Meetings of board.
The board of local improvements shall meet upon the call of the president or
any two (2) members thereof.
(Code 1965, § 2-177)
   State law reference—Notice of meetings, 65 ILCS 120/2.02.
Sec. 2-388. Duties of the board.
The duties of the board of local improvements shall be those created by law as
passed by the constitution of the state effective July 1, 1971, by statute or
by ordinance. (Code 1965, § 2-175)
   State law reference—Duties of board of local improvements, 65 ILCS 5/9-2-
9 et seq.
Secs. 2-389-2-400. Reserved.
DIVISION 4. EMERGENCY TELEPHONE SYSTEM BOARD*
   *State law reference—Emergency telephone system board, 50 ILCS 750/15.4.
Sec. 2-401. Created; composition; terms; qualifications; chairman.
There is hereby created the emergency telephone system board consisting of
seven (7) members appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of the
board of trustees. The term of each member shall be for three (3) years, except
that the terms of the initial appointments shall be staggered so that three (3)
expire on May 1, 1995, two (2) expire on May 1, 1994; and two (2) expire on May
1, 1993. All members shall possess the qualifications required under the
Emergency Telephone System Act [50 ILCS 750/0.01 et seq.]. The mayor shall
annually designate one of the members as chairman.
(Ord. No. 27-1992, § 2-280(a), 11-16-92)
Sec. 2-402. Compensation; removal of members.
All members of the emergency telephone system board shall serve without
compensation until their successors are appointed and qualified. Any member may
be removed from office by the mayor on any formal charge whenever the mayor is
of the opinion that the interests of the village demand removal. He shall
report the reason for the removal to the board of trustees at a meeting to be
held not less than five (5) nor more than ten (10) days after the removal.
Should the mayor fail to report the reasons for a removal or should the board
of trustees by a two-thirds vote of all its members authorized by law to be
elected disapprove of the removal, the officer shall be restored to office.
(Ord. No. 27-1992, § 2-280(b), 11-16-92)
Sec. 2-403. Meetings.
The emergency telephone system board shall meet at least quarterly as it
establishes. The meetings shall be open to the public and shall comply with the
Open Meetings Act [5 ILCS 120/1 et seq.]. The business of the meetings shall be
governed by Robert's Rules of Order unless the board shall adopt its own rules
of order. The board shall provide for its officers (except the chairman) and
the selection thereof.
(Ord. No. 27-1992, § 2-280(c), 11-16-92)
Sec. 2-404. Powers and duties.
The emergency telephone system board shall exercise the powers and shall
perform the duties authorized by the Emergency Telephone System Act including:
      (1)   Planning a 911 system.
      (2)   Coordinating and supervising the implementation, upgrading or
maintenance of the system, including the establishment of equipment
specifications and coding systems.
      (3)   Receiving monies from the surcharge, and from any other source, for
deposit into the emergency telephone system fund.
      (4)   Authorizing all disbursements from the fund.
      (5)   Hiring, on a temporary basis, any staff necessary for the
implementation or upgrade of the system.
(Ord. No. 27-1992, § 2-280(d), 11-16-92)
Sec. 2-405. Emergency telephone system fund.
The village treasurer shall be custodian of the emergency telephone system
fund. No expenditures may be made therefrom except upon approval of a majority
of all members of the board. Expenditures may be made only to pay for costs
authorized under the Emergency Telephone System Act [50 ILCS 750/0.01 et seq.].
(Ord. No. 27-1992, § 2-280(e), 11-16-92)
DIVISION 5. HISTORICAL COMMISSION.
Sec. 2-411   Establishment.
An Historical Commission of the village is hereby established and composed of
seven members.
   (1)   The seven members shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the consent of
the Board of Trustees. A member having been duly appointed shall continue to
serve after the expiration of his term or until his successor has been
appointed. All terms shall be for one year and shall expire on April 30.
   (2)   The Mayor shall designate one of the members to serve as Chairman. The
Historical Commission shall designate one of their members, or another person,
to serve as Secretary.
   (3)   The Historical Commission shall hold meetings at regular intervals
established at the beginning of each year, and in no event less than four times
each year. Additional meetings may be scheduled from time to time upon the call
of the Chairman.
   (4)   All meetings of the Historical Commission shall be open to the public,
except as authorized by the provisions of the Open Meetings Act. Official
minutes shall be kept available for public inspection.
   (5)   A quorum shall consist of a majority of the Historical Commission. All
decisions or actions shall be made by a majority vote of those members present
and voting at any meeting where a quorum exists.
   (6)   No action shall be taken by the Historical Commission that could in
any manner hinder or cause undue hardship on the part of a property owner
relating to the property's use, modification, maintenance, disposition, or
demolition until the owner has received due notice and has had an opportunity
to be heard at a public meeting of the Historical Commission. The Chairman may
administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses.
Sec. 2-412. Powers and duties.
The Historical Commission shall have the power and duty to:
   (1)   Adopt its own procedural regulations;
   (2)   Conduct an ongoing survey and inventory of historically or
architecturally significant properties, buildings, structures, and areas within
the village that exemplify the architectural, social, cultural, economic, and
political history of the village, state, or nation;
   (3)   Investigate and recommend to the Board of Trustees the adoption of
ordinances designating properties, buildings, structures, or areas having
special historical, architectural, community, or aesthetic interest or value as
"landmarks" or "historic districts";
   (4)   To investigate and recommend to the Board of Trustees the acceptance
of any gifts of property, either as easements, development rights, or in fee,
transferred to the village by any entity for the purpose of preserving
properties, buildings, structures, or areas;
   (5)   Administer on behalf of the village, by means of annual inspections
and reports of condition, all properties, easements, or development rights
transferred to the village for the purpose of preservation;
   (6)   Keep a register of all properties and structures that have been
designated as landmarks or historic districts, including all information
required for each designation;
   (7)   Maintain an archive of preservation-related documents, and keep it
available in the Clerk's office for public use;
   (8)   Determine an appropriate system of street signs and make
recommendations for the design and implementation of specific street signs on
routes leading from one landmark or historic district to another,
   (9)   Advise and assist owners of landmarks and buildings, property, or
structures within historic districts on physical and financial aspects of
preservation, renovation, rehabilitation, and reuse, and on procedures for
inclusion in the National and State Registers of Historic Places;
   (10)   Nominate landmarks and historic districts to the State and National
Registers of Historic Places;
   (11)   Participate in programs under the National Historic Preservation Act
and the Illinois Historic Preservation Act;
   (12)   Inform and educate the citizens of the village concerning the
historic and architectural heritage of the village by publishing appropriate
maps, newsletters, brochures, and pamphlets, and by holding programs and
seminars;
   (13)   Develop specific design guidelines for the alteration, construction,
or removal of landmarks, property, and structures within historic districts;
   (14)   Review proposed zoning amendments, applications for special use
permits, or applications for zoning variances that affect proposed or
designated landmarks and historic districts;
   (15)   Call upon available village staff members, as well as other experts,
for technical advice;
   (16)   Appoint such citizen advisory committees as may be required from time
to time, to reach the goals set forth hereunder;
   (17)   Testify before all boards and commissions on any matter affecting
historically and architecturally significant property, structures, and areas;
   (18)   Confer recognition upon the owners of landmarks, property, or
structures within historic districts by means of certificates, plaques, or
markers; and
   (19)   Undertake any other action or activity necessary or appropriate to
the implementation of its powers and duties or to the implementation of the
purpose of this chapter.
Secs. 2-413 – 2-419. Reserved.
ARTICLE VI. SALE OF PROPERTY
Sec. 2-420. Sale of personal property.
The mayor may authorize the sale of personal property that is no longer
necessary or useful to, or for the best interest of the village. The mayor may
authorize the sale with or without advertisement; may authorize any municipal
officer to convert that personal property into some other form that is useful
to the village by using the material in the personal property; or may authorize
any municipal officer to trade in the personal property as part payment on a
new purchase of a similar article. In the event that an item of personal
property has no value or the cost of selling the same would exceed the sale
price, the mayor may authorize the donation or junking of such personal
property.
No personal property may be sold or transferred to any officer or employee of
the village without advertisement and the acceptance of public bids. The mayor
shall report in writing to the board of trustees with regard to any personal
property disposed of under the provisions of this section within 10 days after
sale or transfer.
Revised July, 2003
ARTICLE VII. EMERGENCY POWERS
Sec. 2-430. Declaration of state of emergency.
The Mayor is hereby authorized to declare a state of emergency in the event of:
(1) an attack upon the United States directly inflicting substantial damage or
injury to persons or property within the Village in any manner by sabotage or
by the use of bombs, missiles, shellfire, or atomic, radiological, chemical,
bacteriological, or biological means; or (2) in the event of a disaster
determined to be an occurrence or threat of catastrophic or widespread injury
or loss of life or property within the Village resulting from any natural or
manmade cause, including but not limited to, fire, flood, earthquake, tornado,
epidemic or explosion. In order to declare a state of emergency, the Mayor
shall set forth in writing a statement finding that one or more of the above
standards has been met, setting forth facts to substantiate such findings,
describing the nature of the emergency, and declaring that a state of emergency
exists. Such statement shall be signed under oath and filed with the Village
Clerk as soon as practicable. A state of emergency shall expire not later than
the adjournment of the first regular meeting of the Mayor and Board of Trustees
after the state of emergency has been declared.
Sec. 2-431. Powers of Mayor in state of emergency.
Whenever a state of emergency has been declared, the Mayor shall have the right
and authority to exercise any power that could be exercised by the Mayor or
Board of Trustees, or by any official of the Village. Without limitation, the
Mayor shall have the right to act unilaterally to prevent the loss of life or
property in the Village and shall have the authority to make orders which have
the effect of law.
Sec. 2-432. Emergency interim Mayoral succession.
In the event that the Mayor is unavailable due to a vacancy in office, or in
the event that the Mayor is absent or unable to exercise the powers and
discharge the duties of his office; an emergency interim successor shall have
the right to exercise the powers and discharge the duties of Mayor (including
the right to declare a state of emergency) until a successor is appointed as
provided by the Evergreen Park Municipal Code and the Illinois Municipal Code.
Sec. 2-433. Line of emergency interim Mayoral succession.
The line of succession for emergency interim mayor shall be:
   (1)   Village Trustee with greatest years of service
   (2)   Village Trustee with second greatest years of service
   (3)   Village Trustee with third greatest years of service
   (4)   Village Trustee with fourth greatest years of service
   (5)   Village Trustee with fifth greatest years of service
   (6)   Village Trustee with sixth greatest years of service
The Village Clerk shall maintain records which show the years of service for
all Village Trustees and which shall be used to determine the emergency interim
mayor.
Sec. 2-434. Formalities of taking office.
An emergency interim mayor shall take an oath prior to exercising the powers
and discharging the duties of the Office of Mayor. No other provision of law
relating to taking office shall be a prerequisite to the exercise of powers by
an emergency interim mayor.
Sec. 2-435. Period for exercising emergency powers.
The Board of Trustees may at any time terminate the authority of an emergency
interim mayor or may replace such person at any time, with or without cause.
ARTICLE VIII. ETHICAL CONDUCT
Sec. 2-450. Definitions.
For purposes of this Article, the following terms shall be given these
definitions:
   "Campaign for elective office" means any activity in furtherance of an
effort to influence the selection, nomination, election, or appointment of any
individual to any federal, State, or local public office or office in a
political organization, or the selection, nomination, or election of
Presidential or Vice-Presidential electors, but does not include activities (i)
relating to the support or opposition of any executive, legislative, or
administrative action, (ii) relating to collective bargaining, or (iii) that
are otherwise in furtherance of the person's official duties.
   "Candidate" means a person who has filed nominating papers or petitions for
nomination or election to an elected office, or who has been appointed to fill
a vacancy in nomination, and who remains eligible for placement on the ballot
at a regular election, as defined in Section 1-3 of the Election Code (10 ILCS
5/1-3).
   "Collective bargaining" has the same meaning as that term is defined in
Section 3 of the Illinois Public Labor Relations Act (5 ILCS 315/3).
   "Compensated time" means, with respect to an employee, any time worked by or
credited to the employee that counts toward any minimum work time requirement
imposed as a condition of his or her employment, but for purposes of this
Article, does not include any designated holidays, vacation periods, personal
time, compensatory time off or any period when the employee is on a leave of
absence. With respect to officers or employees whose hours are not fixed,
"compensated time" includes any period of time when the officer is on premises
under the control of the employer and any other time when the officer or
employee is executing his or her official duties, regardless of location.
   "Compensatory time off" means authorized time off earned by or awarded to an
employee to compensate in whole or in part for time worked in excess of the
minimum work time required of that employee as a condition of his or her
employment.
   "Contribution" has the same meaning as that term is defined in Section 9-1.4
of the Election Code (10 ILCS 5/9-1.4).
   "Employee" means a person employed by the Employer, whether on a full-time
or part-time basis or pursuant to a contract, whose duties are subject to the
direction and control of an employer with regard to the material details of how
the work is to be performed, but does not include an independent contractor.
   "Employer" means the Village of Evergreen Park.
   "Gift" means any gratuity, discount, entertainment, hospitality, loan,
forbearance, or other tangible or intangible item having monetary value
including, but not limited to, cash, food and drink, and honoraria for speaking
engagements related to or attributable to government employment or the official
position of an officer or employee.
   "Leave of absence" means any period during which an employee does not
receive (i) compensation for employment, (ii) service credit towards pension
benefits, and (iii) health insurance benefits paid for by the employer.
   "Officer" means a person who holds, by election or appointment, an office
created by statute or ordinance, regardless of whether the officer is
compensated for service in his or her official capacity.
   "Political activity" means any activity in support of or in connection with
any campaign for elective office or any political organization, but does not
include activities (i) relating to the support or opposition of any executive,
legislative, or administrative action, (ii) relating to collective bargaining,
or (iii) that are otherwise in furtherance of the person's official duties.
   "Political organization" means a party, committee, association, fund, or
other organization (whether or not incorporated) that is required to file a
statement of organization with the State Board of Elections or a county clerk
under Section 9-3 of the Election Code (10 ILCS 5/9-3), but only with regard to
those activities that require filing with the State Board of Elections or a
county clerk.
   "Prohibited political activity" means:
      (1)   Preparing for, organizing, or participating in any political
meeting, political rally, political demonstration, or other political event.
      (2)   Soliciting contributions, including but not limited to the purchase
of, selling, distributing, or receiving payment for tickets for any political
fundraiser, political meeting, or other political event.
      (3)   Soliciting, planning the solicitation of, or preparing any document
or report regarding anything of value intended as a campaign contribution.
      (4)   Planning, conducting, or participating in a public opinion poll in
connection with a campaign for elective office or on behalf of a political
organization for political purposes or for or against any referendum question.
      (5)   Surveying or gathering information from potential or actual voters
in an election to determine probable vote outcome in connection with a campaign
for elective office or on behalf of a political organization for political
purposes or for or against any referendum question.
      (6)   Assisting at the polls on election day on behalf of any political
organization or candidate for elective office or for or against any referendum
question.
      (7)   Soliciting votes on behalf of a candidate for elective office or a
political organization or for or against any referendum question or helping in
an effort to get voters to the polls.
      (8)   Initiating for circulation, preparing, circulating, reviewing, or
filing any petition on behalf of a candidate for elective office or for or
against any referendum question.
      (9)   Making contributions on behalf of any candidate for elective office
in that capacity or in connection with a campaign for elective office.
      (10)   Preparing or reviewing responses to candidate questionnaires.
      (11)   Distributing, preparing for distribution, or mailing campaign
literature, campaign signs, or other campaign material on behalf of any
candidate for elective office or for or against any referendum question.
      (12)   Campaigning for any elective office or for or against any
referendum question.
      (13)   Managing or working on a campaign for elective office or for or
against any referendum question.
      (14)   Serving as a delegate, alternate, or proxy to a political party
convention.
      (15)   Participating in any recount or challenge to the outcome of any
election.
   "Prohibited source" means any person or entity who:
      (1)   is seeking official action (i) by an officer or (ii) by an
employee, or by the officer or another employee directing that employee;
      (2)   does business or seeks to do business (i) with the officer or (ii)
with an employee, or with the officer or another employee directing that
employee;
      (3)   conducts activities regulated (i) by the officer or (ii) by an
employee, or by the officer or another employee directing that employee; or
      (4)   has interests that may be substantially affected by the performance
or nonperformance of the official duties of the officer or employee.
Sec. 2-451. Prohibited Political Activities
   (a)   No officer or employee shall intentionally perform any prohibited
political activity during any compensated time, as defined herein. No officer
or employee shall intentionally use any property or resources of the Employer
in connection with any prohibited political activity.
   (b)   At no time shall any officer or employee intentionally require any
other officer or employee to perform any prohibited political activity (i) as
part of that officer or employee's duties, (ii) as a condition of employment,
or (iii) during any compensated time off (such as holidays, vacation or
personal time off).
   (c)   No officer or employee shall be required at any time to participate in
any prohibited political activity in consideration for that officer or employee
being awarded additional compensation or any benefit, whether in the form of a
salary adjustment, bonus, compensatory time off, continued employment or
otherwise, nor shall any officer or employee be awarded additional compensation
or any benefit in consideration for his or her participation in any prohibited
political activity.
   (d)   Nothing in this Section prohibits activities that are permissible for
an officer or employee to engage in as part of his or her official duties, or
activities that are undertaken by an officer or employee on a voluntary basis
which are not prohibited by this Article.
   (e)   No person either (i) in a position that is subject to recognized merit
principles of public employment or (ii) in a position the salary for which is
paid in whole or in part by federal funds and that is subject to the Federal
Standards for a Merit System of Personnel Administration applicable to grant-
in-aid programs, shall be denied or deprived of employment or tenure solely
because he or she is a member or an officer of a political committee, of a
political party, or of a political organization or club.
Sec. 2-452. Gift Ban
   (a)   Except as permitted by this Section, no officer or employee, and no
spouse of or immediate family member living with any officer or employee
(collectively referred to herein as "recipients"), shall intentionally solicit
or accept any gift from any prohibited source, as defined herein, or which is
otherwise prohibited by law or this Article. No prohibited source shall
intentionally offer or make a gift that violates this Section.
   (b)   The provisions of paragraph (a) shall be not applicable to the
following:
      (1)   Opportunities, benefits, and services that are available on the
same conditions as for the general public.
      (2)   Anything for which the officer or employee, or his or her spouse or
immediate family member, pays the fair market value.
      (3)   Any (i) contribution that is lawfully made under the Election Code
or (ii) activities associated with a fundraising event in support of a
political organization or candidate.
      (4)   Educational materials and missions.
      (5)   Travel expenses for a meeting to discuss business.
      (6)   A gift from a relative, meaning those people related to the
individual as father, mother, son, daughter, brother, sister, uncle, aunt,
great aunt, great uncle, first cousin, nephew, niece, husband, wife,
grandfather, grandmother, grandson, granddaughter, father-in-law, mother-in-
law, son-in-law, daughter-in-law, brother-in-law, sister-in-law, stepfather,
stepmother, stepson, stepdaughter, stepbrother, stepsister, half brother, half
sister, and including the father, mother, grandfather, or grandmother of the
individual's spouse and the individual's fiancé or fiancee.
      (7)   Anything provided by an individual on the basis of a personal
friendship unless the recipient has reason to believe that, under the
circumstances, the gift was provided because of the official position or
employment of the recipient or his or her spouse or immediate family member and
not because of the personal friendship. In determining whether a gift is
provided on the basis of personal friendship, the recipient shall consider the
circumstances under which the gift was offered, such as: (i) the history of the
relationship between the individual giving the gift and the recipient of the
gift, including any previous exchange of gifts between those individuals; (ii)
whether to the actual knowledge of the recipient the individual who gave the
gift personally paid for the gift or sought a tax deduction or business
reimbursement for the gift; and (iii) whether to the actual knowledge of the
recipient the individual who gave the gift also at the same time gave the same
or similar gifts to other officers or employees, or their spouses or immediate
family members.
      (8)   Food or refreshments not exceeding $75 per person in value on a
single calendar day; provided that the food or refreshments are (i) consumed on
the premises from which they were purchased or prepared or (ii) catered. For
the purposes of this Section, "catered" means food or refreshments that are
purchased ready to consume which are delivered by any means.
      (9)   Food, refreshments, lodging, transportation, and other benefits
resulting from outside business or employment activities (or outside activities
that are not connected to the official duties of an officer or employee), if
the benefits have not been offered or enhanced because of the official position
or employment of the officer or employee, and are customarily provided to
others in similar circumstances.
      (10)   Intra-governmental and inter-governmental gifts. For the purpose
of this Act, "intragovernmental gift" means any gift given to an officer or
employee from another officer or employee, and "inter-governmental gift" means
any gift given to an officer or employee by an officer or employee of another
governmental entity.
      (11)   Bequests, inheritances, and other transfers at death.
      (12)   Any item or items from any one prohibited source during any
calendar year having a cumulative total value of less than $100.
Each of the exceptions listed above is mutually exclusive and independent of
every other.
   (c)   An officer or employee, his or her spouse or an immediate family
member living with the officer or employee, does not violate this Section if
the recipient promptly takes reasonable action to return a gift from a
prohibited source to its source or gives the gift or an amount equal to its
value to an appropriate charity that is exempt from income taxation under
Section 501 (c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as now or hereafter
amended, renumbered, or succeeded.
Sec. 2-453. Penalties
   (a)   A person who intentionally violates any provision of Sec. 2-451 may be
punished by a term of incarceration in a penal institution other than a
penitentiary for a period of not more than 364 days, and may be fined in an
amount not to exceed $2,500.
   (b)   A person who intentionally violates any provision of Sec. 2-452 is
subject to a fine in an amount of not less than $1,001 and not more than
$5,000.
   (c)   Any person who intentionally makes a false report alleging a violation
of any provision of this Article to the local enforcement authorities, the
State's Attorney or any other law enforcement official may be punished by a
term of incarceration in a penal institution other than a penitentiary for a
period of not more than 364 days, and may be fined in an amount not to exceed
$2,500.
   (d)   A violation of Sec. 2-451 shall be prosecuted as a criminal offense by
an attorney specially appointed by the Employer by filing in the circuit court
an information, or sworn complaint, charging such offense. The prosecution
shall be under and conform to the rules of criminal procedure. Conviction shall
require the establishment of the guilt of the defendant beyond a reasonable
doubt.
   (e)   A violation of Sec. 2-452 may be prosecuted as a quasi-criminal
offense by an attorney specially appointed by the Employer.
   (f)   In addition to any other penalty that may be applicable, whether
criminal or civil, an officer or employee who intentionally violates any
provision of Sec.
2-451 or Sec.
2-452 is subject to discipline or discharge.
ARTICLE IX. PUBLIC SAFETY EMPLOYEE BENEFITS ACT
Sec. 2-460. Application process.
   A public safety employee, or family member of an injured or deceased public
safety employee who is otherwise not capable of applying for benefits, must
file with the Village Clerk a full and complete application, on a form provided
by the village, for benefits under the Public Safety Employee Benefits Act
("PSEBA"). Upon receipt of the application, and any supporting documentation
necessary to make an initial determination, the information shall be submitted
to the Village Treasurer. The Village Treasurer shall review the application
and supporting documents to make an initial determination on whether:
   (a)   The application for benefits should be granted or denied based upon
the facts in the application and supporting documentation;
   (b)   Set the matter for an administrative hearing to make a determination,
based upon the results of the administrative hearing, on whether the
application should be granted; and
   (c)   Enter such other finding as is consistent with the evidence or by
agreement of the applicant and the village.
(Ord. No. 18-2015 § 1, 8-17-15)
Sec. 2-461. Initial grant or denial of benefits.
   If the Village Treasurer grants the benefits based upon the application and
supporting documentation, the applicant will be contacted by the Village
Clerk's office within 30 days of the decision. If the Village Treasurer denies
the application for benefits, the applicant shall receive written notice of
such denial from the Village Clerk's office. The notice of denial shall include
the right to request an administrative hearing to appeal the initial
determination. The applicant shall have the right to request an administrative
hearing, in writing, within 30 days after being served with the written notice
of denial. The applicant's failure to file a timely written request for an
administrative hearing shall result in the forfeiture of benefits under the
PSEBA. The administrative hearing officer shall preside over any hearing
relating to a referral made by the Village Treasurer pursuant to Section
2-460(b) or an appeal of the Village Treasurer's denial of the application of
benefits.
(Ord. No. 18-2015 § 1, 8-17-15)
Sec. 2-462. Administrative hearing officer.
   (a)   Appointment. The Mayor, with the consent of the Board of Trustees, is
hereby authorized to appoint a person to hold the position of an administrative
hearing officer for each and every individual hearing that shall come before
this village.
   (b)   Qualifications for office. The administrative hearing officer must be
an attorney who has been licensed to practice law in the this state for at
least three years and who has knowledge of and experience in employment and
labor law, general civil procedure, the rules of evidence and administrative
practice. In addition, in making the administrative hearing officer
appointment, the Mayor shall consider all pertinent information, including, at
a minimum, the candidate's ability to comply with the requirements of the
position and background and performance data made available to the Mayor, on
file with the village or otherwise obtained by the village.
   (c)   Compensation. The compensation to be paid for the administrative
hearing officer at any individual hearing procedure shall be approved by the
Mayor and Board of Trustees.
   (d)   Authority. The administrative hearing officer shall have all of the
powers granted to him under the common law relative to the conduct of an
administrative hearing, including the power to:
      (1)   Preside over all hearings under the PSEBA;
      (2)   Administer oaths;
      (3)   Hear testimony and accept evidence that is relevant to the issue of
benefits under the PSEBA;
      (4)   Issue subpoenas to secure attendance of witnesses and the
production of relevant papers or documents upon the request of the parties or
their representatives;
      (5)   Rule upon objections in the admissibility of evidence;
      (6)   Preserve and authenticate the record of the hearing and all
exhibits introduced into evidence at the hearing;
      (7)   Issue a determination based on the evidence presented at the
hearing, the determination of which shall be in writing and shall include a
written finding of fact, decision and order.
(Ord. No. 18-2015 § 1, 8-17-15)
Sec. 2-463. Conduct of hearing.
   (a)   Scheduling. An administrative hearing shall be held to adjudicate and
determine whether the subject public safety employee is entitled to the
benefits under PSEBA on the date, time and place as established by the village
with appropriate notice served upon the public safety employee. A pretrial
hearing may be required in order to schedule the administrative hearing and to
stipulate to certain facts.
   (b)   Record. All hearings shall be attended by a certified court reporter
and a transcript of all proceedings shall be made by said certified court
reporter.
   (c)   Hearings rights. The village and the petitioning public safety
employee shall be entitled to representation by counsel at said hearing and may
present witnesses, may present testimony and documents, may cross examine
opposing witnesses, and may request the issuance of subpoenas to compel the
appearance of relevant witnesses or the production of relevant documents.
   (d)   Evidentiary standard. The rules of evidence as set forth in the
Illinois Code of Evidence shall apply.
   (e)   Final determination. The determination of whether the petitioning
public safety employee is entitled to the benefits of the PSEBA by the
administrative hearing officer shall constitute a final determination for the
purpose of judicial review under the common law writ of certiorari.
   (f)   Burden of proof. The applicant shall have the burden of proof to
establish qualification for benefits by a preponderance of the evidence
standard.
(Ord. No. 18-2015 § 1, 8-17-15)
Chapter 3
ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR
Art. I.   In General, §§ 3-1 – 3-30
Art. II.   Liquor Operations and Licensing §§ 3-31 – 3-75
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 3-1. Penalties.
   (a)   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be
punished as provided in section
1-9.
   (b)   In the alternative, the village may prosecute an offense and ask for
imprisonment of a period not to exceed 6 months.
   (c)   The penalties in this section are in addition to any penalties that
may be imposed or any action taken by the local liquor control commissioner.
   (d)   Any person who violates Sections
3-2 and
3-3 shall be punished by a fine of not less than $250 nor more than $1,000.
Each day any violation of any provision referenced in this subsection shall
continue shall constitute a separate offense. Failure to pay the fine on or
before the first hearing date shall result in an increase of the fine to $500.
   (e)   Any person who violates Sections
3-4(b) or
3-37 shall be punished by a fine of not less than $250 nor more than $1,000.
Each violation of any provision referenced in this subsection shall continue
shall constitute a separate offense. Failure to pay the fine on or before the
first hearing date shall result in an increase of the fine to $500.
(Ord. No. 11-2007 § 1, 2-19-07; Am. Ord. No. 21-2007 § 1, 3-19-07; Am. Ord. No.
13-2008 § 1, 4-21-08 )
Sec. 3-2. Violations by minors.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any owner or occupant of any premises to
knowingly allow any person under the age of 21 years to violate any provisions
of this chapter.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any parent or guardian to knowingly suffer or
permit any person under the age of 21 years of which he may be the parent or
guardian to violate any provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 13-2008, § 1, 4-21-08)
Sec. 3-3. Consumption on public way, parking lot.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to drink, consume, transport, carry or
possess any alcoholic liquor, except in the original package and with the seal
unbroken, on a public street, sidewalk, parkway, public parking lot or
semipublic parking lot. The term "semipublic parking lot" shall include any
area wherein motor vehicles are parked by the public in conjunction with any
business, enterprise, or commercial establishment.
(Ord. No. 13-2008, passed 4-21-08)
Sec. 3-4. Consumption, possession; false identification; employment of
underaged persons.
   (a)   No person under the age of 21 years shall consume, purchase or accept
delivery of alcoholic liquor or have alcoholic liquor in his possession,
excepting the possession and dispensing, or consumption by a person under the
age of 21 years of alcoholic liquor in the performance of a religious service
or ceremony, the consumption by a person under the age of 21 years under the
direct supervision and approval of the parent(s) or guardian(s) of such
underage person in the privacy of the parent's or guardian's home, or the
possession and delivery of alcoholic liquors in pursuit of a person's
employment by a licensee as allowed by state law.
   (b)   No person shall sell, give or deliver alcoholic liquor to a person
under the age of 21 years, except as allowed in subsection (a) of this section.
   (c)   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 21 years to use
false identification or the identification of another to obtain admittance to
or obtain alcoholic liquor from any liquor establishment.
   (d)   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, give or furnish any
person under the age of 21 years any identification which is used by any other
person for the purpose of gaining entrance into a liquor establishment or which
is used for the purpose of purchasing or attempting to purchase any alcoholic
beverage.
   (e)   It shall be unlawful for any person to employ or permit the employment
of any person under the age of 21 years in any licensed premises where
alcoholic liquor is sold where that person is involved in the sale or delivery
of alcoholic liquor. Persons under the age of 21 may be employed in any
licensed premises where their employment does not require them to sell, accept
money for, check identification for, or serve alcoholic liquor.
(Ord. No. 11-2007 § 1, 2-19-07; Am. Ord. No. 21-2007 § 1, 3-19-07; Am. Ord. No.
13-2008 § 1, 4-21-08 )
Sec. 3-5.   Video gaming.
   (a)   The provisions of this section shall apply to facilities and
establishments licensed under the Video Gaming Act, 230 ILCS 40/1 et seq. The
definitions of the Video Gaming Act are incorporated into this section by
reference. No other provision of the Evergreen Park Municipal Code pertaining
to the licensing of establishments, operators, or video gaming shall be
applicable to a licensed veterans establishment.
   (b)   The annual license fee for each licensed veterans establishment shall
be $250.
   (c)   The annual license fee for a video gaming terminal shall be $50.
(Ord. No, 13-2012, § 1, 6-4-12)
Secs. 3-6 - 3-30. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. LIQUOR OPERATION AND LICENSING
Sec. 3-31. Local liquor control commissioner.
   The mayor shall be the local liquor control commissioner. The local liquor
control commissioner shall receive as compensation the sum of $10,000 per year.
Compensation shall be paid in installments in the same manner as for employees
of the village.
(Ord. No. 13-2008 § 1, 4-21-08)
Sec. 3-32. State and federal law.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any licensee in the conduct of the licensed
premises or upon the licensed premises to violate any law of the state, any law
of the United States, or any rule of the state liquor control commission.
   (b)   The Local Liquor Control Commissioner is hereby authorized to grant
exemptions to the 100-foot locational prohibition contained in Section 6-11 of
the Liquor Control Act of 1934.
(Ord. No. 13-2008 § 1, 4-21-08; Am. Ord. No. 19-2018 § 1, 8-20-18)
Sec. 3-33. Permitting violations of ordinance.
   It shall be unlawful for any licensee, in the conduct of his business, to
commit, suffer or permit, through himself, agent, servant or employee, a
violation of a village ordinance.
(Ord. No. 13-2008 § 1, 4-21-08)
Sec. 3-34. Permitting violation of rules, regulations.
   It shall be unlawful for any licensee to suffer or permit a violation of any
rule or regulation of the local liquor control commissioner.
(Ord. No. 13-2008 § 1, 4-21-08)
Sec. 3-35. Report of violations.
   A licensee shall immediately report to the police a violation of any village
ordinance, state law or federal law occurring in the licensed premises, or
outside the licensed premises, but adjacent thereto, involving the conduct of
his business or patrons.
(Ord. No. 13-2008 § 1, 4-21-08)
Sec. 3-36. Hours of operation.
   Licensed premises shall have the following hours of operation during which
time alcoholic liquors may be sold, delivered, consumed or offered for sale:
      (1)   Class A, Class AA, Class B, and Class D shall be open only from 7:
00 a.m. in the morning to 2:00 a.m. the next morning on all days, except Sunday
when the opening hour shall be 11:00 a.m. No package sales after 12:00
midnight.
      (1.1)   Class BL shall be open only from 9:00 a.m. in the morning to 10:
00 p.m. on all days, except Sunday when the opening hour shall be 11:00 a.m.
      (2)   Class C and Class M shall be open only from 7:00 a.m. in the
morning to 12:00 midnight on all days, except Sunday when the opening hour
shall be 9:00 a.m.
      (3)   Class CC, Class E, Class F, Class G and Class H shall be open only
from 7:00 a.m. in the morning to 12:00 midnight on all days, except Sunday when
the opening hour shall be 11:00 a.m.
      (4)   Class EE shall be open only from 10:00 a.m. in the morning (except
Sundays at which time the opening hour shall be 11:00 a.m.) to 11:00 p.m. on
all days, except Thursday, Friday and Saturday when the closing hour shall be
12:00 midnight. The licensed premises may be opening no earlier than 8:30 a.m.
on Saturday and Sunday for the purpose of serving breakfast without any
alcoholic beverages.
      (4.1)   Class EEE shall be open only from 8:00 a.m. in the morning to 5:
00 p.m. on all days.
      (5)   Class P shall be open only from 9:00 a.m. in the morning to 11:00
p.m. on all days, except Friday and Saturday when the closing hour shall be 12:
00 midnight.
      (6)   Class S shall be open only from 12:00 noon to 7:00 p.m.
   The local liquor control officer is hereby authorized to extend the hours
for any licensed premises, but such extended hours may not be authorized for
more than seven days during any calendar year.
(Ord. No. 21-2005 § 1, 7-18-05; Am. Ord. No. 4-2006 § 1, 1-16-06; Am. Ord. No.
13-2008 § 1, 4-21-08; Am. Ord. No. 6-2012 § 1, 3-5-12; Am. Ord. No. 9-2012 § 1,
4-16-12; Am. Ord. No. 26-2013 § 1, 11-18-13; Am. Ord. No. 21-2014 § 3, 9-15-14;
Am. Ord. No. 28-2014 § 3, 12-15- 14; Am. Ord. No. 22-2015 § 3, 9-8-15; Am. Ord.
No. 15-2016 § 3, 5-2-16; Am. Ord. No. 16- 2016 § 2, 6-6-16; Am. Ord. No. 6-2023
§ 2, 3-6-23; Am. Ord. No. 26-2024 § 2, 10-21-24)
Sec. 3-37. Closing hour restrictions.
   (a)   No licensee shall sell, offer for sale, deliver or allow the
consumption of any alcoholic liquor after the closing hour. At and after the
closing hour all alcoholic beverages shall be removed from any table, bar or
other area in which patrons and customers are served. No customer, patron or
employee shall drink or possess alcoholic liquor after the closing hour or be
permitted access thereto by the licensee. After the closing hour all doors
directly opening into or out of the licensed premises shall remain unlocked to
allow access by the Evergreen Park Police Department as long as there are any
persons other than employees within the licensed premises.
   (b)   All licensees shall be required to allow police officers into the
licensed premises after the closing hour in order to determine compliance with
this chapter.
((Ord. No. 4-2006 § 2, 1-16-06; Am. Ord. No. 13-2008 § 1, 4-21-08)
Sec. 3-38. Prohibited conduct.
   Every licensee under this article engaged in the sale of alcoholic beverages
shall conduct his place of business in a quiet, decent and respectable manner
and shall eject therefrom or refuse to admit thereto all persons rendering
themselves objectionable or undesirable by reason of undue noise or other acts
disturbing the peace.
(Ord. No. 13-2008 § 1, 4-21-08)
Sec. 3-39. Furnishing intoxicants to persons under the influence; prostitution.
   It shall be unlawful for any licensee, officer, associate, member, agent,
representative or employee of such licensee to give or deliver any alcoholic
liquor or intoxicating beverage to a person under the influence of alcohol or
drugs. Soliciting of drinks or prostitution is prohibited.
(Ord. No. 13-2008 § 1, 4-21-08)
Sec. 3-40. Obscene acts by patrons.
   No licensee shall permit his patrons to perform any lewd, lascivious acts,
or an act of obscenity, as defined in Section
12-251.
(Ord. No. 13-2008 § 1, 4-21-08)
Sec. 3-41. Report of disorderly persons.
   Every licensee shall immediately report to the police any act by any person
or patron rendering himself objectionable, causing undue noise or disturbance,
breach of peace, unusual conduct, or a person with a firearm, knife, bludgeon
or deadly instrument.
(Ord. No. 13-2008 § 1, 4-21-08)
Sec. 3-42. Permitting disorderly conduct.
   No person licensed under the provisions of this article shall suffer any
loud or boisterous talking, or obscene or profane language, quarreling,
singing, fighting or other disturbance of persons passing along any street or
public square in the vicinity thereof or to the disturbance of the peace and
quiet of persons doing business or residing in the neighborhood thereof.
(Ord. No. 13-2008 § 1, 4-21-08)
Sec. 3-43. Attire of employees.
   All persons or employees dispensing or serving food or alcoholic liquor
shall be decently clothed. Topless or similar type of attire is hereby
prohibited. In addition, there shall be compliance with Section
12-257.
(Ord. No. 13-2008 § 1, 4-21-08)
Sec. 3-44. Diseased employees.
   It shall be unlawful to employ in any premises used for the retail sale of
alcoholic liquor any person who is afflicted with, or who is a carrier of, any
contagious, infectious or venereal disease. It shall be unlawful for any person
who is afflicted with or a carrier of any such disease to work in or about any
premises or to engage in any way in the handling, preparation or distribution
of such liquor.
(Ord. No. 13-2008 § 1, 4-21-08)
Sec. 3-45. Permitting gambling.
   It shall be unlawful for any licensee to suffer or permit any species of
gambling in his premises or any part thereof or any place adjacent thereto
under his control.
(Ord. No. 13-2008 § 1, 4-21-08)
Sec. 3-46. Permitting removal of opened containers.
   It shall be unlawful for any licensee to permit alcoholic liquor, except in
the original package and with the seal unbroken, to be taken out of the
premises wherein it was sold, delivered, or given.
(Ord. No. 13-2008 § 1, 4-21-08)
Sec. 3-47. Happy hour; reduced price drinks.
   (a)   All licensees shall maintain a schedule of the prices charged for all
drinks of alcoholic liquor to be served and consumed on the licensed premises
or in any room or part thereof whenever a hotel or multiuse establishment which
holds a valid retailer's license operates on its premises more than one
establishment at which drinks of alcoholic liquor are sold at retail, the hotel
or multiuse establishment shall maintain at each such establishment a separate
schedule of the prices charged for such drinks at that establishment.
   (b)   No licensee or employee or agent of such licensee shall:
      (1)   Serve 2 or more drinks of alcoholic liquor at one time to one
person for consumption by that one person, except selling or delivering wine by
the bottle or carafe.
      (2)   Sell, offer to sell or serve to any person an unlimited number of
drinks of alcoholic liquor during any set period of time for a fixed price,
except at private functions not open to the general public.
      (3)   Sell, offer to sell or serve any drink of alcoholic liquor to any
person on any one date at reduced price other than that charged other
purchasers of drinks on that day where such reduced price is a promotion to
encourage consumption of alcoholic liquor, except as authorized in subsection
(c)(7) of this section.
      (4)   Increase the volume of alcoholic liquor contained in a drink, or
the size of a drink of alcoholic liquor, without increasing proportionately the
price regularly charged for the drink on that day.
      (5)   Encourage or permit, on the licensed premises, any game or contest
which involves drinking alcoholic liquor or the awarding of drinks of alcoholic
liquor as prizes for such game or contest on the licensed premises.
      (6)   Sell, offer to sell or serve any drink of alcoholic liquor to any
person on any one date at reduced price other than that charged other
purchasers of drinks on that day where such reduced price is the result of a
club membership or other similar arrangement. All persons being served
alcoholic beverages on a premises must be charged the same price for alcoholic
beverages as other persons are charged on the same day.
      (7)   Advertise or promote in any way, whether on or off the licensed
premises, any of the practices prohibited under subsections (b)(1) through (6).
   (c)   Nothing in subsection (b) shall be construed to prohibit a licensee
from:
      (1)   Offering free food or entertainment at any time.
      (2)   Including drinks of alcoholic liquor as part of a meal package.
      (3)   Including drinks of alcoholic liquor as part of a hotel package.
      (4)   Negotiating drinks of alcoholic liquor as part of a contract
between a hotel or multiuse establishment and another group for the holding of
any function, meeting, convention or trade show.
      (5)   Providing room service to persons renting rooms at a hotel.
      (6)   Selling pitchers (or the equivalent, including but not limited to
buckets), carafes, or bottles of alcoholic liquor which are customarily sold in
such manner and delivered to 2 or more persons at one time.
      (7)   Increasing prices of drinks of alcoholic liquor in lieu of, in
whole or in part, a cover charge to offset the cost of special entertainment
not regularly scheduled, provided that all patrons are charged such uniform
price of drinks.
(Ord. No. 13-2008 § 1, 4-21-08)
Sec. 3-48. Teen dances.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any licensee to conduct or allow a teen dance
on any part of a licensed premises at any time during the period for which a
liquor license is issued to those premises.
   (b)   For the purposes of this section a teen dance is any dance, party, or
concert where persons under the age of 21 are present.
   (c)   This section shall not prohibit any teen dance operated by any unit of
government, any school located within the village, or any religious
organization whose church is located within the village.
(Ord. No. 13-2008 § 1, 4-21-08)
Sec. 3-49. Restricted hours for minors.
   No person under the age of 21 years shall be present on any premises which
holds a Class A, Class AA or Class B liquor license between the hours of 11:00
p.m. and 6:00 a.m. except as follows:
   (a)   When no entertainment is being provided in the room where the minor is
located provided that such room is separated by closed doors to the room where
the entertainment is being provided.
   (b)   When alcoholic liquor is not being served to any persons.
   (c)   When accompanied by a parent or legal guardian.
   (d)   When the premises are rented for a private party (such as a wedding),
no admission or charge is required to enter the premises, the premises are not
open to the public, and no advertising or publication of the private party is
made.
   (e)   In conjunction with a school or church sponsored event when chaperones
from the sponsoring organization are present.
   (f)   During the course of employment at the premises.
(Ord. No. 13-2008 § 1, 4-21-08)
Sec. 3-50. BYOB; catering.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person not possessing a caterer's liquor
license issued by the village to deliver or serve alcoholic liquor or to allow
the delivery or service of alcoholic liquor in any place of public
accommodation.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person to allow alcoholic liquor to be
brought into or consumed in any place of public accommodation within the
Village which does not possess a liquor license. BYOB (bring your own bottle)
facilities are prohibited in any place of public accommodation within the
village.
(Ord. No. 13-2008 § 1, 4-21-08)
Sec. 3-51. Clear view into licensed premises.
   It shall be unlawful to block the view of village police officers through
any door into the licensed premises. Every licensee shall allow a clear view
into its premises so that a police officer can observe conduct therein through
a door or window easily accessible to a police officer.
(Ord. No. 13-2008 § 1, 4-21-08)
Sec. 3-52. Liquor license required.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the sale at retail of
any alcoholic beverage of any kind without first obtaining a license therefore
from the local liquor control commissioner.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in business to, or
conduct a business where patrons are allowed to bottle, blend, deliver,
furnish, give, divide, distribute, barter, use, consume, possess, or store
alcoholic liquors in any commercial establishment without first obtaining a
license therefore from the local liquor control commissioner.
   (c)   It shall be unlawful for any person to bottle, blend, deliver,
furnish, give, divide, distribute, barter, use, consume, possess, or store
alcoholic liquors on any premises which has not been licensed by the local
liquor control commissioner.
   (d)   It shall be unlawful for any person to furnish containers, water or
other beverages for the mixture thereof for alcoholic liquors in any commercial
establishment which has not been licensed by the local liquor control
commissioner.
   (e)   It shall be unlawful for any person, business, licensee, agent,
servant, or employee to allow or permit any persons to commit any of the acts
prohibited in subsections (a), (b), (c) and (d) of this section.
   (f)   It shall be unlawful for any person engaged in the business of leasing
any premises to allow the use, sale, giving away, or consumption on the
premises of alcoholic liquor, without first securing a license or without the
lessee first securing a license from the local liquor control commissioner.
(Ord. No. 13-2008 § 1, 4-21-08)
Sec. 3-53. Application generally.
   (a)   Every person desiring to engage in the business of selling at retail
shall make application in writing on forms furnished by the village for a
license, stating his name, age, residence, length of time in business, whether
he then holds or has theretofore held a license to conduct such business in any
other village or city in the state, whether he has ever been refused such
license by any municipality within the state, and whether any license
theretofore granted to him for the conduct of such business has ever been
revoked. Such written application shall be verified. Such application shall be
filed with the local liquor control commission; and such applicant shall, at
the time of the filing of the same, pay to the commissioner in cash the
required license fee.
   (b)   Except for applications for new licenses during the course of the
annual year, every application for renewal of a license shall be completed and
in the hands of the local liquor control commissioner at least 15 days prior to
the beginning of the annual year. No application will be accepted or approved
unless the application is fully completed, the questions answered, properly
signed and verified. Failure to complete the application and to file the same
within the time limit prescribed herein shall be deemed grounds for refusal of
the local liquor control commissioner to renew such license.
   (c)   The application shall contain such queries as shall intelligently
inform the local liquor control commissioner as to whether or not the applicant
is eligible for a license and complies with the applicable requirements of the
Liquor Control Act of 1934 [235 ILCS 5/1 1 et seq.] for retail liquor license.
   (d)   Applicants may be required to submit information as to sources of
funds for the purchase or operation of their businesses. The commissioner may
require such other information in writing or an oral examination.
   (e)   Misstatements in the application shall be deemed grounds for refusal
to issue or renew the license and, if a license is issued, grounds for
revocation.
(Ord. No. 13-2008 § 1, 4-21-08)
Sec. 3-54. Fingerprinting of licensed applicant and bartenders.
   The applicant for a license under this division shall be fingerprinted and a
complete set of fingerprints maintained on file with the police department. In
case of corporations, the manager or person in charge shall also be
fingerprinted.
(Ord. No. 13-2008 § 1, 4-21-08)
Sec. 3-55. Original issuance or transfer.
   (a)   In addition to the annual liquor license fee, an applicant shall
reimburse the Village for all costs involved (including fingerprinting and
legal fees) with respect to the investigation of an applicant for the original
issuance of or transfer of a liquor license.
   (b)   The local liquor control commissioner may, at his discretion, permit
the transfer of interest in or location of a license issued for the operation
of the sale of alcoholic liquors at any location to which such license has been
issued, suspended or revoked. Except with the consent of the local liquor
control commissioner, licenses issued pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter are not subject to sale, assignment, transfer or to a change of
location.
   (c)   For the purpose of this section, a transfer of any interest in a
partnership, association, or in more than 5% of ownership in shares of the
stock of a corporation shall be a transfer of interest and require the payment
of the transfer fee provided for by this section.
(Ord. No. 13-2008 § 1, 4-21-08)
Sec. 3-56. License classifications.
   Licenses for sale at retail of alcoholic liquor shall be divided in the
following classes:
      (1)   Class A, consumption on premises and package sales. A Class A
license entitles the licensee to make sales at retail of alcoholic liquors for
consumption on the premises and to sell package alcoholic liquors for
consumption off the premises.
      (1.1)   Class AA, consumption on premises and package sales (beer and
wine only). A Class AA license entitles the licensee to make sales at retail of
alcoholic liquors for consumption on the premises and to sell package beer and
wine only for consumption off the premises.
      (2)   Class B, consumption on premises. A Class B license entitles the
licensee to make sales at retail of alcoholic liquors for consumption on the
premises.
      (2.1)   Class BL, Consumption on premises, limited. A Class BL license
entitles the licensee to make sales at retail of alcoholic liquors for
consumption on the premises for limited hours.
      (3)   Class C, package sales. A Class C license entitles the licensee to
make sales at retail of packages alcoholic liquors for consumption off the
premises and allows the licensee to serve tasting samples of alcoholic liquors
without charge for consumption on the premises. A Class C licensee is also
permitted to have wine tasting and alcoholic liquor tasting sessions for which
it charges a fee, provided that the Local Liquor Control Commissioner approves
the same.
      (3.1)   Class CC, package sales (beer and wine only). A Class CC license
entitles the licensee to make package sales of beer and wine only for
consumption off the premises.
      (4)   Class D, veterans consumption on premises. A Class D license shall
be issued only to a veterans organization organized and existing under a
charter issued by a national organization incorporated by act of the Congress
of the United States. A Class D license entitles the licensee to make sales at
retail of alcoholic liquors for consumption on the premises.
      (5)   Class E, restaurant consumption on premises (beer and wine). A
Class E license shall be issued only to a restaurant having a seating capacity
of 70 or more persons at individual tables or booths. A Class E license
entitles the licensee to make sales at retail of beer and wine only for
consumption on the premises. No bar shall be permitted on the premises which
can accommodate the seating or service of a patron from the bar. All sales of
alcoholic liquor shall be made incidental to the sale of food purchased for and
consumed on the licensed premise.
      (5.1)   Class EE, small restaurant consumption on premises. A Class EE
license entitles the licensee to make sales at retail of alcoholic liquors for
consumption only on the premises. The primary business conducted on the
premises shall be the sale of food. The maximum capacity for the premises shall
be 100 persons. All sales of alcoholic liquor shall be made incidental to the
sale of food on the premises. The premises shall have a fully operating kitchen
during all hours that the premises are open. No patrons of the premises shall
smoke on any sidewalk, parkway, street, or on any private property where they
are visible to a residential dwelling unit. No music or entertainment is
permitted if it can be heard more than 10 feet from the premises. No sale or
consumption of alcoholic liquor is allowed outside of the building except in
connection with the consumption of food in a seating area as authorized, in
writing, by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner.
      (5.2)   Class EEE, small breakfast and lunch restaurant, consumption on
premises. A Class EEE license entitles the licensee to make sales at retail of
alcoholic liquors for consumption only with breakfast and lunch served on the
premises. The primary business conducted on the premises shall be the sale of
food. The maximum capacity for the premises shall be 70 persons. All sales of
alcoholic liquor shall be made incidental to the sale of food on the premises.
The premises shall have a fully operating kitchen during all hours that the
premises are open. No patrons of the premises shall smoke on any sidewalk,
parkway, street, or on any private property where they are visible to a
residential dwelling unit. No music or entertainment is permitted if it can be
heard more than 10 feet from the premises. No sale or consumption of alcoholic
liquor is allowed outside of the building except in connection with the
consumption of food in a seating area as authorized, in writing, by the Local
Liquor Control Commissioner.
      (6)   Class ENT, entertainment. A Class ENT license may be issued in
conjunction with a Class A, Class AA, Class B, Class D, Class E, Class EE,
Class F, Class G, and Class P license under the terms and conditions
established by the local liquor control commissioner. A Class ENT license
entitles a licensee to provide entertainment under the terms and conditions of
the license.
      (7)   Class ENLT, entertainment limited. A Class ENTL license may be
issued in conjunction with any license under the terms and conditions
established by the local liquor control commissioner on a daily basis. A Class
ENTL license entitles a licensee to provide entertainment under the terms and
conditions of the license.
      (8)   Class F, restaurant consumption on premises. A Class F license
shall be issued only to a restaurant having a seating capacity of 100 or more
persons at individual tables or booths. A Class F license entitles the licensee
to make sales at retail of alcoholic liquor only for consumption on the
premises. No bar shall be permitted on the premises which can accommodate the
seating or service of a patron from the bar. All sales of alcoholic liquor
shall be made incidental to the sale of food purchased for and consumed on the
licensed premise.
      (9)   Class G, recreational club consumption on premises. A Class G
license shall be issued only to a health or recreational organization such as a
tennis club. A Class G license entitles the licensee to make sales at retail of
alcoholic liquors for consumption on the premises. Sales of alcoholic liquor
shall be made only to members and their guests, and for club banquets.
      (10)   Class H, restaurant consumption on premises (specified alcohol). A
Class H license shall be issued only to a restaurant having a seating capacity
of less than 100 persons at individual tables or booths. A Class H license
entitles the licensee to make sales at retail of beer, wine, and not more than
five specified alcoholic liquor drinks for consumption only on the premises. No
bar shall be permitted on the premises which can accommodate the seating or
service of a patron from the bar. All sales of alcoholic liquor shall be made
incidental to the sale of food purchased for and consumed on the licensed
premise.
      (11)   Class M, grocery store consumption on premises and package sales.
A Class M license entitles the licensee to make sales at retail of alcoholic
liquors for consumption on the premises (including tastings) and to sell
package alcoholic liquors for consumption off the premises.
      (12)   Class P, banquet party consumption on premises. A Class P license
entitles the licensee to make sales at retail of alcoholic liquors for
consumption only on the premises during times when a party or banquet is being
conducted, and then only to invited guests of the party or banquet. The sole
business conducted on the premises shall be the provision of parties and
banquets to private grounds. Each party or banquet shall be evidenced by a
written contract, which shall be maintained on the premises during the time of
the party or banquet. There shall be no individual cover charge or other
entrance charge collected from patrons. All sales of alcoholic liquor shall be
made incidental to the service of food during the party and banquet. Food may
be cooked on the premises or may be catered. No patrons of the premises shall
smoke on any sidewalk, parkway, street, parking lot, or on any private property
where they are visible to a residential dwelling unit. No sale or consumption
of alcoholic liquor is allowed outside of the building.
      (13)   Class S, government-owned sports facility. A Class S license
entitles the licensee to make sales at retail of beer and wine for consumption
only on the premises during times when a government-owned sports facility is
open and conducting sporting events or practice. Sale or consumption of beer
and wine is permitted in any building or patio area connected to the
government-owned sports facility.
(Ord. No. 21-2005 § 2, 7-18-05; Am. Ord. No. 13-2008 § 1, 4-21-08; Am. Ord. No.
6-2012 § 2, 3-5-12; Am. Ord. No. 31-2013 § 1, 12-16-13; Am. Ord. No. 21-2014 §
1, 9-15-14; Am. Ord. No. 28-2014 § 1, 12-15-14; Am. Ord. No. 22-2015 § 1, 9-8-
15; Am. Ord. No. 15-2016 § 1, 5-2-16; Am. Ord. No. 16-2016 § 1, 6-6-16; Am.
Ord. No. 9-2021 § 3, 7-19-21; Am. Ord. No. 6-2023 § 1, 3-6-23; Am. Ord. No. 26-
2024 § 1, 10-21-24)
Sec. 3-57. Entertainment and entertainment limited license.
   (a)   Entertainment may only be provided in a premises licensed to sell
alcoholic liquor in conformity with a Class ENT or a Class ENTL license which
is issued in conjunction with a license to serve alcoholic liquor.
   (b)   For purposes of this chapter, "Entertainment" means any theatrical
performance, musical performance, fashion show or sporting event including but
not limited to live disc jockeys, bands, dancers, actors, musicians, comedians,
athletes, models, magicians, and entertainers. "Entertainment" does not include
music or video which is provided through a television, radio, tape player, or
similar device provided that there is no disc jockey and that there is no
dancing.
   (c)   A Class ENT or Class ENTL license may be issued by the local liquor
control commissioner upon his determination that the provision of entertainment
will not disturb the public health, safety and welfare. In determining whether
to issue such a license the local liquor control commissioner shall take into
consideration the space available for the entertainment, the compatibility with
surrounding property uses, traffic, availability of parking, the disturbance of
neighboring properties, the days and hours of entertainment, the type of
entertainment (but not the content or message thereof), the ages of patrons,
and the legality of the entertainment. The local liquor control commissioner
may provide limitations and conditions for the provision of entertainment when
issuing the Class ENT or Class ENTL license, which limitations and conditions
may be changed upon the basis of complaints arising from the entertainment. No
entertainment shall be provided except in conformity with such limitations and
conditions.
   (d)   A Class ENT or Class ENTL license is a privilege and not a right. A
Class ENT or Class ENTL license can be suspended or terminated for violation of
limitations and conditions thereof, for violation of any ordinance, for
violation of any state law, or if the provision of entertainment creates a
disturbance within the licensed premises or outside of the licensed premises.
(Ord. No. 13-2008 § 1, 4-21-08)
Sec. 3-58. Fees and limitations.
   (a)   All licenses shall be on a calendar year basis. The license fee for
each class of license and the maximum number of licenses in each class is as
follows:
Class Description Number Fee
Class Description                                             Number Fee
A     Consumption on premises and package sales               2      $2,000.00
AA    Consumption on premises and package sales (beer and     3      2,000.00
      wine)
B     Consumption on premises                                 8      1,600.00
BL    Consumption on premises, limited                        1      1,500.00
C     Package sales                                           6      1,400.00
CC    Package sales (beer and wine only)                      1      1,400.00
D     Veterans consumption on premises                        1      200.00
E     Restaurant consumption on premises (beer and wine)      2      1,400.00
EE    Small restaurant consumption on premises                4      1,600.00
EEE   Small breakfast and lunch restaurant, consumption on    1      1,000.00
      premises
ENT   Entertainment                                                 300.00
ENTL  Entertainment limited (per day)                               10.00
F     Restaurant consumption on premises                      0      1,400.00
G     Recreational club consumption on premises               0      1,400.00
H     Restaurant consumption on premises (specified alcohol)  2      1,600.00
M     Grocery store consumption on premises and package sales 2      2,500.00
P     Banquet party consumption on premises                   1      1,400.00
S     Government-owned sports facility                        2      25.00
 
   (b)   The number of licenses authorized in this section for all classes
shall remain at the number set forth in this section; provided, however, that
any license in such classes which is revoked, or not used because of the
termination of liquor business on the premises for which the license has been
issued, shall automatically reduce the number of authorized licenses of the
particular class by the total number of revoked or not used licenses in the
particular class and shall reduce the total number of licenses available.
(Ord. No. 21-2005 § 1, 7-18-05; Am. Ord. No. 36-2007 § 1, 10-15-07; Am. Ord.
No. 13-2008 § 1, 4-21-08; Am. Ord. No. 7-2010 § 1, 4-19-10; Am. Ord. No. 10-
2010 § 1, 5-17-10; Am. Ord. No. 14-2010, § 1, 11-15-10; Am. Ord. No. 15-2011 §
1, 10-17-11; Am. Ord. No. 6-2012 § 3, 3-5-12; Am. Ord. No. 7-2012 § 1, 3-19-12;
Am. Ord. No. 9-2012 § 2, 4-16-12; Am. Ord. No. 15-2013 § 1, 7-1-13; Am. Ord.
No. 19-2014 § 1, 9-2-14; Am. Ord. No. 21-2014 § 2, 9-15-14; Am. Ord. No. 22-
2014 § 1, 10-6-14; Am. Ord. No. 28-2014 § 2, 12-15-14; Am. Ord. No. 22-2015 §
2, 9-8-15; Am. Ord. No. 15-2016 § 2, 5-2-16; Am. Ord. No. 1-2017 § 1, 1-3-17;
Am. Ord. No. 13-2017 § 1, 6-5-17; Am. Ord. No. 14-2017 § 1, 6-19-17; Am. Ord.
No. 10-2018 § 1, 4-2-18; Am. Ord. No. 26-2018 § 1, 10-15-18; Am. Ord. No. 6-
2019 § 1, 3-18-19; Am. Ord. No. 25-2019 § 1, 10-7-19; Am. Ord. No. 26-2019 § 1,
11-4-19; Am. Ord. No. 9-2021 § 1, 7-19-21; Am. Ord. No. 3-2022, § 1, 2-7-22;
Am. Ord. No. 4-2022, § 1, 3-7-22; Am. Ord. No. 7-2022, § 1, 4-18-22; Am. Ord.
No. 6-2023 § 3, 3-6-23; Am. Ord. No. 17-2023 § 1, 9-5-23; Am. Ord. No. 26-2024
§ 3, 10-21-24; Am. Ord. No. 13-2025 § 1, 4-21-25; Am. Ord. No. 16-2025 § 1, 6-
16-25; Am. Ord. No. 17-2025 § 1, 7-21-25)
Sec. 3-59. Temporary licenses.
   (a)   The local liquor control commissioner may issue temporary liquor
licenses for a period not to exceed 5 days for any special event. The type of
alcoholic beverages to be served, the place of service, and the hours of
service shall be established by the local liquor control commissioner. The fee
for a temporary liquor license shall be $25 per day.
   (b)   The local liquor control commissioner may extend the hours for opening
or closing any licensed premises for any special event, including but not
limited to Super Bowl Sunday, St. Patrick's Day, and other similar events, or
an event unique to a premises.
   (c)   The local liquor control commissioner may issue a caterer's license
for a period not to exceed 2 days to allow a commercial enterprise to bring and
sell alcoholic liquor onto a premises which are not licensed for sale and
consumption of alcoholic liquor. The fee for a caterer's license shall be $25
for every event not to exceed 2 days.
(Ord. No. 13-2008 § 1, 4-21-08)
Sec. 3-60. Location.
   No alcoholic beverage shall be sold, offered for sale, kept for sale,
displayed, advertised for sale at retail, or delivered to any person, except at
the location, place or premises described in a liquor license. All alcoholic
beverages shall be sold and consumed inside of the licensed premises and not
outside of any building on the licensed premises except where specific approval
has been obtained from the Local Liquor Control Commissioner for a "lanai" or
other similar outdoor seating area. If outdoor seating is allowed on the
sidewalk, public street, or public parkway, the licensee shall provide
liability and dram shop insurance naming the village as an additional insured.
(Ord. No. 13-2008 § 1, 4-21-08; Am. Ord. No. 9-2021 § 2, 7-19-21)
Sec. 3-61. Suspension or revocation.
   (a)   At all hearings, proceedings shall be taken and prepared by a
certified court reporter; and an appeal shall be limited to a review of the
certified official record of the proceedings of the local liquor control
commissioner. The village attorney shall act as law officer, ask questions to
clarify statements, advise the local commissioner on procedure and law, and
otherwise assist the local commissioner in the conduct of the hearings. He
shall not act as judge or jury or assist the local commissioner in making
findings and determinations.
   (b)   The local liquor control commissioner shall have the power to suspend
any license for a period of not to exceed 60 days. In the case of revocation of
any license, the local liquor control commissioner shall have the power to
allow the use of the premises for the sale of alcoholic liquors after 90 days
from the date of such revocation upon his determination that the public good
will be served.
   (c)   He shall also have the power to fine the licensee a sum not to exceed
$2,000 for each act of violation, and the costs of the proceedings, including
reasonable attorney's fees. The provisions of this subsection shall be
cumulative to other powers given the mayor.
   (d)   He shall also have the power to require a licensee and employees
thereof to complete the Beverage Alcohol Sellers and Servers Education and
Training (BASSET) program, whether or not a formal charge has been filed with
respect to a violation. Failure to complete the BASSET program as required by
the local liquor control commissioner shall be grounds for suspension or
revocation of a liquor license.
(Ord. No. 13-2008 § 1, 4-21-08)
Chapter 4
ANIMAL CONTROL
   Art. I.   Animals, Generally, §§ 4-1 - 4-19
   Art. II.   Dogs and Cats, §§ 4-20 - 4-29
   Art. III.   Dog Park, §§ 4-30 - 4-40
   *Cross references–Health, ch.
9; nuisances, ch.
14.
   State law references–Powers of home rule units, Ill. Const. art. VII, § 6;
Animal Control Act, 510 ILCS 5/1 et seq.
ARTICLE I. ANIMALS, GENERALLY
Sec. 4-1. Definitions.
   The following words, terms and phrases when used in this chapter shall have
the following meanings:
   Administrator means as defined in the Animal Control Act.
   Animal means every living creature, domestic or wild, not including human
beings.
   Animal control warden means an agent or employee of the village with
authority and responsibility for the administration of this chapter.
   At-large means any dog on public property, or any private property without
permission, when not under restraint.
   Cat means Felis catus.
   Dangerous animal means any animal which, without provocation, attacks or
injures a person who is peaceably conducting himself in any place where he or
she is lawfully authorized to be present. Dangerous animals shall include any
animal which, because of its size, vicious propensity or other characteristics,
would constitute a danger to life if not restrained or kept in a safe manner.
Examples of dangerous animals include: lion, tiger, leopard, ocelot, jaguar,
cheetah, margay, mountain lion, lynx, bobcat, jaguarundi, bear, hyena, wolf or
coyote, or any poisonous or life-threatening reptile.
   Dangerous dog means (i) any individual dog anywhere other than upon the
property of the owner or custodian of the dog and unmuzzled, unleashed, or
unattended by its owner that behaves in a manner that a reasonable person would
believe poses a serious and unjustified imminent threat of serious physical
injury or death to a person or a companion animal or (ii) a dog that, without
justification, bites a person and does not cause serious physical injury.
   Deputy Administrator means as defined in the Animal Control Act.
   Dog means all members of the family Canidae.
   Domestic animal means any animal which is not wild, and is tame and owned as
a pet.
   Enclosure means a fence or structure of at least six (6) feet in height,
forming or causing an enclosure suitable to prevent the entry of young
children, and suitable to confine a vicious dog in conjunction with other
measures that may be taken by the owner or keeper, such as tethering of the
vicious dog within the enclosure. The enclosure shall be securely enclosed and
locked and designed with secure sides, top, and bottom and shall be designed to
prevent the animal from escaping from the enclosure. If the enclosure is a room
within a residence, it cannot have direct ingress from or egress to the
outdoors unless it leads directly to an enclosed pen and the door must be
locked. A vicious dog may be allowed to move about freely within the entire
residence if it is muzzled at all times.
   Farm animal means breeds of animals which can or may be used in and for the
preparation of meat or meat products for consumption by human beings or
animals, including but not limited to, cattle, chickens, ducks, geese, sheep,
swine, horses, mules, goats, and other fowl or livestock.
   Impounded means taken into the custody of the Village of Evergreen Park or
the County of Cook, as the case may be.
   Owner means any person identified as the owner of an animal on any license,
or having a right of property in an animal, or who keeps or harbors any animal,
or who has an animal in his or her care or control, or acts as its custodian,
or who knowingly permits an animal to remain on any premises occupied by him or
her.
   Person means any individual, firm, association, partnership, corporation, or
other legal entity.
   Physical injury means the impairment of physical condition.
   Potentially dangerous dog means a dog that is unsupervised and found running
at large with three (3) or more other dogs.
   Serious physical injury means a physical injury that creates a substantial
risk of death or that causes death, serious disfigurement, protracted
impairment of health, impairment of the function of any bodily organ, or
plastic surgery.
   Under restraint means: (i) under the control of the owner or other
responsible person by means of a leash, cord, rope, strap, chain, or lead held
by such owner or person, and securely fastened to the collar or harness
attached to the dog; or (ii) securely enclosed, confined, or restrained on
premises where the dog lawfully may be located, so as to be unable to enter
upon the public way or adjacent properties or to interfere with persons
lawfully using the public way or adjacent properties.
   Vicious dog means a dog that, without justification, attacks a person and
causes serious physical injury or death or any individual dog that has been
found to be a "dangerous dog" upon three (3) separate occasions.
   Wild animal means any naturally wild animals, including but not limited to
deer, feral cats, feral dogs, raccoons, skunk, opossum or coyote.
(Ord. No. 7-2023 § 1, 6-19-23)
Sec. 4-2. Animal control warden.
   There is hereby created the position of animal control warden who shall have
the power, in addition to law enforcement personnel, to issue citations, take
complaints, make arrests, impound animals, and do all things necessary and
expedient to enforce the provisions of this chapter and/or the Animal Control
Act.
(Ord. No. 7-2023 § 1, 6-19-23)
Sec. 4-3. Animal bites.
   The Evergreen Park Police Department shall investigate all reports of animal
bites.
(Ord. No. 7-2023 § 1, 6-19-23)
Sec. 4-4. Animal care.
   Every owner of an animal shall provide to such animal:
   (a)   A sufficient quantity of good and wholesome food and water;
   (b)   Adequate shelter and protection from the weather;
   (c)   Veterinary care when needed to prevent suffering; and
   (d)   Humane care and treatment.
(Ord. No. 7-2023 § 1, 6-19-23)
Sec. 4-5. Miscellaneous offenses.
   No owner shall permit or suffer an animal to:
   (a)   Molest persons or vehicles by chasing, parking or biting;
   (b)   Attack another animal;
   (c)   Damage property of another person;
   (d)   Bark, whine or howl excessively; or
   (e)   Create noxious or offensive odors.
(Ord. No. 7-2023 § 1, 6-19-23)
Sec. 4-6. Dangerous animals..
   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, harbor, care for, act as
custodian of or maintain in his/her possession any dangerous animal in the
village.
(Ord. No. 7-2023 § 1, 6-19-23)
Sec. 4-7. Farm animals.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, harbor, care for, act as
custodian of or maintain in his/her possession any farm animal in the village.
(Ord. No. 7-2023 § 1, 6-19-23)
Sec. 4-8. Pigeons.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, harbor, care for, act as
custodian of or maintain in his/her possession any pigeon.
(Ord. No. 7-2023 § 1, 6-19-23)
Sec. 4-9. Feeding or attracting animals.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct an activity or create a
condition to attract any domestic or wild animal in a manner that causes damage
to property or creates a hazard to the health of others.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person to feed any wild animal (other
than grain, seed, or bird feed purchased at a store).
   (c)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place or maintain one or more
feeder(s) for animals on his/her property having a combined total surface area
of more than one (1) square foot.
(Ord. No. 7-2023 § 1, 6-19-23)
Sec. 4-10. Animals as door prizes or as attractions for trade.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to give away any live vertebrate animal
as a prize for, or as an inducement to enter any contest, game or other
competition, or as an inducement to enter a place of amusement, or to offer
such vertebrate as an incentive to enter into any business agreement whereby
the offer was for the purpose of attracting trade.
(Ord. No. 7-2023 § 1, 6-19-23)
Sec. 4-11. Penalty and administration.
   (a)   Any person violating any provision of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be fined not less than one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00)
nor more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) for each offense, and a separate
offense shall be deemed committed on each day during on which a violation
occurs or continues.
   (b)   Violations of this article may be administered through the provisions
of Chapter 12, Miscellaneous Provisions and Offenses, Article X, Administrative
Adjudication of Non-Vehicular Regulations Violations, of the Evergreen Park
Municipal Code, or by any other means permitted by law. Nothing in this chapter
shall be interpreted to limit the remedies or penalties available to Village of
Evergreen Park.
(Ord. No. 7-2023 § 1, 6-19-23)
Secs. 4-12 through 4-19. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. DOGS AND CATS
Sec. 4-20.   Number of dogs and cats.
   It shall be unlawful to keep or maintain more than three (3) dogs or three
(3) cats of two (2) months of age or older in any single-family residence,
building or lot or to keep or maintain more than one (1) dog or one (1) cat of
two (2) months of age or older in any family unit of a multifamily residence or
in a business establishment within the village. This section shall not apply to
licensed pet shops, animal hospitals, animal grooming establishments or
kennels.
(Ord. No. 7-2023 § 1, 6-19-23)
Sec. 4-21.   Licenses.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any owner to keep or maintain any dog or cat
that is not licensed by the village.
   (b)   Every owner of a dog or cat in the village shall annually apply to the
Village Clerk for a license for each dog or cat. Applications for licenses
shall be submitted to the Village Clerk no later than May 31 of each calendar
year, and licenses shall be valid from May 1 through April 30. Applications
shall identify the name and address of the owner, and the name, breed, color,
sex and age of each dog or cat to be licensed. The owner shall also submit
proof of vaccination. An annual license fee of five dollars ($5.00) per dog or
cat shall be paid to the Village Clerk at the time of application. An
additional fee of two dollars and fifty cents ($2.50) shall be charged per
license purchased on or after June 1 of the year; provided, however, that such
penalty shall not be charged to applicants who apply for a license within
thirty (30) days after acquiring the dog or cat to be licensed.
   (c)   The Village Clerk shall issue to the owner of each dog and cat
licensed a durable tag, stamped with an identifying number and with the year of
issuance.
   (d)   The license tag shall be affixed to a collar firmly attached and
maintained around the neck of such dog or cat at all times.
(Ord. No. 7-2023 § 1, 6-19-23)
Sec. 4-22.   Rabies vaccination.
   (a)   The owner of a dog or cat age four (4) months or older shall have such
dog or cat vaccinated against rabies by a licensed veterinarian with an
approved rabies vaccine, on an annual basis or as otherwise required by
Illinois law.
   (b)   The standard vaccination tag issued by such licensed veterinarian
shall be affixed to a collar firmly attached and maintained around the neck of
such dog or cat at all times.
(Ord. No. 7-2023 § 1, 6-19-23)
Sec. 4-23.   Dog restraint.
   The owner of a dog shall keep his/her dog under restraint at all times.
(Ord. No. 7-2023 § 1, 6-19-23)
Sec. 4-24.   Dogs running at large.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to suffer or permit any dog to run
at large in the village.
   (b)   Dogs found running at large in the village shall be apprehended and
impounded. The animal control warden shall utilize any existing or available
animal control facility or licensed animal shelter. A dog found running at
large a second or subsequent time must be sterilized within thirty (30) days
after being reclaimed.
   (c)   When a dog is apprehended and impounded, it shall be scanned for the
presence of a microchip and examined for other currently acceptable methods of
identification, including, but not limited to, identification tags, tattoos,
and rabies license tags. The examination for identification shall be done
within twenty-four (24) hours after the intake of each dog. The animal control
warden shall make every reasonable attempt to contact the owner as soon as
possible. The animal control warden shall give notice of not less than seven
(7) business days to the owner prior to disposal of the animal. Such notice
shall be mailed to the last known address of the owner. Testimony of the animal
control warden, or his or her authorized agent, who mails such notice shall be
evidence of the receipt of such notice by the owner. A mailed notice shall
remain the primary means of owner contact; however, the animal control warden
shall also attempt to contact the owner by any other contact information, such
as by telephone or email address, provided by the microchip or other method of
identification found on the dog. If the dog has been microchipped and the
primary contact listed by the chip manufacturer cannot be located or refuses to
reclaim the dog, an attempt shall be made to contact any secondary contacts
listed by the chip manufacturer prior to adoption, transfer, or euthanization.
Prior to transferring the dog to another humane shelter, pet store, rescue
group, or euthanization, the dog shall be scanned again for the presence of a
microchip and examined for other means of identification. If a second scan
provides the same identifying information as the initial intake scan and the
owner has not been located or refuses to reclaim the dog, the animal control
facility may proceed with the adoption, transfer, or euthanization.
   (d)   In case the owner of any impounded dog desires to make redemption
thereof, he or she may do so by doing the following:
      (1)   Presenting proof of current rabies inoculation, microchipping,
registration and licensure, if applicable;
      (2)   Paying for the rabies inoculation, microchipping, registration, and
licensure, if applicable; and
      (3)   Paying the pound for the board of the dog for the period it was
impounded.
   (e)   When not redeemed by the owner a dog must be scanned for a microchip.
If a microchip is present, the registered owner or chip purchaser, if the
purchaser was a nonprofit organization, animal shelter, animal control
facility, pet store, breeder, or veterinary office, must be notified. After
contact has been made or attempted, dogs deemed adoptable by the animal control
facility shall be offered for adoption, or made available to a licensed animal
shelter or rescue group. The animal may be humanely dispatched pursuant to the
Humane Euthanasia in Animal Shelters Act. An animal control facility or animal
shelter shall not adopt or release any dog to anyone other than the owner or a
foster home unless the animal has been rendered incapable of reproduction and
microchipped. Nothing herein shall prevent humane societies or animal shelters
from engaging in activities set forth by their charters; provided, they are not
inconsistent with provisions hereof. No animal shelter or animal control
facility shall release dogs to an individual representing a rescue group,
unless the group has been licensed by the Department of Agriculture or is a
representative of a not-for-profit out-of-state organization, animal shelter,
or animal control facility.
(Ord. No. 7-2023 § 1, 6-19-23)
Sec. 4-25.   Potentially dangerous dogs; dangerous dogs; and vicious dogs.
   (a)   Administration. The determination of whether any dog is a potentially
dangerous dog, dangerous dog, or vicious dog may be made by a hearing officer
upon the filing of a complaint by any person through proceedings administered
pursuant to Chapter 12, Miscellaneous Provisions and Offenses, Article X,
Administrative Adjudication of Non-Vehicular Regulations Violations, of the
Evergreen Park Municipal Code, or by any other means permitted by law. The
owner or custodian of the dog shall be given written notice of the complaint
and hearing, may be represented by an attorney, and shall have the right to
present evidence and testimony, and to cross-examine witnesses. All final
decisions and determinations of the hearing officer shall be subject to
administrative review in the Circuit Court of Cook County.
   (b)   Potentially dangerous dog.
      (1)   A dog found running at large and unsupervised with three (3) or
more other dogs shall be deemed a potentially dangerous dog by the hearing
officer. The designation of "potentially dangerous dog" shall expire twelve
(12) months after the most recent violation of this subsection.
      (2)   In addition to any fine that may be imposed, a hearing officer
shall order a potentially dangerous dog to be spayed or neutered and
microchipped within fourteen (14) days of reclaim. The expense of complying
with an order of the hearing officer shall be the responsibility of the owner.
      (3)   The owner shall present evidence to the animal control warden that
the order of the hearing officer has been complied with no later than fifteen
(15) days after the determination. Any potentially dangerous dog being kept or
maintained in violation of any lawful order of the hearing officer shall be
subject to impoundment.
   (c)   Dangerous dog.
      (1)   Any individual dog shall be deemed a dangerous dog by the hearing
officer if it:
         a.   Is found anywhere other than upon the property of the owner or
custodian of the dog and unmuzzled, unleashed, or unattended by its owner that
behaves in a manner that a reasonable person would believe poses a serious and
unjustified imminent threat of serious physical injury or death to a person or
a companion animal; or
         b.   Without justification, bites a person and does not cause serious
physical injury.
      (2)   A dog shall not be declared dangerous if the conduct of the dog was
justified because:
         a.   The threat was sustained by a person who at the time was
committing a crime or offense upon the owner or custodian of the dog or was
committing a willful trespass or other tort upon the premises or property
occupied by the owner of the animal;
         b.   The threatened person was abusing, assaulting, or physically
threatening the dog or its offspring;
         c.   The injured, threatened, or killed companion animal was attacking
or threatening to attack the dog or its offspring;
         d.   The dog was responding to pain or injury or was protecting
itself, its owner, custodian, or a member of its household, kennel, or
offspring; or
         e.   It is a guide dog for the blind or hearing impaired, support dog
for persons with a physical disability, or a sentry, guard, or police-owned
dog; provided, an attack or injury to a person occurs while the dog is
performing duties as expected. The exception for sentry or guard dogs shall
only be available if said dog is on the Administrator's categorized list of
exempt dogs and performing duties at the location of station.
      (3)   In addition to any fine that may be imposed, a hearing officer
shall order:
         a.   The dangerous dog to be spayed or neutered and microchipped
within fourteen (14) days;
         b.   The dangerous dog be kept under restraint and under the direct
supervision of an adult eighteen (18) years of age or older whenever the animal
is on public property or the property of others; and
         c.   The dangerous dog be muzzled whenever it is on public property or
the property of others in a manner that will prevent it from biting any person
or animal.
      The expense of complying with an order of the hearing officer shall be
the responsibility of the owner.
      (4)   The owner shall present evidence to the animal control warden that
the order of the hearing officer has been complied with no later than fifteen
(15) days after the determination. Any dangerous dog being kept or maintained
in violation of any lawful order of the hearing officer shall be subject to
impoundment.
   (d)   Vicious dog.
      (1)   Any individual dog that, without justification, attacks a person
and causes serious physical injury or death or any individual dog that has been
found to be a "dangerous dog" upon three (3) separate occasions, shall be
deemed a vicious dog by the hearing officer.
      (2)   A dog shall not be declared vicious if the conduct of the dog was
justified because:
         a.   The threat, injury, or death was sustained by a person who at the
time was committing a crime or offense upon the owner or custodian of the dog,
or was committing a willful trespass or other tort upon the premises or
property owned or occupied by the owner of the animal;
         b.   The injured, threatened, or killed person was abusing,
assaulting, or physically threatening the dog or its offspring, or has in the
past abused, assaulted, or physically threatened the dog or its offspring;
         c.   The dog was responding to pain or injury, or was protecting
itself, its owner, custodian, or member of its household, kennel, or offspring;
         d.   A professional trained dog for law enforcement or guard duties;
or
         e.   It is a guide dogs for the blind or hearing impaired, support dog
for persons with a physical disability, or a sentry, guard, or police-owned
dog; provided, an attack or injury to a person occurs while the dog is
performing duties as expected. The exception for sentry or guard dogs shall
only be available if said dog is on the Administrator's categorized list of
exempt dogs and performing duties at the location of station.
      (3)   In addition to any fine that may be imposed, a hearing officer
shall order: (i) the dangerous dog to be spayed or neutered and microchipped
within ten (10) days; and (ii) the vicious dog be subject to enclosure. The
expense of complying with an order of the hearing officer shall be the
responsibility of the owner.
      (4)   The owner shall present evidence to the animal control warden that
the order of the hearing officer has been complied with no later than eleven
(11) days after the determination. A vicious dog shall not be released to the
owner until an enclosure approved by the animal control warden has been
constructed on the property where the dog is kept. Any vicious dog being kept
or maintained in violation of any lawful order of the hearing officer shall be
subject to impoundment.
   (e)   Violations.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain any
potentially dangerous dog, dangerous dog, or vicious dog in the village that is
not spayed, neutered, and microchipped or that is otherwise being kept or
maintained in violation of any lawful order of the Administrator, Deputy
Administrator, animal control warden, or hearing officer.
      (2)   It shall be unlawful for any person to allow a dangerous dog to be
on public property unless under restraint (leash), muzzled, and under the
direct supervision of an adult eighteen (18) years of age or older.
      (3)   It shall be unlawful for any person to allow a vicious dog out of
its approved enclosure except:
         a.   When necessary for the owner or keeper to obtain veterinary care
for the dog;
         b.   In the case of an emergency or natural disaster where the dog's
life is threatened; or
         c.   To comply with the order of a court of competent jurisdiction,
provided that the dog is securely muzzled and restrained with a leash not
exceeding six (6) feet in length, and shall be under the direct control and
supervision of the owner or keeper of the dog.
      (4)   It shall be unlawful for any owner of a vicious dog to sell or give
away said vicious dog.
   (f)   Notification. The animal control warden shall notify the Administrator
or Deputy Administrator of Cook County of any potentially dangerous dog,
dangerous dog, or vicious dog.
(Ord. No. 7-2023 § 1, 6-19-23)
Sec. 4-26.   Bites; rabies; observation period.
   Whenever any dog or cat bites a person, the owner shall immediately notify
the animal control warden, and the animal control warden shall notify the
Administrator or Deputy Administrator for Cook County. The Animal Control Act
shall govern the terms of the dog or cat's confinement and observation.
(Ord. No. 7-2023 § 1, 6-19-23)
Sec. 4-27.   Authority to euthanize/deprivation of life.
   (a)   Any dog or cat found in a public way or public place within the
village and which, in the opinion of any police officer or the animal control
officer, appears to be injured or diseased beyond a reasonable likelihood of
recovery, and which is not being attended or properly cared for by the owner,
or which has not been removed to private property or to some place designated
by such officer, within one hour after being found or left in such condition,
may be deprived of life by such officer, or as he or she may direct.
   (b)   Any police officer, and any other person designated by the animal
control warden, shall be authorized to take the life of any dog or cat when
deemed necessary to protect any person or other animal from physical harm or
death.
(Ord. No. 7-2023 § 1, 6-19-23)
Sec. 4-28.   Miscellaneous violations.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any dog or cat off his/
her premises without license and vaccination tags securely affixed to its
collar.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any dog or cat to enter
or remain upon the premises of another within the village without the consent
of the person owning, occupying or lawfully in control of such premises.
   (c)   It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or permit a dog under his
ownership or control to be on any property, public or private, not owned by
such person, unless such person shall have in his or her possession a device
for the removal of any excrement which might be deposited by such dog.
   (d)   It shall be unlawful for any person who owns or controls a dog which
deposits excrement upon any property, public or private, to fail to promptly
remove such excrement to a public receptacle or a proper receptacle located on
property owned or possessed by such person. This provision shall not apply to
blind or physically handicapped persons while walking with their guide dog.
   (e)   It shall be unlawful for a cat owner to permit any cat excrement to
remain on any property, public or private, not owned by the cat owner, upon
notification to the cat owner by the person owning, occupying, or lawfully in
control of such property that the owner's cat has defecated on such property.
Upon such notification, the cat owner shall immediately remove the excrement
from such property to a public receptacle or a proper receptacle on property
owned or possessed by such cat owner.
(Ord. No. 7-2023 § 1, 6-19-23)
Sec. 4-29.   Penalty and administration.
   (a)   Any person violating Sec. 4-24(a) shall, upon conviction thereof, be
fined as follows:
 
                            Animal being less than 40 pounds at time of
                             incident
First Offense                $250.00
Second Offense               $500.00
Third and Subsequent Offense $750.00
 
 
                            Animal being 40 pounds or more at time of incident
First Offense                $500.00
Second Offense               $1,000.00
Third and Subsequent Offense $1,500.00
 
If the dog cannot be weighed at or near the time the citation is issued, the
person issuing the citation shall mark on the citation the following
information: (i) an estimate of the weight of the dog; (ii) breed of dog; (iii)
sex of dog; and (iv) whether the dog is mature. The estimation of weight shall
be deemed prima facie true and correct.
   (b)   Any person violating any other provision of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be fined not less than one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00)
nor more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) for each offense, and a separate
offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation
occurs or continues.
   (c)   The provisions of this article may be administered through the
provisions of Chapter 12, Miscellaneous Provisions and Offenses, Article X,
Administrative Adjudication of Non-Vehicular Regulations Violations, of the
Evergreen Park Municipal Code, or by any other means permitted by law. Nothing
in this chapter shall be interpreted to limit the remedies or penalties
available to Village of Evergreen Park.
(Ord. No. 7-2023 § 1, 6-19-23)
ARTICLE III. DOG PARK
Sec. 4-30.   Applicability.
   The provisions of this article shall pertain to and govern the operation of
the "Happy Bark" Dog Park located at 91st Street and California Avenue in the
Village of Evergreen Park.
(Ord. No. 7-2023 § 1, 6-19-23)
Sec. 4-31.   Registration and vaccination.
   (a)   No animals other than dogs shall be permitted in the Dog Park.
   (b)   No dog shall enter or remain in the Dog Park unless registered and
licensed with the village.
   (c)   No dog shall enter or remain in the Dog Park unless vaccinated against
rabies.
   (d)   No dog shall enter or remain in the Dog Park unless said dog has a
current license tag and vaccination tag affixed to a collar firmly attached and
maintained around the neck of such dog at all times.
(Ord. No. 7-2023 § 1, 6-19-23)
Sec. 4-32.   Fobs.
   (a)   No person shall enter the Dog Park or allow an animal to enter the Dog
Park without a current working fob.
   (b)   Fobs are registered to an owner and are not transferable and may not
be used by any person other than to whom registered, except that the fob can be
used by a spouse or other person of not less than eighteen (18) years of age
residing in the same household as the registered owner of the fob.
   (c)   Any person who operates a commercial dog walking service or is paid to
walk a dog is not eligible to register for a fob, but may use the fob
registered to the owner for that dog only provided that the person notifies the
village in writing and is authorized by the village.
(Ord. No. 7-2023 § 1, 6-19-23)
Sec. 4-33.   Maximum dogs.
   No person shall allow more than three (3) dogs to enter or remain in the Dog
Park at one time.
(Ord. No. 7-2023 § 1, 6-19-23)
Sec. 4-34.   Supervision.
   Dogs must be kept under supervision at all times. If dogs behave
aggressively, they must be leashed and removed from the dog area. Failure to
maintain supervision will result in suspension of registration and right to
enter the Dog Park.
(Ord. No. 7-2023 § 1, 6-19-23)
Sec. 4-35.   Rules and regulations.
   No person shall violate any rule or regulation of the Dog Park. The Village
Clerk is hereby authorized to issue rules and regulations governing the
operation of the Dog Park.
(Ord. No. 7-2023 § 1, 6-19-23)
Sec. 4-36.   Cleanliness.
   No food, alcoholic beverages, dog toys, treats, chews, rawhide or similar
items are allowed. Dog feces must be removed and disposed of by the owner. No
littering is allowed.
(Ord. No. 7-2023 § 1, 6-19-23)
Sec. 4-37.   Age of dogs.
   All dogs must be at least four (4) months old to enter the Dog Park.
(Ord. No. 7-2023 § 1, 6-19-23)
Sec. 4-38.   Dangerous dogs and vicious dogs prohibited.
   No dangerous dogs or vicious dogs shall be permitted in the Dog Park.
(Ord. No. 7-2023 § 1, 6-19-23)
Sec. 4-39.   Prohibited persons.
   (a)   No person who is under the age of eighteen (18) shall be allowed to
enter the Dog Park unless accompanied by an adult with a fob.
   (b)   No person shall be allowed to enter the Dog Park unless that person
has a fob or is a spouse, child, grandchild, or resides in the same household
as the registered owner of the fob.
   (c)   No more than three (3) persons may accompany the registered owner of a
fob to enter or remain in the Dog Park.
(Ord. No. 7-2023 § 1, 6-19-23)
Sec. 4-40.   Penalty and administration.
   (a)   The penalties for violation of any provision of this article shall be
as provided for in Section
1-9 of the Municipal Code of Evergreen Park.
   (b)   The provisions of this article may be administered through the
provisions of Chapter 12, Miscellaneous Provisions and Offenses, Article X,
Administrative Adjudication of Non-Vehicular Regulations Violations, of the
Evergreen Park Municipal Code, or by any other means permitted by law. Nothing
in this chapter shall be interpreted to limit the remedies or penalties
available to Village of Evergreen Park.
(Ord. No. 7-2023 § 1, 6-19-23)
Chapter 5
BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS
Art. I.   In General, §§ 5-1-5-70
   Div. 1. Generally, §§ 5-1-5-40
   Div. 2. License, §§ 5-41-5-70
Art. II.   Technical Standards, §§ 5-71-5-235
   Div. 1. Generally, §§ 5-71-5-105
   Div. 2. Building Permits, §§ 5-106-5-135
   Div. 3. Electricity, §§ 5-136-5-170
   Div. 4. Plumbing, §§ 5-171-5-235
      Subdiv. I. In General, §§ 5-171-5-200
      Subdiv. II. Cross Connection Control, §§ 5-201-5-235
Art. III.   Fences, §§ 5-236-5-265
Art. IV.   Housing and Property Maintenance, § 5-266-5-269
Art. V.   Commercial Store Front Appearance Standards, §§ 5-270-5-272
Art. VI.   Accessory Buildings, Garages and Sheds, §§ 5-300-5-306
Art.VII.   Rental Housing, §§ 5-350-5-373
   Div. 1. Registration of Rental Housing, §§ 5-350-5-355
   Div. 2. Registration of Rental Managers, §§ 5-360-5-362
   Div. 3. Inspection Certificate for Rental Housing, §§ 5-370-5-373
   Div. 4. Residential Leases, §§ 5-380-5-385
Art. VIII.   Floodplain Provisions, §§ 5-390-5-397
Art. IX.   Erosion and Sediment Control, §§ 5-400-5-406
Art. X.   Post Construction Storm Water Runoff, §§ 5-407-5-413
Art. XI.   Short-Term Housing Rentals, §§ 5-420-5-426
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 5-1. Building code.
   (a)   “The 2021 International Building Code” as published by the
International Code Council, Inc. is hereby adopted as the Building Code of the
Village with the following changes, additions or insertions:
      Section 101.1, insert “Village of Evergreen Park.”
      Section 101.4.3, change the words “International Plumbing Code” to
“Illinois Plumbing Code”. Change the last sentence to read “Private sewage
disposal systems are prohibited.” Add the following sentence: “Whenever the
International Plumbing Code is referenced, the reference shall be to the
Illinois Plumbing Code.”
      Section 102.4.1, change to read “In the event of conflict between this
code and any referenced code or other ordinance of the Village, the most
stringent provisions shall be applied unless the building official otherwise
determines.”
      Section 103.1, delete in full.
      Section 103.2, change first sentence to read “The building official shall
be the Building Commissioner.”
      Section 105.2, delete paragraph 1, 2, 4, and 6 under Building.
      Section 109.4, add the following to read “A penalty of not less than $100
nor more than $750 is hereby imposed for each violation. Each day that a
violation occurs shall be considered a separate violation and subject to
penalty.”
      Section 113.1, delete the last two sentences and add “The board of
appeals shall be the Board of Trustees.”
      Section 113.2, change the last sentence to read “The board shall have the
authority to waive the requirements of this Code for due cause in hardship
situations, which decision to waive shall not be subject to further appeal.”
      Section 114.4, add the following, “A penalty of not less than $100 nor
more than $750 is hereby imposed for each violation of this Code. Each day that
a violation occurs shall be considered a separate violation and subject to
penalty.”
      Section 903.2, add the following: “Automatic sprinkler systems are
required to be installed in residential structures only where the residential
structure contains more than 10,000 square feet of dwelling space or where the
residential structure also contains commercial space within the same structure
and the commercial space is required to be sprinklered.”
      Section 1209.1, add the following, “The minimum height for a crawl space
shall be 3 feet. All crawl spaces shall have a minimum 2-inch concrete cement
floor with vapor barrier.”
      Section 1209.2, add the following, “Where a furnace is located in an
attic, the furnace shall be located in an enclosed insulation room of not less
than 64 square feet of flat area with a walkway of a minimum 24 inches wide to
the furnace from the access opening.”
      Section 1612.3, change the second sentence to read “The flood hazard map
shall be the most recent flood insurance rate map issued by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency, as amended from time to time.”
      Section 1807.1, add the following, “All foundations and foundation walls
shall be concrete foundations and no other materials may be used.”
      Section 1807.1.3, delete in full.
      Section 1807.1.4, delete in full.
      Section 1807.1.5, add the following, “Masonry foundation walls are not
permitted.”
      Section 1809.9, delete in full.
      Section 1809.12, delete in full.
      The following Appendixes are hereby declared to be mandatory: Appendix D,
Appendix F, Appendix G, Appendix H, Appendix J, Appendix K
      Appendix D, Fire Districts, Section D101.1, change first sentence to read
“The fire district shall include all territory within the Village.”
      Appendix H, Signs, is hereby adopted, but nothing therein shall permit
the erection or maintenance of any sign unless permitted by the zoning
ordinance.
      Appendix K, Administrative Provisions, Section K111.1, is changed by
adding a sentence to read “The Chicago Electrical Code shall apply within the
Village and shall be the electrical code and govern all electrical installation
and maintenance.”
(Ord. No. 4-2007 § 1, 1-16-07; Am. Ord. No. 18-2007 § 1, 2-19-07; Am. Ord. No.
20-2007 § 1, 3-19-07; Am. Ord. No. 9-2010 § 1, 5-3-10; Am. Ord. No. 2-2013 § 1,
1-22-13; Am. Ord. No. 18- 2016 § 1, 6-6-16; Am. Ord. No. 3-2017 § 1, 1-17-17;
Am. Ord. No. 22-2018 § 1, 8-20-18; Am. Ord. No. 17-2022, § 1, 8-15-22)
Sec. 5-2. 2021 International Residential Code.
   (a)   The “2021 International Residential Code”, as published by the
International Code Council, Inc. is hereby adopted as the International
Residential Code (for One- and Two-Family Dwellings) of the Village with the
following changes, additions or insertions:
      Section R101.1, insert “Village of Evergreen Park.”
      Section R102.4.1, change to read “In the event of conflict between this
code and any referenced code or other ordinance of the Village, the most
stringent provisions shall be applied unless the building official otherwise
determines.”
      Section R103.1, delete in full.
      Section R103.2, change first sentence to read “The building official
shall be the Building Commissioner.”
      Section R105.2, delete paragraph 1, 2, 3, 5, 9, and 10 under Building.
      Section R108.6, add the following to read “The additional fee for
commencing work without obtaining the necessary permits shall be $50 per day
measured from the time that work began until the required permits are obtained.
This fee shall be paid at the time that the permits are issued.”
      Section R112.1, change to read “All appeals shall be taken as provided in
the Building Code.”
      Section R112.3, delete in full.
      Section R112.4, delete in full.
      Section R113.4, add the following, “A penalty of not less than $100 nor
more than $750 is hereby imposed for each violation of this Code. Each day that
a violation occurs shall be considered a separate violation and subject to
penalty.”
      Table R301.2(1), Insert, “The building official shall determine the
applicable criteria from the referenced tables and figures.”
      Section R401.2, insert “All foundations and foundation walls shall be
poured concrete and no other materials may be used.”
      Section R402.1, delete in full, including Section R402.1.1 and Section
R402.1.2.
      Section R402.3, delete in full, including Section R402.3.1.
      Section R402.4, delete in full.
      Section R403.1, change the first sentence to read “All footings shall be
poured concrete footings and no other materials may be used.”
      Section R404.1, change the last sentence to read “All foundation walls
and retaining walls shall be poured concrete and no other materials may be
used.”
      Section R404.1.1, delete the last sentence as masonry foundation walls
are prohibited.
      Section R404.1.2, delete in full, including Section R404.1.2.1.
      Section R404.1.4.1, delete in full.
      Section R404.1.5.1, delete in full.
      Section R404.1.5.3, delete in full.
      Section R404.1.8, delete in full.
      Section R404.2, delete in full.
      Section R404.5, delete in full.   
      Section R408.1, add the following, “The minimum height for a crawl space
shall be 3 feet. All crawl spaces shall have a minimum 2 inch concrete cement
floor with vapor barrier.”
      Section R807.1, add the following, “Where a furnace is located in an
attic, the furnace shall be located in an enclosed insulation room of not less
than 64 square feet of flat area with a walkway of a minimum 24 inches wide to
the furnace from the access opening.”
      Section R904.2, add the following, "Compatibility of materials. Roof
assemblies shall be of materials that are compatible with each other and with
the building or structure to which the materials are applied. Roofing materials
and shingles must be uniform for the total roof on a structure. Replacement
roofing must match in quality, color and size of existing roofing, such that
replacement shingles must match exactly and have a uniform appearance. In the
event that the Building Commissioner determines that replacement roofing is not
uniform, then the complete reroofing of the structure shall be required.”
      Section P2601.1, change paragraph to read “Only methods, materials,
construction and systems allowed by the Illinois Plumbing Code are permitted.”
      Section P2603.5.1, delete in full as private sewage disposal systems are
not permitted.
      Section P2904.1, add the following: “Automatic sprinkler systems are
required to be installed in residential structures only where the residential
structure contains more than 10,000 square feet of dwelling space or where the
residential structure also contains commercial space within the same structure
and the commercial space is required to be sprinklered.”
      Section E401.1, change paragraph to read “Only wiring methods, materials,
construction and systems allowed under the Chicago Electrical Code are
permitted.”
      The following Appendixes are hereby declared to be mandatory: Appendix
AA, Appendix AB, Appendix AC, Appendix AD, Appendix AF, Appendix AG, Appendix
AH, Appendix AJ, Appendix AK, Appendix AM, Appendix AN, Appendix AP, and
Appendix AT.
(Ord. No. 4-2007 § 2, 1-16-07; Am. Ord. No. 9-2010 § 2, 5-3-10; Am. Ord. No. 2-
2013 § 2, 1- 22-13; Am. Ord. No. 18-2016 § 2, 6-6-16; Am. Ord. No. 22-2018 § 2,
8-20-18; Am. Ord. No. 17-2022, § 2, 8-15-22)
Sec. 5-3. Mechanical Code.
   The “2021 International Mechanical Code” as published by the International
Code Council, Inc. is hereby adopted as the Mechanical Code of the Village with
the following changes, additions or insertions:
      Section 101.1, insert “Village of Evergreen Park.”
      Section 103.1, delete in full.
      Section 103.2, change first sentence to read “The code official shall be
the Building Commissioner.”
      Section 108.5, change the last sentence to read: “Any person violating a
stop work order shall be liable for a fine of not less than $100 nor more than
$750 for each violation. Each day that a violation occurs shall be considered a
separate violation and subject to penalty.”
      Section 109.2, change to read "The code official shall establish a
schedule of permit fees and plan review fees."
      Section 109.6, change to read "The code official may authorize a refund
of fees."
      Section 113.4, change to read “A penalty of not less than $100 nor more
than $750 is hereby imposed for each violation of this Code. Each day that a
violation occurs shall be considered a separate violation and subject to
penalty.”
      Section 114, delete in full. All appeals shall be taken as provided in
the Building Code.
      Section 115.4, change to read “A penalty of not less than $100 nor more
than $750 is hereby imposed for each violation of this Code. Each day that a
violation occurs shall be considered a separate violation and subject to
penalty.”
(Ord. No. 4-2007 § 3, 1-16-07; Am. Ord. No. 9-2010 § 3, 5-3-10; Am. Ord. No. 2-
2013 § 3, 1- 22-13; Am. Ord. No. 18-2016 § 3, 6-6-16; Am. Ord. No. 22-2018 § 3,
8-20-18; Am. Ord. No. 17-2022, § 3, 8-15-22)
Sec. 5-4. Plumbing Code.
   The “Illinois Plumbing Code” as promulgated by the Illinois Department of
Public Health at 77 Illinois Administrative Code, Part 890 with amendments to
July 1, 2022, is hereby adopted as the Plumbing Code of the Village with the
following changes, additions or insertions:
      Appendix A, Table A: All materials shall meet the following requirements
or be approved by the Building Commissioner.
      Approved Materials for Water Service Pipe shall be as permitted by Table
29 (18-29-605.4) of the Chicago Plumbing Code.
      Approved Materials for Water Distribution Pipe shall be as permitted by
Table 29 (18-29-605.5) of the Chicago Plumbing Code.
      Approved Standards for Fittings shall be as permitted by Table 29 (18-29-
605.6) of the Chicago Plumbing Code.
(Ord. No. 4-2007 § 4, 1-16-07; Am. Ord. No. 9-2010 § 4, 5-3-10; Am. Ord. No. 2-
2013 § 4, 1- 22-13; Am. Ord. No. 18-2016 § 4, 6-6-16; Am. Ord. No. 22-2018 § 4,
8-20-18; Am. Ord. No. 17-2022, § 4, 8-15-22)
Sec. 5-5. Electrical Code.
   The “Chicago Electrical Code” (Title 14E of the Municipal Code of Chicago as
amended to July 1, 2022) is hereby adopted as the Electrical Code of the
Village with the following changes, additions or insertions:
      “Village of Evergreen Park” shall be substituted for “City of Chicago.”
   Any amendments to the Chicago Electrical Code after July 1, 2022 shall be
effective in the Village upon the date of applicability in the City of Chicago.
(Ord. No. 4-2007 § 5, 1-16-07; Am. Ord. No. 18-2016 § 6, 6-6-16; Am. Ord. No.
22-2018 § 6, 8-20-18; Am. Ord. No. 17-2022, § 6, 8-15-22)
Sec. 5-6. Energy Conservation Code.
   The “Illinois Energy Conservation Code” as published by the Capital
Development Board of the State of Illinois (Section 600.110 of Title 71 of the
Illinois Administrative Code) is hereby adopted as the Energy Conservation Code
of the village.
(Ord. No. 18-2016 § 7, 6-6-16; Am. Ord. No. 22-2018 § 7, 8-20-18; Am. Ord. No.
17-2022, § 7, 8-15-22)
Sec. 5-7. Life Safety Code.
The Life Safety Code, as published by the National Fire Protection Association
in effect on May 1, 1996, is hereby adopted as the Life Safety Code of the
village. Any amendments to the Life Safety Code after May 1, 1996 shall be
effective in the village 30 days after promulgated by the NFPA.
Sec. 5-8. Property Maintenance Code.
   The "2021 International Property Maintenance Code" as published by the
International Code Council, Inc. is hereby adopted as the Property Maintenance
Code of the Village with the following changes, additions or insertions:
      Section 101.1, insert "Village of Evergreen Park."
      Section 102.3, Application of other codes, change to read "Repairs,
additions or alterations to a structure, or changes of occupancy, shall be done
in accordance with the procedures and provisions of the Building Code, Plumbing
Code, Mechanical Code, and Electrical Code adopted by the Village. Nothing in
this Code shall be construed to cancel, modify or negate any provision of the
zoning ordinance."
      Section 102.4, Existing remedies, add "The Village shall have the right
to cause the demolition, repair or enclosure of unsafe buildings as provided
for in the Illinois Municipal Code without following any of the procedures and
notice requirements of this Code."
      Section 103, Code Compliance Agency, delete in full.
      Section 104.1, Fees, add "The Building Commissioner shall be the code
official. The code official may designate any employee of the Village with the
enforcement of this code."
      Section 107, Means of Appeal, delete in full.
      Section 108, Board of Appeals, delete in full.
      Section 109.2, Inspections, change to read "The code official may serve a
notice of violation, but no such notice is a prerequisite to the existence of a
violation or to action by the Village to restrain, correct or abate such
violation."
      Section 109.3, Right of entry, change to read "The code official may
institute court proceedings to restrain, correct or abate any violation, or to
require the removal or termination of the unlawful occupancy of any structure,
or the order or direction of the code official. Any action taken on such
premises shall be charged against the real estate upon which the structure is
located and shall be a lien upon such real estate.
      Section 109.4, Violation penalties, change to read "Any person who
violates any provision of this Code shall be subject to a fine of not less than
$100 nor more than $750 for each violation thereof. Each day that a violation
occurs shall constitute a separate offense and violation."
      Section 110.4, Failure to comply, change to read "Any person who shall
continue any work after having been served with a stop work order, except such
work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe
condition, shall be subject to a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $750
for each violation thereof. Each day that a violation occurs shall constitute a
separate offense and violation."
      Section 111.1.1, Unsafe conditions, add "No structure may be boarded up
for more than 6 months. An unsafe structure includes any structure boarded up
for more than 6 months."
      Section 111.4.1, Unlawful structure, change to read "Whenever the code
official has condemned a structure or equipment, notice shall be sent by first
class mail to the taxpayer of record or the party responsible for paying any
water bill. The notice shall include a statement of the violations and a
deadline by which to correct the violations."
      Section 113.1, General, change to read "The code official may order the
demolition of any structure which is:
         1.   Dangerous, unsafe, unsanitary or otherwise unfit for human
habitation or occupancy.
         2.   A public nuisance.
         3.   Vacant or abandoned for more than 6 months.
         4.   Boarded up for more than 6 months.
         5.   Under construction where there has been a cessation of normal
construction activity for a period of more than 6 months.
         6.   Maintain in violation of the provisions of this code for more
than 6 months."
      Section 113.2, Notices and orders, change to read "A notice of order of
demolition shall be served as provided for in the Illinois Municipal Code."
      Section 201.6, Local Codes, add Section to read "Whenever reference is
made to the International Building Code, International Fire Code, International
Zoning Code, International Plumbing Code, or International Mechanical Code,
such reference shall be to the Building Code, Fire Code, Zoning Ordinance,
Plumbing Code, Mechanical Code, currently in effect."
      Section 301.3, Vacant structures and land, add "No structure shall be
maintained which is:
         1.   Dangerous, unsafe, unsanitary or otherwise unfit for human
habitation or occupancy.
         2.   A public nuisance.
         3.   Vacant or abandoned for more than 6 months.
         4.   Boarded up for more than 6 months.
         5.   Under construction where there has been a cessation of normal
construction activity for a period of more than 6 months.
         6.   In violation of the provisions of this code for more than 6
months."
      Section 302.4, Weeds, insert "8 inches" at the end of the first sentence.
      Section 304.3, Premises identification, add "Street numbers must be
attached to the structure (or light pole or mailbox) and may not be painted
thereon. Street numbers may not be painted on any stairway, stoop, sidewalk,
curb, or other area."
      Section 304.14, Insect screens, insert "May 1" and "October 1."
      Section 404.5, Overcrowding, add "If any room used for residential
purposes is overcrowded, the code official may order the number of persons
sleeping or living in said room to be reduced in order to conform to the
minimum area requirements of this Chapter. It shall be prohibited to use for
sleeping purposes any kitchen, hallway, closet, basement, storage room, public
area, dining room or living room (except that a living room may be used for
sleeping purposes of a guest for not more than 2 consecutive nights)."
      Section 602.3, Heat supply, insert "October 1" and "May 1." Delete the
Exception.
      Section 602.4, Occupiable work spaces, insert "October 1" and "May 1."
      Appendix A, Boarding Standard, is mandatory and shall be in effect.
      Appendix B, Board of Appeals, is deleted and shall not be in effect.
(Ord. No. 27-2006 § 1, 7-17-06; Am. Ord. No. 18-2007 § 2, 2-19-07; Am. Ord. No.
4-2010 § 1, 2-15-10; Am. Ord. No. 19-2012 § 1, 8-7-12; Am. Ord. No. 12-2016 §
1, 4-18-16; Am. Ord. No. 16-2018 § 1, 7-16-18; Am. Ord. No. 7-2021 § 1, 7-19-
21)
Sec. 5-9. Administration.
All provisions in this chapter shall be under the administration and direction
of the building commissioner. The building commissioner may direct other
officials or employees of the village to inspect or enforce the provisions in
this chapter.
Sec. 5-10. Plan review.
In addition to any building permit fees, an applicant shall be required to pay
any fees charged for review of plans made by the BOCA Plan Review Service upon
request of the building commissioner.
Sec. 5-11. Architectural and landscaping plans.
For any development which includes structures containing more than 10,000
square feet, the Building Commissioner shall have the right to approve the
architectural appearance and landscaping plans for the development. The
Building Commissioner shall be guided by the following standards:
   (a)   Public Good: All plans shall be so designed that the public health,
welfare, and safety will be protected. Plans shall not have buildings located
to cause traffic problems on adjacent streets.
   (b)   Property Value: The proposed development shall be such that it does
not cause substantial injury to the value of other property in the immediate
area.
   (c)   Protection of Conditions: All plans shall provide for protection of
both aesthetics and function of the natural environment.
   (d)   Appearance: All plans shall present a visually modern appearance that
projects a viable business image consistent with the image of the Village as a
modem retail center.
   (e)   Greenery: All plans shall incorporate landscaping and greenery to the
maximum extent consistent with the goals of the Village to protect the
environment and to present a uniform image along any major street.
Sec. 5-12. Construction Site Security.
   It shall be the responsibility of the property owner and the general
contractor to provide site security for any construction site where a new
building is being constructed or a building is being demolished. Construction
site security must include the following:
   (a)   Fencing.  No less an area than the building foundation area shall be
completely secured by a 6-foot chain link construction fence or plywood barrier
which shall be locked at all times that no construction personnel or security
personnel are on site until the building is secured with doors that are locked
and windows that are closed. All construction fencing and barriers shall be
securely anchored not less than 24 inches into the ground. The location of
fencing must be approved by the Building Commissioner. Fencing may only be
installed on the public right-of-way or prevent use of the public right-of-way
with the approval of the Building Commissioner.
   (b)   Lighting. The building shall be equipped from the inside from dusk to
dawn with a motion detector lighting system which shall be located in an area
which is not easily accessible to non construction personnel working on the
site. Lighting may be powered by a 110 volt source or a battery.
(Ord. No. 31-2007 § 1, 8-6-07; Am. Ord. No. 15-2008 § 1, 4-21-08 )
Sec. 5-13. Storage Containers and Refuse Dumpsters Prohibited.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place or maintain a storage
container or refuse dumpster on the public right-of-way except pursuant to a
permit issued by the Village. A permit application shall be submitted to the
Building Department and shall be accompanied by a twenty-five dollars ($25.00)
fee. A permit shall be issued only when the refuse dumpster or storage
container is less than ten (10) feet in height and being used in conjunction
with the reconstruction of the residence or moving to or from the residence and
shall be limited to a period of thirty (30) consecutive days in any one (1)
calendar year and there is not room on the adjoining private property to locate
the same. The Building Department is authorized to extend the maximum thirty
(30)-day period in writing for circumstances beyond the control of the property
owner which were not anticipated and foreseen when the permit was originally
issued.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place or maintain a storage
container on any private property except pursuant to a permit issued by the
Village. A permit application shall be submitted to the Building Department and
shall be accompanied by a twenty-five dollars ($25.00) fee. A permit shall be
issued only when the storage container is less than ten (10) feet in height and
being used in conjunction with the reconstruction of the residence or moving to
or from the residence and shall be limited to a period of thirty (30)
consecutive days in any one calendar year. The Building Department is
authorized to extend the maximum thirty (30)-day period in writing for
circumstances beyond the control of the property owner which were not
anticipated and foreseen when the permit was originally issued.
   (c)    It shall be unlawful for any person to place or maintain a refuse
dumpster on any residentially zoned or used private property for more than
thirty (30) days in any twelve (12)-month period. The Building Department is
authorized to extend the thirty (30)-day maximum for circumstances beyond the
control of the property owner which were not anticipated and foreseen when the
permit was originally issued.
   (d)   For the purposes of this section the term “refuse dumpster” shall mean
any garbage container in excess of a four (4)-yard capacity. The term “storage
container” shall mean any truck trailer, PODS container, freight container,
shipping container or similar container.
(Ord. No. 17-2009 § 1, 7-20-09; Am. Ord. 17-2009 (revised) § 1, 1-3-11)
DIVISION 2. LICENSE
Sec. 5-41. Required.
A license shall be required before any person shall, within the limits of the
village, engage in the business of construction or demolition of buildings or
other structures, maintenance of buildings and grounds, including but not
limited to:
Aluminum contractors.
Building moving contractors. Burglar/security alarms contractors. Carpentry
contractors.
Catchbasin cleaners.
Concrete contractors.
Drywall or lathing contractors. Electrical contractors.
Excavator/demolition contractors. Fence contractors.
Fertilizer dispenser contractors. Fire alarm installation contractors.
Fire suppression equipment maintenance contractors.
Fire suppression systems installation contractors.
General contractors.
Insulation contractors.
Landscape contractors.
Landscape maintenance contractors. Lawn sprinkler contractors.
Masonry contractors.
Mechanical contractors.
Paving contractors.
Pipefitter contractors.
Plumbing contractors.
Roofing contractors.
Sewer contractors.
Sign installation/maintenance contractors. Snow removal contractors.
Structural steel/iron contractors. Swimming pool contractors.
Tree service contractors.
Window replacement/installation contractors.
Sec. 5-42. Contractor License Application and Fee.
Application for license shall be made upon forms provided by the Building
Commissioner. The annual fee for a general contractor's license shall be
$225.00 and the annual fee for all other contractors shall be $150.00.
(Ord. 5-2008 § 1, 2-18-08)
Sec. 5-43. Approval.
The building commissioner shall issue the license upon receipt of an approved
application and certificate of insurance. All licenses shall be issued for a
period of one year to commence on January 1 and terminate on December 31 of
that year.
Sec. 5-44. Revocation.
If, at any time after the granting of a license under this article, the
building commissioner shall certify to the mayor that any licensee hereunder
has failed to comply with any building requirements under this Code, such
license may be revoked by the building commissioner or mayor. Any licensee
whose license has been revoked shall have the right to appeal to the board of
trustees. The licensee must file the appeal within 5 days of revocation. The
board of trustees, or a committee thereof, shall conduct a hearing on the
matter being appealed and issue its decision within thirty 30 days of the
appeal.
Secs. 5-44-5-70. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. TECHNICAL STANDARDS
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 5-71. Hours of construction.
Construction, alteration, repair, removal, demolition and excavation of
structures is allowed only during the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. on Monday
through Saturday, provided that an owner of a single-family residential
structure may personally make repairs and construct additions from 9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m. on Sunday's and holidays. Emergency work during prohibited hours may
be permitted by the building commissioner. Interior decorating and remodeling
work during prohibited hours may be permitted by the building commissioner.
Sec. 5-72. Day Care Centers, Automatic Sprinkler Systems.
   (a)   For the purposes of this section, the phrase "day care center" means
any building or structure, other than the home of the person cared for,
occupied by 3 or more persons of any age who receive custodial or day care for
less than 24 hours by individuals other than parents or guardians, relatives by
blood marriage, or adoption. The term does not include a structure used for any
of the programs not included within the definition of day care center as
provided in the second sentence of 225 ILCS 10/2.09. All day care centers
licensed or regulated by the State of Illinois are within the definition of
"day care center", regardless of the number of persons receiving custodial or
day care.
   (b)   All buildings or structures used to for a day care center shall have
an automatic sprinkler system installed throughout in compliance with NFPA 13R.
(Ord. No. 32-2007 § 1, 8-6-07)
Sec. 5-73. Reserved.
Sec. 5-74. Satellite earth stations.
   (a)   For the purposes of this section, the phrase "satellite earth station"
means an antenna of any size, shape or description designed for receiving
communication or other signals from satellites. Such antenna may have a low-
noise amplifier (LNA) and be connected with coaxial cable to a television or
other receiver. A satellite earth station is also commonly referred to as an
earth station, a ground station, or a satellite dish.
   (b)   No person shall erect a satellite earth station without a permit
therefor.
   (c)   An application for such permit shall be on such forms as required by
the building commissioner and shall be accompanied by a current survey showing
the dimensions of the lot, the location of all buildings or structures thereon,
and the proposed location of the satellite earth station. In addition, plans
and specifications describing the earth station and its structural and
engineering components (the manufacturer's specifications) shall be attached.
The exact location, height and other proposed construction of the satellite
earth station shall not be varied without written approval of the building
commissioner.
   (d)   No satellite earth station shall be erected:
      (1)   In any front yard.
      (2)   In any side yard forward of the rear wall of the main structure
located on the lot.
      (3)   Within fifteen (15) feet of the side lot lines.
      (4)   In any required side yard.
      (5)   Within fifteen (15) feet of the rear lot line.
   (e)   All satellite earth stations shall meet the following construction
requirements:
      (1)   The dish shall not exceed fourteen (14) feet in diameter.
      (2)   Galvanized metal supports or equivalent must be used.
      (3)   Installations must conform to the provisions of the village
electrical code adopted in section
5-5.
      (4)   A concrete base or caisson extending not less than forty-two (42)
inches below the surface must be used to anchor the dish to the ground.
      (5)   The maximum height of the highest part of the dish shall not exceed
eighteen (18) feet above the ground on which it is constructed.
      (6)   The dish and structure shall be designed to withstand a wind force
of seventy-five (75) miles per hour without the use of supporting guy wires.
      (7)   No linkage, physically or electronically, shall be permitted to a
receiver not located on the same lot.
      (8)   Wiring to the satellite earth station shall be placed at least four
(4) inches beneath the surface of the ground.
      (9)   Any driving motor shall be limited to one hundred twenty-five-volt
maximum design voltage and be encased in protective guards. Grounding to a
grounding roof must be provided.
      (10)   Any dish may be mounted upon a roof of a primary or accessory
structure on the lot but shall not be mounted on chimneys, towers, trees,
poles, or spires. A roof-mounted dish shall be mounted directly to the part of
the roof not visible from the street immediately in front of the structure or
from the side street in case of a corner lot. Roof-mounted dishes may only be
mounted on the rear portion of any roof and not on the front or side of any
roof. Any roof-mounted dish must be designed to withstand a wind force of
eighty-five (85) miles per hour.
   (f)   The provisions of this section may be varied in cases of hardship or
impracticability by the board of trustees by the passage of a motion at a
committee meeting or regular meeting to that effect.
(Ord. No. 25-1990, § 1(7-23), 1-7-91)
Sec. 5-75. Parking lots.
   (a)   For the purpose of this section, the terms "parking lot" and "parking
area" shall mean any lot or parcel of property constructed or used, in whole or
in part, for the off-street parking of motor vehicles.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person to construct and maintain or
operate any parking lot without first submitting a plan or other drawing to the
building commissioner showing that compliance will be made with the
requirements, specifications and restrictions set forth in section 25-167 of
this Code. If such plans show that the requirements, specifications and
restrictions as set forth herein are met, the building commissioner will
thereupon issue a permit.
(Ord. No. 25-1990, § 1(7-24), 1-7-91)
Sec. 5-76. Storage of building materials.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or store upon the
street, parkway, sidewalk or alley abutting upon or adjacent to the lot or
tract, upon which any building or structure is being erected, constructed,
altered or repaired, or upon any street, parkway, sidewalk or alley within the
village, any building materials, tools, apparatus, or structures designed or
intended to be used in the erection, construction, alteration or repair of
buildings. All such building materials, tools, apparatus or structures, when
first delivered, shall be placed entirely within the boundary lines of such lot
or tract, and shall so remain until the completion of such building or
structure or until finally removed from such lot or tract.
   (b)   In instances where it is not practical to store building materials and
equipment as stated in subsection (a) of this section, permission will be
granted to store the material/ equipment on village property for the purpose of
erection, construction, alteration or repair of buildings. Storage shall be
limited to one-third of the street pavement or alley width and shall not remain
overnight.
   (c)   Under no circumstances shall the storage allowed in subsection (b) of
this section be allowed on 87th Street, 91st Street, 95th Street, 99th Street,
103rd Street, Western Avenue, California Avenue, Kedzie Avenue, and Central
Park Avenue from 95th Street to 103rd Street within the corporate limits of the
village.
(Ord. No. 25-1990, § 1(7-25), 1-7-91)
Sec. 5-77. Air Conditioning Equipment
New and replacement central air conditioning equipment, including the
compressor unit, must be installed to the rear (as determined in the Evergreen
Park Zoning Code) of the principal building on all residential lots. The
location of central air conditioning equipment shall be subject to the approval
of the building commissioner.
The installation of central air conditioning equipment shall be performed by a
licensed heating and air conditioning contractor and wired by a licensed and
registered electrical contractor. A permit for the installation shall be
obtained from the building department.
Sec. 5-78. Uniformity of appearance.
No 2 single-family dwellings of identical front elevation or facade shall be
constructed of located on adjacent lots, nor shall there be constructed or
located more than 25% of single-family dwellings of the same elevation or
facade in any block. A change of front elevation or facade shag be deemed to
exist when there is substantial difference in roofline, type and location of
windows, and kind and arrangement of materials.
Sec. 5-79. Residential construction requirements.
   (a)   Single-Family Detached Dwellings. All single-family detached
residential dwelling units shall have exterior walls constructed of solid face
brick masonry or face brick veneer for the first ground level floor thereof
extending at least eight feet or to the underside of the roof soffit, whichever
is higher. If a floor is partially in the ground, then the exterior walls above
ground level shall also be constructed of solid face brick masonry or face
brick veneer extending to the underside of the level constructed on top of that
floor.
   (b)   Existing Single-Family Frame Detached Dwellings. Frame additions
without any type of brick masonry may be constructed to existing single-family
detached residential dwelling units where the existing exterior walls are not
constructed of solid face brick masonry or face brick veneer.
   (c)   Single-Family Detached Garages and Storage Sheds. Detached garages and
storage sheds for single-family residential dwelling units may be of frame
construction.
   (d)   Multi-Family Dwelling Units. All multi-family residential structures
shall have exterior walls constructed of solid face brick masonry and floors
constructed of precast concrete or poured concrete with a minimum fire
resistance rating of two hours. A townhouse multi-family dwelling unit (where a
separate dwelling unit is not located on top of another) may be constructed to
conform to the requirements for single-family detached dwellings provided that
a fire wall is constructed between dwelling units through the roof with a
minimum fire resistance rating of two hours.
   (e)   Multi-Family Detached Garages and Storage Sheds. Detached garages and
storage sheds for multi-family residential dwelling units shall have exterior
walls constructed of solid face brick masonry or face brick veneer.
Sec. 5-80. Elevator Required.
   The installation and operation of an elevator shall be required in any non-
residential structure which has three or more floors, and in any residential
building which has three or more floors where there is more than one dwelling
unit on each floor. Such elevator must service any basement and all floors of
the building.
(Ord. No. 32-2018 § 1, 12-3-18)
Secs. 5-81. Temporary Roof Coverings.
   No person shall place a tarp on a roof or any temporary roof covering on any
structure, including main structures and accessory structures, without first
obtaining a permit therefor. All tarps and temporary roof coverings shall be
fire resistant effective against light fire exposure. All permits issued shall
expire 30 days after the date of issuance, unless extended by the Building
Commissioner. The fee for a temporary roof covering permit shall be $25 for
each 30 days or part thereof. Applicants are required to post a $100 cash bond
as a prerequisite to obtaining such permit, which bond shall be returned to the
applicant upon removal of the temporary roof covering within the time frame
allowed by the permit. If a temporary roof covering is not removed by the
expiration date of the permit for such temporary roof covering, the village may
cause the removal of such temporary roof covering and use the cash bond to pay
for said removal.
(Ord. No. 19-2019 § 1, 8-19-19)
Secs. 5-82 – 5-105. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. BUILDING PERMITS
Sec. 5-106. Building plans.
The building commissioner shall not issue any permit authorizing the erection,
construction, alteration, addition or repair of any building or structure
unless the plans submitted for his approval clearly show that such building or
structure, with all of its appurtenances, foundations and attachments, can be
erected entirely within the limits of the lot or tract of land upon which it is
proposed to erect such building or structure. Except as provided by the
building code and zoning chapter of this Code. No permit to construct or alter
any building or structure shall authorize the use of any part of any public
highway or other public ground for the construction or maintenance of such
building or structure except as provided by this Code; nor shall any permit be
issued for the construction or maintenance of any balcony extending over any
public highway or other public ground unless permits therefore have been
obtained from the village board; nor, in the case of single-family residential
subdivisions where no alleys are provided to service the lot, shall a permit be
issued unless the building or structure is so constructed on the lot to provide
room for a side drive or a front drive accessing a garage.
Sec. 5-107. Alteration of plans.
It shall be unlawful to alter or in any way modify plans which have been
approved by the building commissioner. If, during the progress of such work, it
is desired to deviate, in any manner affecting the construction or other
essentials of the building, from the terms of the application or drawing,
notice of such intention to alter or deviate shall be given to the building
commissioner, and his written assent shall first be obtained before the
alteration or deviation may be made; provided however, that alterations in
buildings which do not involve any change in their structural parts, or of
their stairways, elevators, fire escapes or other means of ingress or egress,
or in lighting or ventilation or in plumbing or electric wiring, and that are
not in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or the provisions of
the zoning chapter of this Code, may be made without the permission of the
building commissioner.
Sec. 5-108. Building permit fees.
   (a)   The fee for a building permit for any construction, including but not
limited to buildings, driveways, garages, sheds, fences, and equipment, shall
be a percentage of the total cost of construction as follows:
   (i)   Single family residential   1.5%
   (ii)    All other structures      2.5%
The minimum building permit fee shall not be less than $100, subject to
reduction by the Building Commissioner. At the time of making an application
for a building permit, payment of the building fee shall be made based upon the
estimated cost of construction. If the total cost of construction is different
than the estimated cost of construction used on the building permit
application, the fee for the building permit shall be adjusted accordingly and
paid within 10 days thereof. Every applicant shall submit a sworn contractor's
statement showing the total cost of construction upon demand of the Building
Commissioner.
   (b)   In addition to the building permit fee in paragraph (a) above, an
additional fee is charged for electrical, plumbing, and HVAC construction work.
Such fee shall be established by the Building Commissioner who shall publish a
schedule of permit fees and plan review fees for electrical, plumbing, and HVAC
construction work. The minimum plumbing permit fee shall be $250.00 for a
structure under 10,000 square feet, and the minimum plumbing permit fee shall
be $500 for a structure of 10,000 square feet or greater. The minimum
electrical permit fee shall be $250 for a structure under 10,000 square feet,
and the minimum electrical permit fee shall be $500 for a structure of 10,000
square feet or greater. The plumbing plan review fee for a non-residential
structure shall be $100. The electrical plan review fee for a non-residential
structure shall be $100. The fire sprinkler and fire alarm plan review fee for
a non-residential structure shall be $100. The minimum building plan review fee
for a non-residential structure under 10,000 square feet shall be $250. The
minimum building plan review fee for a non-residential structure of 10,000
square feet or greater shall be $500. Prior to receiving a building permit; all
building, electrical, plumbing, HVAC, water, sewer, license, and other fees and
bond require by the village shall be paid.
   (c)   A building permit shall be valid for a period of one year. Upon the
expiration of one year, a building permit renewal fee equal to 25% of the
original fee shall be paid. This subsection shall not apply to large
construction projects which cannot be completed within one year.
   (d)   The building permit fee for repair, remodeling, renovation or
installation of equipment (including but not limited to HVAC, fire sprinkler
systems, alarm systems or other life safety equipment) to existing structures
of institutions established and used solely for religious or educational
purposes shall be $1.00. This reduced building permit fee shall not apply to
any new construction involving the expansion of an existing church or school
structure.
(Ord. No. 6-2005, 2-21-05; Am. Ord. No. 5-2008 § 2, 2-18-08; Am. Ord. No. 8-
2015 § 1, 5-4-15)
Sec. 5-109. Demolition permit fees.
   (a)   The permit fee for a demolition of a structure under 11,000 square
feet shall be $1,500.
   (b)   The permit fee for the demolition of a structure 10,000 square feet or
greater shall be $3,000.
   (c)   The permit fee for the demolition of a residential garage or shed
shall be $100, subject to reduction by the Building Commissioner.
(Ord. No. 5-2008 § 3, 2-18-08; Am. Ord. No. 8-2015 § 2, 5-4-15)
Sec. 5-110. Bond Required.
   (a)   Cash Bond. A cash bond for permits; cash meaning currency, money
order, business check or cashier's check shall be deposited with the Village
before a building permit, electrical permit, or plumbing permit is issued. A
cash bond shall be refunded to the person making the deposit within 30 days
after the certificate of occupancy is issued unless a portion of the cash bond
is retained to insure that the public sidewalk or public street is properly
repaired where there has been a street cut or augering. The cash bond shall not
be refunded if work remains to be completed to meet the requirements of this
chapter. If work is not completed, the Village shall send written notice to the
permittee that work remains to be completed, and that such work must be
completed within 30 days. If the work is not satisfactorily completed within 30
days after notice, the Village may cause the work to be completed, with payment
for said work (including a 25 percent Village administrative fee) to be
deducted from the cash bond and any remainder refunded. If a cash bond is not
sufficient to cover the payment, the full amount of the cash bond shall be
forfeited and the permittee shall be billed for the difference. Any cash bond
remaining after 4 years of deposit shall be forfeited to the Village to cover
administrative costs.
   (b)   Single-Family Residences - New Construction. The amount of the cash
bond shall be $500 except in the following cases:
      (1)   Where a street is to be augered for sewer; or
      (2)   Where a street is to be open cut,
in which cases the bond shall be $1,500. An additional plumbing cash bond of
$500 and an additional electrical bond of $500 shall be required.
   (c)   Multiple-Family Buildings - New Construction. The amount of cash bond
shall be $500 per dwelling unit but not less than $1,500. An additional
plumbing cash bond of $500 and an additional electrical cash bond of $500 shall
be required.
   (d)   Commercial Buildings - New Construction. The amount of cash bond shall
be $20,000 for all commercial buildings which includes the plumbing cash bond
and electrical cash bond except where the cost of construction exceeds
$1,000,000 then a separate $5,000 plumbing cash bond and a $5,000 electrical
cash bond shall be required.
   (e)   Existing Commercial Buildings. The amount of the cash bond shall be
$10,000 which includes the plumbing cash bond and electrical cash bond.
   (f)   Existing Residential Buildings.
      (1)   Residential building is to be owner occupied. The amount of the
cash bond shall be $500 where the amount of construction work being permitted
is $5,000 or more. For work less than $5,000, the amount of the cash bond shall
be $250. An additional plumbing cash bond of $500 and an additional electrical
cash bond of $500 shall be required.
      (2)   Vacant residential building is to be non-owner occupied. The amount
of the cash bond shall be $10,000 and must be paid by the property owner for
any residential building which is being rehabilitated where the building has
been vacant just prior to acquisition thereof and the building will be non-
owner occupied after rehabilitation. An additional plumbing cash bond of $500
and an additional electrical cash bond of $500 shall be required. This category
covers buildings which are being substantially rehabilitated for sale or for
rent. A structure is "non-owner occupied" if the person or entity which
purchased the property and is making or contracting for the improvements does
not occupy the same as their principal residence for at least 12 months after
the certificate of occupancy is issued. Such structure must be entitled to a
homeowner's exemption from the Cook County Assessor for that entire 12-month
period in order to be owner-occupied.
   (g)    Building Demolitions. The amount of the cash bond shall be $1,000 for
single family residential buildings, $500 for residential garages and $5,000
for all other buildings.
   (h)    Refund. Any fees owed to the Village, including building permit fees,
inspection fees, professional fees and unpaid fines for violations incurred
during construction shall be deducted from the cash bond on deposit with the
Village before any refund is made.
   (i)    Payment. All cash bonds shall be paid by the property owner, except
that a cash bond required for electrical or plumbing work shall be paid by the
applicable contractor.
(Ord. No. 6-2005 § 2, 2-21-05; Am. Ord. No. 5-2008 § 4, 2-18-08; Am. Ord. 9-
2013 § 1, 6-3-13; Am. Ord. No. 8-2014 § 2, 4-7-14)
Sec. 5-111. Temporary Occupancy Permit.
In cases where weather or other circumstances prohibit the completion of work
to be performed on the public right-of-way, outside of the structure, or within
the structure; the Building Commissioner may issue a temporary occupancy permit
subject to the above work being completed by a certain date. A cash bond in the
amount of 125 percent of the cost of the work and improvements as determined by
the Village shall be posted prior to the issuance of the temporary occupancy
permit.
Sec. 5-112. Building Inspection Fees.
A residential inspection fee of $50.00 shall be paid for each separate
inspection (including building, plumbing, electrical, and HVAC) required by the
Village at the construction site. A commercial/industrial inspection fee of
$60.00 shall be paid for each separate inspection (including building,
plumbing, electrical, and HVAC) required by the Village at the construction
site. Inspection fees are in addition to permit fees.
(Ord. No. 5-2008 § 5, 2-18-08; Am. Ord. No. 8-2014 § 3, 4-7-14)
Sec. 5-113. Time Limitations for Building Permits.
A building permit shall be valid for a period of one year, except for large
construction projects where the building permit has initially been granted for
more than one year. If a building permit expires before being renewed within
its original period, as provided for in Section 5-108, the building permit
shall be null and void. In such event, a new building permit application shall
be submitted which will require the payment of a new building permit fee.
(Ord. No. 21-2016 § 1, 7-18-16)
Sec. 5-114. Elevator Inspection Fees.
An elevator inspection fee shall be paid for each separate elevator inspection.
The fee shall be equal to the amount charged to the Village by the elevator
inspection company plus an administrative charge of $25.00.
(Ord. No. 5-2008 § 6, 2-18-08)
Sec. 5-115. Penalty for Failure to Obtain Permit.
In the event that work is started on a project before a building permit is
used, or in the event that occupancy of a structure is made before an occupancy
permit is issued, a penalty of one hundred and fifty dollars ($150.00) shall be
charged and shall be paid prior to the issuance of the building permit of the
occupancy permit.
(Ord. No. 6-2011 § 1, 5-16-11)
Secs. 5-116 – 5-135. Reserved.
DIVISION 3. ELECTRICITY
Sec. 5-136. Waiver of specific provisions of code.
The electrical inspector may waive specific provisions of this electrical code
relating to the installation, alteration, construction, sale and use of
electrical equipment only when such waiver appears to him to be justified and
when such waiver will not materially impair or affect the safety of the
electrical work being performed or installed.
Sec. 5-137. Permits.
   (a)   No electrical equipment shall be installed or altered within the
village unless a permit for such installation or alteration is first issued by
the electrical inspector.
   (b)   No permit for installation, alteration, and use of electrical
equipment shall be issued except pursuant to an application therefor made out
on a printed form, to be furnished by the electrical inspector or his duly
authorized deputy, and upon the payment of a fee.
   (c)   The application for each permit shall contain the name of the owner or
user of electrical equipment to be installed, altered or used; the location of
the premises where such installation or alteration is to be made by street and
number; and a detailed description of the work to be done.
Sec. 5-138. Reserved.
Sec. 5-139. Certificate of approval.
   (a)   The electrical inspector shall issue a certificate of approval after
each inspection in which the wiring or apparatus is found to be in compliance
with the terms of this chapter and with the rules adopted. A copy of such
certificate shall be sent to the building commissioner.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful to use or turn on power into or induce any
electrical current to flow through any wires or equipment hereafter installed
for which such certificate has not been issued.
Sec. 5-140. Periodic reinspections; correcting or disconnecting dangerous
conditions.
The electrical inspector may periodically make a thorough reinspection of the
installation in the buildings of all electric wiring, electric devices and
electric material now installed within the village, and when the installation
of any such wiring, devices or material is found to be in a dangerous or unsafe
condition, the person owning, using or operating the same shall be notified and
shall make the necessary repairs or changes required to place such wiring,
devices and material in a safe condition and have such work completed within 15
days, or any longer period specified by the electrical inspector in such
notice. The electrical inspector is hereby empowered to disconnect or order the
discontinuance of electrical service to such wiring devices or material so
found to be defective, until the installation of such wiring, devices and
material has been made safe as directed by the electrical inspector.
Sec. 5-141. Electrician's bond required.
Each and every electrician doing business within the limits of the village
shall file with the village a bond in the sum of $5,000.00, with sureties to be
approved by the village board, for the faithful performance of the electrical
work described in the application for permit to do electrical work in the
village. Such bond shall be filed at the time such electrician makes such
application.
Sec. 5-142. License required.
An electrician shall obtain a valid contractor's license and provide proof of
insurance.
Secs. 5-143-5-170.   Reserved.
DIVISION 4. PLUMBING
Subdivision I. In General
Sec. 5-171. Standards for water allocation.
The standards set out in this section are herewith adopted pursuant to the
state department of transportation, division of water resources requirement for
issuance of Lake Michigan water allocation. The standards are as follows:
      (1)   All new water services shall be metered. All new and replacement
plumbing fixtures shall be labeled as a WaterSense product, as specified by
USEPA.
      (2)   The flushing of sanitary sewers with potable water will be allowed
only if the flushing is done with a high-velocity type sewer jet.
      (3)   Installation of the following water-saving plumbing fixtures are
required:
         a.   Flow rates. In all new construction and in all repair and/or
replacement of fixtures or trim, only fixtures and trim, not exceeding the
following flow rates and/or water usage, shall be installed. These ratings are
based on a pressure at the fixture of forty (40) to fifty (50) psi.
 
                                                Gallons
1.   Water closets, tank type, per flush     3.5
2.   Water closets, flushometer type, per flu3.0
3.   Urinals, tank type, per flush           3.0
4.   Urinals, flushometer type, per flush    3.0
5.   Shower heads, per minute                3.0
6.   Lavatory, sink faucets, per minute      3.0
 
         b.   Lavatories for public use. ID addition to the requirements of
subsection (3)a. of this section, in all new construction and replacement of
fixtures, faucets of lavatories located in restrooms intended for public use
shall be of metering or self closing type.
         c.   Carwash installation. In all new construction and replacement of
fixtures, carwash installations shall be equipped with a water recycling
system.
      (4)   In all new construction and in all remodeling, only closed system
air conditioning shall be installed.
(Am. Ord. No. 21-2015 § 1, 9-8-15)
Sec. 5-172. Licensed plumber required.
No person shall engage in plumbing work in the village unless he shall be
licensed as a plumber or apprentice, in accordance with the Illinois Plumbing
License Law [225 ILCS 320/0.01 et seq.].
Sec. 5-173. Overhead sewers; when required.
All new buildings with basements, floors, rooms or occupancy areas below ground
level at the building site and served by a public or private sewer system shall
have overhead plumbing. No building permit application will be accepted nor any
permits issued for construction of any structure, unless plans and
specifications therefor provide for such overhead plumbing.
Sec. 5-174. Reserved.
Sec. 5-175. Plumbing inspection.
All plans for the installation, removal, alteration or repair for plumbing work
in the village shall be inspected by a plumber licensed by the state, under the
jurisdiction and supervision of the building commissioner.
Secs. 5-176 – 5-200. Reserved.
Subdivision II. Cross Connection Control
Sec. 5-201. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this subdivision, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
   Air gap means the unobstructed vertical distance through the free atmosphere
between the lowest opening from any pipe or faucet supplying water to a tank,
plumbing fixture or other device and the flood level rim of the receptacle.
   Approved means accepted by the water and sewer department as meeting an
applicable specification stated or cited in this subdivision or as suitable for
the proposed use.
   Auxiliary supply means any water source or system other than the potable
water supply that may be available in the building or premises.
   Back flow means the flow of any water, foreign liquids, gases or other
substances back into the distribution pipes of the potable water system.
   Back flow preventer means a device or means to prevent backflow.
   Backsiphonage means the flowing back of used, contaminated or polluted water
due to a negative gauge or subatmospheric pressure in that pipe.
   Commissioner means the water and sewer commissioner or his authorized
designee. Contamination. See "pollution."
   Cross connection means any actual or potential connection between the
potable water supply and a source of possible contamination or pollution.
   Drain means any pipe that carries wastewater or waterborne wastes in a
building drainage system.
   Fixture plumbing means installed receptacles, devices or appliances supplied
with water or that receive or discharge liquids for liquid-borne wastes.
   Flood-level rim means the edge of the receptacle from which water overflows.
   Hazard, health, means any condition or device which, in the judgment of the
commissioner, may create a danger to the health and well-being of a water
consumer. An example of a health hazard is a structural defect in the water
supply system, whether of location, design or construction, that regularly or
occasionally may prevent satisfactory treatment of the water supply or cause it
to be polluted from extraneous sources.
   Hydropneumatic tank means a pressure vessel in which air pressure acts upon
the surface of the water contained within the vessel, pressurizing the water-
distribution piping connection to the vessel.
   Nonresidential means all buildings and uses which do not consist of single-
family residential or multifamily (apartment or condominium) housing.
   Outlet means the open end of the water supply pipe through which the water
is discharged into the plumbing fixture.
   Plumbing system means and includes the water supply and distribution pipes,
plumbing fixtures, traps, soil pipes, vent pipes, building drains and building
sewers, including their respective connections, devices and appurtenances, any
of which are located within the property lines of the premises; and water-
treating or water-using equipment.
   Pollution shall mean the presence of any foreign substance (organic,
inorganic, radiological or biological) in water that, either by itself or in
combination with another substance in the water, tends to or has the potential
to degrade its quality so as to constitute a hazard or impair the usefulness of
the water.
   Receiving tank means the receiving, nonpressure vessel forming part of the
air gap separation between a potable and an auxiliary supply.
   Reduced pressure principle backflow preventer means an assembly of
differential valves and checkvalves, including an automatically opened spillage
port to the atmosphere designed to prevent backflow.
   Vacuum means any pressure less than that exerted by the atmosphere.
   Water, nonpotable, means water that is not safe for human consumption or
that is of questionable potability.
   Water, potable, means water free from contaminants in amounts sufficient to
cause disease or harmful physiological effects. Its bacteriological and
chemical quality shall conform to the requirements of the federal and state
drinking water regulations and to any regulations of the applicable public
health authority having local jurisdiction.
(Ord. No. 25-1990, § 1(7-80), 1-7-91)
   Cross reference—Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.
Sec. 5-202. Prohibition; enforcement.
   (a)   Cross connections between potable water systems and other systems or
equipment containing water or other substances are prohibited except when and
where approved cross connection control devices, such as a reduced pressure
principal backflow preventer, are installed, tested and maintained to ensure
proper operation on a continuing basis.
   (b)   To protect the public water system from contamination due to
contaminants through the water service connection into the public water system,
a program of inspection and regulation shall be provided.
   (c)   The commissioner shall inspect the plumbing in every building or
premises served by the public water system as frequently as in his judgment may
be necessary to ensure that such plumbing has been installed and maintained in
such a manner as to prevent the possibility of pollution of the water supply of
the village. The commissioner shall notify or cause to be notified, in writing,
the owner or authorized agent of the owner of any such building or premises to
correct, within a reasonable time set by the commissioner, any plumbing
installed or existing contrary to or in violation of this subdivision or any
other applicable law or ordinance and which, in his judgment, may therefore
permit the pollution of the village water supply or otherwise adversely affect
the public health.
   (d)   The commissioner shall have the right of entry into any building
during reasonable hours for the purpose of making inspection of the plumbing
systems installed in such building or premises; provided that, with respect to
the inspection of any single-family dwelling, consent to such inspection shall
first be obtained from a person of suitable age and discretion therein or in
control thereof. Consistent refusal to allow inspection of a specific dwelling
may be cause for requiring installation of a suitable backflow protection
device, approved by the village, or discontinuation of potable water service.
(Ord. No. 25-1990, 1(7-81), 1-7-91)
Sec. 5-203. Technical requirements.
A potable water supply system shall be designed, installed and maintained in
such a manner as to prevent contamination from nonpotable liquids, solids or
gases being introduced into the potable water supply through cross connections
or any other piping connections to the system. The requirements for the system
are as follows:
      (1)   Connection to the potable water supply system is prohibited, unless
protected against backflow, as set out herein. Examples of fixtures and
equipment from which the potable water supply system must be protected include,
but are not limited to:
         a.   Bidets.
         b.   Operating, dissecting, embalming and mortuary tables or similar
equipment. In such installation, the hose used for the water supply shall
terminate at least twelve (12) inches away from every point of the table or
attachments.
         c.   Pumps for nonpotable water, chemicals or other substances.
Priming connections may be made only through an air gap.
         d.   Building drainage, sewer or vent systems.
      (2)   Potable water connections to boilers shall be made through an air
gap or provided with a village-approved backflow preventer.
      (3)   Refrigerating unit condensers and cooling jackets. Except where
potable water provided for a refrigerator condenser or cooling jacket is
entirely outside the piping or tank containing a toxic refrigerant, the inlet
connection shall be provided with a village-approved checkvalve. Also adjacent
to and at the outlet side of the checkvalve, a village-approved pressure relief
valve set to relieve at five (5) psi above the maximum water pressure at the
point of installation shall be provided if the refrigeration units contain more
than twenty (20) pounds of refrigerants.
      (4)   Protection against backflow and backsiphonage:
         a.   A potable water system shall be protected against backflow and
backsiphonage by providing and maintaining at each outlet an air gap, as
specified below, between the potable water outlet and the flood-level rim of
the fixture it supplies or between the outlet and any other source of
contamination or an approved device or means to prevent backflow.
         b.   Minimum required air gap:
            1.   The minimum required air gap shall be measured vertically from
the lowest end of a potable water outlet to the flood rim or line of the
fixture or receptacle into which it discharged.
            2.   The minimum required air gap shall be twice the effective
opening of a potable water outlet, unless the outlet is a distance less than
three (3) times the effective opening away from a wall or similar vertical
surface; in which case, the minimum required air gap shall be three (3) times
the effective opening of the outlet. In no case shall the minimum required air
gap be less than one (1) inch.
      (5)   Before any device for the prevention of backflow or backsiphonage
is installed, it shall have first been certified by the Foundation for Cross-
Connection Control Research of the University of Southern California and the
National Sanitation Foundation. Devices, other than reduced pressure principle
backflow preventers, installed in a residential potable water supply
distribution system for the protection against backflow shall be maintained in
good working condition by the person responsible for the maintenance of the
system. Reduced pressure zone backflow preventers installed in a nonresidential
building potable water supply distribution system shall be tested and
maintained by a state-certified backflow preventer maintenance/tester in
accordance with section 653.802(d) of subtitle F, title 35, of the Illinois
Administrative Code, as adopted by the State of Illinois Environmental
Protection Agency, including any subsequent amendments thereto. The
commissioner routinely shall inspect such devices; and if they are found to be
defective or inoperative, the commissioner shall notify the owner of his
obligation to have the device repaired within seventy-two (72) hours of oral or
written notice. If the building owner does not perform the necessary repairs
within seventy-two (72) hours, the commissioner shall require the replacement
thereof and shall engage the services of a plumber to perform the required
work, which cost shall be invoiced to the building owner, plus a cost of ten
(10) percent for processing costs to be paid to the village. In the case of an
emergency repair, the commissioner may require the replacement of the device
and arrange with a plumber for the device to be removed. The cost of this work
will be invoiced to the building owner at actual cost.
      (6)   Installation of devices:
         a.   A reduced pressure principle type backflow preventer may be
installed subject to full static pressure.
         b.   Backflow and backsiphonage preventing devices containing
backflows to separate fixtures shall be accessibly located, preferably in the
same room with the fixture they serve. Installation in utility or service
spaces, provided they are readily accessible, is also permitted.
      (7)   Below-rim supply:
         a.   Where a potable water outlet terminates below the rim of a tank
or vat, and the tank or vat has an overflow of diameter not less than two (2)
inches, the overflow pipe shall be provided with an air gap as close to the
tank as possible.
         b.   The potable water outlet to the tank or vat shall terminate a
distance not less than one and one-half (11/2) times the height to which water
can rise in the tank above the top of the overflow. This level shall be
established at the maximum flow rate of the supply to the tank or vat and with
all outlets, except the air gap overflow outlet, closed. The distance from the
outlet to the high water level shall be measured from the critical point of the
potable water supply outlet.
      (8)   Village-approved devices to protect against backflow and
backsiphonage shall be installed at all fixtures and equipment where backflow
and backsiphonage may occur and where a minimum air gap cannot be provided
between the water outlet to the fixture or equipment and its flood-level rim.
Where a potable water connection is made to a line, fixture, tank, vat, pump or
other equipment with a hazard of backflow or backsiphonage where the water
connection is subject to back pressure and an air gap cannot be installed, the
commissioner will require adequate protection which will include the use of an
approved reduced pressure principal backflow preventer.
      (9)   When a booster pump is used on a water pressure booster system, and
the possibility exists that a positive pressure of less than twenty (20) psi
may occur on the suction side of the pump, there shall be installed a low-
pressure cutoff on the booster pump to prevent the creation of a vacuum or
negative pressure on the suction side of the pump, thus cutting off water to
other outlets.
      (10)   Prior to the installation of any backflow preventer, a drawing
showing the location of the device, the method of installation and the size of
the plumbing system shall be approved by the commissioner. In addition, a copy
of the manufacturer's specifications for the device and its installation shall
be given to the commissioner. After installation, any change in the drawing
previously submitted shall be made by the person installing the device;
provided, however, that no change from the original method of installation on
the drawing may be made without prior approval of the commissioner.
(Ord. No. 25-1990, § 1(7-82), 1-7-91)
Sec. 5-204. Backflow prevention devices required.
   (a)   Generally. All new residential and nonresidential construction, and
all remodeling, additions or rehabilitations of existing residential and
nonresidential construction involving revisions or additions to the potable
water system shall require the installation of a backflow prevention device
immediately downstream of the water meter. Such installations shall be made as
part of the construction and shall be a condition of any building permit.
Backflow prevention devices shall also be installed on any existing building
used for any of the following purposes:
      (1)   Hospitals;
      (2)   Mortuaries;
      (3)   Clinics;
      (4)   Nursing homes;
      (5)   Laboratories;
      (6)   Piers;
      (7)   Docks;
      (8)   Waterfront facilities;
      (9)   Sewage treatment plants;
      (10)   Sewage pumping stations or stormwater pumping stations;
      (11)   Food or beverage processing plants;
      (12)   Chemical plants;
      (13)   Metalplating industries;
      (14)   Petroleum-processing or storage plants;
      (15)   Radioactive material processing plants or nuclear reactors;
      (16)   Carwashes; and
      (17)   Other hazardous uses as determined by the water department.
   (b)   Permits. For residential construction permits, backflow preventers
will be issued by the water and sewer department upon receipt of payment. For
nonresidential construction, backflow preventers (reduced pressure principal)
shall be furnished by the permittee.
   (c)   Installation. Backflow preventers shall be installed by a licensed
plumber at the sole expense of the owner of the premises being served. All
devices shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's
recommendations. Reduced pressure principal backflow preventers shall be
installed as follows:
      (1)   Reduced pressure principal backflow preventers shall be installed
on fire lines and potable water service lines separately, downstream of the
respective meters for both the fire lines and water service lines.
      (2)   Reduced pressure principal backflow preventers shall be installed
with two (2) resilient seat gate valves with a test cock on the No. 1 gate
valve.
      (3)   Installation shall be in a location where the unit is readily
accessible for maintenance and testing. Location should be immediately
downstream of the water meter.
      (4)   Minimum clearances recommended by the manufacturer shall be
observed.
      (5)   The unit shall be protected against flooding and freezing.
      (6)   Free draining of the relief port must be maintained under all
conditions; and provisions to accomplish the same, such as floor drains, shall
be provided.
      (7)   If installed at ceiling level, a collection system shall be
installed with a fixed and proper air gap under the drain port to protect areas
below the unit from drainage and a proper air gap between the discharge of the
collection system and structure accepting the discharged water.
      (8)   There shall be no reduction made in the size of the relief port
drain.
      (9)   Provisions shall be made for easy and unrestricted removal of the
unit.
   (d)   Testing. Testing of reduced pressure principal backflow preventers
shall be as follows:
      (1)   Each year, the village may cause the testing of each reduced
pressure principal backflow preventer installed.
      (2)   Testing of units shall be the responsibility of the building owner
and be performed in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendation. Minimal
maintenance, such as internal cleaning, if needed, shall be provided. Costs for
tests, parts and replacement of units will be the responsibility of the
building owner.
      (3)   Testing of initial installation before occupancy shall be required.
The initial certification test will be done at no charge.
      (4)   The water and sewer department may perform random inspections and
testing each year, based on the anniversary date of the installation. Such
tests shall be conducted, where possible, within sixty (60) days of the
anniversary date.
      (5)   The building owner shall be responsible for authorizing a
qualified, licensed plumber to perform all necessary tests and file all
necessary reports with state and local authorities and to certify that the
owner's reduced pressure principal backflow pre-venters are operating and being
maintained in accordance with existing state code requirements and
manufacturer's recommendations. These reports shall be submitted annually to
the commissioner. A copy of the maintenance and inspection records shall be on
file at the plant facility and shall be made available to the inspector or
backflow-maintainer on request.
      (6)   The cost of subsequent annual inspections and testing of units
shall be the owner's responsibility. The charge for random inspections and
testing by the village will be based on its actual cost to the village.
      (7)   All parts necessary to rebuild a unit to meet factory and state
standards shall be provided by the manufacturer of the backflow preventer and
shall be new parts.
      (8)   Any maintenance, inspections and testing requested of the water and
sewer department by the owner between annual inspections will be performed by
the water and sewer department and invoiced at then-current prices or rates.
      (9)   No persons other than the commissioner or other state-certified
backflow preventer maintenance/tester shall remove, repair, test or perform any
maintenance of any reduced pressure principal backflow preventer.
      (10)   Owners of all reduced pressure principal backflow preventers shall
provide easy access to units and necessary tools and equipment and shall
furnish the water department with necessary ladders and scaffolding and shall
assign an employee or employees to assist the water and sewer department in
performing any necessary testing and service according to this Code, as may be
necessary, all at the owner's expense. The owner of each device shall maintain
in a neat and orderly manner a manufacturer's maintenance manual and
manufacturer's testing instructions at the point of installation of the device.
   (e)   Service. When a unit is out of service, or otherwise in the need of
service, the water sewer department shall be notified within twenty-four (24)
hours.
   (f)   Bypass lines. If there is only one (1) service line and the water
service cannot be interrupted, a second backflow preventer may be installed in
parallel with the first. Under no circumstances will a backflow preventer be
bypassed by unprotected piping. For buildings where water service cannot be
interrupted during normal village working hours, a bypass will be required with
a backflow preventer.
   (g)   Reduced pressure lines. Reduced pressure principal backflow preventers
shall be of the type approved by the Foundation for Cross-Control Research of
the University of Southern California or as otherwise approved by the
commissioner.
(Ord. No. 25-1990, § 1(7-83), 1-7-91)
Sec. 5-205. Notification of violation.
The commissioner shall notify the owner or authorized agent of the owner of the
building or premises in which there is found a violation of this subdivision of
such violation. The commissioner shall set a reasonable time, based on the
level of hazard to health, for the owner to have the violation removed or
corrected, and shall include in such notification an indication that water
service may be terminated if the owner fails to correct the defect in such
time. Upon notification, the commissioner may, if in his judgment an imminent
health hazard exists, cause the water service to the building or premises to be
terminated and recommend such additional fines or penalties to be invoked as
may be provided in this chapter.
(Ord. No. 25-1990, § 1(7-84), 1-7-91)
Sec. 5-206. Hearing.
Any party involved in a violation of this subdivision may request a hearing
before the commissioner by notifying the other party and requesting a hearing.
The commissioner may
request or initiate a hearing or the owner or his authorized agent shall
request a hearing within 5 days of the receipt of the notice. All hearings
shall be held within 15 days of the request of initiation.
ARTICLE III. FENCES
Sec. 5-236. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
   Fence means any manmade structure, hedge, wall or densely planted shrubbery
forming a barrier at least 2 feet in height between lots, between a lot and a
street or alley, or between portions of a lot or lots, such structure being
independent of any other.
Sec. 5-237. Permit required; fee.
It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or construct any fence without
first obtaining a permit.
Sec. 5-238. General construction and design.
   (a)   Fences shall be designed and constructed to resist a horizontal wind
pressure of not less than 30 pounds per square foot in addition to all other
forces to which the fence may be subjected. Barbed wire and electric fences are
prohibited.
   (b)   Fences shall be of uniform construction. No fence shall be constructed
of materials which will be an eyesore or detract from neighborhood appearance
in the decision of the building commissioner.
   (c)   Fences shall be constructed so that the poles, supports and braces are
on the inside of the fence of the property being fenced and so that the "good"
side of the fence is facing neighboring property.
Sec. 5-239. Location.
   (a)   No fence shall exceed 6 feet in height except where a residential lot
line is adjacent to non-residentially zoned property, the maximum height of any
fence shall be increased to 8 feet.
   (b)   No fence shall be constructed on the public right-of-way.
   (c)   No fence shall be located or constructed forward of the front yard
foundation line of the main structure on the lot provided that where the main
structure is not located in the front one-half of the lot, a fence may be
constructed up to the required front yard setback line.
   (d)   For corner lots, no fence shall be located or constructed forward of
the front yard foundation line of the main structure on the lot or in the side
yard adjacent to the street except to the rear of the main structure on the
lot. On a corner lot, the front yard is the yard having the shortest length
abutting a public street.
Sec. 5-240. Barbed wire, electric, etc., fences.
It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or maintain any electric fence,
any barbed wire fence, or any fence which has spikes, barbs, sharply pointed
pickets, sharp projections or sharp protrusions, except that barbed wire is
permitted on top of fencing around high voltage/ communications wires and
equipment maintained by public utility, on the top of fencing in a
manufacturing district, and on top of fencing on any property owned or occupied
by a unit of government; provided that the barbed wire is not less than 6 feet
above the ground level. Chainlink fences less than 6 feet above ground level
shall be installed in residential areas with the barbs down.
Secs. 5-241-5-265. Reserved
ARTICLE IV. HOUSING AND PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
Sec. 5-266. Certificate of building inspection.
   (a)   Generally. It shall be unlawful for a person who is the new owner or
lessee of any structure to occupy the structure until a certificate of building
inspection without any deficiencies has been issued for the subject property
within the prior 3 months.
   (b)   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following words
shall have the meanings set forth below:
      (1)   Lease means the transfer of occupancy rights of real property for
consideration, even if no written agreement is entered into.
      (2)   Owner means the title holder of the real property, including but
not limited to the beneficiaries of a land trust, all partners in a
partnership, and the officers of a corporation or the owner of shares in a
cooperative association corporation.
      (3)   Sale means the transfer for consideration of the title to real
estate and includes the purchase of a condominium unit or the shares in a
cooperative apartment association corporation.
   (c)   Applications; fees. All applications for a certificate of building
inspection shall be made on such forms as prescribed by the building
department. The building department shall issue a certificate within fourteen
(14) days after gaining access to the subject property, whether by consent or
by warrant, and after the payment of the following fee:
 
(1) Residential structures, per dwelling unit                         $50.00
(2) Non-residential structures, per 15,000 sq. ft. or portion thereof $100.00
The building department shall inspect the subject property for compliance with
the building, housing, property maintenance, and zoning codes and ordinances of
the village. All deficiencies shall be noted on the certificate.
   (d)   Evidence. No evidence obtained in a consented inspection of real
property pursuant to this section shall be used in the prosecution of any
criminal or ordinance violation against the owner of the property when the
inspection was made.
   (e)   Warrant; issuance. Where no consent has been given to enter or inspect
any property, no entry or inspection shall be made without the procurement of a
warrant from the county circuit court. The court may consider any of the
following factors along with such other matters as it deems pertinent in its
decision as to whether a warrant shall be issued:
      (1)   Eyewitness account of violation.
      (2)   Citizen complaints.
      (3)   Tenant complaints.
      (4)   Plain view violations.
      (5)   Violation apparent from village records.
      (6)   Property deterioration.
      (7)   Age of property.
      (8)   Nature of alleged violation.
      (9)   Similar properties in the area.
      (10)   Documented violations of similar properties in the area.
      (11)   Passage of time since last inspection.
      (12)   Previous violations on the property.
Cause for issuance of a warrant shall be deemed to exist in light of reasonable
legislative and administrative standards which show that there is reason to
believe that a condition of nonconformity exists with respect to a particular
property in violation of a village ordinance.
   (f)   Sale or lease of property. Nothing herein shall prohibit the sale or
lease of real estate to a new owner or lessee even if no certificate of
building inspection has been obtained or even if such certificate shows
deficiencies therein. The village does not guarantee the condition of the
subject property and is not responsible for any claims arising out of the
subject property or the condition thereof. The village does not warrant that
all deficiencies are listed in a certificate and does not warrant anything as
to the condition of the property or the habitability thereof.
(Ord. No. 25-1990, § 1(7-101), 1-7-91; Am. Ord. No. 10-2005 § 1, 4-4-05)
Sec. 5-267. Certificate of zoning compliance.
   (a)   Certificate Required for Residential Property. A certificate of zoning
compliance shall be required prior to the issuance of tax stamps pursuant to
Section
11-61 through
11-74 of the Evergreen Park Municipal Code for property zoned for, or occupied
by, one or more residential dwelling units. However, a certificate of zoning
compliance shall not be required for property subject to the Illinois
Condominium Property Act, for property located within cooperative buildings, or
for property containing a newly constructed residential dwelling that is sold
to the initial occupant of the dwelling.
   (b)   Application. The owner or owner's agent may apply for a certificate of
zoning compliance for any property by submitting to the Building Commissioner
an application on the prescribed form and payment of a $50.00 administrative
fee. The consent of the owner of the property for which a certificate is
requested shall not be required unless the Building Commissioner determines
that an on-site inspection of the property is required.
   (c)   Use Analysis. Upon receipt of an application for a certificate of
zoning compliance, the Building Commissioner shall conduct a use analysis of
the property. For purposes of issue of a certificate of zoning compliance, the
use analysis shall be limited to a determination of the applicable and lawful
number of dwelling units on the property. Nothing herein shall be deemed or
interpreted as precluding the Building Commissioner from performing otherwise
authorized and lawful zoning inspections, or from initiating otherwise
authorized and lawful zoning enforcement procedures, for any property at any
time.
   (d)   Action. Within five business days after receipt of an application for
a certificate of zoning compliance, the Building Commissioner shall either: (1)
issue the certificate of zoning compliance if the Building Commissioner
determines that there are no more dwelling units on the property than that
which are permitted by the applicable provisions of the Evergreen Park Zoning
Ordinance; or (2) deny the application for a certificate of zoning compliance
by issuance of a written statement setting forth the reason for such denial. If
no request for reconsideration is made, the decision of the Building
Commissioner shall become a final decision within five business days after its
issuance. The failure of the Building Commissioner to act within the time
periods prescribed shall be deemed to be a waiver of the requirement for the
issuance of a certificate of zoning compliance.
   (e)   Reconsideration. Any person whose application for a certificate of
zoning compliance is denied may request the Building Commissioner to reconsider
the determination. If such a request for reconsideration is made, the Building
Commissioner shall review any additional information presented by the applicant
and shall conduct an on-site inspection of the property, regardless of whether
any such on-site inspection previously was made; provided, however, that no on-
site inspection shall be conducted without the prior written consent therefor
by the owner of the property, or its duly authorized agent. Within five
business days after the request for reconsideration is made, the Building
Commissioner shall render a final decision which shall consist of either: (1)
issuance of the certificate of zoning compliance, or (2) issuance of a written
statement setting forth the reasons for denial of the application. The failure
of the Building Commissioner to act within the time periods prescribed shall be
deemed to be a waiver of the requirement for the issuance of a certificate of
zoning compliance.
   (f)   Appeal. Any final decision of the Building Commissioner may be
appealed to the Mayor and Board of Trustees.
   (g)   Effective Period. A certificate of zoning compliance shall be valid
for one year following the date of its issuance.
ARTICLE V. COMMERCIAL STORE FRONT APPEARANCE STANDARDS
Sec. 5-270. Definitions.
For the purposes of this Article, the following words and phrases shall have
the following meanings:
   (a)   Commercial property means any property any portion of which is used
other than as a dwelling unit.
   (b)   Exterior wall, window or door means any wall, window or door one side
of which is on the outside of a building.
   (c)   Graffiti means any unauthorized inscription, word, figure, painting or
other defacement that is written, marked, etched, scratched, sprayed, drawn,
painted, or engraved on or otherwise affixed to any surface of public or
private property, to the extent that the graffiti was not authorized in advance
by the owner or occupant of the property, or, despite advance authorization, is
otherwise deemed a public nuisance by the Building Commissioner.
   (d)   Security gate means any system employing bars, gates, shutters,
grills, or other similar devices affixed to a structure with the intent of
preventing or which prevents access to or from the interior of the structure,
including roll-down, accordion, or removable systems.
   (e)   Solid means any system with a surface that is less than 80% see-
through such that substantial visibility is allowed through the system.
Sec. 5-271. Security gates prohibited.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person owning or occupying any commercial
property to install, maintain or have any security gate on the outside of any
exterior wall, window or door which faces and is substantially parallel to the
public street.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person owning or occupying any commercial
property to install, maintain or have any solid security gate on the inside of
any exterior window or door which faces and is substantially parallel to the
public street.
   (c)   Nothing herein shall prohibit security gates on the interior walls or
doors of any building, including shopping malls. Nothing herein shall prohibit
security gates on rear doors and windows.
Sec. 5-272. Removal of graffiti.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person owning or occupying any commercial
property to permit property that is defaced with graffiti to remain defaced for
a period of 5 days after service of a notice from the Village by personal
delivery or first class mail ordering the removal of the graffiti.
   (b)   The existence of graffiti in violation of this section is declared to
be a public nuisance and subject to removal and abatement by the Village in
accordance with due process. Any unpaid costs incurred by the Village in the
removal of such graffiti shall be a charge and lien on the property where the
graffiti was removed. The Mayor may establish regulations to implement the
provisions of this article.
ARTICLE VL ACCESSORY BUILDINGS, GARAGES AND SHEDS
Sec. 5-300. Attached garages.
   (a)   Zoning Code. All garages must be located and constructed in compliance
with the provisions of the Evergreen Park Zoning Code. The regulations in this
division are in addition to any zoning regulations.
   (b)   Maximum Size. No attached garage can exceed 816 square feet in area.
   (c)   Maximum Dimension. No attached garage can exceed 34 feet in width or
25 feet in depth.
   (d)   Door Height. No garage door or opening can exceed 8 feet in height.
   (e)   Uses. A garage can only be used for the storage of motor vehicles,
boats, trailers and other personal property of persons actually residing on the
property. Rental of garage space or storage of goods for persons not residing
on the property is prohibited.
   (f)   Construction Standards. An attached garage shall be separated from the
main building by construction providing fire resistance of not less than one
hour. Floor construction shall be of portland cement concrete. Access to the
garage from the residence shall be limited to one doorway not exceeding 21
square feet in area which shall be protected by a self-closing solid core wood
door, solid or honeycomb core steel door of not less than 1-3/4 inch. The sill
of any door to the residence shall be raised not less than 4 inches above the
garage floor. A sill of not less than 4 inches above the garage floor is
required on all interior walls abutting the residence.
Sec. 5-301. Detached garages.
   (a)   Zoning Code. All garages must be located and constructed in compliance
with the provisions of the Evergreen Park Zoning Code. The regulations in this
division are in addition to any zoning regulations.
   (b)   Maximum Size. No detached garage can exceed 816 square feet in area.
   (c)   Maximum Dimension. No detached garage can exceed 34 feet in width or
25 feet in depth.
   (d)   Door Height. No garage door or opening can exceed 8 feet in height.
   (e)   Garage Height. No detached garage shall exceed 15 feet in height or
the height of the main building on the zoning lot, whichever is lesser, but the
height of the garage may be at least 12 feet in any event.
   (f)   Location. No detached garage shall be located closer than 10 feet to
any structure. No detached garage shall be erected within 3 feet of any side
yard or rear yard lot line, within 20 feet of any street right-of-way (except
where access to the garage is from an alley), or in any manner that a portion
of the garage extends past the front of the principal structure on the lot. A
detached garage may be located closer than 10 feet to any structure if
separated from such structure by construction providing fire resistance of not
less than one hour.
   (g)   Multiple Garages. Only one detached or attached garage is permitted
per zoning lot except that a residence with a one car attached garage can have
a detached garage not exceeding 576 square feet in area.
   (h)   Access. All detached garages must have access from a public street or
public alley.
   (i)   Uses. A detached garage can only be used for the storage of motor
vehicles, boats, trailers and other personal property of persons actually
residing on the property. Rental of garage space or storage of goods for
persons not residing on the property is prohibited.
   (j)   Construction Standards. Floor construction shall be of portland cement
concrete.
Sec. 5-302. Garages in multi-family residential districts.
   (a)   Attached Garages. All attached garages in multifamily residential
districts shall comply with the provisions of Sec. 5-300. All attached garages
shall be constructed of solid masonry materials.
   (b)   Detached Garages. All detached garages in multi-family residential
districts shall comply with the provisions of Sec. 5-301 except that there is
no maximum size or maximum width. All detached garages of greater than 816
square feet shall be constructed of solid masonry materials.
Sec. 5-303. Carports.
Carports are prohibited and may not be constructed on any zoning lot.
Sec. 5-304. Utility or storage sheds.
   (a)   Zoning Code. All utility or storage sheds must be located and
constructed in compliance with the provisions of the Evergreen Park Zoning
Code. The regulations in this division are in addition to any zoning
regulations.
   (b)   Maximum Size. No utility or storage shed shall exceed 3% of the lot
area on which it is constructed provided however that a utility or storage shed
of 144 square feet shall be allowed on a zoning lot and provided further that
no utility or storage shed shall exceed 350 square feet.
   (c)   Maximum Dimension. No utility or storage shed can exceed 20 feet in
width or depth.
   (d)   Door Height. No door or opening can exceed 8 feet in height.
   (e)   Utility or Storage Shed Height. No utility or storage shed shall
exceed 12 feet in height.
   (f)   Location. No utility or storage shed shall be located closer than 10
feet to any structure. No utility or storage shed shall be erected within 3
feet of any side yard or rear yard lot line, or in any manner that a portion of
the utility or storage shed extends forward of the rear of the principal
structure on the lot. No utility or storage shed shall be attached to the
principal structure on the lot. A utility or storage shed may be attached to
the rear of a detached garage provided that the construction of the shed area
(including shingles) is of the same material and design as the garage.
   (g)   Multiple Utility or Storage Shed. Only one utility or storage shed is
permitted per zoning lot.
   (h)   Construction Standards. Floor construction shall be of portland cement
concrete to which the utility or storage shed shall be bolted. No utility or
storage shed shall have garage-type doors which allow for access from an alley
or driveway. Utility or storage sheds shall be constructed to harmonize with
the surrounding residential properties as determined by the Building
Commissioner.
   (i)   Uses. A utility or storage shed can only be used for the storage of
personal property (excluding motor vehicles, boats, trailers and motor vehicle
parts) of persons actually residing on the property. Rental of space or storage
of goods for persons not residing on the property is prohibited.
Sec. 5-305. Driveways.
   (a)   Construction Standards. All residential driveways and parking areas
shall be constructed of portland cement concrete driveway pavement or
bituminous concrete driveway pavement meeting the Standard Specifications for
Road and Bridge Construction adopted by the Illinois Department of
Transportation or of solid paving bricks on an approved sand or stone base.
   (b)   Width of Residential Driveways. The minimum width for a driveway shall
be 9 feet and the maximum width for a driveway shall be 4 foot wider than the
garage which the driveway services. In the event that there is no garage, then
the maximum driveway width is 16 feet.
Sec. 5-306. Multi-story parking garages prohibited.
   It shall be unlawful to construct a multi-story parking garage on any
property within the village. For purposes of this section, a multi-story
parking garage means any structure in which parking is located on any level
other than ground level or the first floor of a building
(Ord. No. 17-2024 § 1, 5-6-24)
Secs. 5-307-5-320. Reserved.
ARTICLE VII. RENTAL HOUSING
DIVISION I. REGISTRATION OF RENTAL HOUSING
Sec. 5-350. Definitions.
For the purposes of this Article, the following terms are hereby defined:
   (a)   Building Commissioner means the Building Commissioner of the Village
or any person employed by the Building Department and authorized to act by the
Building Commissioner.
   (b)   Dwelling unit means any part of a building used as a residence or
sleeping place by one or more persons.
   (c)   Owner means the legal title holder or holders of the realty, except,
(1) if legal title is held by an Illinois land trust, owner shall mean the
beneficial owner or owners of the land trust; and (2) if there is a purchaser
or purchasers under a real estate installment sales contract, owner shall mean
the purchaser or purchasers. Owner shall also include any mortgagee in
possession of the realty.
   (d)   Property Maintenance Code means the code in effect pursuant to Sec.
5-8 of the Evergreen Park Municipal Code.
   (e)   Rental agreement means an oral or written lease or agreement
containing the terms of occupancy of a dwelling unit by a tenant.
   (f)   Rental housing means any real estate, including a condominium unit,
containing one or more dwelling units occupied by a tenant for which rental
income is paid.
   (g)   Rental income means rent and includes any consideration paid for or in
connection with the use or occupancy of a dwelling unit.
   (h)   Rental manager means a person, who is not the owner of property, who
receives compensation for managing any rental housing.
   (i)   Tenant means a person occupying a dwelling unit pursuant to an oral or
written rental agreement.
(Ord. No. 5-2007 § 1, 2-5-07)
Sec. 5-351. Rental housing registration required.
The owner of any building used as rental housing shall file a registration
statement for each such building with the Building Department. The registration
statement shall be on a form provided by the Building Department and shall
contain the following information:
   (a)   The name, street address, and telephone number of each owner of the
building. If the owner is a partnership, corporation, limited liability company
or similar entity, the statement shall include the name, street address,
telephone number and position of the responsible partner or officer. The person
designated shall be authorized to receive service of process on behalf of the
owner.
   (b)   The street address and permanent index number of the building, and the
number of dwelling units therein.
   (c)   If rents are collected or the property is managed by a person who is
not the owner, then the name, street address, and telephone number of such
rental manager.
Only one registration statement is required for each building provided that the
names of all owners are listed thereon.
Sec. 5-352. Time for registration.
The registration statement shall be filed no later than June 1 of each calendar
year and within 20 days after a change in ownership of the building.
Registration shall be effective for a period of June 1 through May 31
thereafter.
Sec. 5-353. Rental housing registration fee.
   The annual registration fee for rental housing shall be $25.00 for each
dwelling unit in a multi-family structure and $35.00 for each single-family
residential dwelling owned and shall be paid at the time of filing the
registration statement (or amendment thereto), provided that the registration
statement is timely filed. The annual registration fee shall be due for any
additional dwelling units purchased or converted to rental subsequent to March
1, which additional registration fee shall be due within 30 days after the
dwelling unit was purchased or converted to rental. The registration fee for a
late registration statement filed after March 1 of each year or after 30 days
after the dwelling unit was purchased or converted to rental shall be double
the normal registration fee. Registration fees shall not be prorated.
Violations not corrected will be subject to citation and fine.
(Am. Ord. No. 14-2013 § 1, 8-19-13; Am. Ord. No. 8-2014 § 1, 4-7-14)
Sec. 5-354. Enforcement.
In addition to any other remedies provided by law, the Village may terminate
water and sanitary sewer service to any building which is not registered as
required by this Division.
Sec. 5-355. Effect of ordinance violations.
Whether rental housing complies with all ordinances of the Village is
immaterial to the requirement to register such rental housing. Rental housing
is registered without regard to ordinance violations, and no such registration
shall be indicative of compliance with any ordinance of the Village, except for
this Division.
DIVISION 2. REGISTRATION OF RENTAL MANAGERS
Sec. 5-360. Rental manager registration required.
No person shall act as a rental manager of rental housing without having filed
a registration statement. A rental manager shall file a registration statement
which shall contain the following information:
   (a)   The name, street address, and telephone number of the rental manager.
If the rental manager is a partnership, corporation, limited liability company
or similar entity, the statement shall include the name, street address,
telephone number and position of the responsible partner or officer. The person
designated shall be authorized to receive service of process on behalf of the
rental manager.
   (b)   The street address and permanent index number of all buildings for
which it acts as rental manager.
Sec. 5-361. Time for registration.
The registration statement shall be filed no later than June 1 of each calendar
year. In the event that the rental manager is employed with respect to rental
housing for any property after the registration statement is filed, then the
rental manager shall file an amended registration statement within 20 days
after such new employment, which amendment shall list the street address and
permanent index number of such building. Registration shall be effective for a
period of June 1 through May 31 thereafter.
Sec. 5-362. Rental manager registration fee.
   The annual registration fee for a rental manager shall be $25.00 for each
dwelling unit managed and shall be paid at the time of filing the registration
statement (or amendment thereto), provided that the registration statement is
timely filed. The annual registration fee shall be due for any additional
dwelling units placed under management subsequent to June 1, which additional
registration fee shall be due within 30 days after the dwelling unit was placed
on management. The registration fee for a late registration statement filed
after June 1 of each year or after 30 days after the dwelling unit is being
managed shall be $50.00 for each dwelling unit. Registration fees shall not be
prorated.
(Am. Ord. No. 14-2013 § 2, 8-19-13)
DIVISION 3. INSPECTION CERTIFICATE FOR RENTAL HOUSING
Sec. 5-370. Inspection Certificate required.
   No person shall own or operate any rental housing unless a current unrevoked
Inspection Certificate shall be in effect for such property. Inspection
Certificates shall be valid for a period of 12 months from issuance, provided
that the rental housing has not changed ownership. The annual fee for a
certificate of inspection is $150.00 per single family residential dwelling
unit and $75.00 per apartment or condominium dwelling unit. The above
inspection fee covers only two inspections of the property. All additional
inspections shall be charged at the rate of $50.00 per inspection.
(Am. Ord. No. 14-2013 § 3, 8-19-13)
Sec. 5-371. Issuance of Inspection Certificate.
An Inspection Certificate shall be issued by the Building Commissioner after
the rental housing has been inspected after the registration of such rental
housing as required by Division 1 hereof. An Inspection Certificate shall be
issued if the Building Commissioner determines that the rental housing complies
with the provisions of the Property Maintenance Code.
In the event that an inspection or other evidence shows that the rental housing
does not comply with the Property Maintenance Code, the Building Commissioner
shall issue a deficiency report and permit the deficiencies to be remedied in a
period of time set forth therein. No evidence obtained in a consented
inspection of real property shall be used in the prosecution of any criminal or
ordinance violation.
All deficiencies set forth in a deficiency report shall be remedied and brought
into compliance within the period of time set forth therein. A reinspection of
the rental housing shall be made and an Inspection Certificate issued if the
rental housing is brought into compliance.
Sec. 5-372. Revocation of Inspection Certificate.
The Building Commissioner may revoke any Inspection Certificate if violations
of the Property Maintenance Code exist. Notice of revocation shall be issued to
the owner of the rental housing and provide for a period of 7 days for the
owner to remedy the violations and to respond in writing concerning the
violations. In the event that the owner requests a hearing in writing within
the 7-day period, the Building Commissioner shall grant a hearing before
revoking any Inspection Certificate.
The owner shall have the right to appeal the revocation to the Village Clerk by
filing a written notice of appeal within 7 days of the receipt of the final
decision by the Building Commissioner. The Village Clerk shall conduct a
hearing after providing notice to the owner and shall make a determination as
to whether violations of the Property Maintenance Code exist such that the
Inspection Certificate shall be revoked.
Sec. 5-373. Failure to possess Inspection Certificate.
In the event that an Inspection Certificate is revoked or in the event that
rental housing is operated without an Inspection Certificate, no new tenants
shall be permitted to occupy the rental housing and no new rental agreements
shall be renewed or entered into. All tenants shall vacate the premises within
30 days after a notice to vacate is posted by the Village. No tenant shall be
required to pay any rent for the period of time that an Inspection Certificate
has been revoked or for the period of time that the rental housing is operated
without an Inspection Certificate.
DIVISION 4. RESIDENTIAL LEASES
Sec. 5-380. Written Leases Required.
   All rental agreements or leases for residential property must be for a
period of 90 or more calendar days and must be in writing and shall be entered
into within 30 calendar days of the commencement of such rental. The lessor
shall provide an executed copy of the written lease to each tenant within 7
calendar days after final execution thereof. All leases shall contain such
provisions as required by this Article. An oral lease or license, regardless of
the length thereof, to occupy residential property is invalid and not
permitted.
(Am. Ord. No. 20-2024 § 1, 7-15-24)
Sec. 5-381. Maintenance of Written Leases.
The landlord shall maintain a copy of all written leases, and shall provide a
copy of such written leases to the Village upon request at the time of
inspection for the issuance of a Inspection Certificate.
Sec. 5-382. Provisions of Written Lease.
All written leases shall contain the following information:
   (a)   The maximum occupancy levels permitted in the dwelling unit based upon
the Property Maintenance Code.
   (b)   The names of all persons permitted to occupy the dwelling unit
pursuant to the lease.
Sec. 5-383. Maximum Occupancy.
   The landlord shall not enter into any leases (whether written or oral) which
will cause the dwelling unit to be occupied by more persons than allowed under
the provisions of Section
5-8, Property Maintenance Code, of the Evergreen Park Municipal Code. Prior to
entering into any lease the landlord shall advise the prospective tenant as to
the maximum occupancy allowed under the Property Maintenance Code. It shall be
unlawful for any tenant to occupy any dwelling unit such that the occupancy is
by more persons than allowed under the provisions of Section
5-8, Property Maintenance Code, of the Evergreen Park Municipal Code.
Sec. 5-384. Rental Premises.
   The rental of bedrooms, sleeping rooms, or portions of a dwelling unit or
swimming pools, yard, or garages on residential property is not permitted. All
rentals must apply to the complete dwelling unit and zoning lot such that no
property shall be operated similar to a boarding house, dormitory or other
similar use. No separate dwelling unit shall be allowed below grade.
(Am. Ord. No. 14-2013 § 4, 8-19-13; Am. Ord. No. 20-2024 § 2, 7-15-24)
Sec. 5-385. Invalidity of Lease.
Any lease entered into which does not comply with the provisions of this
Division shall be null and void, and any tenancy thereunder shall be illegal.
Secs. 5-386 – 5-389. Reserved.
ARTICLE VIII. FLOODPLAIN PROVISIONS
Sec. 5-390. Permit requirements.
   (a)   No person shall erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, improve,
move, or demolish any building or structure without first obtaining a separate
permit for each building or structure from the Building Commissioner.
   (b)   No man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including
but not limited to buildings or other structures, fences, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, shall be commenced
until a separate permit has been obtained from the Building Commissioner for
each change.
   (c)   No manufactured home shall be placed on improved or unimproved real
estate without first obtaining a separate permit for each mobile home from the
Building Commissioner.
Sec. 5-391. Permit application.
To obtain a permit, the applicant shall first file a permit application on a
form furnished for that purpose. The form must be completed and submitted to
the Building Commissioner before the issuance of a permit will be considered.
Sec. 5-392. Duties of the Building Commissioner.
   (a)   The Building Commissioner, is appointed as the person responsible for
receiving applications and examining the plans and specifications for the
proposed construction or development.
   (b)   After reviewing the application, the Building Commissioner may require
any additional measures which are necessary to meet the minimum requirements of
this Article.
   (c)   The Building Commissioner shall review proposed development to assure
that all necessary permits have been received from those governmental agencies
from which approval is required by Federal or State law, including Section 404
of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334.
Sec. 5-393. Review of permit application.
The Building Commissioner shall review all permit applications to determine
whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. If a
proposed building site is in a flood prone area, all new construction and
substantial improvements (including the placement of manufactured homes) shall
be:
   (a)   Designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse, or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and
hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy,
   (b)   Constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood
damage,
   (c)   Constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage, and
292
   (d)   Constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air
conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the
components during conditions of flooding.
Sec. 5-394. Review of subdivision proposals.
The Building Commissioner shall review subdivision proposals and other proposed
new development to determine whether such proposals will be reasonably safe
from flooding. If a subdivision proposal or other proposed new development is
in a flood prone area, any such proposal shall be reviewed to assure that:
   (a)   All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage within the flood prone area,
   (b)   All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical,
and water systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood
damage, and
   (c)   Adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure of flood hazard.
Sec. 5-395. Water supply system.
The Building Commissioner shall require within flood prone areas, new and
replacement water supply systems to be designed to minimize or eliminate
infiltration of flood waters into the systems.
Sec. 5-396. Sanitary sewage systems.
The Building Commissioner shall require within flood prone areas new and
replacement sanitary sewage systems to be designed to minimize or eliminate
infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the systems
into flood waters, and
Sec. 5-397. Definitions
   (a)   Development means any man-made change to real estate, including but
not limited to construction or reconstruction of buildings, installing
manufactured homes or travel trailers, installing utilities, construction of
roads or bridges, erection of levees, walls, or fences, drilling, mining,
filling, dredging, and storage of materials.
   (b)   Flood means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from overflow of inland or tidal waves,
or the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any
source.
   (c)   Floodplain or Flood Prone Area means any land area susceptible to
being inundated by water from any source (see Flood). Floodplains shall be
generally identified according to the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) number
17031C, panels 0628F, 0630F and 0635F of Cook County dated November 6, 2000.
   (d)   Floodproofing means any combination of structural and non-structural
additions, changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood
damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities,
structures and their contents.
   (e)   Manufactured Home means a structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designated for use with
or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities.
   (f)   New Construction means, for the purposes of determining insurance
rates, structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the
effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is
later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For
floodplain management purposes, new construction means structures for which the
start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain
management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structures.
   (g)   Person includes any individuals, corporation, partnership,
association, or any other entity, including State and local governments and
agencies
   (h)   Special Flood Hazard Area is the land in the floodplain within a
community subject to a 1 percent or greater chance of flooding in any given
year. The area may be designated as Zone A on the FHBM. After detailed
ratemaking has been completed in preparation for publication of the flood
insurance rate map, Zone A usually is refined into Zones A, AO, AH, A130, AE,
A99, AR, AR/A130, AR/AE, AR/AO, AR/AH, AR/A, VO, or V130, VE, or V. For
purposes of these regulations, the term special flood hazard area is synonymous
in meaning with the phrase area of special flood hazard.
   (i)   Structure means for floodplain management purposes, a walled and
roofed building, including gas or liquid storage tanks, that is principally
above ground. The term includes recreational vehicles and travel trailers on
site for more than 180 days.
   (j)   Substantial Improvement means any repair, reconstruction or
improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of
the market value of the structure either, (a) before the improvement or repair
is started, or (b) if the structure has been damaged, and is being restored,
before the damage occurred. For the purposes of this definition "substantial
improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall,
ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or
not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure regardless
of the actual work performed. The term does not, however, include either (1)
any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or
local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely
necessary to assure safe living conditions or (2) any alteration of a "historic
structure", provided that the alteration will not preclude the structures
continued designation as a historic structure.
Secs. 5-398 – 5-399. Reserved.
ARTICLE IX. EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL
Sec. 5-400. Scope and Purpose.
   This Article applies to all developments which disturb areas of not less
than 1.0 acre, either alone or as part of a larger common plan of development.
The purpose of this Article is to safeguard persons, protect property, and
prevent damage to the environment as eroded soil endangers water resources and
also necessitates repair of storm water facilities.
(Ord. No. 5-2014 § 1, 3-3-14)
Sec. 5-401. Definitions.
   For the purposes of this Article, the following terms are hereby defined:
   Clearing means any activity that removes the vegetative surface cover.
   Drainage way means any channel that conveys surface runoff.
   Erosion control means a measure that prevents erosion.
   Erosion and sediment control plan means a plan prepared by or under the
direction of a licensed professional engineer indicating the specific measures
and sequencing to be used to control sediment and erosion during and after
construction.
   Grading means excavation or fill of material, including the resulting
conditions thereof, whether or not materials are brought onto or taken off of
site.
   IEPA means Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
   Illinois Urban Manual means the Illinois Urban Manual developed by the USDA
Natural Resources Conservation Service and the Illinois Environmental
Protection Agency, current edition.
   Perimeter control means a barrier that prevents sediment from leaving a site
by filtering sediment-laden runoff or diverting it to a sediment trap or basin.
   Phasing means clearing an area in distinct phases, with the stabilization of
each phase completed before the clearing of the next.
   Sediment control means measures that prevent eroded sediment from leaving a
site.
   Site means a parcel of land or a combination of contiguous parcels
containing not less than 1.0 acre where grading work is performed as part of a
common plan of development.
   Site development permit means a permit issued by the Village for the
construction or alteration of ground improvements and structures for the
control of erosion, runoff, and grading.
   Stabilization means the use of practices that prevent exposed soil from
eroding.
   Start of construction means the first land-disturbing activity associated
with a development, including land preparation such as clearing, grading, and
filling; installation of streets and walkways; excavation for basements,
footings, piers, or foundations; erection of temporary forms; and installation
of accessory buildings such as garages.
   Village means the Village of Evergreen Park.
   Watercourse means any body of water, including, but not limited to lakes,
ponds, rivers, streams, and bodies of water delineated by the Illinois
Department of Natural Resources Office of Water Resources (IDNR/OWR), the
United States Geologic Survey (USGS), the United States Army Corps of Engineers
or the Village.
   Waterway means a channel that directs surface runoff to a watercourse or to
the public storm drain.
(Ord. No. 5-2014 § 1, 3-3-14)
Sec. 5-402. Site Development Permit Required.
   (a)   No person shall clear, grade or disturb any site that would require
the uncovering of more than 1.0 acres without a site development permit issued
by the Village or without an NPDES permit issued by the IEPA.
   (b)   No site development permit is required for the following activities:
      (1)   Any emergency activity that is immediately necessary for the
protection of life, property, or natural resources.
      (2)   Existing nursery and agricultural operations conducted as a
permitted or accessory use.
   (c)   Each application shall bear the name and address of the owner or
developer of the site, and of any consulting firm retained by the applicant
together with the name of the applicant's principal contact at such firm and
shall be accompanied by a filing fee, erosion and sediment control plan, and
such other information as required by the Village. The filing fee shall be $250
per acre, or part thereof, of the site, plus any review fees incurred by the
Village to independent contractors.
   (d)   The applicant may be required to file with the Village a faithful
performance bond, letter of credit, or other improvement security in an amount
deemed sufficient by the Village to cover all costs of improvements,
landscaping, maintenance of improvements for such period as specified by the
Village, and engineering and inspection costs to cover the cost of failure or
repair of improvements installed on the site.
(Ord. No. 5-2014 § 1, 3-3-14)
Sec. 5-403. Erosion and Sediment Control Plan.
   (a)   The erosion and sediment control plan shall include the following:
      (1)   A sequence of construction of the site, including stripping and
clearing; rough grading; construction of utilities, infrastructure, and
buildings; and final grading and landscaping. Sequencing shall identify the
expected date on which clearing will begin, the estimated duration of exposure
of cleared areas, areas of clearing, installation of temporary erosion and
sediment control measures, and establishment of permanent vegetation.
      (2)   All erosion and sediment control measures necessary to meet the
objectives throughout all phases of construction and after completion of
development of the site. Depending upon the complexity of the project, the
drafting of intermediate plans may be required at the close of each season.
       (3)   Seeding mixtures and rates, types of sod, method of seedbed
preparation, expected seeding dates, type and rate of lime and fertilizer
application, and kind and quantity of mulching for both temporary and permanent
vegetative control measures.
      (4)   Provisions for maintenance of control facilities, including
easements and estimates of the cost of maintenance.
   (b)   Modifications to the plan may be authorized by the Village by written
authorization to the permittee, and shall include:
      (1)   Major amendments of the erosion and sediment control plan submitted
to the Village.
      (2)   Field modifications of a minor nature.
(Ord. No. 5-2014 § 1, 3-3-14)
Sec. 5-404. Design Requirements.
   (a)   Grading, erosion control practices, sediment control practices, and
waterway crossings shall meet the design criteria set forth in the most recent
version of the Illinois Urban Manual, and shall be adequate to prevent
transportation of sediment from the site to the satisfaction of the Village.
Cut and fill slopes shall be no greater than 2:1, except as approved by the
Village to meet other community or environmental objectives.
   (b)   Clearing and grading of natural resources, such as forests and
wetlands, shall not be permitted, except when in compliance with all other
chapters of this Code. Clearing techniques that retain natural vegetation and
drainage patterns, as described in the Illinois Urban Manual, shall be used to
the satisfaction of the Village.
   (c)   Clearing, except that necessary to establish sediment control devices,
shall not begin until all sediment control devices have been installed and have
been stabilized.
   (d)   Phasing shall be required on all sites disturbing greater than 30
acres, with the size of each phase to be established at plan review and as
approved by the Village.
   (e)   Erosion control requirements shall include the following:
      (1)   Soil stabilization shall be completed within 14 days of clearing or
inactivity in construction.
      (2)   If seeding or another vegetative erosion control method is used, it
shall become established within 14 days or the Village may require the site to
be reseeded or a nonvegetative option employed.
      (3)   Special techniques that meet the design criteria outlined in the
Illinois Urban Manual on steep slopes or in drainage ways shall be used to
ensure stabilization.
      (4)   Soil stockpiles must be stabilized or covered at the end of each
workday.
      (5)   The entire site must be stabilized, using a heavy mulch layer or
another method that does not require germination to control erosion, at the
close of the construction season.
      (6)   Techniques shall be employed to prevent the blowing of dust or
sediment from the site.
      (7)   Techniques that divert upland runoff past disturbed slopes shall be
employed.
   (f)   Sediment control requirements shall include:
      (1)   Settling basins, sediment traps, or tanks and perimeter controls.
      (2)   Settling basins that are designed in a manner that allows
adaptation to provide long-term storm water management, if required by the
Village.
      (3)   Protection for adjacent properties by the use of a vegetated buffer
strip in combination with perimeter controls.
   (g)   Construction site access requirements shall include:
      (1)   A temporary access road provided at all sites.
      (2)   Other measures required by the Village in order to ensure that
sediment is not tracked onto public streets by construction vehicles or washed
into storm drains.
(Ord. No. 5-2014 § 1, 3-3-14)
Sec. 5-405. Inspection.
   (a)   The Building Commissioner shall make inspections as hereinafter
required and either shall approve that portion of the work completed or shall
notify the permittee wherein the work fails to comply with the erosion and
sediment control plan as approved. Plans for grading, stripping, excavating,
and filling work bearing the stamp of approval of the Village shall be
maintained at the site during the progress of the work. To obtain inspections,
the permittee shall notify the Village at least 2 working days prior to:
      (1)   Start of construction,
      (2)   Installation of sediment and erosion measures,
      (3)   Completion of final landscaping.
   (b)   The permittee or agent shall make regular inspections of all control
measures in accordance with the inspection schedule outlined on the approved
erosion and sediment control plan. The purpose of such inspections will be to
determine the overall effectiveness of the control plan and the need for
additional control measures. All inspections shall be documented in written
form and submitted to the Village at the time interval specified in the
approved permit.
   (c)   The Building Commissioner and the Village Engineer may enter the
property of the applicant as deemed necessary to make regular inspections.
(Ord. No. 5-2014 § 1, 3-3-14)
Sec. 5-406. Stop-Work Order; Revocation of Permit.
   In the event that any person violates the terms of a site development
permit, clears or grades a site in violation of this Article, implements site
development in such a manner as to adversely affect the health, welfare, or
safety of persons or property, the Village may suspend or revoke the site
development permit without notice or hearing and may stop all construction
work, including clearing and grading, on the site.
(Ord. No. 5-2014 § 1, 3-3-14)
ARTICLE X. POST CONSTRUCTION STORM WATER RUNOFF
Sec. 5-407. General Provisions.
   (a)   Findings of Fact. It is hereby determined that:
      (1)   Land development projects alter the hydrologic response of local
watersheds and increase storm water runoff rates and volumes, flooding, stream
channel erosion, and sediment transport and deposition;
      (2)   This storm water runoff contributes to increased quantities of
water-borne pollutants; and
      (3)   Storm water runoff, soil erosion and nonpoint source pollution can
be controlled and minimized through the regulation of storm water runoff from
development sites.
Therefore, the Village of Evergreen Park establishes this set of water quality
and quantity policies applicable to all surface waters to provide reasonable
guidance for the regulation of storm water runoff for the purpose of protecting
local water resources from degradation. It is determined that the regulation of
storm water runoff discharges from land development projects and other
construction activities in order to control and minimize increases in storm
water runoff rates and volumes, soil erosion, stream channel erosion, and
nonpoint source pollution associated with storm water runoff is in the public
interest and will prevent threats to public health and safety.
   (b)   Purpose. The purpose of this Article is to establish minimum storm
water management requirements and controls to protect and safeguard the general
health, safety, and welfare of the public residing in watersheds within this
jurisdiction. This Article seeks to meet that purpose through the following
objectives:
      (1)   Minimize increases in storm water runoff from any development in
order to reduce flooding, siltation, increases in stream temperature, and
streambank erosion and maintain the integrity of stream channels.
      (2)   Minimize pollution caused by storm water runoff from development
that would otherwise degrade local water quality.
      (3)   Minimize the total annual volume of surface water runoff that flows
from any specific site during and following development to not exceed the pre-
development hydrologic regime to the maximum extent practicable.
      (4)   Reduce storm water runoff rates and volumes, soil erosion and
pollution, wherever possible, through storm water management controls and to
ensure that these management controls are properly maintained and pose no
threat to public safety.
   (c)   Applicability. This Article shall apply to all sites, as defined
herein provided that the following may be exempted by the Village:
      (1)   Additions or modifications to existing single family structures.
      (2)   Repairs to any storm water treatment practice deemed necessary by
the Village.
      (3)   Developments that do not disturb more than one acre of land,
provided that such development is not part of a larger common development plan.
      (4)   Developments that have been granted a waiver under Section
5-410.
Decisions on permitting shall be made by the Building Commissioner and on-site
storm water requirements shall be made by the Village Engineer. This
determination shall be dependent upon the amount of impervious area created by
the redevelopment and its impact on water quality. Final authorization of all
redevelopment projects will be determined after a review by the Village.
   (d)   Compatibility with Other Permit and Article Requirements. This Article
is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other ordinance, rule
or regulation, statute, or other provision of law. The requirements of this
Article should be considered minimum requirements, and where any provision of
this Article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other
Article, rule or regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provisions
are more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or
the environment shall be considered to take precedence.
(Ord. No. 7-2014 § 1, 3-3-14)
Sec. 5-408. Definitions.
   For the purposes of this Article, the following terms are hereby defined:
   Applicant means a property owner or agent of a property owner who has filed
an application for a storm water management permit.
   Channel means a natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and
banks that conducts continuously or periodically flowing water.
   Detention means the temporary storage of storm runoff in a storm water
management practice with the goals of controlling peak discharge rates and
providing gravity settling of pollutants.
   Detention facility means a detention basin or alternative structure designed
for the purpose of temporary storage of stream flow or surface runoff and
gradual release of stored water at controlled rates.
   Illinois Urban Manual means the Illinois Urban Manual developed by the USDA
Natural Resources Conservation Service and the Illinois Environmental
Protection Agency, current edition.
   Infiltration means the process of percolating storm water into the subsoil.
   Land disturbance activity means any activity that changes the volume or peak
flow discharge rate of rainfall runoff from the land surface. This may include
the grading, digging, cutting, scraping, or excavating of soil, placement of
fill materials, paving, construction, substantial removal of vegetation, or any
activity which bares soil or rock or involves the diversion or piping of any
natural or man-made watercourse.
   MWRDGC means the Metropolitan Water Reclamation District of Greater Chicago.
   Off-site facility means a storm water management measure located outside the
subject property boundary described in the permit application for land
development activity.
   On-site facility means a storm water management measure located within the
subject property boundary described in the permit application for land
development activity.
   Redevelopment means any construction, alteration or improvement exceeding
1.0 acre in areas where existing land use is high density commercial,
industrial, institutional or multi-family residential.
   Site means a parcel of land or a combination of contiguous parcels
containing not less than 1.0 acre where any land disturbance activity occurs as
part of a common plan of development.
   Storm water management means the use of structural or non-structural
practices that are designed to reduce storm water runoff pollutant loads,
discharge volumes, peak flow discharge rates and detrimental changes in stream
temperature that affect water quality and habitat.
   Storm water runoff means flow on the surface of the ground, resulting from
precipitation.
   Watercourse means a permanent or intermittent stream or other body of water,
either natural or man-made, which gathers or carries surface water.
(Ord. No. 7-2014 § 1, 3-3-14)
Sec. 5-409. Permit Procedures and Requirements.
   (a)   Permit Required. No person shall conduct or permit any land
disturbance activity on any site, except those exempted under Section
5-407, without a storm water management permit issued by the Village.
   (b)   Application Requirements. A permit application shall bear the name and
address of the owner or developer of the site, and of any consulting firm
retained by the applicant and shall be accompanied by a filing fee and a storm
water management concept plan and a maintenance agreement. The filing fee shall
be $250 per acre, or part thereof, of the site, plus any review fees incurred
by the Village to independent contractors.
   (c)   Application Procedure. All applications shall be submitted to the
Building Commissioner and shall include not less than 4 sets of plans and any
required fees.
(Ord. No. 7-2014 § 1, 3-3-14)
Sec. 5-410. Waivers to Storm Water Management Requirements.
   (a)   Waiver Eligibility Criteria. Every applicant shall provide for storm
water management as required by this Article, unless this requirement is waived
by the Village. The minimum requirements for storm water management may be
waived in whole or in part upon request of the applicant, provided that at
least one of the following conditions applies:
      (1)   It can be demonstrated that the proposed development is not likely
to impair attainment of the objectives of this Article.
      (2)   Alternative minimum requirements for on-site management of storm
water discharges have been established in a storm water management plan that
has been approved by the Village and the implementation of the plan is required
by local ordinance.
      (3)   Provisions are made to manage storm water by an off-site facility.
The off-site facility is required to be in place, to be designed and adequately
sized to provide a level of storm water control that is equal to or greater
than that which would be afforded by on-site practices and there is a legally
obligated entity responsible for long-term operation and maintenance of the
storm water practice.
      (4)   The Village finds that meeting the minimum on-site management
requirements is not feasible due to the natural or existing physical
characteristics of a site.
      (5)   Non-structural practices will be used on the sites that reduce: (i)
the generation of storm water from the site, (ii) the size and cost of storm
water storage and (iii) the pollutants generated at the site. These non-
structural practices are explained in detail in the Illinois Urban Manual.
   (b)   Assurances Required for Waiver. In instances where one of the
conditions above applies, the Village may grant a waiver from strict compliance
with these storm water management provisions, as long as acceptable mitigation
measures are provided. However, to be eligible for a variance, the applicant
must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Village that the variance will not
result in the following impacts to downstream waterway.
      (1)   Deterioration of existing culverts, bridges, dams, and other
structures.
      (2)   Degradation of biological functions or habitat.
      (3)   Accelerated streambank or streambed erosion or siltation.
      (4)   Increased threat of flood damage to public health, life, and
property.
(Ord. No. 7-2014 § 1, 3-3-14)
Sec. 5-411. General Performance Criteria for Storm Water Management.
   Unless judged by the Village to be exempt or granted a waiver, the following
performance criteria shall be addressed for storm water management at all
sites:
   (a)   All site designs shall, to the maximum extent possible, establish
storm water management practices to control the peak flow rates of storm water
discharge associated with specified design storms and reduce the generation of
storm water runoff. These practices should seek to utilize pervious areas for
storm water treatment and to infiltrate storm water runoff from driveways,
sidewalks, rooftops, parking lots, and landscaped areas to the maximum extent
practical.
   (b)   To protect stream channels from degradation, a specific channel
protection criterion shall be provided as prescribed in the Illinois Urban
Manual.
   (c)   Certain industrial sites are required to prepare and implement a storm
water pollution prevention plan, and shall file a notice of intent (NOI) under
the provisions of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES)
general permit. The storm water pollution prevention plan requirement applies
to both existing and new industrial sites.
   (d)   Prior to design, applicants are required to consult with the Village
to determine if they are subject to additional storm water design requirements.
   (e)   The calculations for determining peak flows as required by the MWRDGC
shall be used for sizing all storm water management practices where applicable.
(Ord. No. 7-2014 § 1, 3-3-14)
Sec. 5-412. Basic Storm Water Management Design Criteria.
   (a)   Detention basins shall incorporate design features to capture storm
water runoff pollutants. In particular, designers shall give preference to wet
bottom and wetland designs in locations adjacent to or near existing wetlands
or in other areas where they are suitable and acceptable to the Village and all
flows from the development shall be routed through the basin.
   (b)   Dry basins with low flow bypasses may be preferred in certain
developments to enhance multiple uses where suitable and acceptable to the
Village. Retention and infiltration of storm water shall be promoted throughout
the property's drainage system to reduce the volume of storm water runoff and
to reduce the quantity of runoff pollutants.
   (c)   The drainage system should incorporate multiple uses where
practicable. Uses considered compatible with storm water management include
open space, aesthetics, aquatic habitat, recreation, wetlands and water quality
mitigation. The applicant should try to avoid using portions of the property
exclusively for storm water management.
(Ord. No. 7-2014 § 1, 3-3-14)
Sec. 5-413. Post Construction Management.
   (a)   The requirements of Section IV (D)(2)(b) of NPDES permit No. ILR10
including management practices, controls and other provisions at least as
protective as the requirements contained in the Illinois Urban Manual.
   (b)   The long term operation and maintenance of all BMP's shall be provided
for.
(Ord. No. 7-2014 § 1, 3-3-14)
ARTICLE XI. SHORT-TERM HOUSING RENTALS
Sec. 5-420. Purpose and intent.
   This article, prohibiting certain short-term housing rentals in the "A"
Single Family Residential District and the "B" Multi-Family Residential
District, is designed to prevent overcrowding, promote low density housing
units occupied by permanent residents of the village, limit traffic on
residential streets, establish tranquility where families can permanently
reside, prevent public nuisances, and prevent conditions that would adversely
effect the value of residential properties in the village.
(Ord. No. 8-2023 § 1, 6-21-23)
Sec. 5-421. Definitions.
   The following words, terms and phrases, as used in this article, shall have
the following meanings ascribed to them unless the context clearly indicates a
different meaning:
   Applicable laws means any and all ordinances of the village governing the
condition, maintenance, use, or occupancy of property and structures thereon.
   Host means any person engaged in providing a short-term housing rental.
   Hosting platform means a marketplace entity, in whatever form or format
which facilitates short-term housing rentals through advertising, matchmaking
or other means, using any medium or facilitation, or from which the operator of
the hosting platform derives revenue, including booking fees or advertising
revenues from providing or maintaining the marketplace information. Examples
include Airbnb, VRBO, TripAdvisor, Flipkey, Expedia, HomeToGo and HomeAway.
   Property shall mean any real property in the village located in the "A"
Single Family Residential District and the "B" Multi-Family Residential
District.
   Rental includes any arrangement, such as licensing or contracting, whereby a
person pays or receives consideration.
   Short-term housing rental means the rental of a property, including a
single-family home in its entirety, an individual room within a dwelling unit,
an accessory structure, including swimming pool, or any portion of the inside
or outside area of a property for a period of less than ninety (90) calendar
days, whether or not a hosting platform is used.
   Village means the Village of Evergreen Park.
(Ord. No. 8-2023 § 1, 6-21-23)
Sec. 5-422. Short-term housing rentals prohibited.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to provide a short-term housing rental
for any property.
(Ord. No. 8-2023 § 1, 6-21-23)
Sec. 5-423. Short-term housing rentals hosting prohibited.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to act as or operate a hosting platform
for any property.
(Ord. No. 8-2023 § 1, 6-21-23)
Sec. 5-424.   Short-term housing rental agreement.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to enter into an agreement providing for
a short-term housing rental.
(Ord. No. 8-2023 § 1, 6-21-23)
Sec. 5-425.   Penalties.
   The fine for the first violation of this article shall be five hundred
dollars ($500.00). The fine for all subsequent violations shall be one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00). Each day a violation occurs or is permitted to continue
shall constitute a new and separate offense. Violations of this article that
concern different properties shall constitute separate offenses as to those
properties.
(Ord. No. 8-2023 § 1, 6-21-23)
Sec. 5-426.   Administration.
   Violations of this article may be administered through the provisions of
Chapter 12, Miscellaneous Provisions and Offenses, Article X, Administrative
Adjudication of Non-Vehicular Regulations Violations, of the Evergreen Park
Municipal Code, or by any other means permitted by law. Nothing in this article
shall be interpreted to limit the remedies or penalties available to the
village.
(Ord. No. 8-2023 § 1, 6-21-23)
Chapter 6
ELECTIONS*
*Cross references—Mayor and board of trustees, § 2-26 et seq.; village clerk, §
2-216 et seq.
State law references—Municipal elections generally, 65 ILCS 5/3-2-1 et seq.;
Election Code, 10 ILCS 5/1-1 et seq.
Sec. 6-1. Conduct generally.
Elections for village officers shall be held in the manner provided by law.
(Code 1965, § 10-1)
State law references—Election of mayor and trustees, 65 ILCS 5/3-5-1 et seq.;
election of clerk, 65 ILCS 5/3-5-9.
Chapter 7
FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
Art. I.   In General, §§ 7-1-7-30
Art. II.   Fire Department, §§ 7-31-7-75
   Div. 1. Generally, §§ 7-31-7-55
   Div. 2. Pension Fund, §§ 7-56-7-75
Art. III.   Fire Prevention Code and Standards, §§ 7-76-7-120
Art. IV.   Fireworks, §§ 7-121 - 7-155
Art. V .   Discharge of Hazardous Materials, §§ 7-166-7-161
Art. VI.   Celebrity Promotion Permits, §§ 7-170-7-177
Art. VII.   Carbon Monoxide Alarm Detectors §§ 7-180 - 7-183
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 7-1. Disobedience to orders of chief, other officers; penalty.
Every person who shall be present at a fire shall be subject and obedient to
the orders of the fire chief and other officers of the fire department engaged
in extinguishing the fire and in the removal and protection of property. In
case any person shall refuse to obey such orders, he shall be punished as
provided in section
1-9 of this Code.
Sec. 7-2. Obstructing firefighters or injuring equipment.
Any person who shall willfully offer any hindrance to any officer or
firefighter in the performance of his duty at a fire, or shall willfully in any
manner destroy, injure or deface any hosecart, hose or other fire apparatus
belonging to the village, shall for every such offense be punished as provided
in section
1-9 of this Code.
Sec. 7-3. Open burning and fires; burning of combustible materials.
   (a)   No person shall cause or allow open burning except as permitted in
this section. "Open burning" is defined as the combustion of any matter with a
flame in excess of 4 inches outside of any enclosed structure in such a way
that the products of the combustion are emitted to the open air.
    (b)   The following types of open burning are permitted on privately owned
property:
   (1)   Burning of charcoal, propane, or natural gas is permitted in a
barbecue for the purpose of cooking.
   (2)   Burning of commercially purchased candles and torches is permitted not
less than 30 feet from any structure or tree.
   (3)   Small open flames for heating tar, for welding, acetylene torches, and
highway safety flares.
   (4)   Burning of firewood only for a campfire in a container which does not
exceed 6 square feet.
   (5)   Burning of firewood only for a campfire in a container or contained
area with a permit issued from the Fire Department.
   (6)   Burning pursuant to a permit issued by the Illinois Environmental
Protection Agency.
   (7)   Burning pursuant to a permit issued by the Village of Evergreen Park.
   (8)   Burning pursuant to a permit issued by the Building Commissioner in a
gas-fired incinerator bearing an underwriter approval which reduces all
combustible materials to a fine ash and emits no smoke or odor.
   (c)   Open burning of leaves, garbage, construction wood, building by-
products and waste is prohibited.
   (d)   Open burning on publicly owned property is prohibited except by the
governmental agency owning such property.
(Ord. No. 13-2007 § 1, 2-19-07; Am. Ord. No. 30-2007 § 1, 7-16-07)
Sec. 7-4. False alarms of fire, accident or emergency.
It shall be unlawful for any person to transmit in any manner to the fire
department a false alarm of fire, accident or emergency, knowing at the time of
such transmission that there is no reasonable ground for believing that such
fire, accident or emergency exists.
Sec. 7-5. Opening, tampering with signal devices prohibited.
No person, except one connected with the management of the fire department,
shall open any signal box unless it is to communicate an alarm of fire, or
break, cut, deface, derange or in any manner meddle or interfere with any
signal box, fire hydrant or fire alarm, telegraph or telephone wires.
ARTICLE II. FIRE DEPARTMENT
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 7-31. Established.
There is hereby established a department of the village government which shall
be known as the fire department, and which shall embrace a fire chief,
assistant fire chief and the members of the fire department.
Sec. 7-32. General duties.
   (a)   It shall be the duty of the officers of the fire department to enforce
all laws and ordinances covering the following:
      (1)   The prevention of fires.
      (2)   The storage and use of explosives and flammables.
      (3)   The installation and maintenance of automatic and other private
fire alarm systems and fire extinguishing equipment.
      (4)   The maintenance of protection and the elimination of hazards in
buildings and structures, including those under construction.
      (5)   The means and adequacy of exit in case of fire from factories,
schools, hotels, lodginghouses, asylums, hospitals, churches, halls, theaters,
amphitheaters and all other places where numbers of persons work, live or
congregate, from time to time, for any purpose.
      (6)   The investigation of the cause, origin and circumstances of fires.
   (b)   The officers of the fire department shall have such other powers and
perform such other duties as are set forth in other sections of this article
and other ordinances, and as may be conferred and imposed from time to time by
law.
(Ord. No. 26-1990, § 1(12-32), 12-17-90)
Sec. 7-33. Fire chief, assistant fire chief—Positions created.
There are hereby created the offices of chief of the fire department of the
village and assistant chief.
(Ord. No. 26-1990, § 1(12-33), 12-17-90)
Sec. 7-34. Same—Duties.
   (a)   The chief shall be chief of the fire department, subject to the mayor
and board of trustees, and shall have command and control of the department and
all members thereof. He shall have the general care and custody of the engines,
hosecarts, hoses, trucks, hooks, ladders and all other property and equipment
of the department and shall personally attend to all repairs required to be
made upon same.
   (b)   He shall take command of the organization and see that the several
members of the fire department faithfully perform their respective duties.
   (c)   The fire chief shall keep, in a book to be provided for that purpose,
a full, true and complete record of all the property and equipment of the fire
department, together with a record of all transactions of the fire department
and of all property placed in his charge and custody. He shall annually, at the
close of each fiscal year, make a written report to the mayor and board of
trustees showing the condition of the department, together with a complete list
of all fires occurring in the village during the preceding year, the date and
location of each fire, the loss incurred thereby, the amount of insurance and
such other information as he may deem important to the village.
   (d)   The fire chief, or other officer in command, may prescribe limits in
the vicinity of any fire within which no person except those who reside
therein, firefighters, police officers and those admitted by order of any
officer of the fire department may be permitted to go. He shall have power to
cause a removal of any property, whenever it shall become necessary for the
preservation of such property from fire, to prevent the spreading of fire, or
to protect adjoining property.
(Ord. No. 26-1990, § 1(12-34), 12-17-90)
Sec. 7-35. Compensation of the chief, personnel.
The chief, assistant chief and members of the fire department shall receive for
their services such compensation as determined by the mayor and board of
trustees. (Ord. No. 26-1990, § 1(12-35), 12-17-90)
Sec. 7-36. Ambulance service.
   (a)   The fire department may provide ambulance and rescue service in cases
of emergency requiring the prehospital care and transportation of persons who
are sick, injured, wounded, or otherwise incapacitated or helpless at the time
of the dispatch of a fire department vehicle.
   (b)   The response area shall be limited to the territory within the
village. Service outside corporate limits shall be limited to:
      (1)   Circumstances governed by contract or mutual-aid agreement; and
      (2)   Extreme lifesaving necessity.
   (c)   Except when personnel or equipment is needed for continued lifesaving
support, the fire chief shall assure that neither personnel nor equipment is
unduly delayed in:
      (1)   Its dispatch to or departure from the scene.
      (2)   Transportation to and from the hospital.
   (d)   The fire department shall transport persons only to one (1) of the
following hospitals:
      (1)   Little Company of Mary Hospital, Evergreen Park, Illinois.
      (2)   Christ Hospital, Oak Lawn, Illinois.
      (3)   Palos Community Hospital, Palos Heights, Illinois.
      (4)   Holy Cross Hospital, Chicago, Illinois.
      (5)   St. Francis Hospital, Blue Island, Illinois.
Provided, however, that in exceptional circumstances, the fire chief may
authorize the transportation of persons to other hospitals that have specialist
physicians or special equipment and facilities not available at the above-
mentioned hospitals, or to other emergency care facilities.
   (e)   Fees for ambulance service and prehospital care provided by the fire
department shall be charged to all residents and nonresidents of the village in
accordance with the schedule adopted by the board of trustees.
(Ord. No. 26-1990, § 1(12-36), 12-17-90)
Secs. 7-37-7-55. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. PENSION FUND
Sec. 7-56. Created; powers, duties and authority.
There is hereby established a firefighters' pension fund pursuant to article 4
of the Illinois Pension Code [40 ILCS 5/4-101, et seq.], and all amendments
thereto, with the powers, duties and authority therein and herein conferred and
as may hereafter be conferred by statute or by ordinance.
ARTICLE III. FIRE PREVENTION CODE AND STANDARDS
Sec. 7-76. Administration, enforcement of article.
The provisions of this article shall be administered and enforced by the fire
chief.
Sec. 7-77. Modifications.
The fire chief shall have the power to modify any of the provisions of this
article upon application in writing by the owner of lessee, or his duly
authorized agent, when there are practical difficulties in the way of carrying
out the strict letter of this article, provided that the intent of this article
shall be observed, public safety secured, and substantial justice done. The
particulars of the order shall be entered upon the records of the fire
department and a signed copy shall be furnished the applicant.
Sec. 7-78. Appeals.
Whenever the fire chief shall disapprove an application or refuse to grant a
permit applied for, or when it is claimed that the provisions of this article
do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of this article have been
misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant is permitted to appeal from
the decision to the board of trustees within 30 days from the date of the
decision appealed.
Sec. 7-79. Fire Prevention Code.
   “2021 International Fire Code” as published by the International Code
Council, Inc. is hereby adopted as the Fire Prevention Code of the Village with
the following changes, additions or insertions:
      Section 101.1, insert “Village of Evergreen Park.”
      Section 103.2, change to read “The code official is the Fire Inspector.”
      Section 107.2, add the following, "The code official shall establish a
schedule of permit fees which are required to be paid in conjunction with the
issuance of any required permit".
      Section 111, delete in full. All appeals shall be taken as provided in
the Building Code.
      Section 112.4, change to read, “A penalty of not less than $100 nor more
than $750 is hereby imposed for each violation of this Code. Each day that a
violation occurs shall be considered a separate violation and subject to
penalty.”
      Section 903.2, add the following: “Automatic sprinkler systems are
required to be installed in residential structures only where the residential
structure contains more than 10,000 square feet of dwelling space or where the
residential structure also contains commercial space within the same structure
and the commercial space is required to be sprinklered.”
      Section 1103.5.3, insert “January 1, 2020.”
      Section 5704.2.9.6.1, add the following, “The code official shall
establish the limits in which the storage of Class I and Class II liquids and
above-ground tanks outside of buildings is prohibited.”
      Section 5706.2.4.4, add the following, “The code official shall establish
the limits in which the storage of Class I and Class II liquids and above-
ground tanks is prohibited.”
      Section 5806.2, add the following, “The code official shall establish the
limits in which the storage of flammable cryogenic fluids in stationary
containers is prohibited.”
      Section 6104.2, add the following, “The code official shall establish the
limits in which the storage of liquefied petroleum gas is restricted for the
protection of heavily populated or congested areas.”
      Appendix B, Fire-Flow Requirements for Buildings, is hereby adopted.
      Appendix C, Fire Hydrant Locations and Distribution, is hereby adopted.
      Appendix D, Fire Apparatus Access Roads, is hereby adopted.
      Appendix E, Hazard Categories, is hereby adopted.
      Appendix F, Hazard Ranking, is hereby adopted.
      Appendix G, Cryogenic Fluids--Weight and Volume Equivalents, is hereby
adopted.
      Appendix H, Hazardous Materials Management Plan (HMMP) and Hazardous
Materials Inventory Statement (HMIS) Instructions, is hereby adopted.
      Appendix I, Fire Protection Systems - Noncompliant Conditions, is hereby
adopted.
      Appendix K, Constructing Requirements for Existing Ambulatory Care
Facilities, is hereby adopted.
   In the event that the 2021 International Fire Code does not contain
provisions on an issue, then the provisions of the Life Safety Code, as
published by the National Fire Protection Association shall govern unless
waived by the code official for due cause in hardship situations.
(Ord. No. 4-2007 § 7, 1-16-07; Am. Ord. No. 19-2007 § 1, 2-19-07; Am. Ord. No.
9-2010 § 6, 5- 3-10; Am. Ord. No. 2-2013 § 5, 1-22-13; Am. Ord. No. 18-2016 §
5, 6-6-16; Am. Ord. No. 22-2018 § 5, 8-20-18; Am. Ord. No. 17-2022, § 5, 8-15-
22)
Sec. 7-79.1. Stairway Doors.
Interior stairway means of egress doors shall be openable from both sides
without the use of a key or special knowledge or effort except as follows:
   (a)   Stairway discharge doors shall be openable from the egress side and
shall only be locked from the opposite side.
   (b)   In stairways serving not more than 4 stories, doors are permitted to
be locked from the side opposite the egress side, provided they are openable
from the egress side.
   (c)   In stairways serving more than 4 stories, doors are permitted to be
locked only if equipped with an operating electrically controlled mechanism
which is connected to a fire alarm system for that structure so that such doors
will automatically unlock from both sides in the event either of the following
occurs:
      (1)   the structure's fire alarm system detects a fire; or
      (2)   the electrical supply to the building is lost making the locking
mechanism inoperable.
Sec. 7-80. Fire lanes on private property, devoted for public use.
Fire lanes shall be as defined and marked by the fire chief.
Sec. 7-81. Authority at fires and other emergencies.
The fire prevention code official or duly authorized representatives, as may be
in charge at the scene of a fire or other emergency involving the protection of
life and/or property, are empowered to direct such operations as may be
necessary to extinguish or control any suspected or reported fires, gas leaks,
or other hazardous conditions or situations, or take any other action necessary
in the reasonable performance of their duties. The fire prevention code
official may prohibit any person, vehicle or object from approaching the scene
and may remove or cause to be removed from the scene any person, vehicle or
object which may impede or interfere with the operations of the fire
department. The fire prevention code official may remove or cause to be removed
any person, vehicle or object from hazardous areas. All persons ordered to
leave a hazardous area shall do so immediately and shall not reenter the area
until authorized to do so by the fire prevention code official.
Sec. 7-82. Interference with fire department operations.
It shall be unlawful to interfere with, attempt to interfere with, conspire to
interfere with, obstruct or restrict the mobility of, or block the path of
travel of any fire department emergency vehicle in any way, or to interfere
with, attempt to interfere with, conspire to interfere with, obstruct or hamper
any fire department operation.
Sec. 7-83. Compliance with orders.
A person shall not willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or
direction of the fire prevention code official or to interfere with the
compliance attempts of another individual.
Sec. 7-84. Vehicles crossing fire hose.
A vehicle shall not be driven or propelled over any unprotected fire hose of
the fire department when laid down on any street, alleyway, private drive or
any other vehicular roadway without the consent of the fire prevention code
official in command of the operation. (Ord. No. 26-1990, § 1(12-84), 12-17-90)
   State law reference—Similar provisions, 625 ILCS 5/11-1411.
Sec. 7-85. Definition of authorized emergency vehicle.
Authorized emergency vehicles shall be restricted to those which are defined
and authorized under the laws of the state.
(Ord. No. 26-1990, § 1(12-85), 12-17-90)
Sec. 7-86. Operation of vehicles on approach of authorized emergency vehicles.
Upon the approach of any authorized emergency vehicle giving audible and visual
signal, the operator of every other vehicle shall immediately drive such
vehicle to a position as near as possible and parallel to the righthand edge or
curb of the street or roadway, clear of any intersection, and shall stop and
remain in such position until the authorized emergency vehicle shall have
passed, unless otherwise directed by the fire prevention code official or a
police officer.
(Ord. No. 26-1990, § 1(12-86), 12-17-90)
   State law reference—Similar provisions, 625 ILCS 5/11-205(b).
Sec. 7-87. Vehicles following fire apparatus.
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle, other than one on
official business, to follow closer than three hundred (300) feet from any fire
apparatus traveling in response to a fire alarm, or to drive any vehicle within
the block or immediate area where a fire apparatus has stopped in answer to a
fire alarm.
(Ord. No. 26-1990, § 1(12-87), 12-17-90)
   State law reference—Similar provisions, 625 ILCS 5/11-1141.
Sec. 7-88. Unlawful boarding or tampering with fire department emergency
equipment.
A person shall not without proper authorization from the fire prevention code
official in charge of the fire department emergency equipment, cling to, attach
himself to, climb upon or into, board or swing upon any fire department
emergency vehicle, whether the vehicle is in motion or at rest, or sound the
siren, horn, bell or other sound-producing device thereon, or to manipulate or
tamper with, or attempt to manipulate or tamper with any levers, valves,
switches, starting devices, brakes, pumps, or any equipment or protective
clothing on, or a part of, any fire department emergency vehicle.
(Ord. No. 26-1990, § 1(12-88), 12-17-90)
Sec. 7-89. Damage, injury to fire department equipment, personnel.
It shall be unlawful for any person to damage or deface, or attempt or conspire
to damage or deface, any fire department emergency vehicle at any time or to
injure, or attempt or conspire to injure, fire department personnel while
performing departmental duties. (Ord. No. 26-1990, § 1(12-89), 12-17-90)
Sec. 7-90. Hydrant use approval.
A person shall not use or operate any fire hydrant intended for use of the fire
department for fire suppression purposes unless such person first secures a
permit for such use from the fire prevention code official and the water
company having jurisdiction. This section shall not apply to the use of such
hydrant by a person employed by, and authorized to make such use by, the water
company having jurisdiction.
(Ord. No. 26-1990, § 1(12-90), 12-17-90)
Sec. 7-91. Yard systems.
All new and existing oil storage facilities, lumberyards, amusement or
exhibition parks, and educational or institutional complexes and similar
occupancies and uses involving high fire or life hazards, which are located
more than one hundred fifty (150) feet from a public street or which require
quantities of water beyond the capabilities of the public water distribution
system, shall be provided with properly placed fire hydrants. Such fire
hydrants shall be capable of supplying fire flows as required by the fire
prevention code official and shall be connected to a water system in accordance
with accepted engineering practices. The fire prevention code official shall
designate and approve the number and location of fire hydrants. The fire
prevention code official may require the installation of sufficient fire hose
and equipment housed in accordance with the approved rules and may require the
establishment of a trained fire brigade when the hazard involved requires such
measures. Private hydrants shall not be placed into or removed from service
until approved by the fire prevention code official. (Ord. No. 26-1990, § 1(12-
91), 12-17-90)
Sec. 7-92. Maintenance of fire suppression equipment.
A person shall not obstruct, remove, tamper with or otherwise disturb any fire
hydrant or fire appliance required to be installed or maintained under the
provisions of the fire prevention code except for the purpose of extinguishing
fires, training or testing purposes, recharging or making necessary repairs, or
when permitted by the fire prevention code official. Whenever a fire appliance
is removed as permitted in this section, it shall be replaced or reinstalled as
soon as the purpose for which it is removed has been accomplished. Defective
and nonapproved fire appliances or equipment shall be replaced or repaired as
directed by the fire prevention code official.
(Ord. No. 26-1990, § 1(12-92), 12-17-90)
Sec. 7-93. Sale of defective fire extinguishers.
A person shall not sell, trade, loan or give away any form, type or kind of
fire extinguisher which is not approved by the fire prevention code official,
or which is not in proper working order, or the contents of which do not meet
the requirements of the fire prevention code official. The requirements of this
section shall not apply to the sale, trade or exchange of obsolete or damaged
equipment for junk when the units are permanently disfigured or marked with a
permanent sign identifying the unit as junk.
(Ord. No. 26-1990, § 1(12-93), 12-17-90)
Sec. 7-94. Street obstructions.
   (a)   No person shall erect, construct, place or maintain any bumps, fences,
gates, chains, bars, pipes, wood or metal horses or any other type of
obstruction in or on any street within the boundaries of the village.
   (b)   The word "street" as used in this chapter shall mean any roadway
accessible to the public for vehicular traffic, including but not limited to
private streets or access lanes, as well as all public streets and highways
within the boundaries of the village.
(Ord. No. 26-1990, § 1(12-94), 12-17-90)
Sec. 7-95. Underground storage tanks for flammable liquids.
No person shall violate any of the provisions of title 41, chapter 1, part 170
of the state fire marshal's regulations, which regulations are adopted by
reference.
(Ord. No. 26-1990, § 1(12-95), 12-17-90)
Sec. 7-96. Notice of truss and rainroof construction.
   (a)   Definitions. The following terms shall have the meanings ascribed to
them:
   "Rainroof" means a gable roof built over a flat roof.
   "Rainroof construction" means a structure on which there is a rainroof.
   "Residential structure" means a structure which is devoted entirely to
residential use and does not include any other use such as commercial, office,
or industrial.
   "Truss" means a framed structural unit, made up of a group of triangles
arranged in a single plane in such a manner that if loads are applied at the
points of intersection of the truss members, only compressive or tensile
(nonbending) forces will result in the members.
   "Truss construction" means a structure in which the roof or floor is
supported by trusses.
   (b)   The owner and occupant of every structure, except a residential
structure, which has truss construction or rainroof construction shall have
affixed to the structure, and maintained thereon, a reflective emblem
designating the type of construction of such building.
   (c)   The emblem shall be supplied by the Village and installed to the left
of the main front and rear doors at no cost. No person shall remove, deface, or
destroy such emblem after installation by the Village.
   (d)   The emblem shall be printed with the following letters as applicable:
      F   to signify a floor with truss construction
      R   to signify a roof with truss construction
      F/R   to signify both a floor and a roof with truss construction
      RR   to signify a rainroof construction building
For a truss constructed structure, the triangle shall point up and for a
rainroof constructed structure the triangle shall point down.
(Ord. 4-2008, § 1, 2-4-08)
Secs. 7-97-7-120. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. FIREWORKS*
   *State law reference—Fireworks, 425 ILCS 30/1 et seq.
Sec. 7-121. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
   Fireworks means any explosive composition or any substance or combination of
substances, or article prepared for the purpose of producing a visible or
audible effect of a temporary exhibitional nature by explosion, combustion,
deflagration or detonating, and shall include blank cartridges, toy cannons in
which explosives are used, the type of balloons which require fire underneath
to propel the balloon, firecrackers, torpedoes, sky rockets, Roman candles,
bombs or other fireworks of like construction and any fireworks containing any
explosive compound; or any tablets or other device containing any explosive
substance, or containing combustible substances producing visual effects;
provided, however, that the term "fireworks" shall not include toy pistols, toy
cannons, toy guns, or other devices in which paper caps containing twenty-five
hundredths (0.025) grains or less of explosive compound are used, provided that
they are so constructed that the hand cannot come in contact with the paper
caps when in place for the explosion, and toy pistol paper or plastic cups
which contain less than twenty-five hundredths (0.025) grains of explosive
mixture, the sale and use of which shall be permitted at all times.
(Ord. No. 26-1990, § 1(12-101), 12-17-90)
   Cross reference—Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.
Sec. 7-122. Exception.
Nothing in this article shall be construed to prohibit the storage or use of
signals or fuses necessary for the safe operation of railroads, trucks,
aircraft or other instrumentalities of transportation.
(Ord. No. 26-1990, § 1(12-102), 12-17-90)
Sec. 7-123. Sale prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale any fireworks in
the village. (Ord. No. 26-1990, § 1(12-103), 12-17-90)
Sec. 7-124. Discharge.
No person shall set off, fire or explode any firework whatsoever within the
village. (Ord. No. 26-1990, § 1(12-104), 12-17-90)
Sec. 7-125. Exhibitions.
Public exhibitions of fireworks and pyrotechnics may be given if a license
therefor is granted by the village board. Such exhibitions shall be given
subject to the supervision of the fire chief or of some person designated by
him.
(Ord. No. 26-1990, § 1(12-105), 12-17-90)
Sec. 7-126. Manufacture prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person within the village to manufacture or
fabricate fireworks.
(Ord. No. 26-1990, § 1(12-106), 12-17-90)
Sec. 7-127. Possession prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to possess any fireworks within the
village. (Ord. No. 26-1990, § 1(12-107), 12-17-90)
Sec. 7-128. Offer to purchase prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to offer to purchase any fireworks within
the village. (Ord. No. 26-1990, § 1(12-108), 12-17-90)
Sec. 7-129. Storage prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to store any fireworks within the village.
(Ord. No. 26-1990, § 1(12-109), 12-17-90)
Sec. 7-130. Transportation prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or be in possession of a motor
vehicle within the village which contains any fireworks.
(Ord. No. 26-1990, § 1(12-110), 12-17-90)
Sec. 7-131.   Penalties.
   Unless provided otherwise, any person who violates any provision of this
Article shall be punished as provided for in Section 1-9. Any person who
violates Sections
7-121,
7-123,
7-124,
7-127,
7-128 or
7-130 shall be punished by a fine not less than $125 nor more than $500. Each
day any violation of any provision referenced in this section shall continue
shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 13-2007 § 2, 2-27-07)
Secs. 7-132-7-155. Reserved.
ARTICLE V. DISCHARGE OF HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
Sec. 7-156. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
   Emergency response charge means any expense for personnel and equipment
involved in responding to an occurrence. Emergency responses include, but are
not limited to, firefighting services, emergency rescue services, emergency
medical services, hazardous materials response teams, civil defense services,
technical rescue teams, public works services, police services, and the
services performed by a private contractor responding to an occurrence at the
request of the Village of Evergreen Park.
   Hazardous material means a substance or material in a quantity and form
determined by the United States Department of Transportation to be capable of
posing an unreasonable risk to health, safety and property. Hazardous materials
include, but are not limited to, hazardous waste, marine pollutants, elevated
temperature materials, materials designated as hazardous in the Hazardous
Materials Table (49 CFR 172.101), petroleum, including crude oil or any
fraction thereof, natural gas, natural gas liquids, liquefied natural gas or
synthetic gas usable for fuel.
   Occurrence means any discharge or threatened discharge of a hazardous
material.
   Responsible party means any person or entity owning, controlling, leasing,
having custody over, or conducting any activity upon any land, facility,
equipment or vehicles, who causes or contributes to an occurrence.
   Cross reference—Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.
(Ord. No. 30-2005 § 1, 11-21-05)
Sec. 7-157. Responsible party liability.
   It shall be the duty of any responsible party to reimburse the Village of
Evergreen Park and any other unit of local government for all emergency
response charges relating to an occurrence. The liability of a responsible
party shall be joint and severable.
(Ord. No. 26-1990, § 1(12-122), 12-17-90; Am. Ord. No. 30-2005 § 1, 11-21-05)
Sec. 7-158. Responsible party charges.
   The Village of Evergreen Park shall be reimbursed for its emergency response
charges at the hourly rates noted in the Federal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA) Schedule of Equipment Rates that is in effect at the time of the
incident for fire apparatus, equipment, ambulances or emergency response
vehicles. Personnel costs shall be reimbursed in accordance with the current
hourly salary schedule for each responder. All other charges shall be billed at
their reasonable and customary rates.
(Ord. No. 30-2005 § 1, 11-21-05; Am. Ord. No. 6-2009 § 1, 2-2-09; Am. Ord. No.
1-2018, § 1, 1-2-18; Am. Ord. No. 12-2022, § 1, 6-6-22)
Sec. 7-159. Fines.
   In addition to the reimbursement of any emergency response charges, a
responsible party may be fined up to $750.
(Ord. No. 30-2005 § 1, 11-21-05)
Sec. 7-160 - 7-169. Reserved.
ARTICLE VI. CELEBRITY PROMOTION PERMITS
Sec. 7-170. Definitions.
The following words shall have the meaning ascribed to them for purposes of
this Article:
   (a)   Celebrity means a person who is widely known or famous person and
includes, but is not limited to, musicians, actors, athletes, politicians,
authors, and television personalities. A person is presumed to be a celebrity
if materials are circulated which refer to a person and advise that the person
will be present at an event or place.
   (b)   Promotion means the use of advertising or a person for the purpose of
drawing attention to, attendance at, or customers to an event or place.
Sec. 7-171. Celebrity promotion permit required.
No person shall engage in or conduct any celebrity promotion unless a permit is
issued by the Fire Chief. No permit shall be required for the following:
   (a)   A governmental agency acting within the scope of its functions.
   (b)   A religious organization acting within the scope of its functions and
for which no fee is charged.
   (c)   A seasonal event involving Santa Claus, the Easter Bunny or similar
characters where the name of the person acting as the character is not promoted
or advertised.
   (d)   An event conducted in a licensed theater where the event is not used
to sell or promote a product or business.
Sec. 7-172. Application.
A person seeking a celebrity promotion permit shall file an application with
the Fire Chief which shall consist of a letter detailing the event and
supplemented by such information as required by the Fire Chief. At a minimum
the application shall set for the following information:
   (a)   The name, address and telephone number of the person seeking to
conduct the celebrity promotion.
   (b)   The name, address and telephone number of the agent for the celebrity.
   (c)   The requested date and hours of the celebrity promotion.
   (d)   The location of the celebrity promotion.
   (e)   The approximate number of spectators who will attend the celebrity
promotion.
   (f)   A description of any recording equipment, sound amplification
equipment, banners, signs or other attention-getting devices to be used.
   (g)   The location of parking spaces for the spectators. 403
   (h)   Whether alcoholic beverages will be served or permitted at the event
or in the premises surrounding.
   (i)   The name, address, telephone number and contact person for any company
providing security.
Such application shall be filed not less than 60 days nor more than 180 days
before the event.
A nonrefundable fee of $250 to cover the administrative costs of processing the
permit shall be paid at the time of filing the application.
Sec. 7-173. Police and fire protection.
The Fire Chief shall determine whether and to what extent additional police and
fire protection is reasonably necessary for traffic control and public safety.
If possible, without disruption of ordinary police and fire services or
compromise of the public safety, regularly scheduled on-duty police and fire
personnel will be available for ordinary police and fire functions. If
additional police and fire personnel are deemed necessary by the Fire Chief,
the applicant shall have the duty to secure such additional personnel at the
sole expense of the applicant.
Sec. 7-174. Standards for issuance.
The Fire Chief shall issue a permit as provided for herein when, from a
consideration of the application and from such other information as may
otherwise obtained, he finds that:
   (a)   The celebrity promotion will not substantially interrupt the safe and
orderly movement of pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
   (b)   The conduct of the celebrity promotion will not require a diversion of
police and fire personnel so as to prevent normal police and fire protection.
   (c)   The conduct of the celebrity promotion is not reasonably likely to
cause injury to persons or property.
   (d)   The conduct of the celebrity promotion will not unduly interfere with
proper police and fire protection to contiguous areas.
   (e)   Adequate sanitation and health facilities are provided.
   (f)   There are sufficient parking places near the celebrity promotion to
accommodate the number of vehicles reasonably expected.
   (g)   The conduct of the celebrity promotion will be conducted in compliance
with the Life Safety Code as published by the National Fire Protection
Association.
   (h)   No public sidewalk, street or right-of-way will be used or blocked.
   (i)   Adequate police, fire and security personnel have been employed by the
applicant for crowd control and safety.
The Fire Chief shall uniformly consider each application upon its merits and
shall not discriminate in granting or denying permits based upon political,
religious, ethnic, race, disability, sexual orientation or gender related
grounds or upon the basis of any message being conveyed.
Sec. 7-175. Security Bond for costs.
In the event that a permit is granted, the applicant shall file, at least 21
days prior to the event, with the Village a letter of credit or make a deposit
of $10,000 to act as a security bond to guarantee the payment of any fees
incurred by the Village in providing police and fire protection other than that
ordinarily provided.
Sec. 7-176. Decision and appeal.
The Fire Chief shall render his decision on the application within 14 days
after having received all information required from the applicant. The Fire
Chief may establish conditions in the granting of a permit.
Any applicant shall have the right to appeal the denial or limitation of a
permit to the Mayor and Board of Trustees by filing a written notice of appeal
with the Village Clerk within 5 days after the denial. The Mayor and Board of
Trustees shall make a decision within 14 days of the appeal being filed. In the
event that the Mayor and Board of Trustees rejects the applicant's appeal, the
applicant has the right to file appropriate proceedings in court.
Sec. 7-177. Prohibitions.
The following activities are prohibited:
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to stage, present or conduct a
celebrity promotion without having first obtained a permit therefor.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person in charge of or responsible for a
celebrity promotion to knowingly fail to comply with any condition therefor.
   (c)   It shall be unlawful for any person to stage, present or conduct a
celebrity promotion which causes damage to public or private property.
ARTICLE VII. CARBON MONOXIDE ALARM DETECTORS
Sec. 7-180.   Definitions. 
   The following words shall have the meaning ascribed to them for purposes of
this Article:
   (a)   Approved carbon monoxide alarm means a carbon monoxide alarm that
complies with all the requirements of the rules and regulations of the Illinois
State Fire Marshal, bears the label of a nationally recognized testing
laboratory, and complies with the most recent standards of the Underwriters
Laboratories or the Canadian Standard Association.
   (b)   Dwelling unit means a room or suite of rooms used for human
habitation, and includes a single family residence as well as each living unit
of a multi-family residence and each living unit in a mixed use building.
(Ord. No. 1-2007 § 1, 1-2-07)
Sec. 7-181.   Carbon monoxide detector.
   (a)   Every dwelling unit shall be equipped with at least one approved
carbon monoxide alarm in an operating condition within 15 feet of every room
used for sleeping purposes. The carbon monoxide alarm may be combined with
smoke detecting devices provided that the combined unit is an approved carbon
monoxide alarm and provided that the combined unit emits a warning in a manner
that clearly differentiates the hazard.
   (b)   Every structure that contains more than one dwelling unit shall
contain at least one approved carbon monoxide alarm in operating condition
within 15 feet of every room used for sleeping purposes.
   (c)   It is the responsibility of the owner of a structure to supply and
install all required carbon monoxide alarms. It is the responsibility of a
tenant to test and to provide general maintenance for the carbon monoxide
alarms within the tenant's dwelling unit or rooming unit, and to notify the
owner or the authorized agent of the owner in writing of any deficiencies that
the tenant cannot correct. The owner is responsible for providing one tenant
per dwelling unit with written information regarding carbon monoxide alarm
testing and maintenance.
   (d)   The tenant is responsible for replacement of any required batteries in
the carbon monoxide alarms in the tenant's dwelling unit, except that the owner
shall ensure that the batteries are in operating condition at the time the
tenant takes possession of the dwelling unit. The tenant shall provide the
owner or the authorized agent of the owner with access to the dwelling unit to
correct any deficiencies in the carbon monoxide alarm that have been reported
in writing to the owner or the authorized agent of the owner.
   (e)   The carbon monoxide alarms required under this Article may be either
battery powered, plug-in with battery back-up, or wired into the structure's AC
power line with secondary battery back-up.
(Ord. No. 1-2007 § 1, 1-2-07)
Sec. 7-182.   Prohibitions.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to install or maintain a
carbon monoxide alarm as required by this Article.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper with, remove, destroy or
disconnect any installed carbon monoxide alarm.
   (c)   It shall be unlawful for any person to remove batteries from an
installed carbon monoxide alarm except for the purpose of contemporaneously
replacing such batteries.
(Ord. No. 1-2007 § 1, 1-2-07)
Sec. 7-183.   Exemptions.
   The following residential units shall not require carbon monoxide detectors:
   (a)   A residential unit in a building that: (i) does not rely on combustion
of fossil fuel for heat, ventilation, or hot water; (ii) is not connected in
any way to a garage; and (iii) is not sufficiently close to any ventilated
source of carbon monoxide, as determined by the Building Commissioner, to
receive carbon monoxide from that source.
   (b)   A residential unit that is not sufficiently close to any source of
carbon monoxide so as to be at risk of receiving carbon monoxide from that
source, as determined by the Building Commissioner.
(Ord. No. 1-2007 § 1, 1-2-07)
Chapter 8
FOOD STORES AND FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS*
   *Cross references–Retail  dealers of alcoholic liquor, § 3-31 et seq.;
health, ch.
9; licenses, taxation and miscellaneous business regulations, ch.
11.
   State law references–Powers  of home rule units, Ill. Const. art. VII, § 6;
food and drugs, 410 ILCS 615/1 et seq.
Art. I.   In General, §§ 8-1-8-40
Art. II.   Food Establishment Permit, §§ 8.41-8-46
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 8-1. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
   Food service establishment includes any food service establishment, food
processing establishment, retail food store or community operation.
   Cross reference–Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.
Sec. 8-2. Food service sanitation code.
   (a)   The provisions of Title 77, Chapter I, Subchapter m, Part 750, of the
Illinois Administrative Code (amended as of July 1, 2018) are hereby adopted as
the Food Code of the Village.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful to violate any provision of the Food Code.
   (c)   Violations of the Food Code may be prosecuted as ordinance violations
or may be prosecuted in accordance with Chapter 12, Article X, Administrative
Adjudication of Non-Vehicular Regulations Violations.
(Am. Ord. No. 20-2018 § 1, 8-20-18)
Sec. 8-3. Retail food store sanitation code.
It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain, own, operate or conduct any
premises in violation of the retail food store sanitation code issued by the
state department of public health, as amended from time to time, which code is
hereby adopted by reference.
Sec. 8-4. Food, drugs and cosmetics act.
It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain, own, operate, or conduct any
premises in violation of the Illinois Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act [410 ILCS
620/1 et seq.].
Sec. 8-5. Access to records.
All food establishments shall make their premises and records available for
inspection at any reasonable time to employees of the village.
Sec. 8-6. Inspection report.
   (a)   An inspection report shall be made on the retail food sanitary
inspection report form promulgated by the village. The inspection report shall
summarize the requirements of this chapter and shall set forth a weighted point
value for each requirement. Indication of any violation and correction
necessary shall be noted thereon. The rating score shall be the total of the
weighted point values for all violations subtracted from one hundred (100).
   (b)   A copy of the completed inspection report shall be furnished to the
premises at the conclusion of the inspection.
Sec. 8-7. Correction of violations.
   (a)   The completed inspection report shall specify a period of time for
correction of violations. It shall be the duty of any person operating a food
establishment to correct the violations in accordance with the following:
      (1)   If an imminent health hazard exists, such as complete lack of
refrigeration or sewage backup, the establishment shall immediately cease food
operations. Operations shall not be resumed until authorized by the village.
      (2)   All violations of four- or five-point weighted items shall be
corrected as soon as possible, but in any event within ten (10) days following
inspection. A followup inspection shall be conducted to confirm correction at
the discretion of the village.
      (3)   All one- or two-point weighted items shall be corrected as soon as
possible, but in any event by the time of the next routine inspection.
      (4)   When the rating score is less than sixty (60), corrective action
shall be initiated on all identified violations within forty-eight (48) hours.
Reinspections will be conducted thereafter to ensure correction.
      (5)   In the case of temporary food establishments, all violations shall
be corrected within twenty-four (24) hours. If violations are not corrected
within twenty-four (24) hours, the establishment shall immediately cease food
operations until authorized to resume by the village.
   (b)   The inspection report shall state that failure to correct violations
within the time specified may result in prosecution.
   (c)   An opportunity for hearing on the inspection findings and the time
limits for corrections will be provided if a written hearing request is filed
with the village clerk within ten (10) days of service of the inspection
report. Such hearing shall be commenced within ten (10) days of receipt of the
written hearing request.
   (d)   Whenever any food establishment is ordered to cease food operations,
it shall not resume the operations until a reinspection is made showing that
the conditions responsible for the cessation have been corrected. Opportunity
for reinspection shall be offered within a reasonable time.
Sec. 8-8. Examination and condemnation of food.
Food may be examined or sampled by the village as often as necessary for
enforcement of this chapter. The village may, upon written notice to the owner
or person in charge, specifying with particularity the reasons therefor, place
a hold order on any food which it believes to be unsafe for human consumption
in violation of any provision of this chapter. The village shall tag, label, or
otherwise identify any food subject to the hold order. No food subject to a
hold order shall be used, served or moved from the establishment. The village
shall permit storage of the food under conditions specified in the hold order,
unless storage is not possible without risk to the public health, in which case
immediate destruction shall be ordered and accomplished. The hold order shall
state that a written request for hearing may be filed within ten (10) days and
that if no hearing is requested the food shall be destroyed. If a request for
hearing is received the hearing shall be held within ten (10) days after
receipt of the request. On the basis of evidence produced at that hearing, the
hold order may be vacated, or the owner or person in charge of the food may be
directed by written order to denature or destroy such food or to bring it into
compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
Sec. 8-9. Submission of plans.
Prior to construction, remodeling or conversion of a structure which will be a
food establishment, plans and specifications shall be submitted to the building
commissioner for approval. The plans and specifications shall indicate the
proposed layout, arrangement, mechanical plans, construction materials,
equipment and such other items required by the building code. No food
establishment shall be constructed, remodeled or converted except in accordance
with plans and specifications approved by the building commissioner.
Sec. 8-10. Preoperational inspection.
Any food establishment required to submit plans and specifications under
section
8-9 shall be inspected and approved by the village prior to the commencement of
food operations.
Sec. 8-11. Procedure when infection is suspected.
When the village has reasonable cause to suspect possible disease transmission
by an employee of a food establishment, it may secure a morbidity history of
the suspected employee or make any other investigations as indicated and shall
take appropriate action. The village may require any or all of the following
measures:
      (1)   The immediate exclusion of the employee from employment in food
establishments.
      (2)   The immediate closing of the food establishment concerned until, in
the opinion of the village, no further danger of disease outbreak exists.
      (3)   Restriction of the employee's services to some area of the
establishment where there would be no danger of transmitting disease.
      (4)   Adequate medical and laboratory examination of the employee, other
employees and their bodily discharges.
Sec. 8-12. Service of notices.
Any notice required to be served on any permittee or food service establishment
may be delivered in person to the permittee, or any person in charge of the
food service establishment, or may be sent by certified mail, return receipt
requested, to the permittee at the address maintained on village records or at
the food establishment.
Sec. 8-13. Hearings.
Any hearing provided for in this chapter shall be conducted by a person
designated by the mayor at such time and place as designated by the hearing
officer. The hearing shall be transcribed by a certified court reporter. The
hearing officer shall make his decision based upon all competent evidence
presented at the hearing. A written decision shall be furnished to the
permittee within five (5) days after conclusion of the hearing.
Sec. 8-14. Price marking and display.
   (a)   Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this
section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where
the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
      Consumer commodity means any article, product or commodity of food,
liquor, beverage or tobacco which is sold at retail to the public for
consumption off the premises.
      Food dealer means every person engaged in the business of selling
consumer commodities at retail for consumption off the premises.
      Package means a paper bag or other similar material or a cardboard box.
      Selling price means the price at which a consumer commodity is sold at
retail on any given date. In the case of commodities for consumption off the
premises weighed by retailers, the selling price shall only be computed by
using the price per one pound or half pound as the basis for the sale; provided
that the metric system may be employed where customary.
   (b)   Selling price to be accurately stated. It shall be unlawful for any
person to display for sale any consumer commodity unless the selling price is
accurately stated in a clear and conspicuous manner either directly on the
package or at the point of display. (Code 1965, § 16-20; Ord. No. 12-1992, § 1
(16-21), 4-6-92)
Sec. 8-15   Penalties.
   Any person who violates any provision of this Article shall be punished by a
fine of not less than $125 nor more than $750. Each day any violation of any of
the provisions of this Article shall continue shall constitute a separate
offense.
(Ord. No. 20-2007 § 2, 3-19-07)
Secs. 8-16-8-40. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. FOOD ESTABLISHMENT PERMIT
Sec. 8-41. Permit required; application.
   (a)   No person shall own, operate or maintain a food establishment without
having obtained a food establishment permit, which shall be issued only upon
compliance with the terms of this chapter. Food establishment permits are not
transferable between locations or permitees. All food establishment permits
shall be posted in a conspicuous place for viewing by the public.
   (b)   An application for a food establishment permit shall be made upon such
forms as provided by the village clerk. A food establishment permit shall be
valid for a period of six (6) months unless otherwise stated thereon.
   (c)   Prior to the issuance of a food establishment permit by the village,
the premises shall be inspected by the village for compliance with the terms of
this chapter.
Sec. 8-42. Food Establishment Permit Fees.
   The fee for a food establishment permit shall be thirty dollars ($30) per
inspection with a minimum of two (2) inspections per year. A charge for the
first two (2) inspections shall be billed and paid with the annual business
license or business regulation certificate.
(Ord. No. 32-2005 § 1, 12-19-05)
Sec. 8-43. Suspension.
The village may, without warning, notice or hearing, suspend any food
establishment permit if the permittee does not comply with the requirements of
this chapter or if the operation of the food establishment constitutes a
substantial hazard to the public health, safety and welfare. Suspension of food
operations is effective upon the serving of a written notice to the permittee
specifying the reasons for which the food establishment permit is being
suspended. The written notice of suspension shall state that a written request
for hearing may be filed within ten (10) days. If a request for hearing is
received, the hearing shall be held within ten (10) days after receipt of the
request. If no hearing is requested, the suspension shall be final. The
suspension may be lifted at any time if the reasons for the suspension have
been corrected.
Sec. 8-44. Revocation.
The village may, after giving notice and providing opportunity for a hearing,
revoke any food establishment permit if the permittee does not comply with the
requirements of this chapter or if the operation of the food establishment
constitutes a substantial hazard to the public health, safety and welfare.
Prior to revocation, a written notice shall be served on the permittee
specifying the reasons for which the food establishment permit is being
revoked. The written notice of proposed revocation shall state that the food
establishment permit shall be revoked at the end of a ten-day period unless a
written request for hearing is filed within ten (10) days. If a request for
hearing is received, the hearing shall be held within ten (10) days after
receipt of the request. If no hearing is requested, the revocation shall be
final.
Sec. 8-45. Reinstatement after revocation.
Whenever a food establishment permit has been revoked, food operations shall
only resume in those premises upon approval of a new food establishment permit
after application therefor.
Sec. 8-46. Conditional food establishment permit.
Whenever any structural, plumbing, electrical, ventilation, or similar such
defects exist in a food service establishment that may require significant
expenditures to correct, but are not considered to be imminent health hazards,
a conditional food establishment permit may be granted by the village upon the
recommendation of the village. Under no circumstances will conditional food
establishment permits be issued for more than twenty-four (24) consecutive
months. The purpose of the conditional food establishment permit is to allow a
reasonable period of time for correction of existing defects.
Sec. 8-47.   Penalties.
   Any person who violates any provision of this Article shall be punished by a
fine of not less than $125 nor more than $750. Each day any violation of any of
the provisions of this Article shall continue shall constitute a separate
offense.
(Ord. No. 20-2007 § 2, 3-19-07)
Chapter 9
HEALTH
Art. I.   In General, §§ 9-1-9-10
Art. II.   Long-Term Care Facilities, §§ 9-11-9-20
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 9-1. Disposition of fees.
Any and all fees collected by the local registrar as agent's fees paid to him
by the county clerk as agent for the county clerk in the recordation and
registration of births, fetal deaths and deaths shall be paid over to the
village treasurer to be paid into the general corporate fund.
Sec. 9-2. General duties of health officer.
It shall be the duty of the health officer:
   (a)   To enforce and observe all rules, regulations and orders of the state
department of public health and all state laws pertaining to the preservation
of the health of the people within the village.
   (b)   To execute and enforce all sections of this Code and all ordinances of
the village relating to nuisances, public health and sanitation.
   (c)   To investigate the existence of any contagious or infectious disease
within the village and to report the same promptly to the village board and to
the state department of health, and to act without delay in carrying out such
measures for arresting the progress of the same as either or both of such
bodies shall adopt.
   (d)   To make all necessary sanitary and health investigations and
inspections within the village.
   (e)   To periodically inspect all establishments and premises duly licensed
and operating in the village which in any way affect or relate to the health
and welfare of the village.
Sec. 9-3. Air pollution.
   (a)   Contaminant matter. The escape or emission into the open air of
noxious or nauseous or offensive contaminant matter, or any one (1) or more of
them, is hereby declared to be unlawful and a nuisance. No person shall cause
or allow the escape or emission into the open air of such noxious, nauseous, or
offensive contaminant matter.
   (b)   Smoke and contaminant matter. It shall be unlawful for any person to
suffer or allow to emit or discharge smoke or contaminant matter into the
atmosphere, the appearance, density or shade of which is No. 2 or darker on the
Ringelmann Chart as published and described in the U.S. Bureau of Mines
Information Circular No. 8333, which chart shall be the standard for estimating
the light obscurity and determining the appearance, density or shade or smoke.
Sec. 9-4. Noxious gases, nauseous gases and odors and offensive smells.
The escape or emission into the open air of noxious gases or nauseous gases or
nauseous odors or offensive smells, or any one (1) or more of them, is hereby
declared to be a nuisance. No person shag cause or allow the escape or emission
into the open air of any of such noxious gases, nauseous gases, nauseous odors
or offensive smells.
Sec. 9-5. Smoking prohibited in certain public places.
It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke or carry a lighted cigarette,
cigar or pipe in any public elevator or in any retail store, excluding areas
set apart for serving food or beverages, waiting and restrooms, executive
offices, beauty parlors and other rooms or areas where merchandise is exposed.
Sec. 9-6.   Smoking restrictions.
   Smoking is prohibited in the following locations in addition to those
prohibited by the Smoke Free Illinois Act:
   (1)   On any public sidewalk, parkway, street, alley or parking lot except
while in a private passenger vehicle.
   (2)   In any outdoor area of any property, other than that of a single
family residence, except that the owner may designate an outdoor smoking area
which shall be at least 15 feet from the entrance to any building on the
property and which shall be at least 15 feet from any public right-of-way.
   (3)   On any residential property without permission of the owner or
occupant thereof.
(Ord. No. 10-2007 § 1, 3-5-07; Am. Ord. No. 2-2008 § 1, 1-7-08 )
Sec. 9-7.   Penalties.
   Any person who violates any provision of this Article shall be punished by a
fine of not less than $125 nor more than $750. Each day any violation of any of
the provisions of this Article shall continue shall constitute a separate
offense.
(Ord. No. 20-2007 § 3, 3-19-07)
Sec. 9-8 - 9-10. Reserved
ARTICLE II. LONG-TERM CARE FACILITIES
Sec. 9-11. Definitions.
For the purposes of this Article, the definitions contained in the Nursing Home
Care Act, 210 ILCS 45/1-101, et seq., shall apply unless the context otherwise
requires.
Sec. 9-12. License required.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful to establish, operate or maintain a long-term
care facility without obtaining a valid Village license therefor, which license
remains unrevoked and unexpired. Licenses shall be renewed annually and shall
be for a period of 12 months commencing on June 1 of each year.
   (b)   No facility shall operate without a state license.
Sec. 9-13. License application and procedures.
Each applicant shall submit a completed application form and such information
as required by the Village Clerk. The application shall contain the following
information:
   (a)   The name and address of the applicant. If the applicant is other than
an individual, then the name and addresses of all partners, stockholders or
other persons having an interest in the ownership of the facility must be
disclosed.
   (b)   The name and location of the facility for which a license is sought
and the name of the beneficial owners of the facility.
   (c)   The name and address of the administrator of the facility.
   (d)   The number and type of residents for whom maintenance, personal care
or nursing is to be provided.
All applications shall be accompanied by a license issued by the Illinois
Department of Public Health, any management agreements for the operation of the
facility, and copies of any Medicare/Medicaid certifications. A license fee
shall be submitted in the amount of $500.00 plus $30.00 per licensed bed.
Before a license is issued by the Village Clerk, the facility shall be
inspected to determine that it is in compliance with the ordinances of the
Village, the provisions of the Nursing Home Care Act, and any rules promulgated
thereunder.
Sec. 9-14. Security requirements.
   (a)   All exterior doors shall be equipped with a signal that will alert the
staff if a resident leaves the building. Any exterior door that is supervised
may have a disconnect device for the signal during such time as the door is
actually supervised. If there is 24-hour supervision of a door, then a signal
is not required.
   (b)   All exterior doors shall be equipped with a camera which shall be
monitored by the staff so that a resident shall not be allowed to leave the
facility without registering in the log book.
   (c)   The facility shall maintain a log book which shall be used for all
residents leaving the facility. The information required to placed in the log
book before a resident leaves the facility shall be the name of the resident,
the time of leaving, the destination, and the planned time of return. Upon
return to the facility the log book shall be marked with the time of return.
   (d)   The provisions of subparagraph (c) shall not apply to any resident
leaving the facility who remains solely on the property on which the facility
is located.
Sec. 9-15. State law.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a facility in violation
of any provision of the Nursing Home Care Act.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a facility in violation
of the "Minimum Standards, Rules and Regulations for Classification and
Licensure of Long Term Care Facilities", as promulgated by the Illinois
Department of Public Health, pursuant to the Nursing Home Care Act.
   (c)   In the event that a license issued by the State of Illinois for a
facility is revoked, suspended, or not in effect, then such fact shall be
grounds for the Mayor to take similar action with respect to any Village
license.
(Ord. No. 13-2005 § 3, 4-18-05)
Sec. 9-16. Enforcement and penalties.
   (a)   Any person who violates any of the provisions of this Article, any
rule or regulation promulgated hereunder, the Nursing Home Care Act, 210 ILCS
45/1, et seq., or any rule or regulation promulgated thereunder, shall be
subject to a fine of not less than $300.00 nor more than $1,000.00 per
violation. Each day that such violation exists shall constitute a separate and
distinct offense.
   (b)    The Mayor may also suspend, for a period not to exceed 30 days, or
seek revocation of a license issued under this Article, in accordance with the
procedures described in this section, upon the determination that one or more
violations of this Article, any rule or regulation promulgated hereunder, the
Nursing Home Care Act, or any rule or regulation promulgated thereunder, has
occurred.
   (c)   Before any suspension or revocation order shall be issued, the Mayor
shall notify the licensee of the specific charges against him and of his right
to a hearing. Notice shall be served upon licensee of the long-term care
facility at least seven days prior to the hearing date by: (i) first class or
express mail or by overnight carrier; or (ii) personal service. The person
before whom the hearing is held shall not have been involved in the initial
decision to seek suspension. At the hearing, a long-term care facility licensee
and its representatives may be represented by counsel, present documentary
evidence and witnesses, and may cross-examine witnesses called by the charging
party. The charging party shall present sufficient evidence from witnesses
having personal knowledge of the offense to prove, by a preponderance of the
evidence, that one or more violations of the aforementioned provisions
occurred. The strict rules of evidence applicable to judicial proceedings shall
not apply to hearings under this section. The record of each hearing shall
include: (i) a record of the testimony presented at the hearing, which may be
by tape recording or other appropriate means; (ii) any document presented at
the hearing; and (iii) a copy of the written notice of hearing that was served
in accordance with this section. Following the hearing, the Mayor shall issue
in writing a decision stating whether the long-term care facility license shall
be suspended or revoked, or for such lesser relief as may be appropriate. The
licensee may file a complaint in a court of competent jurisdiction seeking to
review of a decision issued by the Mayor.
   (d)   Any official of the Village may file charges seeking the suspension or
revocation of a license under this Article.
(Ord. No. 13-2005 § 3, 4-18-05)
Sec. 9-17.    Persons prohibited from residing in long-term care facilities.
   (a)   Any person required to register as a sex offender under the provisions
of the Sex Offender Registration Act, 730 ILCS 150/1, et seq., is hereby
prohibited from residing in a long-term care facility within the Village.
   (b)   No licensee or owner of a long-term care facility may admit or allow
any person registered as a sex offender (regardless of the address where
registered) on the Sex Offender Registry maintained by the Illinois State
Police to reside in or to remain overnight in such long-term care facility.
Each long-term care facility must conduct a record search of each person to be
admitted as a resident thereof, before the person is admitted, in order to
determine whether the person is a registered sexual predator or sexual
offender. The long-term care facility must search the Sex Offender Registry
maintained by the Illinois State Police. Each long-term care facility must have
in its possession evidence demonstrating that a search of the Sex Offender
Registry has been made before allowing a person to be admitted as a resident
thereof. The long-term care facility must notify the Village within 72 hours
each time that it refuses to admit a prospective resident who was identified as
a sexual predator or sexual offender on the Sex Offender Registry.
   (c)   When a long-term care facility determines upon information or belief
that a person residing therein is a sexual predator or sexual offender who is
required to be registered, but who has failed to register, under the Sex
Offender Registration Act, the long-term care facility shall notify the
Evergreen Park Police Department of its suspicion so that the Police Department
can perform a search of its data base in order to determine if that person is
in fact required to be registered under the Sex Offender Registration Act.
(Ord. No. 13-2005 § 3, 4-18-05)
Sec. 9-18 - 9-20. Reserved
Chapter 10
HUMAN RELATIONS
   Art. I.   In General, §§ 10-1--10-25
   Art. II.   Human Rights Commission, §§ 10-26--10-45
   Art. III.   Discrimination, §§ 10-46--10-75
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
ARTICLE II. HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION
Sec. 10-26. Human Rights Commission established.
   (a)   There is hereby established a Human Rights Commission which shall
consist of three members appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of
the board of trustees. One or more members of the board of trustees may serve
on the commission.
   (b)   The term of office shall be three years, except that the first
appointments shall be appointed for a term of one, two and three years.
   (c)   Members shall receive such compensation as is provided by the board of
trustees; however, no elected official shall receive additional compensation
for serving as a member.
Sec. 10-27. Powers.
The Commission shall have the following powers:
   (a)   To employ such personnel as authorized by the board of trustees.
   (b)   To adopt, promulgate, amend and rescind rules and regulations not
inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter.
   (c)   To hear and decide by majority vote complaints filed before it.
   (d)   To approve settlements of violations.
   (e)   To cooperate with public and private organizations, including the
Illinois Human Rights Commission and the Department of Human Rights.
   (f)   To hold public hearings to obtain information from the general public
on the effectiveness of protection against unlawful discrimination afforded by
this chapter and to accept public recommendations concerning the implementation
of this chapter.
   (g)   To revoke the Village license of any violator. 555
   (h)   To terminate any public contract of the Village with a violator and to
bar a violator from any future public contract with the Village.
ARTICLE III. DISCRIMINATION
Sec. 10-46. Definitions.
   Whenever used in this Chapter, unless otherwise defined herein:
   Age means chronological age of not less than 40 years.
   Disability means (1) a physical or mental impairment that substantially
limits one or more of the major life activities of an individual; (2) a record
of such an impairment; or (3) being regarded as having such an impairment.
Excluded from this definition is an impairment relating to the illegal use,
possession or distribution of "controlled substances" as defined in schedules I
through V of the Controlled Substances Act (21 U.S.C. 812).
   Gender identity means the actual or perceived appearance, expression,
identity, or behavior of a person as being male or female, whether or not that
appearance, expression, identity or behavior is different from that
traditionally associated with the person's designated sex at birth.
   Housing status means the type of housing in which an individual resides,
whether publicly or privately owned; an individual's ownership status with
respect to the individual's residence; or the status of having or not having a
fixed residence.
   Marital status means the status of being single, married, divorced,
separated, or widowed.
   Military discharge status means the fact of having been discharged from the
Armed Forces of the United States, their Reserve components or any National
Guard or Naval Militia other than by a "dishonorable discharge."
   National origin means the place in which an individual or one of his or her
ancestors was born.
   Parental status means the status of living with one or more dependent minors
or disabled children.
   Person means one or more individuals; partnerships, associations, or
organizations; labor organizations, labor unions, joint apprenticeship
committees, or union labor associations; corporations; recipients of Village
funds; legal representatives, trusts, trustees in bankruptcy, or receivers;
state governments other than that of Illinois; or commercial operations or
entities controlled by governments other than those of Illinois, or of the
United States.
   Public accommodation means a person, place, business establishment, or
agency that sells, leases, provides, or offers any product, facility, or
service to the general public in the Village, regardless of ownership or
operation (1) by a public body or agency; (2) for or without regard to profit;
or (3) for a fee or not for a fee. "Public accommodation" also means an
institution, club, association, or other place of accommodation in the Village,
whether or not open to the general public, that has more than 400 members and
provides regular meal service and regularly receives payment for dues, fees,
accommodations, facilities, or services from or on behalf of nonmembers for the
furtherance of trade or business. Public accommodation also means any products,
facilities, or services of a nonpublic accommodation that are made available in
the Village to the general public or to the customers or patrons of another
establishment that is a public accommodation.
   Religion means all aspects of religious observance and practice, as well as
belief, or the actual identification with or perceived identification with a
religion.
   Sexual orientation means the status or expression, whether actual or
perceived, of heterosexuality, homosexuality, or bisexuality.
   Source of income means the lawful manner by which an individual supports
himself or herself and his or her dependents.
   Unlawful discrimination means discrimination against a person because of the
actual or perceived status, practice, or expression of that person's race,
color, sex, age, religion, disability, national origin, ancestry, sexual
orientation, marital status, parental status, military discharge status, source
of income, gender identity or housing status; or the actual or perceived
association with such a person.
(Ord. No. 11-2006 § 1, 2-20-06)
Sec.10-47.   Public accommodations.
   (a)   Prohibition: No person that owns, leases, rents, operates, manages, or
in any manner controls a public accommodation in the Village shall withhold,
deny, curtail, limit, or discriminate concerning the full use of such public
accommodation by any individual on the basis of unlawful discrimination.
   (b)   Exceptions:  
   (1)    The prohibition contained in this section shall not apply to sex
discrimination in any of the following:
   a.   Distinctly Private Facility. Any facility that is distinctly private in
nature, such as rest rooms, shower rooms, bath houses, dressing rooms, or
health clubs.
   b.   Sleeping Rooms. Any facility that restricts rental of residential or
sleeping rooms to individuals of one sex.
   c.   Educational Institutions. Any educational institution that restricts
enrollment of students to individuals of one sex.
   d.   For the purposes of the above exceptions, the determination of an
individual's sex or gender shall be based upon the sex or gender of that
individual as reflected on any official identification of that individual
recognized by the State of Illinois, including a driver's license or state
identification card.
   (2)   The Human Rights Commission may adopt rules specifying any additional
exceptions to the prohibition contained in this section based on bona fide
considerations of public policy.
   (3)   Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this Chapter,
nothing contained in this section shall require any person who does not
participate in the federal Section 8 housing assistance program (42 U.S.C
1437f) to accept any subsidy, payment assistance, voucher, or contribution
under or in connection with such program or to lease or rent to any tenant or
prospective tenant who is relying on such a subsidy, payment assistance,
contribution, or voucher for payment of part of the rent for such place of
accommodation.
   (c)   Sexual Harassment: No person who is, owns, leases, rents, operates,
manages, or in any manner controls a public accommodation shall engage in
sexual harassment affecting access to, participation in, or the full use of
such public accommodation. "Sexual harassment" means any unwelcome sexual
advance, request for sexual favors, or conduct of a sexual nature when (1)
submission to such conduct is an explicit or implicit term or condition of an
individual's access to, participation in, or full use of a public
accommodation; or (2) submission to or rejection of such conduct by an
individual is used as the basis for any decision affecting the individual's
access to, participation in, or full use of a public accommodation; or (3) such
conduct has the purpose or effect of substantially interfering with an
individual's access to, participation in, or full use of any public
accommodation or creating an intimidating, hostile, or offensive environment
with respect thereto.
(Ord. No. 11-2006 § 1, 2-20-06)
Sec. 10-48. Housing.
   (a)   Definitions: Whenever used in this section:
   (1)   Person shall mean any person that is also an owner, lessor, sublessor,
assignor, managing agent, or other individual, firm, or corporation having the
right to sell, rent, lease, or sublease any housing unit within the Village, or
any agent, broker, or other individual working on behalf of any such
individual, firm, or corporation.
   (2)   Real estate transaction means the sale, exchange, rental, occupancy,
lease, sublease, or lease renewal of real property for residential purposes in
the Village or the provision of services or utilities in connection with such
sale, exchange, rental, occupancy, lease, sublease, or lease renewal. "Real
estate transaction" also means with respect to activity conducted or property
located in the Village, the brokering or appraising of residential real
property in the Village and the making, purchasing, or guaranteeing of loans or
mortgages or providing any other financial assistance either (a) for
purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing, or maintaining a dwelling or
(b) secured by residential real property.
   (b)   Prohibitions:   
   (1)   Terms and Conditions. No person shall make any distinction,
discrimination, or restriction in the price, terms, conditions, or privileges
of any real estate transaction, including the decision to engage in or renew
any real estate transaction, on the basis of unlawful discrimination.
   (2)   Discriminatory Communications. No person shall publish, circulate,
issue, or display, or cause to be published, circulated, issued, or displayed,
any communication, notice, advertisement, sign or other writing of any kind
relating to a real estate transaction which will indicate or express any
unlawful limitation or discrimination on the basis of unlawful discrimination.
   (3)   Listings. No person shall deliberately and knowingly refuse
examination of any listing of residential real property within the Village to
any individual because of unlawful discrimination.
   (4)   Representations. No person shall deliberately and knowingly represent
to an individual that residential real property is not available for
inspection, sale, rental, or lease in the Village when in fact it is available,
or fail to bring a residential real estate listing in the Village to an
individual's attention, or refuse to permit a person to inspect residential
real property in the Village because of unlawful discrimination.
   (5)   Blockbusting. No person shall solicit, for sale, lease, or listing for
sale or lease, residential real property within the Village on the grounds of
loss of value due to the present or prospective entry into any neighborhood of
any individual or individuals of any particular race, color, sex, age,
religion, disability, national origin, ancestry, sexual orientation, marital
status, parental status, military discharge status, source of income, gender
identity, or housing status.
   (6)   Encouragement of Blockbusting. No person shall distribute or cause to
be distributed written material or statements designed to induce any owner of
residential real property in the Village to sell or lease his, her, or its
property because of any prospective change in the race, color, sex, age,
religion, disability, national origin, ancestry, sexual orientation, marital
status, parental status, military discharge status, source of income, gender
identity, or housing status of individuals in the neighborhood.
   (7)   Creating Alarm. No person shall intentionally create alarm among
residents of any community within the Village by transmitting communication in
any manner, including a telephone call whether or not conversation thereby
ensues, with a design to induce any person within the Village to sell or lease
his or her residential real property within the Village because of the present
or prospective entry into the vicinity of the property of any individual or
individuals of any particular race, color, sex, age, religion, disability,
national origin, ancestry, sexual orientation, marital status, parental status,
military discharge status, source of income, gender identity, or housing
status.
   (c)   Exceptions: The prohibitions in this section shall not apply to any of
the following:
   (1)   Age. Restricting rental or sale of a housing accommodation to an
individual of a certain age group (a) when such housing accommodation is
authorized, approved, financed, or subsidized in whole or in part for the
benefit of that age group by a unit of state, local, or federal government; or
(b) when the duly recorded initial declaration of a condominium or community
association limits such housing accommodations to individuals 50 years of age
or older, provided that an individual or members of the household of an
individual owning or renting a unit in such housing accommodation prior to the
recording of the initial declaration shall not be deemed to be in violation of
the age restriction as long as the individual or household member continues to
own or reside in the housing accommodation.
   (2)   Religion. Limitation by a religious organization, association, or
society, or any not-for-profit institution or organization operated,
supervised, or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization,
association, or society, of the sale, rental, or occupancy of a dwelling which
it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose to individuals of the
same religion, or from giving preference to such individuals.
   (3)   Single Sex. Restricting the rental of rooms in a housing accommodation
to individuals of one sex. The determination of an individual's sex or gender
shall be based upon the sex or gender of that individual as reflected on any
official identification of that individual recognized by the State of Illinois,
including a driver's license or state identification card.
   (4)   Private Rooms. Rental of a room or rooms in a private home by an owner
if he or she or a member of his or her family resides therein or, while absent
for a period of not more than twelve months, if he or she or a member of his or
her family intends to return to reside therein.
   (5)   Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this Chapter,
nothing contained in this section shall require any person who does not
participate in the federal Section 8 housing assistance program (42 U.S.C
1437f) to accept any subsidy, payment assistance, voucher, or contribution
under or in connection with such program or to lease or rent to any tenant or
prospective tenant who is relying on such a subsidy, payment assistance,
contribution, or voucher for payment of part of the rent for such housing
accommodation.
   (d)   Sexual Harassment: No person shall engage in sexual harassment in any
real estate transaction. "Sexual harassment" means any unwelcome sexual
advance, request for sexual favors, or conduct of a sexual nature when (1)
submission to such conduct is an explicit or implicit term or condition of an
individual's real estate transaction; or (2) submission to or rejection of such
conduct by an individual is used as the basis for any decision affecting the
individual's real estate transaction; or (3) such conduct has the purpose or
effect of substantially interfering with an individual's real estate
transaction or creating an intimidating, hostile, or offensive environment with
respect thereto.
(Ord. No. 11-2006 § 1, 2-20-06)
Chapter 11
LICENSES, TAXATION AND MISCELLANEOUS BUSINESS REGULATIONS
Art. I.   In General, §§ 11-1-11-35
Art. II.   Taxation, §§ 11-36-11-95
   Div. 1. Generally, §§ 11-36-11-45
   Div. 2. Vehicle Fuel Tax, §§ 11-46-11-60
   Div. 3. Real Estate Transfer Tax, §§ 11-61-11-77
   Div. 4. Home Rule Sales Tax, §§ 11-78-11-85
   Div. 5. Reserved, §§ 11-86-11-95
Art. III.   Business Regulation Certificates and Permits, §§ 11-96-11-155
   Div. 1. Generally, §§ 11-96-11-130
   Div. 2. Fee Schedule, §§ 11-131-11-155
Art. IV.   Amusements, §§ 11-156-11-200
   Div. 1. Generally, §§ 11-156-11-180
   Div. 2. Motion Pictures and Theatricals, §§ 11-181-11-200
Art. V.   Garage and Rummage Sales, §§ 11-201-11-225
Art. VI.   Precious Metals Dealers, §§ 11-226-11-255
Art. VII.   Raffles, §§ 11-256-11-300
   Div. 1. Generally, §§ 11-256-11-280
   Div. 2. License, §§ 11-281-11-300
Art. VIII.   Outdoor Pay Telephones, §§ 11-301-11-319
Art. IX.   Tobacco Dealers and Other Products, §§ 11-320-11-339
Art. X .   Reserved, §§ 11-340-11-359
Art. X I.   Video Personal Property Lease Transaction Tax, §§ 11-360-11-369
Art. XII.   Locally Imposed and Administered Tax Rights and Responsibility
Procedures, §§ 11-370-11-400
Art.XIII.   Special Taxation for Improvements, §§ 11-401-11-409
Art. XIV.   Simplified Municipal Telecommunications Tax, §§ 11-411-11-419
Art. XV.   Cable and Video Customer Protection Law, §§ 11-430 - 11-449
Art. XVI.   Cable/Video Service Provider Fee and Peg Access Support Fee, §§ 11-
450 - 11-499
Art. XVII.   Deadly Weapons Dealers, §§ 11-500 - 11-519
Art. XVIII.      Invalidity of Conflicting Ordinances, §§ 11-520, 11-521
Art. XIX.   Defaulted Property Registration, §§ 11-550 - 11-557
Art. XX.   Video Gaming, §§ 11-600 - 11-614
Art. XXI.   Cannabis Retailers' Occupation Tax, §§ 11-620 - 11-622
Art. XXII.   Automated Purchasing Machines, §§ 11-630 - 632
Art. XXIII.      Municipal Grocery Retailers’ Tax, §§ 11-640 - 11-644
ARTICLE 1. IN GENERAL
Sec. 11-1. Nuisances prohibited-Generally.
No business or establishment, whether or not regulated, shall be so conducted
or operated as to constitute a nuisance. No building, vehicle, structure, yard,
lot, premises or part thereof, shall be used, kept, maintained or operated in
connection with any business or establishment so as to occasion any nuisance,
or so as to be dangerous to life or detrimental to health.
Sec. 11-2. Same-Unsafe or unhealthful business.
   (a)   Buildings. No building or structure utilized, constructed or
maintained in connection with any business or occupation shall evidence an
unsanitary, unsafe or dangerous condition.
   (b)   Substances. No substance, matter or thing of any kind whatever which
shall be dangerous or detrimental to health shall be allowed to exist in
connection with any business,or occupation, or be used in any work or labor
performed in the village.
Sec. 11-3. Same-Refuse disposal.
   (a)   Containers. The occupant of every building, structure or premises used
or maintained in connection with any business or occupation shall provide and
maintain in good condition and repair a sufficient number of permanent refuse
containers for the temporary storage of all refuse accumulating between
collections. All refuse which is placed for collection service outside any
building or structure must be kept in standard refuse containers. No plastic
bags shall be placed for collection.
   (b)   Refuse removal. It shall be the duty of the occupant of every
building, structure or premises used or maintained in connection with any
business or occupation to cause to be removed at his own cost and expense at
least once each week all refuse produced therein.
   (c)   Removal of restaurant garbage. Every person owning or controlling any
establishment selling or serving food shall cause garbage to be placed in
approved sanitary refuse containers and be removed on a regular basis so as to
prevent garbage from overflowing the container or being placed outside the
container.
Sec. 11-4. Working conditions-Health requirements.
No owner, lessee, manager or superintendent of any store, factory, workshop or
other place where persons are employed shall cause or permit such place, or any
room or part thereof, to be overcrowded or inadequate or faulty in respect to
light, ventilation, heat or cleanliness.
Sec. 11-5. Same-Sanitation.
All such places of employment shall be kept in a clean condition, free from the
effluvia of a sewer, drain, privy, stable or other nuisance; also as far as
practicable such premises shall be free from all gases, vapors, dust or other
impurities generated by manufacturing processes or otherwise which are
injurious to health. Sufficient washroom facilities for male and female
employees shall be provided and such facilities shall be properly ventilated.
Sec. 11-6. Same-Inspection.
The health officer and the building commissioner shall visit or cause to be
visited all such places of employment in the village as often as they shall
deem necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of this section, and to
have such arrangements made as may be deemed necessary for the health and
safety of the employees.
Sec. 11-7. Inspections.
   (a)   Premises. Whenever inspections of the premises used for or in
connection with the operation of a regulated business or occupation are
provided for or required by this Code or village ordinance or are reasonably
necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of any ordinance or
regulation of the village, or to detect violations thereof, it shall be the
duty of the certificate holder or the person in charge of the premises to admit
thereto for the purpose of making the inspection any officer or employee of the
village who is duly authorized to make such inspection at any reasonable time
that such admission or entry is requested.
   (b)   Commodity or material. Whenever an analysis of any commodity or
material is reasonably necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of
this Code, village ordinance or regulation, or to detect violations thereof, it
shall be the duty of the certificate holder or the person in charge of the
premises to give to any duly authorized officer or employee of the village
requesting the same sufficient samples of such material.
   (c)   Penalty for refusal to admit. In addition to any other penalty which
may be provided, the mayor may revoke the business regulation certificate of
any owner or operator of a regulated business in the village who refuses to
permit any duly authorized officer or employee to make such inspection or to
take an adequate sample of such commodity or who interferes with such officer
or employee while in the performance of his duties; provided, however, that no
business regulation certificate shall be subject to revocation for such cause
unless such officer or employee has been refused permission to enter upon the
premises in the name of the village after first having presented a warrant
authorizing such entry.
(Code 1965, § 18-15)
Sec. 11-8. Offensive or dangerous business restricted generally.
It shall be unlawful within the village or within one (1) mile thereof to
erect, continue or use any building or other place for the exercise of any
trade, employment or manufacture which, by occasion of noxious exhalations,
offensive smells or otherwise, is offensive, unwholesome or dangerous to the
health or safety of individuals or of the public.
(Code 1965, § 18-12)
Sec. 11-9. Charitable games.
All charitable games conducted under a charitable games license issued by the
department of revenue in accordance with the provisions of the Charitable Games
Act [230 ILCS 30/1 et seq.], shall be permitted to be operated in the village,
subject only to rules and regulations of the department of revenue issued in
compliance with such act.
(Code 1965, § 19-36.1)
   Cross references—Raffles, § 11-256 et seq.; gambling and related offenses, §
12.231 et seq.
Secs. 11-10-11-35. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. TAXATION
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 11-36. Automobile renting occupation tax.
   (a)   Imposition. A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the
business of renting automobiles in this village at the rate of one (1) percent
of the gross receipts from such rentals made in the course of such business
while this section is in effect, in accordance with the provisions of section
8-11-7 of the Illinois Municipal Code [65 ILCS 5/8-11-7].
   (b)   Reports. Every person engaged in such business in the village shall
file on or before the last day of each calendar month the report to the state
department of revenue required by sections 2 and 3 of the Automobile Renting
Occupation and Use Tax Act [35 ILCS 155/2, 155/3], as amended.
   (c)   Payment. At the time such report is filed, there shall be paid to the
state department of revenue the amount of tax hereby imposed on account of the
renting of automobiles during the preceding month.
(Code 1965, § 18-39)
Sec. 11-37. Automobile renting use tax.
   (a)   Imposition. A tax is hereby imposed upon the privilege of using in the
village an automobile which is rented from a rentor outside the state and which
is titled or registered with an agency of the state's government in the village
at the rate of one (1) percent of the rental price of such automobile while
this section is in effect, in accordance with the provisions of section
8-11-8 of the Illinois Municipal Code [65 ILCS 5/8-11-8].
   (b)   Collection. The tax provided for in this section shall be collected
from the persons whose state address for titling or registration purposes is
given as being in the village.
   (c)   Payment. The tax imposed by this section shall be paid to the state
department of revenue.
(Code 1965, § 18-39.1)
Sec. 11-38. Municipal replacement vehicle tax.
   (a)   A tax is hereby imposed upon each vehicle, as defined in section 1-157
of the Illinois Vehicle Code [625 ILCS 5/1-157], purchased in the village by or
on behalf of an insurance company to replace a vehicle of an insured person in
settlement of a total loss claim. The tax shall be in the amount of fifty
dollars ($50.00) per vehicle purchased.
   (b)   Every such insurance company that purchases a replacement vehicle
shall complete and file with the state department of revenue a replacement
vehicle certificate (Form RVT-7).
At the time such report is filed, there shall be paid to the state department
of revenue the amount of tax hereby imposed.
(Code 1965, § 18-39.2)
   State law reference—Authority for above tax, 65 ILCS 5/8-11-9.
Secs. 11-39-11-45. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. VEHICLE FUEL TAX
Sec. 11-46. Title.
This division shall be known and cited as the "Evergreen Park Vehicle Fuel Tax
Ordinance," and the tax imposed herein shall be known and cited as the
"Evergreen Park Vehicle Fuel Tax."
(Ord. No. 19-1991, § 1(18-120), 7-1-91)
Sec. 11-47. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
   Distributor or vehicle fuel distributor means any person who produces,
refines, blends, compounds or manufactures vehicle fuel in the village; or
transports or has transported vehicle fuel to any location in the village; or
receives in the village vehicle fuel on which the village vehicle fuel tax has
not been paid; or sells vehicle fuel to a retail dealer for resale in the
village. The term "distributor" shall include any person who transports vehicle
fuel into the village or receives vehicle fuel in the village for his own use
and consumption, and not for sale or resale.
   Person means any individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association,
corporation, joint venture, joint stock company, receiver, trustee,
conservator, legal representative, or other legally recognized entity.
   Retail dealer or retail vehicle fuel dealer means any person who is engaged
in the business of selling vehicle fuel in the village to a purchaser for the
purchaser's use or consumption, and not for resale in any form.
   Sale at retail means any sale to a person for that person's use or
consumption and not for resale to another.
   Sale, resale or purchase means any transfer of ownership or title or both,
any exchange or any barter, whether conditional or otherwise, in any manner or
by any means whatsoever for consideration.
   Tax means the village vehicle fuel tax.
   Use means the exercise of any right to or power over vehicle fuel incident
to the ownership thereof, including but not limited to the receipt of vehicle
fuel by any person into a fuel supply tank of a vehicle.
   Vehicle means any machine or device in, upon or by which any person or
property is or may be transported or drawn upon a rail, street, road, highway
or otherwise upon land, in or upon water, or through the air. The term
"vehicle" includes without limitation automobiles, trucks, buses, trains,
motorcycles, boats, airplanes and helicopters.
   Vehicle fuel means any volatile and inflammable liquid or gas produced,
blended or compounded for the purpose of or which is suitable for operating a
vehicle, or which is used in propelling a vehicle. The term "vehicle fuel"
includes without limitation gasoline, gasohol, diesel oil, motor benzol, motor
benzene, propane gas fuel, kerosene and "special fuel" as defined in the Motor
Fuel Tax Law [35 ILCS 505/1 et seq.].
Sec. 11-48. Tax imposed.
   A tax is hereby imposed upon the privilege of purchasing or using, in the
village, vehicle fuel purchased in a sale at retail. The tax shall be at a rate
of $0.06 per gallon of vehicle fuel. The ultimate incidence of and liability
for payment of the tax shall be upon the purchaser or user of the vehicle fuel,
and nothing in this division shall be construed to impose a tax upon the
occupation of selling or distributing vehicle fuel. It shall be a violation of
this division for any distributor or retail dealer to fail to add this tax to
the retail price of vehicle fuel or to absorb the tax. The tax shall be in
addition to any and all other taxes.
(Ord. No. 26-2009, § 1, 11-16-09)
Sec. 11-49. Payment on retail purchase.
The term "use in the village" shall be deemed to occur only at the place in the
village where the vehicle fuel is transferred into the vehicle by which it is
to be consumed. To the extent that a person has paid the tax imposed in this
section on the retail purchase of vehicle fuel, he shall be exempt from the
payment of and liability for the tax on the use of such fuel.
Sec. 11-50. Collection.
   (a)   The village vehicle fuel tax shall be collected by each vehicle fuel
distributor who sells such fuel to a retail vehicle fuel dealer doing business
in the village. Any distributor who shall pay the tax to the village shall
collect the tax from any retail dealer to whom the distributor sells vehicle
fuel. The retail dealer shall in turn then collect the tax from the purchaser
of the vehicle fuel. Any distributor who sells vehicle fuel directly to a
purchaser or user, for delivery in the village, and not for resale, shall
collect the tax from the purchaser or user.
   (b)   The retail dealer shall in turn then collect the tax from the
purchaser of the vehicle fuel. Any distributor who sells vehicle fuel directly
to a purchaser or user, for delivery in the village, and not for resale, shall
collect the tax from the purchaser or user.
   (c)   If any retail vehicle fuel dealer receives vehicle fuel upon which the
village vehicle fuel tax has not been collected by the distributor, the retail
dealer shall remit such tax directly to the village clerk by the last day of
the month following the month in which he received such vehicle fuel, and shall
collect such tax from his purchasers.
   (d)   If any purchaser or user receives vehicle fuel upon which the village
vehicle fuel tax has not been collected by the distributor or retail dealer,
such purchaser or user shall pay the tax directly to the village by the last
day of the month following the month in which such purchaser or user made the
taxable purchase or use of the vehicle fuel.
   (e)   Any tax remittance required to be made directly to the village shall
be made to the village clerk and shall be accompanied by a remittance form
prescribed by the village clerk.
   (f)   Any person who collects the village vehicle fuel tax shall do so as a
trustee for and on account of the village.
Sec. 11-51. Registration; return; filing.
Every vehicle fuel distributor doing business on August 1, 1991, shall register
with the village clerk by August 31, 1991. Every person becoming a distributor
after that date shall register with the village clerk within thirty (30) days
after the Commencement of such business. Every distributor shall file each
month with the village clerk a remittance return, containing a report of his
sales of vehicle fuel to retail dealers or users in the village occurring in
the prior month. The return shall be in a form prescribed and furnished by the
village clerk. If mailed, the return must be postmarked on or before the last
day of the month following the month for which the report is due. Each such
return shall be accompanied by a remittance of the appropriate amount of tax
applicable to the sales reported. Payment shall be made to the village clerk.
(Ord. No. 19-1991, § 1(18-124), 7-1-91)
Sec. 11-52. Inventory report.
   By December 31, 2009, every retail vehicle fuel dealer shall file with the
village clerk, on forms supplied by the village clerk for that purpose, an
inventory of all vehicle fuel in the retail dealer's possession on December 1,
2009, at 12:01 a.m. The owner or chief executive officer of the retail dealer
shall sign the inventory report and attest under oath to its accuracy. With the
inventory report, the retail dealer shall pay to the village the village
vehicle fuel tax due on the sale of all vehicle fuel in the retail dealer's
possession on December 1, 2009, at 12:01 a.m. and for which such tax has not
been collected on behalf of the village by a vehicle fuel distributor.
(Ord. No. 19-1991, § 1(18-125) 7-1-91; Am. Ord. No. 26-2009, § 2, 11-16-09)
Sec. 11-53. Commission on tax paid when due.
A distributor or retail dealer remitting the tax to the village shall be
entitled to a commission of one (1) percent of the tax remitted, to compensate
him for the cost of collection, filing returns, and supplying information to
the village clerk, but in no event shall any commission be allowed on any tax
not remitted when due.
(Ord. No. 19-1991, § 1(18-126), 7-1-91)
Sec. 11-54. Failure to pay or file; penalties and interest.
   (a)   Failure to pay or remit the tax or to file the remittance return
required by this division shall be subject to the following penalties and
interest:
      (1)   Any tax not paid or remitted when due shall bear interest at the
rate of two (2) percent per month, or fraction thereof, until the tax is paid
or remitted.
      (2)   In addition to any interest charged, any person who fails to pay or
to remit the tax when due shall be subject to a late penalty of ten (10)
percent of such tax.
      (3)   In addition to any interest or penalty charged in subsection (a)(2)
of this section, any person who fails to file a remittance return when due
shall be subject to a late filing penalty of ten (10) percent of the total tax
liability due for the reporting period.
   (b)   Where the failure to pay or to remit the tax or to file the remittance
return in a timely manner is due to reasonable cause beyond the control of the
person charged with filing and paying the tax, the penalties described in
subsections (a)(2) and (a)(3) of this section may be waived by the village
clerk.
(Ord. No. 19-1991, § 1(18-127), 7-1-91)
Sec. 11-55. Recordkeeping.
Every distributor and every retail dealer required to collect and remit the tax
imposed in this division shall keep accurate and complete books and records of
his business of selling vehicle fuel, including the maintenance of all invoices
and other source documents. Every purchaser or user shall keep accurate and
complete books and records of his purchases and uses of vehicle fuel in the
village, including the maintenance of all invoices and other source documents.
All books and records shall be subject to inspection by the village clerk or
duly authorized agents or employees thereof, at all times during regular
business hours.
(Ord. No. 19-1991, § 1(18-128), 7-1-91)
Sec. 11-56. Sales and uses presumed taxable; burden of proof.
It shall be presumed that all sales and uses of vehicle fuel in the village are
subject to tax under this division until the contrary is established. The
burden of proving that a sale or use is not taxable hereunder shall be upon the
distributor, retail dealer, purchaser or user so claiming.
(Ord. No. 19-1991, § 1(18-129), 7-1-91)
Sec. 11-57. Exemptions.
The tax imposed by this division shall not apply to the following sales or uses
of vehicle fuel:
      (1)   Sale by a distributor to another distributor holding a valid
registration certificate.
      (2)   Sale by a distributor or retailer of vehicle fuel whose place of
business is outside the village.
      (3)   Sale or use for purposes other than for propulsion or operation of
a vehicle.
      (4)   Sale to or use by any transportation agency as defined in the
Regional Transportation Authority Act [70 ILCS 3615/1.01 et seq.], which is
operated by, receiving a grant from or has a service agreement with the
regional transportation authority or any of its service boards.
      (5)   Sale of use to the extent the tax imposed by this division would
violate the state or United States Constitution.
      (6)   Sale to or use by the federal government or any state or local
governmental body.
      (7)   Sale to or use by any air common carrier, certified by the carrier
to be used for consumption, shipment or storage in the conduct of its business
as an air common carrier, for a flight destined for a destination outside Ow
United States.
(Ord. No. 19-1991, § 1(18-130), 7-1-91)
DIVISION 3. REAL ESTATE TRANSFER TAX
Sec. 11-61. Real estate transfer tax imposed.
   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in this article, a tax is imposed upon
the privilege of transferring title to, or beneficial interest in, real
property located in the village, whether or not the agreement or contract
providing for the transfer is entered into in the village. The tax shall be at
the rate of $5.00 per $1,000.00 of the transfer price, or fraction thereof, of
the real property or the beneficial interest in real property but in no event
shall the tax be less than $100.00.
   (b)   (1) The tax imposed by this article is due upon the earlier of the
delivery or recording of the deed, assignment or other instrument of transfer.
      (2) In the case of an assignment of a beneficial interest in a trust,
delivery shall be deemed to occur when the trustee receives possession of a
valid assignment of the beneficial interest. In the case of other transfers,
delivery shall be deemed to occur when the transferee, or the transferee's
representative or agent, receives or becomes entitled to receive possession of
the instrument of transfer.
   (c)   The primary incidence of the tax and the obligation to pay the tax are
on the seller, grantor, assignor or other transferor; provided, however, that
if the transferor is exempt from the tax by operation of federal or state law,
then the incidence of the tax and obligation to pay the tax shall be upon the
transferee.
   (d)   The tax imposed by this article shall be due whether the transfer of a
controlling interest in a real estate entity is effected by one transaction or
by a series of related transactions. For purposes of this subsection, it shall
be presumed unless proved otherwise that transactions are related if they occur
within the same 24-month period.
   (e)   Nothing in this article shall be construed to impose a tax upon any
transaction or privilege which, under the constitutions of the United States or
the State of Illinois, may not be made the subject of taxation by the village.
(Am. Ord. No. 13-2013 § 1, 6-17-13)
Sec. 11-62. Definitions.
When any of the following words or terms are used in this article, whether or
not capitalized, they shall have the following meanings:
   (a)   Beneficial interest in real property includes, but is not limited to:
      (1)   the beneficial interest in an Illinois land trust;
      (2)   the lessee interest in a ground lease (including any interest of
the lessee in the related improvements) that provides for a term of 30 or more
years when all options to renew or extend are included, whether or not any
portion of the term has expired; or
      (3)   the indirect interest in real property as reflected by a
controlling interest in a real estate entity.
   (b)   village means the village of Evergreen Park.
   (c)   Controlling interest means (1) 50% or more of the combined voting
power or fair market value of all ownership interests or beneficial interests
in a real estate entity, whether the interests are owned by one or by several
persons, or (2) the right of one or of several persons to receive at the time
of any distribution 50% or more of the income or profits of a real estate
entity.
   (d)   Person means any individual, receiver, administrator, executor,
conservator, assignee, trust, estate, partnership, joint venture, club, joint
stock company, business trust, political subdivision of the State of Illinois,
corporation, association, limited liability company, syndicate, society, or any
group of persons acting as a unit, whether mutual, cooperative, fraternal,
nonprofit or otherwise.
   (e)   Real estate entity means any person (other than an Illinois land
trust) including, but not limited to, any partnership, corporation, trust, or
single or multi-tired entity, that exists or acts substantially for the purpose
of holding directly or indirectly title to or beneficial interest in real
property located in the village, whether for personal use, the production of
rental income, or investment. It shall be presumed, unless proved otherwise,
that an entity is a real estate entity if it owns directly or indirectly real
property located in the village having a fair market value greater than 75
percent of the total fair market value of all of the entity's assets
(determined without deduction for any mortgage, lien or encumbrance).
   (f)   Transfer price means the consideration furnished for the transfer of
title to, or beneficial interest in, real property, valued in money, whether
paid in money or otherwise, including cash, credits and property, determined
without any deduction for mortgages, liens or encumbrances, and specifically
including the amount of any indebtedness or obligation canceled or discharged
in connection with the transfer. In the case where the controlling interest in
a real estate entity is transferred, and the real estate entity holds assets in
addition to title to or beneficial interest in real property located in the
village, "transfer price" means only that portion of the consideration
attributable to the transfer of such real property or such beneficial interest.
Sec. 11-63. Payment of the tax.
   (a)   The tax imposed by this article shall be paid by the purchase of tax
stamps issued by the village clerk or its agent.
   (b)   It shall be the duty of the person or persons liable for the tax to
affix, or cause to be affixed, the appropriate number and denomination of
stamps to the face of the deed, assignment or other instrument of transfer. Any
person affixing a stamp shall cancel it in accordance with the provisions of
Section 11-68(d).
   (c)   The village clerk shall not issue tax stamps unless all water, sewer
and refuse charges relating to the real property have been paid in full.
   (d)   The village clerk shall not issue tax stamps for any residential
housing unless a certificate of housing inspection has been issued for the real
property.
Sec. 11-64. Contingent liability of transferee.
If a real property transfer declaration is not filed with the village clerk as
provided by Section 11-66, then the transferee shall be liable for any unpaid
tax imposed by this article, together with interest and all applicable
penalties.
Sec. 11-65. Exempt transfers.
Subject to the requirement contained in Section 11-66(c), the following
transfers are exempt from the tax imposed by this article:
   (a)   Transfers of real property made prior to January 1, 1986 where the
deed was recorded on or before December 1, 1986, and assignments of beneficial
interest in real property dated prior to November 1, 1986 where the assignment
was delivered on or before December 1, 1986;
   (b)   Transfers involving real property acquired by or from any governmental
body or acquired by any corporation, society, association, foundation or
institution organized and operated exclusively for charitable, religious or
educational purposes or acquired by any international organization not subject
to local taxes under applicable law provided that the property being
transferred qualifies or will qualify as tax-exempt for Illinois real property
tax purposes;
   (c)   Transfers in which the deed, assignment or other instrument of
transfer secures debt or other obligations such as mortgages and trust deeds;
   (d)   Transfers in which the deed, assignment or other instrument of
transfer, without additional consideration, confirms, corrects, modifies, or
supplements a deed, assignment or other instrument or transfer previously
recorded or delivered;
   (e)   Transfers without consideration;
   (f)   Transfers in which the deed is a tax deed;
   (g)   Transfers in which the deed, assignment or other instrument of
transfer releases property which secures debt or other obligations such as a
release of mortgage;
(h)   Transfers in which the deed is a deed of partition; provided, however,
that if a party receives a share greater than its undivided interest in the
real property, then such party shall be liable for tax computed upon any
consideration paid for the excess;
   (i)   Transfers between a subsidiary corporation and its parent or between
subsidiary corporations of a common parent either pursuant to a plan of merger
or consolidation or pursuant to agreement providing for the sale of
substantially all of the seller's assets;
   (j)   Transfers from a subsidiary corporation to its parent for no
consideration other than the cancellation or surrender of the subsidiary's
stock and transfers from a parent corporation to its subsidiary for no
consideration other than the issuance or delivery to the parent of the
subsidiary's stock;
   (k)   Transfers made pursuant to a confirmed plan of reorganization as
provided under Section 11-46(c) of Article 11 of the United States Bankruptcy
Code of 1978, as amended;
   (l) Transfers in which the deed or other instrument of transfer is issued to
the mortgagee or secured creditor pursuant to a mortgage or security interest
foreclosure proceeding or sale or pursuant to a transfer in lieu of
foreclosure, but not including transfers where consideration is paid.
   (m)   Transactions made between an executor or administrator and the heirs
of an estate, but not including transfers where consideration is paid;
   (n)   Transactions made between any person acting in a fiduciary capacity to
a successor fiduciary;
Exempt transfers shall have the wording "Village of Evergreen Park Exempt Real
Estate Transfer Tax" stamped thereon by the village clerk or its agent.
Sec. 11-66. Filing of real property transfer declaration.
   (a)   At or before the time that the tax imposed by this article is due or,
in the case of an exempt transfer, at or before the time that the deed,
assignment or other instrument of transfer is delivered, there shall be filed
with the village clerk a real property transfer declaration signed by at least
one of the transferors and also signed by at least one of the transferees, or
by their respective attorneys or agents. The declaration shall be on a form
prescribed by the village clerk, and shall contain such information as the
village clerk may reasonably require.
   (b)   If the declaration is signed by an attorney or agent on behalf of
transferors or transferees who have the power of direction to deal with the
title to the real property under a land trust agreement, the trustee being the
mere repository of record legal title with a duty of conveying the real
property only when and if directed in writing by the beneficiary or
beneficiaries having the power of direction, the attorney or agent executing
the declaration on behalf of the transferors or transferees shall not be
required to identify the beneficiary or beneficiaries having the power of
direction under the land trust agreement.
   (c)   No transfer shall be exempt from the tax imposed by this article
unless the declaration describes the facts supporting the exemption and is
accompanied by such supporting exemption and is accompanied by such supporting
documentation as the director may reasonably require.   Obligations of
trustees.
No trustee of a trust which holds title to or beneficial interest in real
property located in the village shall accept or acknowledge an assignment of a
beneficial interest in the trust unless the trustee has received from the
assignor and assignee a complete and fully executed real estate transfer
declaration as provided in Subsection
11-66, and unless the amount of tax stamps required by this article has been
affixed to the assignment.
Sec. 11-68. Tax stamps.
   (a)   The village clerk shall cause to be printed, in such form and
quantities and in such denominations as he or she may from time to time
determine, adhesive stamps for the purpose of paying the tax imposed by this
article. The village clerk also may appoint one or more agent to sell the
stamps.
   (b)   (1) The village clerk from time to time may provide for the issuance
and exclusive use of tax stamps of a new design and forbid the use of stamps of
any prior design, but only after giving at least 60 days' notice of the change.
The notice shall be published once in a newspaper of general circulation in the
village during the 60-day period before the change takes effect. After the
effective date of the change, it shall be unlawful for any person to pay the
tax imposed by this article.
      (2)   Any person lawfully in possession of unused tax stamps of a
superseded issue or design may, not later than 90 days after the effective date
of the change, surrender the stamps to the village clerk together with a sworn
application setting forth the name and address of the owner and party
surrendering the stamps, how, when and from whom the stamps were acquired and
such other information as the village clerk reasonably may require. If the
village clerk determines that the application is in proper order, it promptly
shall issue, or authorize an agent to issue, replacement stamps of the new
issue or design in exchange for the surrendered stamps.
   (c)   No person shall sell or expose for sale, traffic in, trade, barter or
exchange tax stamps issued pursuant to this article without first obtaining the
village clerk's written consent. No person shall sell or expose for sale,
traffic in, trade, barter or exchange any transfer tax stamp for an amount less
than the stamp's face value.
   (d)   The person affixing the tax stamp shall write or stamp thereupon the
person's name or initials and the date upon which the stamp is affixed, and
further shall cut or perforate the stamp in a substantial manner so that the
stamp cannot be again used; provided, however, that no stamp shall be defaced
in such a manner as to prevent its authenticity and denomination from being
determined.
Sec. 11-69. Open transactions.
In the case of a transfer where any part of the transfer price is contingent
upon the occurrence of a future event or the attainment of a future level of
financial performance, additional tax shall be due at the time each additional
amount of consideration is furnished and shall be paid directly to the village
clerk. A supplemental real estate transfer declaration shall be filed with the
village clerk at the time each tax payment is due.
Sec. 11-70. Penalties and interest.
Any transferor or transferee who fails to file with the village clerk a real
property transfer declaration as required by Section 11-66, or a supplemental
transfer declaration as required by Section 11-69, prior to the village clerk
issuing a notice of tax audit, investigation or liability in connection with
the transfer of title to, or beneficial interest in, real property shall be
subject to a penalty equal to the amount of the applicable tax. This penalty
shall be in addition to any tax and interest due. In the event of failure to
pay the tax when due, interest shall accumulate and be due upon said tax at the
rate of 1% per month, or part thereof.
Sec. 11-71. Tax liens.
   (a)   In the event that the tax imposed by this article is not paid when
due, the village shall have a lien against the related real property in an
amount equal to the tax, together with all applicable interest and penalties.
The lien shall expire only at such time as the outstanding tax, interest and
penalties are paid in full, the lien is foreclosed, or the period for bringing
a foreclosure action described in Section 11-71(c) expires.
   (b)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to give the village's lien
a preference or priority over the rights of any bona fide purchaser, holder of
a security interest, mechanics lien or, mortgagee or judgment lien creditor
arising or existing prior to the recording of an instrument evidencing the
village's lien with the Recorder of Deeds of Cook County; provided, however,
that the village's lien, whether or not recorded, shall have priority over any
interest in the real property (including any lien) acquired by a person in
connection with the person providing financing to the transferee taxpayer (or
the taxpayer's nominee or designee) for the acquisition of the real property.
The absence of tax stamps in the proper amount on the deed, assignment or other
instrument of transfer pursuant to which the transferee taxpayer acquired title
to, or beneficial interest in, the real property shall constitute constructive
notice of the village's lien to the person providing financing.
   (c)   The village may not commence an action to foreclose upon the lien more
than seven years after the transfer giving rise to the tax liability.
Sec. 11-72. Maintaining books and records.
Every transferor and transferee shall retain for at least seven years all books
and records relating to any transfer of title to, or beneficial interest in,
real property located in the village, including the contract of sale, the
closing statement and all other original source documents. Every trustee shall
retain for at least seven years every real estate transfer declaration it
receives pursuant to Section 11-67 of this article. All materials described in
this section shall be kept in the English language and, at all times during
business hours of the day, shall be open to inspection by the village.
Sec. 11-73. Rules and regulations.
The village clerk is authorized to adopt, promulgate and enforce rules and
regulations pertaining to the administration and enforcement of this article.
Sec. 11-74. Rebate.
Any transferor of a single-family residential unit (home or condominium) used
as the transferor's primary residence, who has paid the transfer tax imposed by
Section 11-61 may apply for a rebate not to exceed the amount of transfer tax
paid in the event of purchase of another single-family residential unit within
the village for use as the transferor's primary residence. The purchase must
occur not earlier than 3 months prior to nor more than 12 months after the sale
of the property for which the transfer tax rebate is applied for.
The amount of the rebate is the lesser of either the amount of the transfer tax
paid to the Village on the replacement property or the amount of the transfer
tax paid to the Village on the original property. In the event of new
construction of the replacement property, an amount equal to .5% of the total
construction cost as approved by the Mayor may be rebated, provided that the
total amount of rebate does not exceed the amount of transfer tax paid to the
Village on the original property.
Sec. 11-75 - 11-77. Reserved
DIVISION 4. HOME RULE SALES TAX
Sec. 11-78. Home Rule Municipal Retailers’ Occupation Tax and Home Rule
Municipal Service Occupation Tax imposed.
   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of selling
tangible personal property, other than an item of tangible personal property
titled or registered with an agency of this State’s government, at retail in
this municipality at the rate of 1.0% of the gross receipts from such sales
made in the course of such business while this section is in effect; and a tax
is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in this municipality in the business
of making sales of service, at the rate of 1% of the selling price of all
tangible personal property transferred by such serviceman as an incident to a
sale of service. This “Home Rule Municipal Retailers’ Occupation Tax” and this
“Home Rule Municipal Service Occupation Tax” may not be imposed on tangible
personal property taxed at the rate of 1.0% under the Retailers’ Occupation Tax
Act and the Service Occupation Tax Act.
   The imposition of these home rule taxes is in accordance with and subject to
the provisions of Sections 8-11-1 and 8-11-5, respectively, of the Illinois
Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-1 and 5/8-11-5).
(Am. Ord. No. 9-2020 § 1, 9-21-20)
Sec. 11-79. Illinois Department of Revenue to administer.
   The taxes hereby imposed, and all civil penalties that may be assessed as an
incident thereto, shall be collected and enforced by the Department of Revenue
of the State of Illinois. The Department of Revenue shall have full power to
administer and enforce the provisions of this Division.
(Am. Ord. No. 9-2020 § 1, 9-21-20)
Sec. 11-80 - 11-85. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. BUSINESS REGULATION CERTIFICATES AND PERMITS
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 11-96. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
   Accessory use shall mean a use customarily incidental and subordinate to the
principal use of a building located on the same lot with the principal use of
the building.
   Advertising sign shall mean any sign which directs attention to a business,
commodity, service or entertainment, conducted, sold or offered elsewhere than
upon the premises where such sign is located or to which it is affixed.
   Basement shall mean the portion of a building located partly underground but
having less than one-half of its clear floor to ceiling height below the
average grade of the adjoining ground.
   Cellar shall mean the portion of the building partly or wholly underground
but having one-half or more than one-half of its clear floor to ceiling height
below the average grade of the adjoining ground.
   Commercial establishment shall mean any person chartered, licensed,
incorporated or declared to be in existence for the purpose of making a profit
from his activities.
   Floor area shall mean the sum total of the gross horizontal areas of all of
the several floors of a building and its accessory buildings measured in square
feet from the exterior faces of the exterior walls or from the centerline of
party walls separating 2 buildings or business establishments on each of the
respective floors, and shall include the basement floor, cellar floor, motor
vehicle parking space when such space is used in conjunction with a drive-in
commercial establishment, and commercial establishments, devoted to the sale,
service and/or repair of motor vehicles, floor space used for mechanical
equipment, whether open or enclosed, penthouse attic space, balconies,
mezzanines, porches and verandas, floor area devoted to and occupied by
accessory uses.
   Food processing establishment shall mean a commercial establishment in which
food is processed, prepared, packaged or distributed for human consumption.
This does not include a food service establishment or a retail food store.
   Food service establishment shall mean any place where food that is intended
for individual service and consumption is routinely provided completely
prepared. The term includes any such place, regardless of whether consumption
is in, on or off the premises and regardless of whether there is a charge for
the food. The term does not include a private home where food is prepared for
individual family consumption and it does not include the location of food
vending machines or retail food store that does not cook or combine ready-to-
eat potentially hazardous foods for human consumption.
   Food service establishment, temporary, shall mean any food service
establishment which operates for a temporary period of time not to exceed 2
weeks in connection with a fair, carnival, circus, public exhibition or similar
transitory gatherings.
   Manufacturing businesses shall mean any activity where a product is produced
for distribution to any wholesale, retail or service business.
   Office shall mean any service performed or rendered, whether for profit,
control or nonprofit. Common uses found in this definition shall include but
not necessarily be limited to the following activities:
      (1)   Insurance, real estate, financial institutions, finance companies
and other similar business and professional offices..
      (2)   Medical clinics, doctors, dentists, lawyers, accountants,
architects, designers offices.
      (3)   Business offices, such as district offices, sales offices or branch
offices.
   Owner shall mean any individual, firm, association, partnership,
corporation, trust or any other legal entity having sufficient proprietary
interest in a commercial establishment to maintain and manage its operation.
   Restaurant, banquet hall, shall mean a food service establishment which
caters to groups of people who are there for a specific purpose which may or
may not include the consumption of food.
   Restaurant, cafeteria, shall mean a food service establishment where the
food is served from various types of containers while the customer passes along
a line of such foods which are on display for his choice. The customer enters
the building, picks up a tray, follows the line, makes his food selection,
carries the tray to the table and then consumes the food.
   Restaurant, carryout, shall mean a food service establishment where the
customer either preorders his selection or places an order in person. The food
is packaged and the customer carries out the food off of the premises.
   Restaurant, drive-in/fast food, shall mean a food service establishment with
or without interior facilities for eating which permits the consumption of food
either in the customer's automobile parked on the premises or in any other
additional designated area on the premises.
   Restaurant, full service, shall mean where the customer is seated, a waiter
or waitress takes his order, brings his food and after the customer has
consumed same, clears the table in preparation for the next customer. All food
is consumed inside of the establishment.
   Restaurant, snack bar, shall mean a food service establishment with limited
food selection, with no interior or exterior facilities, where the customer
places an order at a counter for immediate consumption.
   Retail food store shall mean a grocery store, meat market, poultry market,
fish market, fresh fruit and vegetable market, confectionary, nut store, bakery
or any other establishment whether fixed or moveable, where food, intended for
human consumption off the premises, is prepared, handled, transported, sold or
offered for sale at retail.
   Retail sales shall mean the exchange of any commodity for a price or fee by
a seller to a consumer.
   Service business shall mean any service performed or rendered for a price or
fee whether or not a commodity is worked upon or exchanged.
   Wholesale and/or storage shall mean any other business or business activity
between raw material to delivery to the final customer.
(Code 1965, § 18-32(a)(8), (b))
   Cross reference—Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.
Sec. 11-97. Scope of article.
Any business activity, retail service, manufacturing, wholesale and/or storage,
which is conducted within the village, whose principal place of business may or
may not be located within the village is subject to the provisions of this
article.
(Code 1965, § 18-32(a)(7))
Sec. 11-98. Certificates required.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, maintain or conduct any
business or occupation without having obtained a business regulation
certificate or in violation of any condition placed on such business regulation
certificate. The village may condition the operation of any business upon any
factor, including, but not limited to, hours of operation, place of operation,
including drive-through and pickup, number of employees required, maximum
number of customers, and traffic/parking pattern. Business regulation
certificates are issued annually for a one-year period. The village may impose
different conditions upon the renewal of a business regulation certificate
without notice and without any hearing as there is no property interest in a
business regulation certificate. Prior to changing or adding conditions, a
village officer shall provide an opportunity to the holder of a business
regulation certificate to meet and confer upon such conditions. Any place
required to have a business regulation certificate shall be open to inspection
by officials of the village during regular business hours and whenever an
application is made for the initial business regulation certificate, transfer
thereof, or renewal thereof.
(Am. Ord. 16-2024 § 1, 5-6-24)
Sec. 11-99. Applications.
   (a)   Applications for all business regulation certificates and permits
required by ordinance shall be made in writing to the village clerk in the
absence of provisions to the contrary. Each application shall contain:
   (1)   The name of the applicant.
   (2)   The permit or business regulation certificate desired.
   (3)   The location to be used, if any.
   (4)   The time covered.
   (5)   The total floor/land area of the common establishment as hereinafter
defined.
   (6)   The fee to be paid.
Each application also shall contain the number of the certificate of
registration required under the retailers' occupation tax act, service
occupation tax act, and/or use tax act, if applicable. Each application shall
contain such additional information as may be needed for the proper guidance of
the village officials in the issuing of the business regulation certificate or
permit applied for.
   (b)   All applications for a business regulation certificate to conduct a
business connected with the storage, handling, sale or preparation of food or
drink intended for human consumption shall also state the kind of food intended
to be sold or handled. The application shall be referred by the village clerk
to the health officer for investigation before the certificate shall be issued.
The health officer shall inspect, or cause to be inspected, the premises used
or intended to be used, and shall report thereon, recommending or advising
against the issuance of the certificate.
(Code 1965, §§ 13-19, 18-1)
Sec. 11-100. Multiple use of same office.
Any multiple use of the same office facilities will require an individual
registration for each separate use. Accounting records will be used to
determine if separate or multiple uses are being conducted in the same office
facilities.
(Code 1965, § 18-32(b)(10))
Sec. 11-101. Renewal of, late filing for certificates; penalties.
A grace period of one (1) month begins on January first of each year for the
renewal of business regulation certificates. If a person fails to renew his or
her business certificate by the following February 1, a penalty equal to
twenty-five (25) percent of the base fee shall be charged for each month (or
part thereof) commencing with February. Delinquency may also result in
suspension or revocation of the right to conduct commercial activities within
the village.
(Code 1965, § 18-22; Ord. No. 3-1989, § 1, 2-6-89; Ord. No. 2-2023 § 1, 2-6-23)
Sec. 11-102. Forms and signatures.
Forms for all business regulation certificates and permits, and applications
therefor, shall be prepared and kept on file by the village clerk. Each
business regulation certificate or permit issued shall bear the signature of
the mayor and the village clerk in the absence of any provisions to the
contrary.
(Code 1965, § 18-3)
Sec. 11-103. Investigations.
   (a)   Referral of application. Upon the receipt of an application for a
business regulation certificate or permit, where an investigation or inspection
is required by this Code or village ordinance before the issuance of such
permit or business regulation certificate, or where an inspection or
investigation shall be deemed reasonably necessary or appropriate, the village
clerk, within forty-eight (48) hours of such receipt, shall refer the
application to the appropriate official for the making of such investigation or
inspection.
   (b)   Report. The official to whom the application has been referred shall
make a report thereon, favorable or otherwise, within ten (10) days after
receiving such application of a copy thereof.
   (c)   Inspections. The health officer shall make or cause to be made an
inspection regarding such permits and business regulation certificates as
relate to the care and handling of food, the prevention of nuisances and the
spread of disease and the protection of health. The building department shall
make or cause to be made any inspections which relate to the compliance with
the building code, zoning chapter and other related regulations. All other
investigations, except where otherwise provided, shall be made by the chief of
police or by some other officer designated by the village president.
   (d)   Evaluation of reports. Upon receipt of all related investigative
reports, the village clerk shall forward such reports, together with the
application, to the mayor and board of trustees for evaluation and
determination.
   (e)   Additional information may be required. If it shall appear to the
corporate authorities that the matters and circumstances relating to an
application require further information before a proper determination can be
made, such application shall be returned to the village clerk for the inclusion
of such additional information as may be specified necessary and appropriate.
   (f)   Disapproval of application. If, after due consideration of the
information contained within the application and the related investigative
reports, the corporate authorities shall determine that the matters concerning
the application are unsatisfactory, they may disapprove such application,
indicating the reasons therefor. Thereupon, the village clerk shall be directed
to promptly notify the applicant that his application is disapproved, and that
no business regulation certificate or permit will be issued.
   (g)   Approval of application, issuance of certificate. If, after due
consideration of the information contained within the application and the
related investigative reports, the corporate authorities shall determine that
the application is satisfactory, they shall approve the application. Thereupon,
the village clerk shall be directed to promptly notify the applicant that his
application is approved, and the business regulation certificate or permit may
be issued. (Code 1965, § 18-4)
Sec. 11-104. Fees generally.
In the absence of a provision to the contrary, all fees and charges for
business regulation certificates or permits shall be paid in advance at the
time application therefor is made to the village clerk in the amounts
prescribed in the schedule set forth in division 2 of this article. When an
applicant has not engaged in the business or activity until after the
expiration of part of the current business regulation certificate year, the
business regulation certificate fee shall be prorated by quarters and the fee
paid for each quarter or fraction thereof during which the business or activity
has been or will be conducted. Except as otherwise provided, all business
regulation certificate and permit fees shall become a part of the corporate
fund. In no event shall any rebate or refund be made of any business regulation
certificate or permit fee, or part thereof, by reason of death or departure of
the certificate holder or permittee; nor shall any rebate or refund be made by
reason of the nonuse of the business regulation certificate or discontinuance
of the operation or conduct of the regulated establishment, business or
activity. (Code 1965, § 18-5)
Sec. 11-105. Building and premises.
No business regulation certificate shall be issued for the conduct of any
business, and no permit shall be issued for any purpose or activity, if the
premises and building to be used for the purpose do not fully comply with all
applicable ordinances and regulations of the village and the state.
(Code 1965, § 18-9)
Sec. 11-106. Annual period.
   (a)   All annual business regulation certificates shall be operative and the
business regulation certificate year for the village shall commence on the
first day of January of each year and shall terminate on the last day of
December of the same year, where no provision to the contrary is made.
   (b)   The village clerk shall notify all certificate holders of the village
of the time of expiration of the business regulation certificate held by the
certificate holder (if an annual) three (3) weeks prior to the date of such
expiration. Provided, a failure to make such notification, or the failure of
the certificate holder to receive it, shall not excuse the certificate holder
from the obligation to obtain a new business regulation certificate or a
renewal thereof, nor shall it be a defense in action based upon operation
without a business regulation certificate.
(Code 1965, § 18-8; Ord. No. 3-1989, § 1, 2-6-89)
Sec. 11-107. Change of location.
The location of any regulated business or occupation, or the location of any
permitted act, may be changed provided that ten (10) days' notice thereof is
given to the village clerk in the absence of any provision to the contrary;
provided, however, that all applicable ordinances and regulations of the
village shall be complied with.
(Code 1965, § 18-10)
Sec. 11-108. Certificate required for each location or separate business.
No business regulation certificate for the operation of a business or
establishment in the village shall be construed to permit the operation of a
regulated business or establishment in more than one (1) location in the
village; a separate business regulation certificate shall be required for each
location of a regulated establishment. For the purpose of this article, the
existence of a single location shall be evidenced by the fact that all
buildings containing the principal or accessory uses shall be connected or
shall be located on the same lot or parcel, shall be operated and managed by
the same person or owner, and shall be an establishment with the same
classification. Where two (2) or more separate businesses, separately owned or
operated, share floor/land space in the same building or on the same parcel of
ground, each shall be deemed a separate business and shall be required to
obtain a separate business certificate based on the square foot area of each
separate use.
Sec. 11-109. Display.
It shall be the duty of every person conducting a regulated business in the
village to keep his business regulation certificate posted in a prominent place
on the premises used for such business at all times.
Sec. 11-110. Business vehicle sticker.
Whenever the number of vehicles used is the basis, in whole or in part, for a
business regulation certificate fee, the village clerk shall furnish the
certificate holder with a tag or sticker for each vehicle covered by the
business regulation certificate, and such tag or sticker shall be posted or
affixed in a conspicuous place on each such vehicle.
Sec. 11-111. Suspension; revocation.
   (a)   Suspension of certificate. When the conduct or operation of any
business or establishment, whether or not regulated, shall constitute a
nuisance in fact and a clear and present danger to the public health, safety or
general welfare, the mayor shall be authorized to summarily order the cessation
of business, the closing of the premises, and the suspension of any business
regulation certificate or permit for a period not to exceed ten (10) days.
   (b)   Hearing. The mayor is authorized to call a hearing for the purpose of
determining whether or not the business regulation certificate or permit should
be suspended or revoked. The mayor is authorized to designate a hearing officer
to preside over any proceeding relating to the suspension, revocation or
refusal to renew a business regulation certificate.
   (c)   Notice of hearing. Notice of the hearing for revocation of a business
regulation certificate or permit shall be given in writing setting forth
specifically the grounds of the complaint and the time and place of hearing.
Such notice shall be sent by certified mail (return receipt requested) to the
certificate holder or permittee at his last known address at least five (5)
days prior to the date set for the hearing.
   (d)   Hearing procedures. At the hearing the village attorney shall present
the complaint and shall represent the village. The certificate holder or
permittee shall be permitted counsel and shall have the right to submit
evidence and cross examine witnesses. The mayor, or his designee, shall preside
and shall render the decision. The decision of the mayor, or his designee, is
subject to judicial review by common law certiorari.
   (e)   Causes for revocation. Business regulation certificates and permits
issued under the ordinances of the village, unless otherwise provided, may be
revoked by the mayor after notice and hearing as provided in subsections (c)
and (d) of this section for any of the following causes:
      (1)   Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the
application for the certificate or permit.
      (2)   Any violation by the certificate holder or permittee of ordinance
provisions relating to the certificate or permit, the subject matter of the
certificate or permit, or the premises occupied.
      (3)   Conviction of the certificate holder or permittee of any felony or
of a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude in the conduct of the business or
occupation.
      (4)   Failure of the certificate holder or permittee to pay any fine or
penalty owing to the village.
      (5)   Refusal to permit an inspection or sampling, or any interference
with a duly authorized village officer or employee while in the performance of
his duties in making such inspections, as provided in section
11-7.
      (6)   Violation of any ordinance or state law in the licensed premises.
      (7)   Any conduct of the business contrary to the public health, safety
or welfare.
Such revocation, if ordered, shall not preclude prosecution and imposition of
any other penalties provided for the violation of other applicable ordinances
of the village.
(Am. Ord. 23-2013 § 1, 9-4-12)
Sec. 11-112. Reserved.
Sec. 11-113. Fines and Debts Owed to the Village of Evergreen Park.
   (a)   No person/entity owing to the Village of Evergreen Park any fine or
debt shall be granted a business regulation certificate and permit, nor shall
the same be renewed, until the fine or debt is satisfied.
   (b)   No business license certificate and permit shall be granted or renewed
if the property at which the business activities are to be conducted has a
memorandum of judgment recorded against it in favor of the Village of Evergreen
park and the judgment has yet to be satisfied.
   (c)   An outstanding fine, debt or judgment shall be cause for the
suspension and/or revocation of any current business regulation certificate and
permit issued by the Village of Evergreen Park.
(Ord. No. 13-2010 § 1, 11-1-10)
Secs. 11-114-11-130.   Reserved.
DIVISION 2. FEE SCHEDULE
Sec. 11-131. Purpose and jurisdiction.
   (a)   Because each commercial establishment located in the village is a
basic part of and affects the physical and economic well-being of the village
necessitating special services from the village in the form of fire, health,
sanitation, building and police inspections and services, such commercial
establishments shall in all respects be in full compliance with the provisions
of this article. This article is designed to provide for the means whereby the
village may render the necessary inspections and services to commercial
establishments and commercial areas in order to promote, protect and safeguard
the public health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the village and to
enable the effecting of an accurate record of commercial establishments located
and carrying on commercial activities or commerce within the village.
   (b)   The commercial establishments so regulated may or may not have their
principal place of business located within the village.
   (c)   The business regulation fees provided for herein are not intended to
license any business or profession nor are they to be construed as an
endorsement of the competency or skill of any individual, company, corporation
or other entity. Only governmental activities and other approved eleemosynary
activities will be issued a certificate without charge, except as may be
required herein.
   (d)   Business regulation fees based upon square foot area are predicated
upon the premises that there is a finite amount of square footage in all of the
commercial zoning districts within the village. These commercial districts
require substantial services over and above the services provided for single-
family homes and other residential districts. The business activities conducted
within the finite square foot area of the commercial districts of the village
require these extra services regardless of the activity being conducted within
each commercial space. All measurements are expressed in square feet and shall
be to the nearest integral square foot; if a fraction is one-half square foot
or more, the integral square foot next above shall be taken. Therefore, the fee
is based equitably upon the square foot area of each place of business as a
minimum fee as identified in section
11-133.
   (e)   The basis for the fee schedule may be based on additional factors
other than the square foot area of the business establishment. Other fees
charged are set out specifically for those activities as identified in section
11-134.
(Code 1965, §§ 18-31, 18-32(a)(6))
Sec. 11-132. Responsibility of owner, lessor, occupant.
   (a)   It shall be the responsibility of the owner, lessor and occupant of
any premises to ensure that the required business regulation certificate and
business regulation fees have been paid for any and all persons occupying or
operating out of those premises. It shall be the responsibility of the owner,
lessor, or occupant of any premises to require that any automatic vending
machine on the premises display the proper village sticker showing that all
fees have been paid.
   (b)   If a person is found not to have been issued the required business
regulation certificate or not to have paid the business regulation fees, the
premises where that person or its machines are situated may be closed by the
mayor in accordance with the provisions of section
11-111. Those premises may be closed whether or not the person violating the
provisions is the major owner or tenant of the premises, the intent of this
section being that the owner, lessor, and occupant of the premises shall be
responsible for all parties occupying the same to see that the proper business
regulation certificate and business regulation fees are obtained and paid.
(Code 1965, § 18-35)
Sec. 11-133. Regulatory fees.
   (a)   Schedule. A minimum regulatory fee schedule shall be based on square
feet of floor/ land area as herein defined. Commercial establishments using
surface area of land for storage, display and/or sales and service shall be
based on square feet of area. Special enumerated fees shall be in addition to
this minimum. See section
11-134.
Classification           Step Floor/Land Area in Square Yearly Registration Fee
                              Feet
Office, manufacturing,
retail, service storage, 1    1 to 1,500                $ 60.00
wholesale
                         2    1,501 to 3,000            70.00
                         3    3,001 to 6,000            90.00
                         4    6,001 to 9,000            110.00
                         5    9,001 to 12,000           140.00
                         6    12,001 to 15,000          155.00
                         7    15,001 to 20,000          190.00
                         8    20,001 to 30,000          220.00
                         9    30,001 to 40,000          265.00
                         10   40,001 to 60,000          330.00
                         11   60,001 to 80,000          410.00
                         12   80,001 to 100,000         500.00
                         13   100,001 to 140,000        645.00
                         14   140,001 to 180,000        745.00
                         15   180,001 to 220,000        850.00
                         16   220,001 and over          935.00
 
   (b)   Floor/land area applicable. Floor/land area shall be calculated as
herein defined. Total area applicable for determination of the yearly
regulatory fee shall include the sum total of all areas in use or reserved for
or retained for the use of the commercial establishment, including but not
restricted to principal and accessory areas, cellars, basements, storage or
detached accessory buildings, even though any such floor area may be
temporarily vacant or not in use.
(Code 1965, § 18-33)
Sec. 11-134. Fees based on factors other than or in addition to square footage.
The following business regulations fees enumerated in this section are for
establishments or activities which cannot feasibly be determined on a square-
foot basis or are additional fees for special categories plus the square foot
area fee. The commercial establishments listed in this section may or may not
have their principal place of business located within the village, but are
conducting commercial activities or business within the village.
Categories Yearly Registration Fees
Categories                                             Yearly Registration Fees
Advertising signs:                                      
Bench, each                                            $10.00
Billboard, each                                        110.00
Amusements:
Amusement arcades (limit of 1 Class A license for 7    550.00
machines)
Plus square feet, plus fee per machine
Amusement park                                         275.00
Per ride over one ride                                 60.00
Billiard and pool tables                               40.00
Bowling alleys, per alley                              220.00
Carnivals, per day                                     220.00
Coin-operated machines for amusement only, each        110.00
Games of skill, each                                   110.00
Golf course                                            330.00
Golf course, miniature                                 110.00
Golf driving range                                     110.00
Jukeboxes, each                                        60.00
Miscellaneous (all other)                              60.00
Shooting gallery                                       110.00
Tennis or racquetball:
Racquetball, per court                              60.00
Tennis, per court                                      110.00
Auctioneer, per day                                    60.00
Automatic vending machines (multiple-slot machines):
5 slots or less                                        60.00
Each slot over 5                                       15.00
Automatic vending machines (one-slot machines):
Penny                                                  10.00
Nickel                                                 25.00
Dime                                                   35.00
Over dime                                              60.00
Automobile filling station:
Storage capacity, 0-4,000 gallons                      110.00
Plus for each 1,000 gallons over 4,000                 15.00
Plus per nozzle                                        10.00
Automobile sales, used                                 220.00
Barber and/or beauty shops                             60.00
Plus for each chair over 3                             10.00
Beauty culture school                                  220.00
Beverage sales (other than grocery store)              60.00
Carwash                                                60.00
Cemeteries                                             275.00
Christmas trees (sales)                                60.00
Plus $50.00 bond is guarantee that the applicant shall restore the premises to
its original condition after such business has completed. The village shall
require an inspection of the premises by the fire department; and upon failure
of the licensee to so restore the premises, the bond shall be forfeited.
Cigars, cigarettes, tobacco; counter or machines, each 90.00
Contractors:
General contractors                                    150.00
All other contractors, subcontractors and service
contractors, including those listed in section         75.00
5-41
A contractor shall receive a credit for the amount of business regulation fee
paid towards the license fee.
Credit union                                           60. 00
Categories Yearly Registration Fees
Categories                                             Yearly Registration Fees
Firearm supplies                                       275.00
Fraternal and club                                     40.00
Hospitals and nursing homes:
1-99 beds                                              150.00
100-149 beds                                           275.00
150 beds and over                                      300.00
Ice-cube stations                                      35.00
Itinerant merchants, per day                           110.00
Junker (1 vehicle only permitted)                      125.00
Laundromat and dry cleaning; coin-operated:
Laundry (washer and/or dryer) each                     10.00
Dry cleaning, per machine                              50.00
Lounge, saloon, tavern (includes 25 seats plus $0.75   60.00
per seat over 25 seats)
Lumberyards, square foot of sales area plus bulk       110.00
storage
Milk refrigerators, each (other than grocery store)    60.00
Motel                                                  60.00
Plus per unit                                          60.00
Newsstand                                              30.00
Patrol service, per vehicle                            60.00
Pawnbroker                                             1,100.00
Peddlers, solicitors and canvassers                    60.00
Real estate broker (out of town)                       60.00
Restaurants and other food dispensers, including banquet hall (15 square feet
equals one seat), public cafeteria and full service:
Serving up to 25 persons                               60.00
Serving 26 to 50 persons                               85.00
Serving 51 to 100 persons                              110.00
Serving 101 to 200 persons                             220.00
Serving 201 to 300 persons                             330.00
Serving over 300 persons                               385.00
Cafeteria (employee)                                   60.00
Drive-in/fast food                                     110.00
Carryouts                                              110.00
Snack bars                                             60.00
Scavenger, commercial                                  600.00
Scavenger, refuse                                      1,000.00
School bus service (other than governmental):
1 to 5 vehicles                                        200.00
Over 5 vehicles                                        25.00
Storage yards (including vehicles and trailers):
Sales and storage                                      220.00
Storage only                                           110.00
Theatres, playhouses:
Seating capacity 750 or less                           900.00
Seating capacity 751 or more                           1,350.00
Undertaking establishments                             135.00
Plus each assistant director                           20.00
Vehicles and delivery trucks:
A. U food vendors, wholesale or retail                 60.00
Automobile wrecker, each                               60.00
Carters, vans and trucks, each                         60.00
Each vehicle whose place of business is not within the
corporate limits of the village but does business or   60.00
solicits business within the corporate limits of the
village
Laundry, pickup, each                                  60.00
Liquor distributors, each                              110.00
Peddlers, from trucks                                  85.00
Taxicabs, each                                         60.00
Tobacco and electronic cigarette dealer, including     100.00
machines
Tobacco and electronic cigarette specialty dealer      150.00
Veterinary hospital:
1 veterinarian                                         80.00
2 or more                                              110.00
 
Sec. 11-135. State Contractor License Required.
Any contractor requiring a license from the State of Illinois before engaging
in business, including but not limited to plumbing contractors required to be
licensed under the Illinois Plumbing License Act and roofing contractors
required to be licensed under the Illinois Roofing Industry Licensing Act,
shall possess and maintain such license at all times while doing business
within the Village.
Secs. 11-136 - 11-155. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. AMUSEMENTS
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 11-156. Application of article.
The provisions of this article shall apply to all public shows, motion picture
houses, theatres, circuses and other amusements in the village.
Sec. 11-157. Amusement arcades.
   (a)   No person shall keep, use, permit, engage in or allow a place of
amusement or amusement arcade where there are amusement, video, pinball,
bagatelle, pigeonhole, or picture, slide or motion picture machines, whether
such devices are manual, mechanical or electronic, or other games, machines,
tables or implements, whether manual, mechanical or electronic, kept or used
for amusement or similar purposes. For the purpose of this section, a "place of
amusement" or "amusement arcade" shall be defined as any place where more than
three (3) of the devices are kept or used. It is the intention of this section
that a maximum of only three (3) machines be permitted on the premises. It
shall not include places under the jurisdiction of a nonprofit school or
municipal body, nor places devoted to amusement purposes in existence prior to
November 1, 1981, but no such place in existence shall increase the number of
machines to greater than the number lawfully on the premises on November 1,
1981.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person to visit, frequent, or be found in
any place defined in subsection (a).
   (c)   It shall be unlawful for any person to lease, let or permit any
building to be used, in whole or in part, for a place of amusement or amusement
arcade prohibited in subsection (a).
Sec. 11-158. Pinball machines and other similar machines.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to set up, keep or maintain for
use or permit the use of, or permit to be set up, kept or maintained, in any
house, place of business, or any place of any kind or character of public
resort within the corporate limits of the village, a pinball machine, or any
other tables or implements kept for a similar purpose. Provided, however, that
coin-operated machines operated for purely amusement purposes only shall not be
prohibited hereby.
For the purposes of this section, such machines for amusement only shall mean
those machines which do not reward the player thereof replays or upon which the
player cannot compound the odds of winning the game played thereon.
   (b)   It is hereby made the duty of every member of the police department of
the village to seize any pinball machine or any other table or implement kept
for a similar purpose, and such machine, table or implement shall be destroyed.
Sec. 11-159. Billiard and pool tables.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any premises open to the public
which contains more than one (1) billiard or pool table (whether coin-operated
or not) whether a charge is or is not made for the use of a billiard or pool
table. This section shall not prohibit the operation of any business engaged in
the sale of billiard or pool tables provided that such tables are used only for
display and trial purposes.
Sec. 11-160. Conduct of customers; crowds.
   (a)   The audience of any amusement, show or theatrical must be orderly and
quiet at all times. It shall be unlawful for any person attending such
amusement, show or theatrical to create a disturbance in the audience.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful to permit or gather such a crowd to witness any
such amusement or show as to create a dangerous condition because of fire or
other risks.
Sec. 11-161. Smoking-Prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke or carry a lighted cigar,
cigarette or pipe on or beneath the stage or in a dressing room of any building
used as an assembly hall with seating accommodations in which theatricals,
shows, amusements, lectures or other entertainments are offered, operated,
presented or exhibited.
Sec. 11-162. Same-Signs.
It shall be the duty of the owner of such premises, or of the occupant in
charge, to provide and place printed signs on which the words "No Smoking"
shall appear in letters at least four (4) inches high, in conspicuous places,
at least two (2) such signs being upon the stage or in the wings thereof and
one (1) in each dressing room.
Sec. 11-163. Shooting galleries; construction, customer behavior.
   (a)   Safety. Targets shall be placed before a backstop of steel,
sufficiently thick to prevent any bullet from piercing it, and so arranged that
there will be no danger from ricochetting bullets or deflected pieces of
bullet.
   (b)   Conduct of customers. All persons present in any shooting gallery
shall conduct themselves in an orderly manner, and shall not make or cause any
loud or unnecessary noise. It shall be unlawful for any person to gamble or bet
in any such place.
(Code 1965, § 4-8)
Sec. 11-164. Carnivals; circuses.
No person shall conduct, maintain or operate any carnival, circus or amusement
rides without the prior approval of the board of trustees.
(Code 1965, § 4-9)
   State law reference—Carnival permits, 65 ILCS 5/11-54.1-1 et seq.
Secs. 11-165—11-180. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. MOTION PICTURES AND THEATRICALS
Sec. 11-181. Conduct of customers; crowds.
It shall be unlawful to permit any person, excepting ushers or other theatre
employees, to remain standing in a hall or room in which a motion picture is
presented during the time of such performance. It shall be unlawful to admit to
any such hall more persons than can be accommodated by the seating arrangements
for the premises.
(Code 1965, § 4-21)
Sec. 11-182. Scenery to be noninflammable.
It shall be unlawful to use any scenery in any theatre other than
noninflammable scenery or such as shall have been rendered noninflammable by
application of fire prevention coatings. (Code 1965, § 4-22)
Sec. 11-183. Obstructing exits.
It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct or permit the obstruction of
any aisles, corridors or exits leading from any room or enclosure in which a
motion picture performance, show, play or theatrical is being given or in which
an audience for such a performance is gathered.
(Code 1965, § 4-23)
Secs. 11-184—11.200. Reserved.
ARTICLE V. GARAGE AND RUMMAGE SALES
Sec. 11-201. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
   Garage sale shall mean and include all general sales, open to the public,
conducted from or on a residential premises in any residential zone, as defined
in the zoning chapter, for the purpose of disposing of personal property
including, but not limited to, all sales entitled "garage," "lawn," "yard,"
"attic," "room," "backyard," "patio," "flea market," or "rummage" sale. This
definition shall not include a situation where no more than five (5) specific
items are held out for sale and all advertisement of such sale specifically
names those items to be sold.
   Personal property shall mean property which is owned, utilized and
maintained by an individual or members of his residence and acquired in the
normal course of living in or maintaining a residence. It does not include
merchandise which was purchased for resale or obtained on consignment.
(Code 1965, § 19-35(a))
   Cross reference—Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.
Sec. 11-202. Application of article.
The provisions of this article shall apply to all garage sales; provided,
however, that any nonprofit corporation may conduct one (1) sale per calendar
year where personal property of its members is sold. A nonprofit corporation
shall not pay the permit fee or the bond, but shall be required to comply with
every provision of this section. If there are violations by a nonprofit
corporation, the village may require in future years that a permit fee be paid
and bond posted. (Code 1965, § 19-35(i))
Sec. 11-203. Permit required; participation; display.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct a garage sale without a
permit and without following the provisions of this article.
   (b)   No more than one garage sale permit may be issued to one (1) residence
or family household during any calendar year. Members of more than one (1)
residence or family household may join in requesting a permit; however, no more
than three (3) families may join together. In such event, the permit issued
shall be considered as having been issued for each and all of such residences
or family households.
   (c)   A permit for a garage sale shall be posted in a place to he visible
from the front of the residence.
(Code 1965, § 19-35(b), (d), (g))
Sec. 11-204. Time requirement; fee; bond.
A permit for a garage sale shall be obtained at least five (5) days in advance
of the proposed sale. The permit fee shall be five dollars ($5.00). In addition
to the permit fee, a cash bond of twenty dollars ($20.00) shall be posted to
guarantee compliance with the provisions of this article. Such bond shall be
forfeited if these provisions are not followed.
(Code 1965, § 19-35(c))
Sec. 11-205. Display of property to be sold.
Personal property offered for sale under this article may be displayed within
the residence, in a garage, side yard, or rear yard. No property shall be
displayed in the front yard or on the public sidewalk or right-of-way.
(Code 1965, § 19-35(0)
Sec. 11-206. Signs.
Two (2) signs of not more than four (4) square feet shall be permitted to be
displayed on the property of the residence where the garage sale is being
conducted. Such signs shall be displayed in the window and not in the front
yard or on the public right-of-way. No sign may be displayed prior to obtaining
a garage sale permit.
(Code 1965, § 19-35(h))
   Cross reference—Signs, ch.
19.
Sec. 11-207. Duration.
A garage sale shall extend over not more than three (3) consecutive days and
shall be limited to the hours of 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.
(Code 1965, § 19-35(e))
Secs. 11-208—11-225. Reserved.
ARTICLE VI. PRECIOUS METALS DEALERS
Sec. 11-226. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
   Precious metals shall mean items of gold, silver or platinum, such as
bullion, coins, rings, bracelets, silverware, teeth, jewelry, chains, necklaces
or items of similar import whose value exceeds the sum of twenty-five dollars
($25.00). The purchase price paid for an item shall be prima facie evidence for
its value; however, any person may establish another value by competent
evidence.
   Precious metals dealer shall mean a person who purchases precious metals
from the public. No person shall be deemed a precious metals dealer if the
number of purchases in a calendar year does not exceed three (3), if the
purchases are not for resale and if no advertising to make purchases is used.
(Code 1965, § 18-40(b), (c))
   Cross reference—Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.
Sec. 11-227. License required, fee.
It shall be unlawful for any person to act or operate as a precious metals
dealer in the village without obtaining a license prior thereto. The fee for
such license shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00) per year. The applicant
shall fill out such forms as are required by the village clerk.
(Code 1965, § 18-40(a))
Sec. 11-228. Records.
   (a)   Every precious metals dealer shall keep a book in which shall be
written in ink at the time of each and every purchase an accurate account and
description of all goods, items, articles, and other things purchased; the
amount of the purchase price; the name and address of the seller; the driver's
license number of the seller; and the social security number of the seller. The
driver's license number of the seller shall be taken by the purchaser from the
driver's license presented to him. If the seller does not have a current
driver's license, or social security number, two other items of identification
verifying the name, address and identity of the seller must be used and written
down.
   (b)   It shall be the duty of each precious metals dealer to deliver to the
police department in the village no later than 12:00 noon on the following day
a legible and duplicate copy from the record book required above of all items
purchased during the preceding day. (Code 1965, § 18-40(d), (0)
Sec. 11-229. Inspections.
The record book, as well as all items on the premises, shall bear an inventory
number and shall at all times be open to the inspection of the village, the
county sheriff, or their agents. (Code 1965, § 18-40(e))
Sec. 11-230. Purchases from minors.
No dealer shall purchase any precious metal from any person under the age of
eighteen (18) years.
(Code 1965, § 18-40(g))
Sec. 11-231. Retention of items.
No item purchased by a precious metals dealer shall be transferred, sold or
otherwise permitted to be removed from the place of purchase for a period of
seven (7) days after the purchase thereof.
(Code 1965, § 18-40(h))
Secs. 11-232—11-255. Reserved.
ARTICLE VII. RAFFLES*
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
   *Cross references—Charitable games, § 11-9; gambling and related offenses, §
12-231 et seq.
   State law reference—Raffles, 230 ILCS 15/1 et seq.
Sec. 11-256. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
   Business shall mean a voluntary organization composed of individuals and
businesses who have joined together to advance the commercial, financial,
industrial and civic interests of the community.
   Charitable shall mean an organization or institution organized and operated
to benefit an indefinite number of the public. The service rendered to those
eligible for benefits must also confer some benefit on the public.
   Educational shall mean an organization or institution organized and operated
to provide systematic instruction in useful branches of learning by methods
common to schools and institutions of learning which compare favorably in their
scope and intensity with the course of study presented in tax-supported
schools.
   Fraternal shall mean an organization of persons having a common interest,
the primary interest of which is to promote the welfare of its members and to
provide assistance to the general public in such a way as to lessen the burdens
of government by caring for those that otherwise would be cared for by the
government.
   Labor shall mean an organization composed of workers organized with the
objective of betterment of the conditions of those engaged in such pursuit and
the development of a higher degree of efficiency in their respective
occupations.
   Net proceeds shall mean the gross receipts from the conduct of raffles, less
reasonable sums expended for prizes, local license fees and other reasonable
operating expenses incurred as a result of operating a raffle.
   Nonprofit shall mean an organization or institution organized and conducted
on a nonprofit basis with no personal profit incurred to anyone as a result of
the operation.
   Raffle shall mean a form of lottery, other than bingo, as regulated by the
state pursuant to the Bingo License and Tax Act [230 ILCS 25/1 et seq.], and
the state lottery, as regulated by the state pursuant to the Illinois Lottery
Law [20 ILCS 1605/1 et seq.], in which:
      (1)   The player pays or agrees to pay something of value for a chance,
represented and differentiated by a number or by a combination of numbers or
some other medium, one (1) or more of which chances is to be designated the
winning chance; and
      (2)   The winning chance is to be determined through a drawing or by some
other method based on an element of chance by a random act or set of random
acts on the part of persons conducting or connected with the raffle, except
that the winning chance shall not be determined by the outcome of a publicly
exhibited sporting contest or any contest involving anything other than a
random or chance act.
   Religious shall mean any church, congregation, society or organization
founded for the purpose of religious worship.
   Veterans shall mean an organization or association comprised of members of
which substantially all are individuals who are veterans or spouses, widows or
widowers of veterans, the primary purpose of which is to promote the welfare of
its members and to provide assistance to the general public in such a way as to
confer a public benefit.
(Code 1965, § 18-81)
   Cross reference—Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.
   State law reference—Similar provisions, 230 ILCS 15/1, 15/2.
Sec. 11-257. Authority.
Raffles may be conducted in the village only upon complying with the provisions
of this article.
(Code 1965, § 18-80)
Sec. 11-258. Conduct of raffles.
The conducting of raffles is subject to the following restrictions:
      (1)   The entire net proceeds of any raffle must be exclusively devoted
to the lawful purposes of the organization permitted to conduct that game.
      (2)   No person, except a bona fide member of the sponsoring
organization, may participate in the management or operation of the raffle.
      (3)   No person may receive any remuneration or profit for participating
in the management or operation of the raffle.
      (4)   A licensee may rent premises on which to determine the winning
chance or chances in a raffle only from an organization which is also licensed
under this article.
      (5)   Raffle chances may be sold or issued only within the area specified
on the license, and winning chances may be determined only at those locations
specified on the licenses.
      (6)   No person under the age of eighteen (18) years may participate in
the conducting of raffles or chances. A person under the age of eighteen (18)
years may be within the area where winning chances are being determined only
when accompanied by his parent or guardian.
(Code 1965, § 18-86)
   State law reference—Similar provisions, 230 ILCS 15/4(a).
Sec. 11-259. Raffles manager; bond.
All operation of and the conduct of raffles shall be under the supervision of a
single raffles manager designated by the organization. The manager shall give a
fidelity bond, in the sum of an amount determined by the village clerk in favor
of the organization, conditioned upon his honesty in the performance of his
duties. The terms of the bond shall provide that notice shall be given in
writing to the licensing authority not less than thirty (30) days prior to its
cancellation. The village clerk may waive this bond requirement by including a
waiver provision in the license issued to an organization under this article,
provided that a unanimous vote of the members of the licensed organization has
approved the waiver of the raffles manager's bond.
(Code 1965, § 18-87)
   State law reference—Similar provisions, 230 ILCS 15/5.
Sec. 11-260. Records.
   (a)   Each organization licensed to conduct raffles and chances shall keep
the records of its gross receipts, expenses and net proceeds for each single
gathering or occasion at which winning chances are determined. All deductions
from gross receipts for each single gathering or occasion shall be documented
with receipts or other records, indicating the amount, a description of the
purchased item or service or other reason for the deductions and the recipient.
The distribution of net proceeds shall be itemized as to payee, purpose, amount
and date of payment.
   (b)   Gross receipts from the operation of raffles programs shall be
segregated from other revenues of the organization, including bingo gross
receipts, if bingo games are also conducted by the same nonprofit organization
pursuant to license therefor issued by the state department of revenue, and
placed in a separate account. Each organization shall have separate records of
its raffles. The person who accounts for gross receipts, expenses and net
proceeds from the operation of raffles shall not be the same person who
accounts for other revenues of the organization.
   (c)   Each organization licensed to conduct raffles shall report within
seven (7) days, after determination of the winners, to the village and to its
membership, its gross receipts, expenses and net proceeds from raffles and the
distribution of net proceeds itemized, as required in this article.
   (d)   Records required by this article shall be preserved for three (3)
years, and organizations shall make available their records relating to the
operation of the raffles for public inspection at reasonable times and places.
(Code 1965, § 18-88)
   State law reference—Similar provisions, 230 ILCS 15/6.
Sec. 11-261. Maximum prizes, prices; duration.
   (a)   The aggregate retail value of all prizes and merchandise awarded by a
licensee in a single raffle should not exceed five hundred thousand dollars
($500,000.00).
   (b)   The maximum price which may be charged for each raffle chance issued
or sold shall not exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00).
   (c)   A license shall be valid for one year after issuance, and no chances
may be sold upon expiration of the license for that specific raffle.
(Code 1965, § 18-89) (Am. Ord. No. 14-2018, § 1, 5-21-18)
Secs. 11-262—11-280. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. LICENSE*
   *State law reference—Authority to license raffles, 230 ILCS 15/2(a).
Sec. 11-281. Required.
It shall be unlawful to conduct a raffle without a license issued pursuant to
this article. (Code 1965, §§ 18-80, 18-82)
   State law reference—Similar provisions, 230 ILCS 15/3(1).
Sec. 11-282. Applications; validity.
   (a)   Licenses may be issued to bona fide nonprofit business, religious,
charitable, labor, fraternal, educational or veterans' organizations which have
been in existence continuously for a period of five (5) years immediately
before making application for a license and which have had during that entire
five-year period a bona fide membership engaged in carrying out its objects, or
to a nonprofit fundraising organization that the licensing authority determines
is organized for the sole purpose of providing financial assistance to an
identified individual or group of individuals suffering extreme financial
hardship as the result of illness, disability, accident or disaster.
   (b)   The applicant must specify the area or areas within the village in
which raffle chances will be sold or issued, the time period during which
raffle chances will be sold or issued, the time of determination of winning
chances and the location or locations at which winning chances will be
determined.
   (c)   The license application must be on the letterhead of the organization
and must contain a sworn statement of the presiding officer and the secretary
that their organization is qualified to hold a license under the provisions of
this article.
   (d)   A license shall be valid for only one raffle.
Sec. 11-283. Fees; issuance.
   (a)   The license fee for each raffle conducted under the terms of this
article shall be $1.00.
   (b)   When all the requirements of this article have been met, the license
shall be issued by the village clerk.
Sec. 11-284. Denial.
No license shall be issued under this division to:
      (1)   Any person who has been convicted of a felony.
      (2)   Any person who is or has been a professional gambler or gambling
promoter.
      (3)   Any person who is not of good moral character.
      (4)   Any firm or corporation in which a person defined in subsection
(1), (2) or (3) above has a proprietary, equitable or credit interest or in
which such a person is active or employed.
      (5)   Any organization in which a person in subsection (1), (2) or (3) of
this section is an officer, director or employee, whether compensated or not.
      (6)   Any organization in which a person defined in subsection (1), (2)
or (3) above is to participate in the management or operation of a raffle.
Sec. 11-285. Reciprocity.
The village clerk may issue a raffle license to an organization upon payment of
the required license fee if that organization has been issued a raffle license
by any municipality located within 10 miles of this village under an ordinance
substantially similar to the provisions in this article. In that event, the
organization need not make application and need not comply with sections 11-259
and 11-260(c).
ARTICLE VIII. OUTDOOR PAY TELEPHONES
Sec. 11-301. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following definitions shall apply:
   (a)   Outdoor pay telephone is any publicly accessible self-service, coin,
or credit card operated telephone.
   (b)   Private outdoor pay telephone is any outdoor pay telephone located
outside of a building which is not a public outdoor pay telephone.
   (c)   Public outdoor pay telephone is any outdoor pay telephone any portion
of which, or its enclosure, is situated on, projects over, or hangs over a
portion of the public right-of-way; or is situated such that it can be used by
a person standing on the public right-of-way.
   (d)   Public right-of-way is the full width of any dedicated street, alley
or highway, including any parkway and public sidewalk.
Sec. 11-302. Outdoor pay telephones-license required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to own or maintain an outdoor pay telephone
without having obtained a license issued for that specific location. A license
application shall list all locations by street address and shall list the
telephone number for each outdoor pay telephone. No outdoor pay telephone shall
be located on any private property without the permission of the property
owner. The address listed in the application shall be used by the village for
sending any required notices. The annual license fee shall be $100 per year
plus an additional $10 for each outdoor pay telephone. Licenses shall be issued
on an annual basis for the period of January 1 through December 31. The village
clerk shall issue a license within 10 days provided that there are no
violations of this article.
Sec. 11-303. Public outdoor pay telephones-permit required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to install, construct or maintain a public
outdoor pay telephone without obtaining a permit from the village. The mayor is
hereby authorized to grant permits for a period not exceeding 3 years for the
privilege of installing and maintaining a public outdoor pay telephone upon
such terms and conditions as deemed necessary in order to protect the public
health, safety and welfare. A permit may provide for the payment of
consideration to the village.
Sec. 11-304. Private outdoor pay telephones-permitted locations.
It shall be unlawful for any person to install, own or maintain a private
outdoor pay telephone under any of the following conditions:
   (a)   On any vacant property;
   (b)   On any property where there is an abandoned building;
   (c)   On any property which has a premises licensed for the sale of
alcoholic liquor;
   (d)   On any property used for residential purposes;
   (e)   At a location within 100 feet of and where the users of the telephone
can be heard from a residential dwelling unit;
   (f)   At a location where use from a vehicle is allowed (i.e. posts are not
installed to prohibit use from a vehicle) which would cause the vehicle to
stand in a driveway or aisle in a parking lot;
   (g)   On any property or at any location which has been determined by the
mayor under Section 11-305 to create a nuisance based upon prior actual use.
Sec. 11-305. Determination of nuisance.
The mayor is hereby authorized to make the determination that the maintenance
and operation of an outdoor pay telephone at a specific location constitutes a
nuisance such that it has a deleterious impact upon the surrounding
neighborhood or upon the public health, safety and welfare. Prior to such
determination the village shall send a notice to the licensee stating that the
licensee has the right to file a written request within 7 days asking for a
public hearing with regard to the issue of nuisance declaration. The public
hearing shall be held within 10 days after receipt of the licensee's request
and shall be conducted with fundamental fairness. Formal or technical rules of
evidence shall not apply. The mayor shall make a decision within 7 days after
the adjournment of the public hearing. If there is no request for a public
hearing by the licensee, the mayor may summarily determine that a nuisance
exists based upon available information. Upon determination of a nuisance, the
outdoor pay telephone shall be removed by the licensee within 7 days. Any
outdoor pay telephone not so removed may be abated or removed by the village
and may be reclaimed by the owner within 30 days after removal upon
reimbursement to the village for removal and storage costs. Any outdoor pay
telephone not so reclaimed may be disposed of as unclaimed property.
Sec. 11-306. Removal of private or public outdoor pay telephones.
The Police Department is hereby authorized to remove any private or public
outdoor pay telephone which does not have a current permit or license, such
being declared a public nuisance. The village shall send written notice to the
owner or operator at least 7 days prior to removal stating that the outdoor pay
telephone is subject to removal unless the permitee or licensee provides
evidence that a permit or licensee has been granted by the village for such
location. Any outdoor pay telephone removed by the village may be reclaimed by
the owner within 30 days after removal upon reimbursement to the village for
removal and storage costs. Any outdoor pay telephone not so reclaimed may be
disposed of as unclaimed property.
Sec. 11-307. Restrictions on Service Provided.
In order to combat loitering, street gangs, illegal activities, unsightly
graffiti, or conduct detrimental to the tranquility of the neighborhood, the
village may require that an outdoor pay telephone:
   (a)   Provide only one-way service such that incoming calls cannot be
received;
   (b)   Prohibit the transmittal of messages to pagers or other devices by
disabling the ability to input data other than the phone number called;
   (c)   Prohibit the acceptance of coin authorized calls from 7:30 p.m. to 4:
00 a.m. (or other limited hours), during which hours only credit card, third
number, collect, 9-1-1, repair, and information calls can be placed.
Such decision shall be made by the chief of police based upon reported or
documented incidents of loitering, street gangs, illegal activities, unsightly
graffiti, or conduct detrimental to the tranquility of the neighborhood. The
village clerk shall condition any license or permit upon compliance with such
restrictions.
ARTICLE IX. TOBACCO DEALERS AND OTHER PRODUCTS
Sec. 11-320. Definitions.
   For the purposes of this Article, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings ascribed to them herein:
   Adult-only facility means a facility or restricted area (whether open-air or
enclosed) where the operator ensures or has a reasonable basis to believe (such
as by checking identification as required under State law, or by checking the
identification of any person appearing to be under the age of 30) that no
person under legal age is present. A facility or restricted area need not be
permanently restricted to persons under 21 years of age to constitute an adult-
only facility, provided that the operator ensures or has a reasonable basis to
believe that no person under 21 years of age is present during the event or
time period in question.
   Age restricted area means a signed designated area in a retail establishment
to which persons under 21 years of age are not permitted access unless
accompanied by a parent or legal guardian.
   Alternative nicotine product means a product or device not consisting of or
containing tobacco that provides for the ingestion into the body of nicotine,
whether by chewing, smoking, absorbing, dissolving, inhaling, snorting,
sniffing, or by any other means. Alternative nicotine product does not include:
cigarettes as defined in Section 1 of the Cigarette Tax Act and tobacco
products as defined in Section 10-5 of the Tobacco Products Tax Act of 1995;
tobacco product and electronic cigarette as defined in this section; or any
product approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration for sale as
a tobacco cessation product, as a tobacco dependence product, or for other
medical purposes, and is being marketed and sold solely for that approved
purpose.
   Electronic cigarette means:
      (1)   Any device that employs a battery or other mechanism to heat a
solution or substance to produce a vapor or aerosol intended for inhalation;
      (2)   Any cartridge or container of a solution or substance intended to
be used with or in the device or to refill the device; or
      (3)   Any solution or substance, whether or not it contains nicotine
intended for use in the device.
   Electronic cigarette includes, but is not limited to, any electronic
nicotine delivery system, electronic cigar, electronic cigarillo, electronic
pipe, electronic hookah, vape pen, or similar product or device, and any
components or parts that can be used to build the product or device. Electronic
cigarette does not include: cigarettes as defined in Section 1 of the Cigarette
Tax Act and tobacco products as defined in Section 10-5 of the Tobacco Products
Tax Act of 1995; tobacco product and alternative nicotine product as defined in
this section; any product approved by the United States Food and Drug
Administration for sale as a tobacco cessation product, as a tobacco dependence
product, or for other medical purposes, and is being marketed and sold solely
for that approved purpose; any asthma inhaler prescribed by a physician for
that condition and is being marketed and sold solely for that approved purpose;
or any therapeutic product approved for use under the Compassionate Use of
Medical Cannabis Pilot Program Act.
   Line of sight means visible to a cashier or other employee.
   Lunch wagon means a mobile vehicle designed and constructed to transport
food and from which food is sold to the general public.
   Nicotine means any form of the chemical nicotine, including any salt or
complex, regardless of whether the chemical is naturally or synthetically
derived.
   Operator means any person, firm, corporation, partnership, or association
who establishes for operation by another, or leases or distributes for the
purpose of operation for another, any device or machine for the vending of
tobacco products, electronic cigarettes, alternative nicotine products, tobacco
accessories or smoking herbs whether or not such establishment for operation,
leasing or distribution be for a fixed charge or rental, or on the basis of the
division of the income obtained from said machine.
   Owner means an operator who has acquired possession and control of a vending
machine by purchase, lease or otherwise.
   Smokeless tobacco means any tobacco products that are suitable for dipping
or chewing.
   Smoking herbs means all substances of plant origin and their derivatives,
including but not limited to broom, calea, California poppy, damiana, hops,
ginseng, lobelia, jimson weed and other members of the Datura genus, passion
flower and wild lettuce, which are processed or sold primarily for use as
smoking materials.
   Tobacco accessories means cigarette papers, pipes, holders of smoking
materials of all types, cigarette rolling machines, and other items, designed
primarily for the smoking or ingestion of tobacco products or of substances
made illegal under any statute or of substances whose sale, gift, barter, or
exchange is made unlawful hereunder.
   Tobacco dealer means any person, at wholesale or retail, selling, offering
for sale, furnishing or offering to furnish, tobacco products, electronic
cigarettes, alternative nicotine products, tobacco accessories or smoking
herbs. Tobacco dealers include operators of vending machines.
   Tobacco product means any product containing or made from tobacco that is
intended for human consumption, whether smoked, heated, chewed, absorbed,
dissolved, inhaled, snorted, sniffed, or ingested by any other means,
including, but not limited to, cigarettes, cigars, little cigars, chewing
tobacco, pipe tobacco, snuff, snus, and any other smokeless tobacco product
which contains tobacco that is finely cut, ground, powdered, or leaf and
intended to be placed in the oral cavity. Tobacco product includes any
component, part, or accessory of a tobacco product, whether or not sold
separately. Tobacco product does not include: an electronic cigarette and
alternative nicotine product as defined in this section; or any product that
has been approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration for sale as
a tobacco cessation product, as a tobacco dependence product, or for other
medical purposes, and is being marketed and sold solely for that approved
purpose.
(Ord. No. 16-2019 § 1, 7-15-19)
Sec. 11-321. Tobacco License required.
   No person shall engage in the business of tobacco dealer in the village
without first having obtained a tobacco license.
(Ord. No. 16-2019 § 1, 7-15-19)
Sec. 11-322. Prohibited Acts.
   (a)   No person shall sell or offer for sale, at retail, to give away,
deliver or to keep with the intention of selling at retail, giving away or
delivering tobacco products, electronic cigarettes, alternative nicotine
products, tobacco accessories or smoking herbs within the village without
having first obtained a tobacco dealer's license.
   (b)   No person, including any tobacco dealer, shall sell, offer for sale,
give away or deliver any tobacco product, electronic cigarette, alternative
nicotine product, tobacco accessory or smoking herb to any person under the age
of 21 years.
   (c)   No tobacco dealer or any officer, associate, member, representative,
agent or employee of such licensee under 18 years of age may sell any tobacco
product, electronic cigarette, alternative nicotine product, tobacco accessory
or smoking herb in a licensed premises. This subsection does not apply to a
sales clerk in a family-owned business which can prove that the sales clerk is
in fact a son or daughter of the owner.
   (d)   Before selling, offering for sale, giving, or furnishing a tobacco
product, electronic cigarette, alternative nicotine product, tobacco accessory
or smoking herb to another person, the person selling, offering for sale,
giving, or furnishing the tobacco product, electronic cigarette, alternative
nicotine product, smoking accessory or smoking herb shall verify that the
person is at least 21 years of age by examining from any person that appears to
be under 30 years of age a government-issued photographic identification that
establishes the person to be 21 years of age or older.
   (e)   The sale or distribution by any person of a tobacco product, including
but not limited to a single or loose cigarette, that is not contained within a
sealed container, pack, or package as provided by the manufacturer, which
container, pack, or package bears the health warning required by federal law,
is prohibited.
   (f)   All single packs of tobacco products, electronic cigarettes,
alternative nicotine products, tobacco accessories and smoking herbs must be
sold from behind the counter or in an age restricted area or in a sealed
display case. Any other tobacco products must be sold in line of sight. The
restrictions described in this subsection do not apply to a retail tobacco
store that:
      (1)   Derives at least 90% of its revenue from tobacco and tobacco
related products;
       (2)   Does not permit persons under the age of 21 to enter the premises
unless accompanied by a parent or legal guardian; and
      (3)   Posts a sign on the main entrance way stating that persons under
the age of 21 are prohibited from entering unless accompanied by a parent or
legal guardian.
This subsection does not prohibit the sale of tobacco products, electronic
cigarettes, alternative nicotine products, tobacco accessories and smoking
herbs from vending machines if the location of the vending machines are
otherwise in compliance with the provision of this Article.
   (g)   No person shall sell, offer for sale, give away or deliver any tobacco
product or alterative nicotine product within 100 feet of any school, child
care facility or other building used for education or recreational programs for
persons under 18 years of age.
   (h)   No person shall distribute without charge samples of any tobacco
product, electronic cigarette, alternative nicotine product, tobacco accessory
or smoking herbs to any other person, regardless of age. This subsection does
not apply to the distribution of a tobacco product, electronic cigarette,
alternative nicotine product, tobacco accessory or smoking herb sample in any
adult-only facility.
   (i)   No person, including shall sell, offer for sale, give away or deliver
any tobacco product, electronic cigarette, alternative nicotine product,
tobacco accessory or smoking herb without posting at or near every display of
such products, or upon every vending machine which offers those products for
sale, a sign stating the following:
      THE SALE OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS, ELECTRONIC CIGARETTES, ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE
PRODUCTS, TOBACCO ACESSORIES, AND SMOKING HERBS TO PERSONS UNDER 21 YEARS OF
AGE OR THE MISREPRESENTATION OF AGE TO PROCURE SUCH A SALE IS PROHIBITED BY
LAW.
The text of such signs shall be in red letters on a white background; the
letters to be at least one inch high. Such signs shall be posted in a
conspicuous place upon the premises or vending machine as the case may be.
(Ord. No. 16-2019 § 1, 7-15-19)
Sec. 11-323. Purchase and Possession by Certain Persons Prohibited.
Unless otherwise expressly permitted by state law, no person under 21 years of
age shall buy, purchase, or possess any tobacco product, electronic cigarette,
alternative nicotine product, tobacco accessory or smoking herb.
(Ord. No. 16-2019 § 1, 7-15-19)
Sec. 11-324. Vaping Machines.
   No tobacco product, electronic cigarette, alternative nicotine product,
tobacco accessory or smoking herb may be sold through a vending machine except
if such tobacco product, electronic cigarette, alternative nicotine product,
tobacco accessory or smoking herb is not placed together with any non-tobacco
product, other than matches, and only if the vending machine is in any of the
following locations:
      (1)    Places to which persons under 21 years of age are not permitted
access at any time; or
      (2)   Places where alcoholic beverages are sold and consumed on the
premises and vending machine operation is under the direct supervision of the
owner or manager.
(Ord. No. 16-2019 § 1, 7-15-19)
Sec. 11-325. Penalty and Administration.
   (a)    Any person found in violation of the provisions of this Article shall
be fined not less than $125 not more than $500 for each offense. Each day a
violation continues shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. To the
extent applicable, tobacco business licensees shall be responsible for the
violations of this Article by their employees and agents.
   (b)   Any tobacco dealer licensee found in violation of the provisions of
this Article shall, in addition to any fine that may be imposed, be subject to
license suspension and/or revocation proceedings.
   (c)   Violations of this Article may be administered in accordance with the
provisions of Chapter 12. Miscellaneous Provisions and Offenses, Article X.
Administrative Adjudication of Non-Vehicular Regulation Violations, of the
Evergreen Park Municipal Code.
(Ord. No. 16-2019 § 1, 7-15-19)
Sec. 11-326. Tobacco and Electronic Cigarette Dealer and Specialty Dealer.
   (a)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following words and
phrases shall have the following meanings:
      Electronic cigarette means: (1) any device that employs a battery or
other mechanism to heat a solution or substance to produce a vapor or aerosol
intended for inhalation; (2) any cartridge or container of a solution or
substance intended to be used with or in the device or to refill the device; or
(3) any solution or substance, whether or not it contains nicotine intended for
use in the device. Electronic cigarette includes, but is not limited to, any
electronic nicotine delivery system, electronic cigar, electronic cigarillo,
electronic pipe, electronic hookah, vape pen, or similar product or device, and
any components or parts that can be used to build the product or device.
Electronic cigarette does not include: cigarettes as defined in Section 1 of
the Cigarette Tax Act and tobacco products as defined in Section 10-5 of the
Tobacco Products Tax Act of 1995; tobacco product and alternative nicotine
product as defined in this subsection; any product approved by the United
States Food and Drug Administration for sale as a tobacco cessation product, as
a tobacco dependence product, or for other medical purposes, and is being
marketed and sold solely for that approved purpose; any asthma inhaler
prescribed by a physician for that condition and is being marketed and sold
solely for that approved purpose; or any therapeutic product approved for use
under the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Pilot Program Act.
      Smoking herbs means all substances of plant origin and their derivatives,
including but not limited to broom, calea, California poppy, damiana, hops,
ginseng, lobelia, jimson weed and other members of the Datura genus, passion
flower and wild lettuce, which are processed or sold primarily for use as
smoking materials.
      Tobacco and electronic cigarette dealer means any person, at wholesale or
retail, selling, offering for sale, furnishing or offering to furnish, tobacco
products, electronic cigarettes, vaping devices, or smoking herbs. Tobacco
dealers include operators of vending machines.
      Tobacco and electronic cigarette specialty dealer means any person, at
wholesale or retail, selling, offering for sale, furnishing or offering to
furnish, tobacco products, electronic cigarettes, vaping devices, or smoking
herbs where such business is the main business being conducted at a specific
premises. For example, a gasoline services station, convenience store, or
grocery store would not be included within this definition.
      Tobacco product means any product containing or made from tobacco that is
intended for human consumption, whether smoked, heated, chewed, absorbed,
dissolved, inhaled, snorted, sniffed, or ingested by any other means,
including, but not limited to, cigarettes, cigars, little cigars, chewing
tobacco, pipe tobacco, snuff, snus, and any other smokeless tobacco product
which contains tobacco that is finely cut, ground, powdered, or leaf and
intended to be placed in the oral cavity. Tobacco product does not include any
item that has been approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration
for sale as a tobacco cessation product, as a tobacco dependence product, or
for other medical purposes, and is being marketed and sold solely for that
approved purpose.
   (b)   License required and maximum number of licenses. No person shall
engage in the business of tobacco and electronic cigarette dealer or tobacco
and electronic cigarette specialty dealer in the Village without first having
obtained a license therefor. The maximum number of licenses that the Village
shall issue for tobacco and electronic cigarette specialty dealers is four (4).
(Ord. No. 18-2021 § 2, 10-18-21)
Secs. 11-327—11-339. Reserved.
ARTICLE X. RESERVED
Secs. 11-340—11-359. Reserved.
ARTICLE XI. VIDEO PERSONAL PROPERTY LEASE TRANSACTION TAX
Sec. 11-360. Definitions.
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
   (a)   "Lease" or "rental" means any transfer of the possession or use of
video personal property, but not title or ownership, to a user for
consideration, whether or not designated as a lease, rental, license or by some
other term.
   (b)   "Lease price" or "rental price" means the consideration for the lease
or rental of video personal property (including late or overdue fees), valued
in money, whether received in money or otherwise, including cash, credits,
property and services, determined without any deduction for costs or expenses
whatsoever, but not including charges that are added to the price by a lessor
on account of the tax imposed by this chapter or on account of any other tax
imposed on the lessee for the lease or rental of video personal property.
   (c)   "Lessee" means any person who leases or rents video personal property
from another, whether the lease or rental price is paid by the lessee or by
another person.
   (d)   "Lessor" means any person, including the assignee of any lease or
rental agreement, who leases or rents video personal property to users.
   (e)   "Video personal property" means any and all video cassettes, VCR
cassettes, VHS cassettes, laser disks, movies, DVD disks, DIVX disks or other
items on which information, entertainment or amusement is stored and which is
played on a television, game player, video cassette recorder, VCR, laser disk
player, DVD player, DIVX player, computer or other device which allows an image
to be seen.
Sec. 11-361. Tax imposed.
   (a)   A tax is imposed upon the lease or rental in the Village of video
personal property at the rate of 5% of the lease or rental price. The tax shall
be paid by the lessee at the time of each lease or rental payment, and each tax
payment shall be determined by applying the tax rate to the lease or rental
payment.
   (b)   The lease or rental of video personal property shall be deemed to take
place at the location where the lessee takes possession or delivery of the
video personal property.
Sec. 11-362. Exempt leases.
The following leases shall be exempt from the tax:
   (a)   Where the lessee is a governmental body.
   (b)   Where the lessee is an organization organized and operated exclusively
for charitable, educational, or religious purposes.
   (c)   Where the video personal property leased or rented is used solely
outside of the Village; provided, however, that this exemption from the tax
shall not apply if the lessee takes possession or delivery of the video
personal property in the Village.
   (d)   Where the video personal property leased is a motion picture film
exhibited at a movie theater or other place of amusement open to the public.
All leases of video personal property are presumed subject to tax and the
burden of proving that a lease is not taxable is upon the person so claiming.
Sec. 11-363. Collection, enforcement, and administration of tax.
   (a)   It shall be the duty of each lessor to collect the tax imposed from
the lessee at the time of each lease or rental payment and to timely remit the
tax to the Village. In the event that a lessor fails to collect or remit the
tax required to be collected, the lessor shall be liable to the Village for the
amount of such tax, penalties and interest.
   (b)   The tax when collected and billed shall be stated as a distinct item
separate and apart from the lease or rental price of the video personal
property.
   (c)   Remittance of the tax to the Village shall be accompanied by a return,
in a form to be prescribed by the Village Clerk, which shall contain such
information as the Village Clerk may reasonably require.
   (d)   If it shall appear that an amount of tax has been paid that was not
due, whether as a result of a mistake of fact or an error of law, then such
amount shall be credited against any tax due, or to become due from the lessor
who made the erroneous payment; provided, however, the Village Clerk may
request, and lessor shall provide, written substantiation for such credit. No
claim for such credit may be made more than 6 months after the date of the
erroneous payment.
   (e)   The Village Clerk may promulgate regulations concerning the
administration and enforcement of this Article consistent with its provisions,
and shall notify all lessors of such regulations.
Sec. 11-364. Payment of tax to Village.
   (a)   Every lessor shall file each month with the Village Clerk a return and
shall pay the tax due for the prior month upon the filing of such return. The
return for each month shall be due no later than the last day of the following
month for which the report is due. Each return shall be accompanied by the
amount of tax required to be paid.
   (b)   A lessor shall be entitled to a commission of 1% of the tax remitted
to compensate for the cost of collecting the tax, filing returns and supplying
information to the Village Clerk. No commission shall be allowed on any tax not
remitted when due.
   (c)   Failure to pay or remit the tax or to file the remittance return
required by this division shall be subject to the following penalties and
interest:
      (1)   Any tax not paid or remitted when due shall bear interest at the
rate of 2% per month, or fraction thereof, until the tax is paid or remitted.
      (2)   In addition to any interest charged, any person who fails to pay or
to remit the tax when due shall be subject to a late penalty of 10% of such
tax.
      (3)   In addition to any interest or penalty charged in subsection (c)(2)
of this section, any person who fails to file a remittance return when due
shall be subject to a late filing penalty of 10% of the total tax liability due
for the reporting period.
   (c)   Where the failure to pay or to remit the tax or to file the remittance
return in a timely manner is due to reasonable cause beyond the control of the
person charged with filing and paying the tax, the penalties described in this
subsection (c)(2) and (c)(3) may be waived by the Village Clerk.
Secs. 11-365—11-369. Reserved.
ARTICLE XII. LOCALLY IMPOSED AND ADMINISTERED TAX RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITY
PROCEDURES
Sec. 11-370. Title.
This Article shall be known as, and may be cited as, the "Locally Imposed and
Administered Tax Rights and Responsibility Procedures."
Sec. 11-371. Scope.
The provisions of this Article shall apply to the Village's procedures in
connection with all of the Village's locally imposed and administered taxes.
Sec. 11-372. Definitions.
Certain words or terms herein shall have the meaning ascribed to them as
follows: "Act" means the "Local Government Taxpayers' Bill of Rights Act."
   "Locally imposed and administered tax" or "tax" means each tax imposed by
the Village that is collected or administered by the Village but does not
include any taxes imposed upon real property under the Property Tax Code or
fees collected by the Village other than infrastructure maintenance fees.
   "Local tax administrator," means the Village Clerk who is charged with the
administration and collection of the locally imposed and administered taxes,
including staff, employees or agents to the extent they are authorized by the
local tax administrator to act in the local tax administrator's stead. The
local tax administrator shall have the authority to implement the terms of this
Article to give full effect thereto. The exercise of such authority by the
local tax administrator shall not be inconsistent with this Article and the
Act.
   "Notice" means each audit notice, collection notice or other similar notice
or communication in connection with each of the Village's locally imposed and
administered taxes.
   "Tax Ordinance" means any ordinance adopted by the Village that imposes any
locally imposed and administered tax.
   "Taxpayer" means any person required to pay any locally imposed and
administered tax and generally includes the person upon whom the legal
incidence of such tax is placed and with respect to consumer taxes includes the
business or entity required to collect and pay the locally imposed and
administered tax to the Village
Sec. 11-373. Notices.
Unless otherwise provided, whenever notice is required to be given, the notice
is to be in writing mailed not less than 7 calendar days prior to the day fixed
for any applicable hearing, audit or other scheduled act of the local tax
administrator. The notice shall be sent by the local tax administrator as
follows:
   (i)   First class or express mail, or overnight mail, addressed to the
persons concerned at the persons' last known address, or
   (ii)   Personal service or delivery.
Sec. 11-374. Late payment.
Any notice, payment, remittance or other filing required to be made to the
Village pursuant to any tax ordinance shall be considered late unless it is (a)
physically received by the Village on or before the due date, or (b) received
in an envelope or other container displaying a valid, readable U.S. Postmark
dated on or before the due date, properly addressed to the Village, with
adequate postage prepaid.
Sec. 11-375. Payment.
Any payment or remittance received for a tax period shall be applied in the
following order: first, to the tax due for the applicable period; second, to
the interest due for the applicable period; and third, to the penalty for the
applicable period.
Sec. 11-376. Credits and Refunds.
   (a)   The Village shall not refund or credit any taxes voluntarily paid
without written protest at the time of payment in the event that a locally
imposed and administered tax is declared invalidly enacted or unconstitutional
by a court of competent jurisdiction. However, a taxpayer shall not be deemed
to have paid the tax voluntarily if the taxpayer lacked knowledge of the facts
upon which to protest the taxes at the time of payment or if the taxpayer paid
the taxes under duress.
   (b)   The statute of limitations on a claim for credit or refund shall be 4
years after the end of the calendar year in which payment in error was made.
The Village shall not grant a credit or refund of locally imposed and
administered taxes, interest, or penalties to a person who has not paid the
amounts directly to the Village.
   (c)   The procedure for claiming a credit or refund of locally imposed and
administered taxes, interest or penalties paid in error shall be as follows:
      (1) The taxpayer shall submit to the local tax administrator in writing a
claim for credit or refund together with a statement specifying:
         (A)   the name of the locally imposed and administered tax subject to
the claim;
         (B)   the tax period for the locally imposed and administered tax
subject to the claim;
         (C)   the date of the tax payment subject to the claim and the
cancelled check or receipt for the payment;
         (D)   the taxpayer's recalculation, accompanied by an amended or
revised tax return, in connection with the claim; and
         (E)   a request for either a refund or a credit in connection with the
claim to be applied to the amount of tax, interest and penalties overpaid, and,
as applicable, related interest on the amount overpaid; provided, however, that
there shall be no refund and only a credit given in the event the taxpayer owes
any monies to the Village.
      (2)   Within 10 days of the receipt by the local tax administrator of any
claim for a refund or credit, the local tax administrator shall either:
         (A)   grant the claim; or
         (B)   deny the claim, in whole or in part, together with a statement
as to the reason for the denial or the partial grant and denial.
      (3)   In the event the local tax administrator grants, in whole or in
part, a claim for refund or credit, the amount of the grant for refund or
credit shall bear interest at the rate of 6% per annum, based on a year of 365
days and the number of days elapsed, from the date of the overpayment to the
date of mailing of a refund check or the grant of a credit.
Sec. 11-377. Audit Procedure.
Any request for proposed audit pursuant to any local administered tax shall
comply with the notice requirements of this Article.
   (a)   Each notice of audit shall contain the following information:
      (1)   the tax;
      (2)   the time period of the audit; and
      (3)   a brief description of the books and records to be made available
for the auditor.
   (b)   Any audit shall be conducted during normal business hours and if the
date and time selected by the local tax administrator is not agreeable to the
taxpayer, another date and time may be requested by the taxpayer within 30 days
after the originally designated audit and during normal business hours.
   (c)   The taxpayer may request an extension of time to have an audit
conducted. The audit shall be conducted not less than 7 days nor more than 30
days from the date the notice is given, unless the taxpayer and the local tax
administrator agreed to some other convenient time. In the event taxpayer is
unable to comply with the audit on the date in question, the taxpayer may
request another date within the 30 days, approved in writing, that is
convenient to the taxpayer and the local tax administrator.
   (d)   Every taxpayer shall keep accurate books and records of the taxpayer's
business or activities, including original source documents and books of entry
denoting the transactions which had given rise or may have given rise to any
tax liability, exemption or deduction. All books shall be kept in the English
language and shall be subject to and available for inspection by the Village.
   (e)   It is the duty and responsibility of every taxpayer to make available
its books and records for inspection by the Village. If the taxpayer or the
Village fails to provide the documents necessary for audit within the time
provided, the local tax administrator may issue a tax determination and
assessment based on the tax administrator's determination of the best estimate
of the taxpayer's tax liability.
   (f)   If an audit determines there has been an overpayment of a locally
imposed and administered tax as a result of the audit, written notice of the
amount of overpayment shall be given to the taxpayer within 30 days of the
Village's determination of the amount of overpayment.
   (g)   In the event a tax payment was submitted to the incorrect local
governmental entity, the local tax administrator shall notify the local
governmental entity imposing such tax.
Sec. 11-378. Appeal.
   (a)   The local tax administrator shall send written notice to a taxpayer
upon the local tax administrator's issuance of a protestable notice of tax due,
a bill, a claim denial, or a notice of claim reduction regarding any tax. The
notice shall include the following information:
      (1)   the reason for the assessment;
      (2)   the amount of the tax liability proposed;
      (3)   the procedure for appealing the assessment; and
      (4)   the obligations of the Village during the audit, appeal, refund and
collection process.
   (b)   A taxpayer who receives written notice from the local tax
administrator of a determination of tax due or assessment may file with the
local tax administrator a written protest and petition for hearing, setting
forth the basis of the taxpayer's request for a hearing. The written protest
and petition for hearing must be filed with the local tax administrator within
45 days of receipt of the written notice of the tax determination and
assessment.
   (c)   If a timely written notice and petition for hearing is filed, the
local tax administrator shall fix the time and place for hearing and shall give
written notice to the taxpayer. The hearing shall be scheduled for a date
within 14 days of receipt of the written protest and petition for hearing,
unless the taxpayer requests a later date convenient to all parties.
   (d)   If a written protest and petition for hearing is not filed within the
45–day period, the tax determination, audit or assessment shall become a final
bill due and owing without further notice.
   (e)   Upon the showing of reasonable cause by the taxpayer and the full
payment of the contested tax liability along with interest accrued as of the
due date of the tax, the local tax administrator may reopen or extend the time
for filing a written protest and petition for hearing. In no event shall the
time for filing a written protest and petition for hearing be reopened or
extended for more than 90 days after the expiration of the 45-day period.
Sec. 11-379. Hearing.
   (a)   Whenever a taxpayer or a tax collector has filed a timely written
protest and petition for hearing under section nine, above, the local tax
administrator shall conduct a hearing regarding any appeal.
   (b)   No continuances shall be granted except in cases where a continuance
is absolutely necessary to protect the rights of the taxpayer. Lack of
preparation shall not be grounds for a continuance. Any continuance granted
shall not exceed 14 days except by agreement of all parties.
   (c)   At the hearing the local tax administrator shall preside and shall
hear testimony and accept any evidence relevant to the tax determination, audit
or assessment. The strict rules of evidence applicable to judicial proceedings
shall not apply.
   (d)   At the conclusion of the hearing, the local tax administrator shall
make a written determination on the basis of the evidence presented at the
hearing. The taxpayer or tax collector shall be provided with a copy of the
written decision.
Sec. 11-380. Interest and Penalties.
In the event a determination has been made that a tax is due and owing, through
audit, assessment or other bill sent, the tax must be paid within the time
frame otherwise indicated.
   (a)   The Village hereby provides for the amount of interest to be assessed
on a late payment, underpayment, or nonpayment of the tax, to be 1% per month
or part thereof that a payment is late.
   (b)   If a tax return is not filed within the time and manner provided by
the controlling tax ordinance, a late filing penalty, of 5% of the amount of
tax required to be shown as due on a return shall be imposed; and a late
payment penalty of 5% of the tax due shall be imposed. If no return is filed
within the time or manner provided by the controlling tax ordinance and prior
to the Village issuing a notice of tax delinquency or notice of tax liability,
then a failure to file penalty shall be assessed equal to 25% of the total tax
due for the applicable reporting period for which the return was required to be
filed. A late filing or payment penalty shall not apply if a failure to file
penalty is imposed by the controlling ordinance.
Sec. 11-381. Abatement.
The local tax administrator shall have the authority to waive or abate any late
filing penalty, late payment penalty or failure to file penalty if the local
tax administrator shall determine reasonable cause exists for delay or failure
to make a filing.
Sec. 11-382. Installment Contracts.
The Village may enter into an installment contract with the taxpayer for the
payment of taxes under the controlling tax ordinance. The local tax
administrator may not cancel any installment contract so entered unless the
taxpayer fails to pay any amount due and owing. Upon written notice by the
local tax administrator that the payment is 30 days delinquent, the taxpayer
shall have 14 days to cure any delinquency. If the taxpayer fails to cure the
delinquency within the 14-day period or fails to demonstrate good faith in
restructuring the installment contract with the local administrator, the
installment contract shall be canceled without further notice to the taxpayer.
Sec. 11-383. Statute of Limitations.
The Village, through the local tax administrator, shall review all tax returns
in a prompt and timely manner and inform taxpayers of any amounts due and
owing. The taxpayer shall have 45 days after receiving notice of the reviewed
tax returns to make any request for refund or provide any tax still due and
owing.
   (a)   No determination of tax due and owing may be issued more than 4 years
after the end of the calendar year for which the return for the applicable
period was filed or for the calendar year in which the return for the
applicable period was due, whichever occurs later.
   (b)   If any tax return is not filed or if during any 4-year period for
which a notice of tax determination or assessment may be issued by the Village,
the tax paid was less than 75% of the tax due, the statute of limitations shall
be 6 years after the end of the calendar year in which return for the
applicable period was due or end of the calendar year in which the return for
the applicable period was filed.
   (c)   No statute of limitations shall not apply if a fraudulent tax return
was filed by the taxpayer.
Sec. 11-384. Voluntary Disclosure.
For any locally imposed and administered tax for which a taxpayer has not
received a written notice of an audit, investigation, or assessment from the
local tax administrator, a taxpayer is entitled to file an application with the
local tax administrator for a voluntary disclosure of the tax due. A taxpayer
filing a voluntary disclosure application must agree to pay the amount of tax
due, along with interest of 1% per month or part thereof, for all periods prior
to the filing of the application but not more than 4 years before the date of
filing the application. A taxpayer filing a valid voluntary disclosure
application may not be liable for any additional tax, interest, or penalty for
any period before the date the application was filed. However, if the taxpayer
incorrectly determined and underpaid the amount of tax due, the taxpayer is
liable for the underpaid tax along with applicable interest on the underpaid
tax, unless the underpayment was the result of fraud on the part of the
taxpayer, in which case the application shall be deemed invalid and void. The
payment of tax and interest must be made by no later than 90 days after the
filing of the voluntary disclosure application or the date agreed to by the
local tax administrator. However, any additional amounts owed as a result of an
underpayment of tax and interest previously paid under this Section must be
paid within 90 days after a final determination and the exhaustion of all
appeals of the additional amount owed or the date agreed to by the local tax
administrator, whichever is longer.
Sec. 11-385. Publication of Tax Ordinances.
Any locally administered tax ordinance shall be published via normal or
standard publishing requirements. The posting of a tax ordinance on the
Internet shall satisfy the publication requirements. Copies of all tax
ordinances shall be made available to the public upon request at the Village
Clerk's office.
Sec. 11-386. Local Tax Administrator.
The local tax administrator shall establish an internal review procedure
regarding any liens filed against any taxpayers for unpaid taxes. Upon a
determination by the local tax administrator that the lien is valid, the lien
shall remain in full force and effect. If the lien is determined to be
improper, the local tax administrator shall:
      (i)   timely remove the lien at the Village's expense;
      (ii)   correct the taxpayer's credit record; and
      (iii)   correct any public disclosure of the improperly imposed lien.
Sec. 11-387. Application.
This Article shall be liberally construed and administered to supplement all of
the Village's tax ordinances. To the extent that any tax ordinance is in
conflict with or inconsistent with this Article, this Article shall be
controlling.
Secs. 11-388—11-400. Reserved.
ARTICLE XIII. SPECIAL TAXATION FOR IMPROVEMENTS
Sec. 11-401. Parking Lot Special Taxation.
   (a)   The Mayor and Board of Trustees, by ordinance, may provide for the
construction and repair of public parking lots along or upon any streets
therein and may provide for the payment of the whole or any part of the cost
thereof by special taxation of parcels of land in the vicinity thereof who will
benefit from the availability of such public parking. The special taxation
shall reflect the cost of land acquisition, constructing and maintaining the
public parking lot. The Mayor and Board of Trustees may provide for a square
foot rate, lineal foot rate, assessed valuation rate, or other method of
special taxation including predicted use of the public parking lot based upon
proximity thereto. The ordinance levying the special tax shall describe by
permanent index number or street address the amount of the special tax, which
tax and interest shall become a lien against the property.
   (b)   Prior to the passage of such ordinance, the Village shall give written
notice to the taxpayer of record of any property proposed to be affected by the
special tax and shall conduct a public hearing thereon. Notice shall be mailed
not less than 10 days prior to the public hearing by first class mail to the
taxpayer of record as reflected in the books of the County Clerk. The notice
shall contain the proposed location of the public parking lot and shall state
the date and place of a public hearing to be held by representatives of the
Village regarding the public parking lot acquisition, construction and repair.
The amount of the proposed special tax on each parcel shall be furnished at or
prior to the public hearing. The notice shall also advise each taxpayer that
the special tax can be paid by a specific date without interest, and that
failure to pay the special tax by that date shall result in a lien against the
property for the amount of the special tax plus interest.
   (c)   The special tax shall bear interest at the rate of 1/2% per month, or
portion thereof, from and after the specified payment date. The special tax may
be made payable in installments not to exceed 10 years and shall become due and
payable upon the transfer or sale of the property. A document giving notice of
the lien may be recorded with the Recorder of Deeds, but the failure to record
such notice shall not affect the validity of the special tax. The Village may
enforce the special tax and lien by refusing to approve the transfer of
property, by refusing to issue real estate transfer stamps, or by refusing to
issue a certificate of housing inspection.
Sec. 11-402. Driveway Special Taxation.
   (a)   The Mayor and Board of Trustees, by ordinance, may provide for the
construction and repair of driveways along or upon any streets therein and may
provide for the payment of the whole or any part of the cost thereof by special
taxation of parcels of land adjacent to where driveways are constructed and
repaired. The special taxation shall reflect the cost of constructing and
repairing the adjacent driveways, or any portion thereof. The Mayor and Board
of Trustees may provide for a square foot rate or lineal foot rate of special
taxation. The ordinance levying the special tax shall describe by permanent
index number or street address the amount of the special tax, which tax and
interest shall become a lien against the property.
   (b)   Prior to the passage of such ordinance, the Village shall give written
notice to the taxpayer of record of any property proposed to be affected by the
special tax and shall conduct a public hearing thereon. Notice shall be mailed
not less than 10 days prior to the public hearing by first class mail to the
taxpayer of record as reflected in the books of the County Clerk. The notice
shall contain by general street location the blocks where the driveways will be
constructed or repaired and shall state the date and place of a public hearing
to be held by representatives of the Village regarding the driveway
construction and repair. The amount of the proposed special tax on each parcel
shall be furnished at or prior to the public hearing. The notice shall also
advise each taxpayer that the special tax can be paid by a specific date
without interest, and that failure to pay the special tax by that date shall
result in a lien against the property for the amount of the special tax plus
interest.
   (c)   The special tax shall bear interest at the rate of 1/2% per month, or
portion thereof, from and after the specified payment date. The special tax
shall become due upon the transfer or sale of the property. A document giving
notice of the lien may be recorded with the Recorder of Deeds, but the failure
to record such notice shall not affect the validity of the special tax. The
Village may enforce the special tax and lien by refusing to approve the
transfer of property, by refusing to issue real estate transfer stamps, or by
refusing to issue a certificate of housing inspection.
Sec. 11-403. Sidewalk Special Taxation.
   (a)   The Mayor and Board of Trustees, by ordinance, may provide for the
construction and repair of sidewalks along or upon any streets therein and may
provide for the payment of the whole or any part of the cost thereof by special
taxation of parcels of land adjacent to where sidewalks are constructed and
repaired. The special taxation shall reflect the cost of constructing and
repairing the adjacent sidewalk, or any portion thereof. The Mayor and Board of
Trustees may provide for a square foot rate or lineal foot rate of special
taxation. The ordinance levying the special tax shall describe by permanent
index number or street address the amount of the special tax, which tax and
interest shall become a lien against the property.
   (b)   Prior to the passage of such ordinance, the Village shall give written
notice to the taxpayer of record of any property proposed to be affected by the
special tax and shall conduct a public hearing thereon. Notice shall be mailed
not less than 10 days prior to the public hearing by first class mail to the
taxpayer of record as reflected in the books of the County Clerk. The notice
shall contain by general street location the blocks where the sidewalks will be
constructed or repaired and shall state the date and place of a public hearing
to be held by representatives of the Village regarding the sidewalk
construction and repair. The amount of the proposed special tax on each parcel
shall be furnished at or prior to the public hearing. The notice shall also
advise each taxpayer that the special tax can be paid by a specific date
without interest, and that failure to pay the special tax by that date shall
result in a lien against the property for the amount of the special tax plus
interest.
   (c)   The special tax shall bear interest at the rate of 1/2% per month, or
portion thereof, from and after the specified payment date. The special tax
shall become due upon the transfer or sale of the property. A document giving
notice of the lien may be recorded with the Recorder of Deeds, but the failure
to record such notice shall not affect the validity of the special tax. The
Village may enforce the special tax and lien by refusing to approve the
transfer of property, by refusing to issue real estate transfer stamps, or by
refusing to issue a certificate of housing inspection.
Secs. 11-404 —11-409. Reserved.
ARTICLE XIV. SIMPLIFIED MUNICIPAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS TAX
Sec. 11-410. Tax Imposed.
   A simplified municipal telecommunications tax is hereby imposed upon the act
or privilege of originating in the Village or receiving in the Village
intrastate or interstate telecommunications by a person at the rate of 6.0% of
the gross charges for such telecommunications purchased at retail from a
retailer, in accordance with and subject to the provisions of the Simplified
Municipal Telecommunications Tax Act
(35 ILCS 636/5-1, et seq.).
(Am. Ord. No. 6-2020 § 1, 6-15-20)
Sec. 11-411. Illinois Department of Revenue to Administer.
   The tax hereby imposed shall be collected and enforced by the Department of
Revenue of the State of Illinois. The Illinois Department of Revenue shall have
full power to administer and enforce the provisions of this Article.
(Am. Ord. No. 6-2020 § 1, 6-15-20)
Secs. 11-412—11-419. Reserved.
ARTICLE XV. CABLE AND VIDEO CUSTOMER PROTECTION LAW
Sec. 11-430. Customer Service and Privacy Protection Law.
   (a)   The regulations of 220 ILCS 5/70-501 are hereby adopted by reference
and made applicable to the cable or video providers offering services within
the Village boundaries.
   (b)   Any amendment to the Cable and Video Customer Protection Law that
becomes effective after the effective date of this Article shall be
incorporated into this Article by reference and shall be applicable to cable or
video providers offering services within the municipality's boundaries.
However, any amendment that makes its provisions optional for adoption by
municipalities shall not be incorporated into this Article by reference without
formal action by the corporate authorities of the Village.
(Ord. No. 38-2007 § 2, 11-5-07)
Sec. 11-431. Enforcement.
   The Village does hereby pursuant to law declare its intent to enforce all of
the customer service and privacy protection standards of the Cable and Video
Protection Law with respect to complaints received from residents within the
Village.
(Ord. No. 38-2007 § 2, 11-5-07)
Sec. 11-432. Customer Credits.
   The Village hereby adopts the schedule of customer credits for violations as
provided for in the provisions of 220 ILCS 5/70-501(s) and applied on the
statement issued to the customer for the next billing cycle following the
violation or following the discovery of the violation. The cable or video
provider is responsible for providing the credits and the customer is under no
obligation to request the credit.
(Ord. No. 38-2007 § 2, 11-5-07)
Secs. 11-433 – 11-449.   Reserved.
ARTICLE XVI. CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEE AND PEG ACCESS SUPPORT FEE.
Sec. 11-450. Definitions.
   As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
   Cable service means that term as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 522(6).
   Commission means the Illinois Commerce Commission.
   Gross revenues means that term as defined in Section 21-801(c) of the Act.
   Holder means a person or entity that has received authorization to offer or
provide cable or video service from the Commission pursuant to Section 5/21-401
of the Act.
   PEG means public, education and governmental.
    PEG access support fee means the amount paid under this Article and Section
5/21-801(d) of the Act by the holder to the Village for the service areas
within its territorial jurisdiction.
   Service means the provision of "cable service" or "video service" to
subscribers and the interaction of subscribers with the person or entity that
has received authorization to offer or provide cable or video service from the
Commission pursuant to Section 5/21-401 of the Act.
   Service provider fee means the amount paid under this Article and Section 5/
21-801 of the Act by the holder to a Village for the service areas within its
territorial jurisdiction.
   Video service means video programming and subscriber interaction, if any,
that is required for the selection or use of such video programming services,
and which is provided through wireline facilities located at least in part in
the public right-of-way without regard to delivery technology, including
Internet protocol technology. This definition does not include any video
programming provided by a commercial mobile service provider defined in 47
U.S.C. § 332(d) or any video programming provided solely as part of, and via,
service that enables users to access content, information, electronic mail, or
other services offered over the public Internet.
(Ord. No. 38-2007 § 2, 11-5-07)
Sec. 11-451. Cable/Video Service Provider Fee Imposed.
   (a)   Fee Imposed. A fee of 5% of the holder's gross revenues is hereby
imposed on any holder providing cable service or video service in the Village.
   (b)   Notice to the Village. A holder shall notify the Village at least ten
(10) days prior to the date on which the holder begins to offer cable service
or video service in the Village.
   (c)   Holder's Liability. The holder shall be liable for and pay the service
provider fee to the Village. The holder's liability for the fee shall commence
on the first day of the calendar month following thirty (30) days after receipt
of the ordinance adopting this Article by the holder. The ordinance adopting
this Article shall be sent by mail, postage prepaid, to the address listed on
the holder's application notice sent pursuant to Section 5/21-401(b)(6) of the
Act to the Village.
   (d)   Payment Date. The payment of the service provider fee shall be due on
a quarterly basis, forty-five (45) days after the close of the calendar
quarter. If mailed, the fee is considered paid on the date it is postmarked.
Each payment shall include a statement explaining the basis for the calculation
of the fee.
   (e)   Exemption. The fee hereby imposed does not apply to existing cable
service or video service providers that have an existing franchise agreement
with the Village in which a fee is paid.
      (1)   Credit for Other Payments. An incumbent cable operator that elects
to terminate an existing agreement pursuant to Section 5/21-301(c) of the Act
with credit for prepaid franchise fees under that agreement may deduct the
amount of such credit from the fees that operator owes under this Section.
(Ord. No. 38-2007 § 2, 11-5-07)
Sec. 11-452. PEG Access Support Fee Imposed.
   (a)   PEG Access Support Fee Imposed. A PEG access support fee of one
percent (1%) of the holder's gross revenues or, if greater, the percentage of
gross revenues that incumbent cable operators pay to the Village or its
designee for PEG access support in the Village is hereby imposed on any holder
providing cable service or video service in the Village in addition to the fee
imposed pursuant to Section
11-451.
   (b)   Payment. The holder shall pay the PEG access support fee to the
Village or to the entity designated by the Village to manage PEG access. The
holder's liability for the PEG access support fee shall commence on the date
set forth in Section
11-451 (c).
   (c)   Payment Due. The payment or the PEG access support fee shall be due on
a quarterly basis, forty-five (45) days after the close of the calendar
quarter. If mailed, the fee is considered paid on the date it is postmarked.
Each payment shall include a statement explaining the basis for the calculation
of the fee.
   (d)   Credit for Other Payments. An incumbent cable operator that elects to
terminate an existing agreement pursuant to Section 5/21-301(c) of the Act
shall pay, at the time they would have been due, all monetary payments for PEG
access that would have been due during the remaining term of the agreement had
it not been terminated pursuant to that section. All payments made by an
incumbent cable operator pursuant to the previous sentence may be credited
against the fees that the operator owes under this Section.
(Ord. No. 38-2007 § 2, 11-5-07)
Sec. 11-453. Applicable Principles.
   All determinations and calculations under this Article shall be made
pursuant to generally accepted accounting principles.
(Ord. No. 38-2007 § 2, 11-5-07)
Sec. 11-454. No Impact on Other Taxes Due from Holder.
   Nothing contained in this Article shall be construed to exempt a holder from
any tax that is or may later be imposed by the Village, including any tax that
is or may later be required to be paid by or through the holder with respect to
cable service or video service. A State-issued authorization shall not affect
any requirement of the holder with respect to payment of the Village's
simplified municipal telecommunications tax or any other tax as it applies to
any telephone service provided by the holder. A State-issued authorization
shall not affect any requirement of the holder with respect to payment of the
local unit of government's 911 or E911 fees, taxes or charges.
(Ord. No. 38-2007 § 2, 11-5-07)
Sec. 11-455. Audits of Cable/Video Service Provider.
   (a)   Audit Requirement. The Village will notify the holder of the
requirements it imposes on other cable service or video service providers to
submit to an audit of its books and records. The holder shall comply with the
same requirements the Village imposes on other cable service or video service
providers in its jurisdiction to audit the holder's books and records and to
recompute any amounts determined to be payable under the requirements of the
Village. If all local franchises between the Village and cable operator
terminate, the audit requirements shall be those adopted by the Village in
Chapter 11, Article XII of the Evergreen Park Municipal Code. No acceptance of
amounts remitted should be construed as an accord that the amounts are correct.
   (b)   Additional Payments. Any additional amount due after an audit shall be
paid within thirty (30) days after the Village's submission of an invoice for
the sum.
(Ord. No. 38-2007 § 2, 11-5-07)
Sec. 11-456. Late Fees / Payments.
   All fees due and payments which are past due shall be governed by the
provisions of
Chapter 11, Article XII of the Evergreen Park Municipal Code.
(Ord. No. 38-2007 § 2, 11-5-07)
Secs. 11-457 – 11-499. Reserved.
ARTICLE XVII. DEADLY WEAPONS DEALERS
Sec. 11-500. Definitions.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
   (a)   "Antique firearm" means:
      (1)   Any firearm (including any firearm with a matchlock, flintlock,
percussion cap, or similar type of ignition system) manufactured in or before
1898; and
      (2)   Any replica of any firearm described in Subsection (1) of this
definition if such replica is not designed or redesigned for using rimfire or
conventional centerfire fixed ammunition, or uses rimfire or conventional
centerfire fixed ammunition which is no longer manufactured in the United
States and which is not readily available in the ordinary channels of
commercial trade.
   (b)   "Engaged in the business" means a person who devotes time, attention
and labor to selling or otherwise dealing in firearms as a regular course of
trade or business with the principal objective of livelihood and profit through
the repetitive purchase and resale of firearms, but such term shall not include
a person who makes occasional sales, exchanges, or purchases of firearms for
the enhancement of a personal collection or for a hobby, or who sells all or
part of such personal collection of firearms.
   (c)   "Firearm" means any pistol, revolver, rifle, shotgun, machine gun,
assault weapon or other device that fits within the definition of "firearm"
contained in the Illinois Firearm Owners Identification Card Act (430 ILCS 65/
1.1 et seq.).
   (d)   "Gun shop" means the premises where any Federally licensed firearms
dealer, excluding any person licensed solely as a collector pursuant to 18
U.S.C. § 923(b), engages in the business of selling, bartering or otherwise
transferring firearms.
   (e)   "Gun show" means any bona fide showing, display or exhibition of
firearms conducted for a temporary time period at a temporary location and
sponsored by a national, State, or local organization, or any affiliate of any
such organization, devoted to the collection, competitive use, or other
sporting use of firearms.
   (f)   "Handgun" means any pistol, revolver, or any other firearm capable of
being concealed upon an individual.
   (g)   "Relative" means a son, daughter, mother, father, sister or brother.
   (h)   "School" means any public or private elementary or secondary school,
community college, college or university; and does not include any pre-nursery
school, nursery school or other school for children before attending elementary
school.
(Ord. No. 10-2017, § 1, 4-17-17)
Sec. 11-501. Applicability.
   This Article shall control the licensing of all firearm dealers within the
Village. The provisions of the Cook Village Deadly Weapons Dealer Control
Ordinance shall not apply in the Village except to the extent incorporated or
referenced herein.
(Ord. No. 10-2017, § 1, 4-17-17)
Sec. 11-502. Gun Shop Employee Background Checks.
   Before any person may be hired as an employee at a gun shop licensed under
this Article, the holder of that license shall perform a background check to
determine whether the potential employee possesses the requisite character and
fitness to deal in firearms. No deadly weapons dealer licensee with fewer than
25 employees may employ a person to work in the gun shop licensed under this
Article if the licensee knows or reasonably should know that person could not
qualify to obtain legally an Illinois firearm owner's identification card, or
if the licensee is otherwise in possession of information that would lead a
reasonable person to conclude that the potential employee does not possess the
requisite character and fitness to deal in firearms.
(Ord. No. 10-2017, § 1, 4-17-17)
Sec. 11-503. License and Permit Required.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person required to be licensed under
Federal law to engage in the business of dealing in firearms, to engage in the
business of dealing, selling, bartering, trading, or to give away or otherwise
transfer, any firearm, without securing a Village deadly weapons dealer
license. A Village deadly weapons dealer license shall be required in addition
to any other license required by law.
   (b)    A Village deadly weapons dealer license shall not be required by any
person licensed solely as a collector pursuant to 18 U.S.C. § 923(b) and
possessing only a Federal "collector's" license as defined in 27 CFR 478.
   (c)    A Village deadly weapons dealer license shall not be required for a
person conducting a bona fide gun show if the person obtains a Village gun show
permit prior to the commencement of the show.
(Ord. No. 10-2017, § 1, 4-17-17)
Sec. 11-504. Application Process.
   (a)   The Mayor may promulgate reasonable rules and regulations necessary to
carry out the duties, responsibilities and requirements imposed by this
Article; including, but not limited to, developing reasonable procedures
consistent with existing practices of regulating persons conducting gun shows
or engaged in the business of dealing in firearms.
      (1)   Any rules or regulations promulgated under this Article shall be
filed in the Village Clerk's office and shall be made available for public
inspection.
      (2)   In addition to any other rights provided by law, the Chief of
Police may, with the assistance of any Federal, State or local law enforcement
agency, enter the premises of any gun shop licensed under this Article during
business hours (including any places used by the gun shop for storage) for the
purpose of inspecting or examining the inventory of ammunition or firearms, or
the records or documents relating to the sale, acquisition, storage or transfer
of ammunition or firearms at the gun shop, if such inspection is performed in
the course of a reasonable inquiry relating to any civil, criminal or
administrative action relating to this Article brought by or against the
licensee or persons other than the licensee; or to ensure or compel compliance
with the provisions of this Article.
      (3)   Any inspections or examinations performed pursuant to this section
shall be done in a reasonable manner designed to minimize, to the extent
reasonably possible, any interference with the licensee's ability to conduct
business.
   (b)   All applications for a deadly weapons dealer license or gun show
permit under this Article shall be made in writing to the Village Clerk's
Office on a form provided for that purpose. In addition to any other
information required by this Article, each application for a license or permit
shall include:
      (1)   The applicant's full name, any aliases by which the applicant has
been known, a copy of the applicant's Federal firearms dealer's license,
driver's license or State identification card and State of Illinois firearms
owner's identification card, the applicant's social security number and the
address and telephone number where the applicant resides and proposes to
conduct the gun show or engage in the business of dealing in firearms. The
applicant shall be fingerprinted by the Police Department;
      (2)   If the applicant is a corporation, the corporate name, business,
and principal place of business of the applicant; the date and state of
incorporation; and the names and residence addresses of the corporate officers
and directors, the names and addresses of all individuals that own stock in the
corporation, its registered agent and a list of all affiliated corporations
noting whether any are engaged in the business of dealing in firearms;
      (3)   If the applicant is a partnership, the name, business address and
telephone number of the principal office or place of business; the partnership
agreement; the names, addresses and telephone numbers of all partners, noting
whether any are engaged in the business of dealing in firearms; and the name,
address and telephone number of a person authorized to receive notices issued
pursuant to this Article;
      (4)   If the applicant is a limited liability company, the name, business
address and telephone number of the principal office or place of business;
operating agreement; the names, addresses and telephone numbers of all members,
noting whether any are engaged in the business of dealing in firearms; and the
name, address and telephone number of a person authorized to receive notices
issued pursuant to this Article;
      (5)   Every person applying for a deadly weapons dealer license must
submit documentation demonstrating that, at the time the application is
submitted, the applicant possesses a valid Federal firearms dealer's license
issued to an address within the Village along with a written statement stating,
under oath, whether or not the applicant, or, to the best of the applicant's
knowledge and belief, the applicant's spouse or relative, has ever owned ten
percent or more in, been a partner in, been a member of, or served as an
officer of, any entity that has had a Federal, State or local firearms dealer
license suspended or revoked at any time for any reason; and
      (6)   In the case of a corporation, partnership, or limited liability
company, a separate response shall be submitted by all individuals owning any
stock, partnership interest, or membership interest in the applicant. Such
individuals must supply the same information as required in subparagraph (1)
above.
   (c)   The Mayor shall deny an application for a Village deadly weapons
dealer license to any person who, at the time the application is made, does not
possess a valid Federal firearm dealer license and an Illinois firearms owner's
identification card for a gun shop located at the same location for which the
license is sought.
   (d)   The Mayor shall deny an application for a deadly weapons dealer
license or gun show permit to any person who has been convicted of any felony
in any jurisdiction and may deny an application for a deadly weapons dealer
license or gun show permit to any person who has been found in violation of any
Federal, State or local law or ordinance relating to the sale, transfer or use
of firearms or any other deadly weapon described in Section 24-1 of the
Illinois Criminal Code of 1961, 720 ILCS 5/24-1 (unlawful use of weapons) or if
the applicant, or the applicant's spouse or relative, or a shareholder,
partner, or member of the applicant has ever had a Federal, State or local
firearms dealer license suspended or revoked at any time for any reason.
   (e)   The Mayor shall deny an application for a deadly weapons dealer
license or gun show permit to any person who fails to provide the information
required by, or is otherwise not in compliance with any provisions of, this
Article or any other applicable law or regulation relating to the sale or
transfer of firearms.
(Ord. No. 10-2017, § 1, 4-17-17)
Sec. 11-505. Dealer License and Gun Show Permit.
   (a)   The annual fee for a deadly weapons dealer license shall be $1,000
which shall be paid each year on or before the anniversary of the issuance of
the license.
   (b)   The fee for a gun show permit shall be $1,000.
   (c)   Any person licensed under this Article who purchases electronic
equipment, such as Livescan or similar equipment, that is used by the licensee
to verify, electronically, the identity of every person seeking to purchase a
firearm from that licensee either through the submission of digital
fingerprints, digital photographs or other digital or electronic means, shall
be entitled to deduct the original cost of such equipment (up to a maximum of
$500.00) during each year that such equipment is in use.
(Ord. No. 10-2017, § 1, 4-17-17)
Sec. 11-506. Limitation on Concentration.
   (a)   No deadly weapons dealer licenses shall be issued in the Village
except upon approval of ordinance authorizing the same.
   (b)   Gun shows shall be prohibited in the Village except upon approval of
ordinance authorizing the same.
   (c)   No deadly weapons dealer license may be issued for a gun shop which
will be located within two miles of any other gun shop within or outside of the
Village as measured from the property lines of the respective properties.
   (d)    No deadly weapons dealer license may be issued to any person seeking
a license to operate a gun shop in the Village which will be located within 500
feet of any school as measured from the building entrance to the building
entrance on the respective properties.
(Ord. No. 10-2017, § 1, 4-17-17)
Sec. 11-507. Nontransferability.
   (a)    No license issued under this Article may be transferred or assigned
to any other person or to any other location.
   (b)   It shall be considered a transfer or assignment in the event that more
than 50% of the shares of a corporation, 50% of a partnership interest or 50%
of a membership interest changes ownership.
(Ord. 10-2017, § 1, 4-17-17)
Sec. 11-508. Revocation of License.
   (a)   The Mayor may revoke the deadly weapons dealer license or not renew
the deadly weapons dealer license if:
      (1)   The licensee or any related person is found to be in violation of
any Federal, State or local law or regulation relating to the sale, transfer or
use of firearms or any other deadly weapon described in 720 ILCS 5/24-1
(unlawful use of weapons);
      (2)   The licensee fails to comply with any provision of this Article;
      (3)   The licensee submits any fraudulent or untrue information to the
Village;
      (4)   The licensee transfers a firearm to any person whom the licensee
knows, or reasonably should know, is acquiring the firearm, not for the
person's own use, but for the purpose of transferring it to another who could
not legally obtain the firearm (commonly known as a straw purchaser);
      (5)   The licensee is convicted of any felony in this or any other
jurisdiction; or
      (6)   The licensee's Federal firearms dealer's license or State firearm
owner's identification card is revoked or expires.
A hearing shall be held by the Mayor after notice to the licensee. The Mayor
may temporarily suspend a deadly weapon dealers license for a period of not to
exceed ten days pending charges for revocation thereof.
(Ord. No. 10-2017, § 1, 4-17-17)
Sec. 11-509. Appeal of Revocation or Denial.
   Any person wishing to appeal the denial or revocation of any deadly weapons
dealer license shall file for judicial review in the Circuit Court of Cook
County as allowed by State law and the rules of the Supreme Court of Illinois.
(Ord. No. 10-2017, § 1, 4-17-17)
Secs. 11-510 – 11-519.   Reserved.
ARTICLE XVIII. INVALIDITY OF CONFLICTING ORDINANCES
Sec. 11-520. Definitions.
   For the purpose of this Article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
   Employee means any individual person permitted and/or hired to work by an
employer, regardless of the number of hours worked and of the number of persons
the employer employs.
   Employer means any individual, partnership, association, firm, corporation,
limited liability company, business trust, school district, or any person or
group of persons employing or seeking to employ one or more employees in, or
having its principal place of business in, the Village of Evergreen Park. The
term employer does not mean or include: (i) the government of the United States
or a corporation wholly owned by the government of the United States; (ii) an
Indian tribe or a corporation wholly owned by an Indian tribe; (iii) the
government of the State or any agency or department thereof; or (iv) units of
local government.
   Federal and State Law means any and all applicable statutes and/or
regulations of the United States and the State of Illinois, as amended from
time to time.
(Ord. No. 11-2017, § 2, 4-17-17; Am. Ord. No. 6-2024 § 2, 1-16-24)
Sec. 11-521. Wage and Sick Leave Laws.
   (a)   Employers shall comply with all Federal and State Laws governing the
rate, eligibility, applicability, accrual, use or payment of/for paid leave and
minimum wage.
   (b)   No employers shall have, or be obligated to adhere to, any additional
or greater obligations with respect to paid leave or minimum wage than as
required or established by Federal and State Law.
   (c)   Any additional obligation with respect to paid leave or minimum wages
imposed by law (including Cook County ordinances), other than Federal and State
Law, upon any employer is hereby declared to be, and shall be deemed to be, in
conflict with this section, and superseded and preempted hereby, and shall have
no force, effect, or applicability to such employer.
   (d)   Nothing in this section shall be deemed or interpreted as affecting or
preventing an employer from imposing upon itself any additional or greater
obligation with respect to paid leave or minimum wage voluntarily or by
contract.
(Ord. No. 11-2017, § 2, 4-17-17; Am. Ord. No. 6-2024 § 2, 1-16-24)
Secs. 11-522 – 11-549.   Reserved.
ARTICLE XIX. DEFAULTED PROPERTY REGISTRATION
Sec. 11-550. Purpose and Intent.
   This Article mandating the registration, inspection, and maintenance of
defaulted properties is designed to prevent those conditions and activities
that may lead to or create public nuisances, and that would ultimately
adversely affect the condition or value of properties in the Village.
(Ord. No. 24-2018 § 1, 9-4-18)
Sec. 11-551. Definitions.
   The following words, terms and phrases, as used in this Article, shall have
the following meanings ascribed to them unless the context clearly indicates a
different meaning:
   Applicable laws means any and all ordinances of the Village governing the
condition, maintenance, use, or occupancy of property and structures thereon.
   Defaulted property means any real property located in the Village, whether
vacant or occupied, that (a) is encumbered by a mortgage in default and for
which a notice of default has been issued to the owner, (b) is subject to a
foreclosure action by a mortgagee, (c) has been the subject of a foreclosure
action by a mortgagee and a judgment has been entered, (d) has been the subject
of a foreclosure sale and title was is held by the mortgagee or transferred to
a beneficiary of a mortgagee, or (e) has been transferred to a beneficiary of a
mortgagee by a deed in lieu of foreclosure.
   Enforcement officer shall mean any officer of the Village authorized to
enforce applicable laws including police officers, code inspectors and
conservators of the peace.
   Foreclosure or foreclosure action shall mean the legal process by which a
mortgagee terminates or attempts to terminate a property owner’s equitable
right of redemption in order to obtain legal and equitable title to the
property pledged as security for a debt.
   Mortgagee shall mean any lender, creditor, trustee, or mortgage servicing
company, and its successors and assigns, having a secured or equitable interest
in real property, or having any legal right to foreclose or prosecute a
foreclosure action. The term mortgagee shall exclude governmental entities and/
or agencies.
   Owner means each record owner, mortgagor, lessor, or any other person
possessing a legal interest in real property.
   Property shall mean any real property in the Village.
   Property manager shall mean any person designated by an owner/mortgagee as
being responsible for management of real property.
   Registerable property shall mean any property qualifying as defaulted
property.
   Vacant means any building or structure that is not lawfully occupied by the
owner or lessee thereof. A building or structure is vacant if any utility
service (including water, electricity, or gas) is terminated to such property.
   Village means the Village of Evergreen Park.
(Ord. No. 24-2018 § 1, 9-4-18)
Sec. 11-552. Registry Established.
   The Village does hereby create and establish a Defaulted Property Registry.
(Ord. No. 24-2018 § 1, 9-4-18)
Sec. 11-553. Registration of Defaulted Property.
   (a)   A mortgagee shall register defaulted property with the Building
Commissioner no later than 10 days of the same qualifies as defaulted property
(the “initial registration”), and every 6 months thereafter (each a “semi-
annual registration”) while the property remains qualified as a defaulted
property.
   (b)   A mortgagee shall identify in its registration, with respect to each
defaulted property: (I) its name, address, and telephone number; (ii) the
address of the property being registered; (iii) the qualifying event requiring
registration; (iv) the name, e-mail, and telephone number of a contact person;
and (v) a status of the property as vacant or occupied. The registration of any
vacant defaulted property shall include the name, address, e-mail, and
telephone number of a property manager responsible for the management of the
vacant defaulted property.
   (c)   Prior to registration, and every 30 days thereafter while the property
remains on the Defaulted Property Registry, a mortgagee shall inspect the
defaulted property to determine whether the same is vacant or occupied.
   (d)   A mortgagee, and its successor or assign, shall update the information
contained in its registration no later than 10 days following a change in
circumstance that would make the information contained on the Defaulted
Property Registry outdated, incorrect, or no longer valid.
   (e)   A non-refundable registration fee in the amount of $300 shall be due
and payable to the Village by the mortgagee for each defaulted property upon
its initial registration and at each semi-annual registration thereafter.
   (f)   Defaulted property shall be and remain on the Defaulted Property
Registry until such time as the same no longer qualifies as registerable
property. Proof of the disqualifying event or circumstance shall be delivered
to and approved by the Village before the defaulted property is removed from
the Defaulted Property Registry.
(Ord. No. 24-2018 § 1, 9-4-18)
Sec. 11-554. Maintenance of Registerable Property.
   Any and all applicable laws, as applicable to owners, occupants, or persons
in possession, shall be applicable to and govern each mortgagee and owner of
defaulted property, respectively, while such real property qualifies as and
remains registerable property, and those laws are incorporated herein as though
set forth at length. Responsibility and liability under this Article for vacant
defaulted property shall be joint and several among the owner and mortgagee.
(Ord. No. 24-2018 § 1, 9-4-18)
Sec. 11-555. Security of Vacant Defaulted Property.
   (a)   Mortgagees and owners of vacant defaulted property shall maintain each
registerable property in secure manner such that all buildings and structures
thereon are inaccessible to unauthorized persons. A “secure manner” means that
all doors, windows, gates, openings, and other points of access are shut,
locked, and in a functioning state free of breaks or holes. No property may
remain boarded up for more than 30 consecutive days.
   (b)   A property manager shall be required and be designated for each vacant
defaulted property.
   (c)   Vacant defaulted property shall posted with the name and 24 hour
contact telephone number of the property manager or owner (if no property
manager is required). The property manager shall be available to be contacted
by the Village Monday through Friday between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00
p.m., legal holidays excepted. The sign shall be placed on the interior of a
window facing the street to the front of the property, shall be no less than 18
inches by 24 inches, and shall be legible from a distance of 45 feet. The
posting shall be in substantially the same form and contain the following
information:
      THIS PROPERTY IS MANAGED BY ________________________ AND IS INSPECTED ON
A REGULAR BASIS. THE PROPERTY MANAGER CAN BE CONTACTED BY TELEPHONE AT
____________________.
   (d)   In the event an interior posting cannot be made visible as required
above, the property shall be posted on the exterior at a location that is
visible from the street to the front of the property at all times, but not
readily accessible to vandals. Exterior postings shall be constructed of and
printed with weather-resistant materials.
(Ord. No. 24-2018 § 1, 9-4-18)
Sec. 11-556. Violations and Penalties.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions of this
Article. The penalty clause for this Article shall be Section
1-9 of the Evergreen Park Municipal Code.
(Ord. No. 24-2018 § 1, 9-4-18)
Sec. 11-557. Administration.
   Violations of this Article may be administered through the provisions of
Chapter 12, Miscellaneous Provisions and Offenses, Article X, Administrative
Adjudication of Non-Vehicular Regulations Violations, of the Evergreen Park
Municipal Code, or by any other means permitted by law. Nothing in this Article
shall be interpreted to limit the remedies or penalties available to the
Village.
(Ord. No. 24-2018 § 1, 9-4-18)
Secs. 11-558 - 11-599. Reserved.
ARTICLE XX. VIDEO GAMING
Sec. 11-600. Authorization.
   Video gaming terminals, as defined herein, may be located, possessed,
maintained, and otherwise operated on premises within the Village by
establishments licensed by the Illinois Gaming Board and by the Village,
pursuant to the terms, conditions and requirements of this Article and of the
Illinois Video Gaming Act, 230 ILCS 40/1 et seq., as amended.
(Ord. No. 11-2020 § 1, 10-19-20)
Sec. 11-601. Definitions.
   Video Gaming Act means the Illinois Video Gaming Act, 230 ILCS 40/1 et seq.,
as amended.
   Reference is hereby made to the Video Gaming Act for the definitions of all
terms used in this Article.
(Ord. No. 11-2020 § 1, 10-19-20)
Sec. 11-602. Local Liquor Control Commissioner to administer this Article.
   (a)   The Local Liquor Control Commissioner shall be charged with the
administration of this Article. All video gaming establishment licenses shall
be issued by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner.
   (b)   The Local Liquor Control Commissioner shall have the following powers,
functions and duties:
      (1)   To grant, suspend for a period not to exceed 30 days, or revoke for
cause, in accordance with the provisions of this Article, a video gaming
establishment license.
      (2)   To enter or to authorize any police officer to enter at any time
upon any video gaming terminal premises licensed hereunder, to determine
whether any of the provisions of this Article or any rules or regulations
issued thereunder have been or are being violated, and at the time of such
entry to examine such premises in connection therewith.
      (3)   To receive complaints from any person that any of the provisions of
this Article, or any rules or regulations issued thereunder have been or are
being violated and to act upon such complaints in the manner hereinafter
provided.
      (4)   To deny any application for the issuance or renewal of a video
gaming establishment license to an applicant upon determination to be
ineligible therefor.
      (5)   To examine or cause to be examined under oath any applicant for a
video gaming establishment license or for a renewal thereof, or any license
upon who notice of revocation of suspension has been served in the manner
hereinafter provided, and to examine or cause to be examined, the books and
records of any such applicant or licensee; to hear testimony in the performance
of his duties and for such purpose to issue subpoenas which shall be effective
in any part of this State. For the purpose of obtaining any of the information
desired by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner under this Section, to
authorize an agent to act.
(Ord. No. 11-2020 § 1, 10-19-20)
Sec. 11-603. Video gaming establishment license required.
   No establishment shall be permitted to operate any video gaming terminal in
the Village pursuant to the Video Gaming Act, unless the establishment also has
obtained a video gaming establishment license and paid a yearly fee to the
Village. No video gaming establishment license may be issued where the
applicant owes a debt, fine, fee or penalty to the Village, or where the
applicant has been convicted of being, or adjudicated to have been, in
violation of any Village Code. A video gaming establishment license is not a
property right. No expectation of the continuance of a video gaming
establishment license is a property right.
(Ord. No. 11-2020 § 1, 10-19-20)
Sec. 11-604. Establishments eligible for video gaming establishment license.
   (a)   Establishments eligible for a video gaming establishment license from
the Village are limited to establishments which are licensed for on-premises
consumption of alcoholic liquor (i.e., Class A, Class AA, Class B, Class D,
Class EE, Class F and Class H liquor licenses), provided such licensed
establishments have been lawfully conducting business on the premises for at
least 18 consecutive months immediately prior to applying for a Village video
gaming establishment license with the same liquor licensee and the same
shareholders, partners, or members. In the event the Class A liquor license of
a licensed video gaming establishment is terminated for any reason, the video
gaming establishment license for such establishment shall terminate and be
revoked forthwith without the requirement of any further notice or action by
the Village.
   (b)   No video gaming establishment license shall be issued to a licensed
truck stop establishment.
   (c)   No more than 12 video gaming establishment licenses shall be issued
and in force at one time throughout the Village.
   (d)   Businesses commonly known as video cafes are not eligible for a video
gaming establishment licenses.
   (e)   Businesses which are granted a video gaming establishment license must
continue to operate their business in the same manner as when such license was
granted. Such establishments must continue to offer the same food and beverages
and may not reduce or change the basic nature of the business operation or
reduce the size of the floor area used for service of food and beverage from
that when the video gaming establishment license is originally issued.
   (f)   If a licensed video gaming establishment is sold or transferred
(including the sale or transfer of more than 5% ownership in shares,
partnership, members, or other interest), or if a new business is opening
within the Village, and the new owner is issued an eligible Village liquor
license for such establishment, the new licensee will be eligible to apply for
a 6-month probationary video gaming establishment license while the new owner’s
application for a non-probationary video gaming establishment license is
processed, and the 18 consecutive month operational requirement may be waived,
after the 6-month probationary period, by the Local Liquor Control
Commissioner. Upon and during the suspension of the licensee’s liquor license,
the licensee’s video gaming establishment license shall automatically be
suspended without further notice or action.
   (g)   No video gaming establishment licenses may be issued in violation of
any locational restriction under the Video Gaming Act.
(Ord. No. 11-2020 § 1, 10-19-20)
Sec. 11-605. Maximum video gaming establishment licenses.
   No more than one video gaming establishment license shall be issued and in
force at any one time for each licensed establishment and not more than the
maximum video gaming terminals under the Video Gaming Act may be located,
maintained or operated in any one licensed video gaming establishment.
(Ord. No. 11-2020 § 1, 10-19-20)
Sec. 11-606. Operation of terminals.
   All video gaming terminals shall at all times be kept, operated, placed and
monitored pursuant to Illinois State law and applicable regulations including
but not limited to the following:
   (a)   No video gaming establishment license shall permit the operation of a
video gaming terminal in a manner which will disturb the peace of persons
otherwise properly within or without the premises where the terminal is
located. No license issued hereunder shall permit the operation of such
terminal in such a manner as to constitute a nuisance in fact.
   (b)   Every licensee shall strictly comply with all of the conditions, rules
and regulations imposed by the State and the Village, and specifically shall
comply with the following:
      (1)   No video gaming terminal may be played unless all State and Village
licenses and registrations required herein, including but not limited to, all
State and Village licenses required by the Video Gaming Act, and any Village
business licenses or occupancy certificates are current and valid.   
      (2)   No video gaming terminal may be played except during the legal
hours of operation allowed for the consumption of alcoholic beverages at the
licensed video gaming establishment, however in no instance shall a video
gaming terminal be operated prior to 8:00 a.m. Monday thru Saturday, and 11:00
a.m. on Sunday.
      (3)   No licensee shall cause or permit any person under the age of 21
years to use or play a video gaming terminal.
      (4)   The video gaming area shall be personally monitored at all times of
legal gaming operation by an employee of the licensed video gaming
establishment who is 21 years of age or older. Lighting and sounds produced by
the video gaming terminals must be limited so as not to be seen or heard
outside of the video gaming area.
      (5)   All video gaming terminals shall be located in a segregated area of
the licensed video gaming establishment which shall not be accessible or
viewable by minors. Applicants shall submit a site plan clearly indicating the
proposed location of all video gaming terminals and the type of physical
barrier to be utilized to segregate the area, provided that such barrier shall
not totally obstruct the view of the video gaming area by employees.
      (6)   The Local Liquor Control Commissioner may require the installation
of video camera surveillance, alarm systems, or other measures to ensure that
no violations of this Article are being committed.
(Ord. No. 11-2020 § 1, 10-19-20)
Sec. 11-607. Grounds for disciplinary actions.
   The licensee of the licensed video gaming establishment shall be subject to
imposition of fines, suspension, revocation or restriction of license, or other
disciplinary action for any act or failure to act, including those by his
agents and employees, that violates any provision of this Article, is injurious
to the public health, safety, morals, good order and general welfare of the
people of the State or the Village, or that would discredit or tend to
discredit the video gaming industry, the State, or the Village. Without
limiting the provisions of this Section, the following acts or omissions shall
be grounds for discipline:
   (a)   Failing to comply with or make provision for compliance with the Video
Gaming Act, the regulations promulgated under the Video Gaming Act and this
Article, any federal, State or local law or regulation, or a control system or
protocol mandated by the Illinois Gaming Board or the Village;
   (b)   Failing to comply with any order or ruling of the Illinois Gaming
Board or its agents pertaining to the regulation of video gaming in the State;
   (c)   Failing to comply with any order or ruling of the Village; the Local
Liquor Control Commissioner or the Village’s officers, employees or agents
pertaining to the regulation of video gaming in the Village;
   (d)   Receiving goods or services from a licensee or other person in
violation of the Video Gaming Act or this Article, or in violation of any
restriction, condition or prohibition of a license;
   (e)   Being suspended or ruled ineligible or having a license revoked or
suspended by the Illinois Gaming Board, the Village or in any other state;
   (f)   Employing, associating with, or participating in any enterprise or
business with a documented or identifiable organized crime group or recognized
organized crime figure;
   (g)   Employing, associating with, or participating in any enterprise or
business with persons of notorious or unsavory reputation or who have extensive
police records, or who have failed to cooperate with any officially constituted
investigatory or administrative body;
   (h)   Failing to establish and maintain standards and procedures designed to
prevent ineligible or unsuitable persons from being employed by the licensee,
including any person known to have been found guilty of cheating or using any
improper device in connection with any game or gaming device regulated under
the Video Gaming Act or under the law of any gaming jurisdiction;
   (i)   Misrepresenting any information to the Illinois Gaming Board, the
Village or the Local Liquor Control Commissioner;   
   (j)   Intentionally making, causing to be made, or aiding, assisting, or
procuring another to make any false statement in any report, disclosure,
application, permit, form, or any other document, including improperly
notarized documents, required by the Video Gaming Act, the regulations
promulgated under the Video Gaming Act or this Article;
   (k)   Submitting tardy, inaccurate or incomplete material or information to
the Village or Local Liquor Control Commissioner;
   (l)   Obstructing or impeding the lawful activities of the Illinois Gaming
Board or its agents, the Village Board, the Local Liquor Control Commissioner
or the Village’s officers, employees or agents;
   (m)   Failing to pay amounts due or to be remitted to the State or the
Village, including sales tax;
   (n)   Failing to timely pay a fine imposed by the Illinois Gaming Board or
the Village;
   (o)   Failing to respond in a timely manner to communications from the
Illinois Gaming Board, the Village or the Local Liquor Control Commissioner;
   (p)   Being unavailable to the Illinois Gaming Board, the Village or their
representatives or agents;
   (q)   Aiding and abetting a violation by an Illinois Gaming Board member,
Village officer or employee, or other government official, of a requirement
established by statute, resolution, ordinance, personnel code or code of
conduct;
   (r)   Violation of the Video Gaming Act, the regulations promulgated under
the Video Gaming Act or this Article by any person identified as a person with
significant influence or control over the operation of the licensed video
gaming establishment;
   (s)   Employing, associating with, or participating in any enterprise or
business with a person who has facilitated, enabled, or participated in the use
of coin-operated devices for gambling purposes or who is under the significant
influence or control of such a person, such that he or she is determined
unsuitable to be an applicant or licensee by the Illinois Gaming Board or any
other gaming jurisdiction;
   (t)   The imposition of fines, suspension, revocation or restriction of a
State license, or other disciplinary action by the Illinois Gaming Board for
any act or failure to act that violates any provision of the Video Gaming Act
or the regulations promulgated under the Video Gaming Act; or
   (u)   The occurrence of a disturbance at the licensed premises provided that
the Local Liquor Control Commissioner finds, upon the recommendation of the
Chief of Police, that as a result of the disturbances or incidents involving
injury or bodily harm a public nuisance exists therein or threat endangering
the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the Village.
(Ord. No. 11-2020 § 1, 10-19-20)
Sec. 11-608. Advertising.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful to advertise or promote video gaming on any
private property or public property (including a street, alley, right-of-way,
park or public place) which can be seen from any street, alley, or sidewalk. No
banners, signs or flags shall be placed on public or private property to
advertise or promote any video gaming.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person to use lighting (including strobe
lights, racing lights, and LED lights) visible from the exterior of any
building where video gaming is licensed to be conducted to advertise or promote
any video gaming.
   (c)   It shall be unlawful for any person to use any amplified sound
(including speakers, live music and recorded music or speech) audible from the
exterior of any building where video gaming is licensed to be conducted to
advertise or promote any video gaming.
(Ord. No. 11-2020 § 1, 10-19-20; Am. Ord. No. 8-2021 § 1, 7-19-21)
Sec. 11-609. Application.
   Application to the Village for a video gaming establishment license shall be
on such form as promulgated by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner.
(Ord. No. 11-2020 § 1, 10-19-20)
Sec. 11-610. Applicant eligibility and license issuance.
   (a)   No video gaming establishment licenses may be issued where the
applicant is a person who has facilitated, enabled, or participated in the use
of coin-operated devices for gambling purposes or who is under the significant
influence or control of such a person who is ineligible for a video gaming
establishment license.
   (b)   Each person seeking a video gaming establishment license for an
establishment shall submit to a background investigation. To the extent that
the corporate structure of the applicant allows, the background investigation
shall include any or all of the following: (1) each beneficiary of a trust, (2)
each partner of a partnership, (3) each member of a limited liability company,
(4) each director and officer of a publicly or non-publicly held corporation,
(5) each stockholder of a non-publicly held corporation, (6) each stockholder
of 5% or more of a publicly held corporation, and (7) each stockholder of 5% or
more in a parent or subsidiary corporation.
   (c)   Each person seeking video gaming establishment license for an
establishment shall disclose the identity of every person, association, trust,
corporation, or limited liability company having a greater than 1% direct or
indirect pecuniary interest in the video gaming terminal operation. Any
management agreement shall be disclosed if the manager is entitled to
compensation. If the disclosed entity is a trust, the application shall
disclose the names and addresses of the beneficiaries; if a corporation, the
names and addresses of all stockholders and directors; if a limited liability
company, the names and addresses of all members; or if a partnership, the names
and addresses of all partners, both general and limited.
   (d)   No person may be licensed if the applicant has been found by the Local
Liquor Control Commissioner to: (1) have a background, including a criminal
record, reputation, habits, social or business associations, or prior
activities that pose a threat to the public interests of the State or to the
security and integrity of video gaming; (2) create or enhance the dangers of
unsuitable, unfair, or illegal practices, methods, and activities in the
conduct of video gaming; or (3) present questionable business practices and
financial arrangements incidental to the conduct of video gaming activities.
   (e)   All applicants have the burden of proving their qualifications to the
satisfaction of the Local Liquor Control Commissioner, whose decision shall be
final and not subject to appeal.
   (f)   License issuance shall be approved by the Local Liquor Control
Commissioner, subject to the availability of video gaming establishment
licenses pursuant to Section 11-604 and other restrictions as provided by this
Article.
(Ord. No. 11-2020 § 1, 10-19-20)
Sec. 11-611.1. Video gaming establishment fee.
   The annual license fee for a video gaming establishment license to locate,
maintain or operate video gaming terminals at its premises shall be $1,000.00.
The new owner of a licensed video gaming establishment who has applied for an
available 6-month probationary video gaming establishment license shall not be
required to pay the annual fees provided for in this Section for the current
year or balance of the current year provided such annual fees for the current
year were fully paid by the prior licensee. The Local Liquor Control
Commissioner may allow for the proration of the video gaming establishment fee
during the first year of operation.
(Ord. No. 11-2020 § 1, 10-19-20; Am. Ord. No. 14-2021 § 1, 8-16-21)
Sec. 11-611.2 Video Gaming Terminal Fee.
   The annual license fee for each video gaming terminal on the licensed
premises of a video gaming establishment shall be $1,000.00, the cost of which
shall be shared equally between the licensed terminal operator and the video
gaming establishment. The Village shall issue a decal or sticker for each
licensed video gaming terminal to the licensed terminal operator that owns or
operates the video gaming terminal. This decal or sticker must be affixed to
the licensed video gaming terminal in a conspicuous place and must be kept on
the device during all times the device is in use. No refunds or partial refunds
of annual fees shall be given by the Village in the event either the licensed
terminal operator or video gaming establishment ceases operating any or all
video gaming terminals or in the event a video gaming terminal fails to
operate. The new owner of a licensed video gaming establishment who has applied
for an available 6-month probationary video gaming establishment license shall
not be required to pay the annual fees provided for in this Section for the
current year or balance of the current year provided such annual fees for the
current year were fully paid by the prior licensee.
(Ord. No. 14-2021 § 1, 8-16-21)
Sec. 11-612. Initial video gaming establishment license application fee.
   A person applying for either an initial or probationary video gaming
establishment license (whether or not the issuance of such license would
require an amendatory ordinance authorizing an increase in the number of video
gaming establishment licenses authorized to be issued), shall pay at the time
of such application a non-refundable initial or probationary license
application fee of $1,000.00 in addition to the video gaming establishment
license fees required in this Article. The video gaming establishment license
application fee shall be for the purpose of defraying any and all costs which
the Village will incur as a result of the consideration and investigation of
said application and applicant(s). This initial license application fee shall
be retained by the Village regardless of whether or not person/applicant is
granted a video gaming establishment license.
(Ord. No. 11-2020 § 1, 10-19-20)
Sec. 11-613. Penalty.
   (a)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this Article shall be
subject to a fine of not to exceed $1,000 for each violation. Each day such
violation continues constitutes a separate fineable offense. Fines may be
assessed in administrative adjudication, through a Village ordinance violation
citation or complaint brought in the Circuit Court, or local administrative
adjudication.
   (b)   Video gaming establishment licenses may be revoked, or suspended for a
period not to exceed 30 days, by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner, after
notice and hearing.
   (c)   Revocation, if ordered, shall not preclude prosecution and imposition
of any other penalties include the seizure of any video gaming terminal.
(Ord. No. 11-2020 § 1, 10-19-20)
Sec. 11-614. Non-transferable.
   No video gaming establishment license shall be transferable, except as
provided in Section
11-604(f).
(Ord. No. 11-2020 § 1, 10-19-20)
ARTICLE XXI. CANNABIS RETAILERS' OCCUPATION TAX
Sec. 11-620. Tax Imposed.
   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of selling
cannabis, other than cannabis purchased under the Compassionate Use of Medical
Cannabis Pilot Program Act, at retail in the Village at the rate of three
percent (3%) of the gross receipts from these sales made in the course of that
business.
(Ord. No. 17-2021 § 1, 10-4-21)
Sec. 11-621. Tax Collections; Reimbursement.
   Each retailer shall collect and remit to the Illinois Department of Revenue
the tax imposed under this Article. A retailer may reimburse itself for its tax
liability hereunder by separately stating the tax as an additional charge,
which charge may be stated in combination, in a single amount, with any
Illinois tax the retailer is required to collect.
(Ord. No. 17-2021 § 1, 10-4-21)
Sec. 11-622. Administration and Enforcement.
   The Illinois Department of Revenue shall have full power and authority to
administer and enforce the provisions of this article. The tax imposed, and all
civil penalties that may be assessed as an incident thereto, shall be collected
and enforced by the Illinois Department of Revenue. Any tax required to be
collected, and any tax collected by such retailer and required to be remitted
to the Illinois Department of Revenue, shall constitute a debt owed by the
retailer to the State of Illinois.
(Ord. No. 17-2021 § 1, 10-4-21)
ARTICLE XXII. AUTOMATED PURCHASING MACHINES
Sec. 11-630. Definitions.
   The following words, terms and phrases when used in this article shall have
the following meanings:
   Automated purchasing machine or APM (also known as a "reverse vending
machine", "ecoATM", or an "automated kiosk") means an interactive automated
device that is capable of taking possession of and dispensing payment or credit
(in any form) for personal property including, but not limited to, any consumer
electronic device.
   Consumer electronic device means any portable electronic or digital device
designed to be purchased and used by end users for daily commercial or non-
commercial purposes including, but not limited to, cellular telephones, touch
screen tablets, laptop computers, smart watches, and digital media players.
   Person means any individual, firm, association, partnership, corporation, or
other legal entity.
(Ord. No. 23-2023 § 1, 11-6-23)
Sec. 11-631. Automated purchasing machines prohibited.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an automated purchasing
machine within the corporate limits of the village.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person to purchase or offer to purchase
any personal property by means of an automated purchasing machine within the
corporate limits of the village.
   (c)   It shall be unlawful for any person to allow or suffer to allow the
siting, placement or operation of any automated purchasing machine on real
property within the corporate limits of the village.
(Ord. No. 23-2023 § 1, 11-6-23)
Sec. 11-632. Penalty and administration.
   (a)   Any person violating any provision of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be fined not less than one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00)
nor more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) for each offense, and a separate
offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation
occurs or continues.
   (b)   Any business, liquor, or other licensee or permittee found in
violation of the provisions of this article shall, in addition to any fine that
may be imposed, be subject to license suspension and revocation proceedings.
   (c)   Violations of this article may be administered through the provisions
of Chapter 12, Miscellaneous Provisions and Offenses, Article X, Administrative
Adjudication of Non-Vehicular Regulations Violations, of the Evergreen Park
Municipal Code, or by any other means permitted by law. Nothing in this chapter
shall be interpreted to limit the remedies or penalties available to Village of
Evergreen Park.
(Ord. No. 23-2023 § 1, 11-6-23)
ARTICLE XXIII. MUNICIPAL GROCERY RETAILERS’ TAX
Sec. 11-640. Municipal Grocery Retailers’s Occupation Tax Imposed.
   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of selling
groceries at retail in the Village of Evergreen Park at the rate of 1% of the
gross receipts from such sales made in the course of such business while this
ordinance is in effect. The imposition of this tax is in accordance with and
subject to the provisions of Section 8-11-24 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65
ILCS 5/8-11-24).
(Ord. No. 09-2025 § 1, 10-6-25)
Sec. 11-641. Municipal Grocery Service Occupation Tax.
   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the Village of Evergreen
Park in the business of making sales of service, who, as an incident to making
those sales of service, transfer groceries as an incident to a sale of service.
The rate of this tax shall be the same rate identified in Section 11-630. The
imposition of this tax is in accordance with and subject to the provisions of
Section 8-11-24 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-24).
(Ord. No. 09-2025 § 1, 10-6-25)
Sec. 11-642. Illinois Department of Revenue to Administer Both Taxes.
   The taxes hereby imposed, and all civil penalties that may be assessed as an
incident thereto, shall be collected and enforced by the Department of Revenue
of the State of Illinois. The Illinois Department of Revenue shall have full
power to administer and enforce the provisions of this ordinance.
(Ord. No. 09-2025 § 1, 10-6-25)
Sec. 11-643. Village Clerk to file Ordinance with Illinois Department of
Revenue.
   As required under Section 8-11-24 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/
8-11-24), the Village Clerk is hereby directed to file a certified copy of this
ordinance with the Illinois Department of Revenue.
(Ord. No. 09-2025 § 1, 10-6-25)
Sec. 11-644. Effective Date.
   The taxes imposed by this ordinance shall take effect on January 1, 2026.
(Ord. No. 09-2025 § 1, 10-6-25)
Chapter 12
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS AND OFFENSES*
   *State law references—Powers of home rule units, Ill. Const. art. VII, § 6;
crimes generally, 720 ILCS 5/1-1 et. seq.
Art. I. In General, §§ 12-1-12.25
Art. II. Offenses Involving Personal Injury, Etc., §§ 12.26-12-50
Art. III. Offenses Directed Against Property Rights, §§ 12-51-12-125
   Div. 1. Generally, §§ 12-51-12-70
   Div. 2. Theft and Related Offenses, §§ 12-71-12-95
   Div. 3. Trespass, Malicious Mischief, Etc., §§ 12-96-12-125
Art. IV. Offenses Involving Public Safety, §§ 12-126-12.170
   Div. 1. Generally, §§ 12-126-12-150
   Div. 2. Weapons, §§ 12-151-12-170
Art. V. Offenses Involving Public Peace and Order, §§ 12-171-12.210
Art. VI. Offenses Involving Public Morals, §§ 12.211-12-300
   Div. 1. Generally, §§ 12-211-12-230
   Div. 2. Gambling and Related Offenses, §§ 12-231-12-250
   Div. 3. Obscenity and Related Offenses, §§ 12-251-12-275
   Div. 4. Prostitution and Related Offenses, §§ 12-276-12-300
Art. VII. Minors and Underaged Persons, §§ 12.301-12-325
Art. VIII. Offenses Against Governmental Operations, §§ 12.326-12-350
Art. IX. Other Offenses, §§ 12-351-12-357
Art. X.   Administrative Adjudication of Non-Vehicular Regulations Violations,
§§ 12-370-12-378
Art. XI.   Synthetic Drugs, §§ 12-400-12-404
Art. XII.   Prohibited Drugs, §§ 12-420-12-423
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 12-1. General offense.
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit any act or fail to perform any
requirement which is prohibited or required by state law, insofar as such laws
are applicable to municipal government.
(Code 1965, § 19-36)
Secs. 12-2—12-25. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. OFFENSES INVOLVING PERSONAL INJURY, ETC.*
   *State law reference—Offenses involving personal injury, etc., 720 ILCS 5/9-
1 et seq.
Sec. 12-26. Assault.
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit assault, which is hereby defined
as any conduct which places another in reasonable apprehension of receiving a
battery. (Code 1965, § 19-6)
   State law reference—Assault, 720 ILCS 5/12-1, 5/12-2.
Sec. 12-27. Battery.
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit battery. A person commits battery
if he intentionally or knowingly without legal justification and by any means
causes bodily harm to an individual or makes physical contact of an insulting
or provoking nature with an individual.
(Code 1965, § 19-10)
   State law reference—Battery, 720 ILCS 5/12-3 et seq.
Secs. 12-28—12-50. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. OFFENSES DIRECTED AGAINST PROPERTY RIGHTS*
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
   *State law reference—Offenses directed against property, 720 ILCS 5/15-1 et
seq.
Sec. 12-51. Burglar tools.
It shall be unlawful for any person to have in his possession any nippers of
any description known as burglar's nippers, picklock, key, instrument, device,
explosive, skeleton key, jimmy or other burglar's instrument or tool of any
description, suitable for use in breaking into a building, housetrailer,
watercraft, motor vehicle, railroad car or any depository designed for the
safekeeping of property with intent to commit a felony or theft.
(Code 1965, § 19-12)
   State law reference—Possession of burglar tools, 720 ILCS 5/19-2.
Secs. 12-52—12-70. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. THEFT AND RELATED OFFENSES*
   *State law reference—Theft and related offenses, 720 ILCS 5/16-1 et seq.
Sec. 12-71. Petit theft.
A person shall commit a theft when he knowingly:
      (1)   Obtains or accepts unauthorized control over property of the owner.
      (2)   Obtains, by deceit, control over property of the owner.
      (3)   Obtains, by threat, control over property of the owner.
      (4)   Obtains with the intention not to pay for control over property of
the owner.
      (5)   Obtains control over stolen property knowing the property to have
been stolen by another or under such circumstances as would reasonably induce
him to believe that the property was stolen.
      (6)   Obtains services from another with the intention of not paying for
the same. (Code 1965, § 19-93)
   State law reference—Theft, 720 ILCS 5/16-1.
Sec. 12-72. Failure to return library books.
It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to return any book belonging to the
public library, or any of its branches, according to the requirements of the
bylaws, rules or regulations duly made and adopted by the directors of such
library for the government thereof. In addition to any fine that may be
assessed by the court, the person shall pay the replacement cost of the book.
(Code 1965, § 19-46)
   State law reference—Library theft, 720 ILCS 5/16B-2.
Sec. 12-73. False pretenses in obtaining food, goods, etc.
It shall be unlawful for any person to obtain any food, drink, goods, wares or
merchandise under false pretenses, or to enter any public place and call for
refreshments or other articles and receive and refuse to pay for same, or
depart without paying for or satisfying the person from whom he received the
food, goods, wares and merchandise.
(Code 1965, § 19-26)
Sec. 12-74. Admission fees; fraudulently avoiding payment.
It shall be unlawful for any person fraudulently to enter, without payment of
the proper admission fee, any theatre, ballroom, lecture, concert or other
place where admission fees are charged; provided, however, that nothing herein
contained shall be deemed to prohibit or restrict the free admission of police
officers engaged in the performance of police duties to any place of public
entertainment or amusement.
(Code 1965, § 19-1)
   State law reference—Theft of services or use of property, 720 ILCS 5/16-3.
Sec. 12-75. Telephone; payment required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to insert, or attempt to insert, into the
coinbox or money receptacle of any telephone any slug, button or other
substance or to manipulate or operate, or attempt to manipulate or operate, in
any manner whatever any telephone instrument or any mechanism or device
connected or commonly used therewith, with the intent to obtain telephone
service without paying therefor.
(Code 1965, § 19-92)
   State law references—Obtaining telecommunications service with intent to
defraud, 720 ILCS 365/1; tampering with coin-operated telephones, 720 ILCS 370/
1 et seq.
Sec. 12-76. Swindling.
It shall be unlawful for any person, who by color, or aid of any trick or
sleight-of-hand performance, or by fraud or by fraudulent scheme, cards, dice
or device, to win for himself or for another any money or property or a
representative of either.
(Code 1965, § 19-91)
Sec. 12-77. Fraud.
No person shall stand, loiter or stroll about in any place in the village,
waiting or seeking to obtain money, or other valuable thing from others by
trick or fraud or to aid or assist therein. No person shall engage in any
fraudulent scheme, device or trick to obtain money or other valuable thing, or
who shall aid, abet or in any manner be concerned therein.
(Code 1965, § 19-18(7), (8))
   State law reference—Deceptive practices, 720 ILCS 5/17-1.
Secs. 12-78—12-95. Reserved.
DIVISION 3. TRESPASS, MALICIOUS MISCHIEF, ETC.*
   *State law reference—Damage and trespass to property, 720 ILCS 5/21-1 et
seq.
Sec. 12-96. Trespass.
   (a)   Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to commit a trespass
within this village upon either public or private property.
   (b)   Enumeration; suppression. Without constituting any limitation upon the
provisions of subsection (a), any of the following acts by any person shall be
deemed included among those that constitute trespass in violations of the
provisions of subsection (a), and appropriate action may be taken hereunder at
any time, to prevent or suppress any violation of this section, and of the
following acts enumerated:
      (1)   An entry upon the premises, or any part thereof, of another,
including any public property in violation of a notice posted or exhibited at
the main entrance to such premises or at any point of approach or entry or in
violation of any notice, warning or protest given orally or in writing, by any
owner or occupant thereof.
      (2)   The pursuit of a course of conduct or action incidental to the
making of an entry upon the land of another in violation of a notice posted or
exhibited at the main entrance to such premises or at any point of approach or
entry, or in violation of any notice, warning or protest given orally or in
writing by any owner or occupant thereof.
      (3)   A failure or refusal to depart from the premises of another in case
of being requested, either orally or in writing, to leave by any owner or
occupant thereof.
      (4)   An entry into or upon any vehicle, aircraft or watercraft made
without the consent of the person having the right to the possession or control
thereof, or a failure or refusal to leave any such vehicle, aircraft or
watercraft after being requested to leave by the person having such right.
      (5)   To take down any fence or to let down any bars or to open any gate
in or on the property of another without the consent of the owner, occupant or
person in charge thereof.
      (6)   An attempt to obtain entry to premises by ringing the doorbell,
knocking or using an instrumentality or similar device, informing the resident
that a person is present at the door where a sign is posted such as:
         a.   "No Solicitors Invited"; or
         b.   "Only Solicitor Registered in Evergreen Park Invited" where the
solicitor has not been registered;
         c.   "No Solicitors." (Code 1965, § 19-96)
   State law reference—Trespass, 720 ILCS 5/21-2 et seq.
Sec. 12-97. Malicious mischief.
   (a)   No person shall injure, damage, destroy or deface, or assist in
injuring, damaging, destroying or defacing, any bridge, fence, building,
street, sign, street sign, traffic sign, schoolhouse, church building, depot,
public building, house lamps, lamppost, sidewalk, hydrants, village-owned or
village-leased vehicles, any material used by any village department, or any
other public or private property.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully, maliciously or
recklessly cut, mark, break, mutilate, remove or pull down any property of
another. Such offense shall include, but is not limited to actions by cutting,
tearing, breaking, marking, painting, or drawing when such actions are intended
to or have the effect of causing damage to property.
   (c)   No person shall willfully or carelessly break, damage, deface or
destroy any sewer, cesspool, culvert, catchbasin, manhole, water pipe or
hydrant laid or placed in, upon or under any street, sidewalk, highway,
thoroughfare or public place.
   (d)   No person shall cut, injure, mark or deface any tree, grass, shrub or
walk in any square, street, or park.
(Code 1965, §§ 19-17, 19-17.1(a), 19-41, 19-98)
   State law reference—Criminal damage to property, 720 ILCS 5/21-1-5/21-1.2,
5/21.4.
Sec. 12-98. Library—Injury to books.
It shall be unlawful for any person to maliciously or wilfully cut, deface,
write upon, tear or destroy any book, newspaper, plate, picture, engraving,
statute, ordinance, or any other thing of value, belonging to or in the
possession of or under control of the Public Library of Evergreen Park, or any
of its branches.
(Code 1965, § 19-44)
   State law reference—Criminal mutilation or vandalism of library materials,
720 ILCS 5/16B-2.1.
Sec. 12-99. Same—Injury to property.
It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully or maliciously commit any
injury upon the grounds, buildings, furniture or fixtures, or any other
property belonging to or under the control of the public library.
(Code 1965, § 19-45)
   State law reference—Criminal damage to property, 720 ILCS 5/21-1.
Sec. 12-100. Posting bills.
It shall be unlawful for any person to paste, post, paint, print or nail any
handbill, sign, poster, advertisement or notice of any kind on any curbstone,
flagstone or any other portion or part of any sidewalk or other public
property, or upon any tree, shrub, lamppost, hitchpost, telegraph pole,
signpost or standard, hydrant, public utility property or upon any private
wall, door or gate, without the consent in writing of the owner of the wall,
door or gate; provided, however, this section shall not prevent posting by
proper village and county official of election signs, polling place signs and
other signs or placards necessary under the law to the conduct of elections or
the placement of traffic or directional traffic signs authorized by the state,
county or the village pertaining to traffic.
(Code 1965, §§ 19-41, 19-75, 27-85)
   Cross reference—Signs, ch.
19.
Sec. 12-101. Property survey stakes; removal.
No person shall wilfully or heedlessly change, remove or destroy any stone,
monument, stake or post set to make the corner of any lot or parcel of ground,
street or alley, or to show the grade of any street, alley or sidewalk of the
village.
(Code 1965, § 19-76)
Sec. 12-102. Penalties.
   Unless provided otherwise, any person who violates any provision of this
Division shall be punished as provided in Section
1-9. Any person who violates Sections
12-96 or
12-97(a) shall be punished by a fine of not less than $125 nor more than $500.
Each day any violation of any of the provisions referenced in this section
shall continue shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. No. 15-2007 § 1, 2-19-07)
Secs. 12-103—12.125. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. OFFENSES INVOLVING PUBLIC SAFETY
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 12-126. False alarms of bomb or crime.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to transmit to another a false
alarm to the effect that a bomb or other explosive of any nature is concealed
in such place that its explosion would endanger human life, knowing at the time
of such transmission that there is no reasonable ground for believing that such
bomb or explosive is concealed in such place.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person to transmit in any manner to any
peace officer, public officer or public employee a report to the effect that an
offense has been committed, knowing at the time of such transmission that there
is no reasonable ground for believing that such an offense has been committed.
(Code 1965, § 19-25)
   Cross reference—False alarm of fire, accident or emergency, § 7-4.
   State law reference—False alarms, 720 ILCS 5/26-1(a)(1)—(a)(3).
Sec. 12-127. Open wells, excavations or other holes.
No person shall leave open a cellar door, vault, wall, cistern, excavation or
other like hole, upon or adjoining any street or sidewalk, without securing or
protecting the same so as to prevent the danger of persons or animals from
falling therein. Excavations shall be fenced in as provided for in section 1 of
the Excavation Fence Act [720 ILCS 605/1].
(Code 1965, § 19-65)
Sec. 12-128. Abandoned refrigerators, boxes, etc.
It shall be unlawful for any person to abandon any refrigerator, icebox,
freezer, cardboard box, cardboard carton, wooden box, crate or object of a
similar nature of a capacity of one and one-half (11/2) cubic feet or more in
any place accessible to the public without having first removed the doors of
such refrigerator, icebox or freezer.
(Code 1965, § 19-86)
   State law reference—Similar provisions, 720 ILCS 505/1.
Sec. 12-129. Throwing of stones or other missiles.
No person shall throw or cast any stone or other missile upon or at any
building, railroad car, tree or public property, or upon or at any person in
any street, avenue, lane, public place or enclosed or unenclosed ground in this
village, or aid or abet in the same.
(Code 1965, § 19-94)
Sec. 12-130. Dropping metal, dangerous articles.
No person shall throw, cast, put into, drop, or leave in or on any street,
alley or sidewalk, public place, or any enclosed public grounds in the village
any metal or articles by which persons or vehicles may be injured or
endangered.
(Code 1965, § 19-94)
Sec. 12-131. Consumption of alcoholic beverages in vehicles.
No person shall drink any alcoholic liquor as defined by law in or about any
motor vehicle upon a public way in the village.
(Code 1965, § 19-18(26))
   Cross references—Alcoholic liquor, ch.
3; motor vehicles and traffic, ch.
13.
Sec. 12-132. Windowsills to be kept clear.
It shall be unlawful for any person to place or keep on any windowsill, porch
or other projection above the first story of any building abutting on any
sidewalk any article which might do injury by falling upon any person on the
sidewalk in front of such building, unless such article is securely fastened or
protected by screens.
(Code 1965, § 19-106)
Sec. 12-133. Obstructing watercourse or drain.
No person shall maliciously stop or obstruct the passage of water in any street
or public ditch or public sewer, culvert, water pipe, or hydrant or drain laid
or placed by the village. (Code 1965, § 19-63)
Secs. 12-134—12-150. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. WEAPONS*
   *State law reference—Weapons generally, 720 ILCS 5/24-1 et seq., 535/1 et
seq.
Sec. 12-151. Furnishing concealable weapons, ammunition; airguns.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of
selling or to sell or give away any pistol, revolver, dagger, stiletto, billy
club, derringer, Bowie knife, dirk or other deadly weapon, which can be
concealed on the person.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of
selling or to sell or give away ammunition for any pistol, revolver or other
deadly weapon.
   (c)   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of
selling, or to sell or give away any air rifle or airgun.
(Code 1965, §§ 32-11, 32-26)
Sec. 12-152. Identification card required.
No person, except one exempt by law, may acquire or possess any firearm or
firearm ammunition within the village without having a firearm owner's
identification card previously issued in his name, according to the laws of the
state or this division.
(Code 1965, § 19-99(a))
   State law reference—Identification cards, 430 ILCS 65/1 et seq.
Sec. 12-153. Unlawful use of weapons.
No person shall:
   (a)   Sell, manufacture, purchase, possess or carry any bludgeon, black-
jack, sling-shot, sand-club, sand-bag, metal knuckles, throwing star, or any
knife, commonly referred to as a switchblade knife, which has a blade that
opens automatically by hand pressure applied to a button, spring or other
device in the handle of the knife, or a ballistic knife, (except crossbows,
common or compound bows and underwater spearguns), which is a device that
propels a knifelike blade as a projectile by means of a coil spring, elastic
material or compressed gas; or
   (b)   Carry or possess with intent to use the same unlawfully against
another, a dagger, dirk, billy, dangerous knife, razor, stiletto, broken bottle
or other piece of glass, stun gun or taser or any other dangerous or deadly
weapon or instrument of like character; or
   (c)   Carry on or about his person or in any vehicle, a tear gas gun
projector or bomb or any object containing noxious liquid gas or substance,
other than an object containing a non-lethal noxious liquid gas or substance
designed solely for personal defense carried by a person 18 years of age or
older; or
   (d)   Carry or possess in any vehicle or concealed on or about his person
except when on his land or in his own abode or fixed place of business any
pistol, revolver, stun gun or taser or other firearm; or
   (e)   Set a spring gun; or
   (f)   Possess any device or attachment of any kind designed, used or
intended for use in silencing the report of any firearm; or
   (g)   Carry or possess any firearm, stun gun or taser or other deadly weapon
in any place which is licensed to sell intoxicating beverages, or at any public
gathering held pursuant to a license issued by any governmental body or any
public gathering at which an admission is charged, excluding a place where a
showing, demonstration or lecture involving the exhibition of unloaded firearms
is conducted; or
   (h)   Carry or possess on or about his person, upon any public street,
alley, or other public lands within the corporate limits of the Village, except
when an invitee thereon or therein, for the purpose of the display of such
weapon or the lawful commerce in weapons, or except when on his land or in his
own abode or fixed place of business, any pistol, revolver, stun gun or taser
or other firearm.
The presence in a vehicle, other than a public omnibus, of any weapon is prima
facie evidence that it is in the possession of, and is being carried by, all
persons occupying such automobile at the time such weapon, instrument or
substance is found, except under the following circumstances: (1) if such
weapon, instrument or instrumentality is found upon the person of one of the
occupants therein; or (2) if such weapon, instrument or substance is found in
an automobile operated for hire by a duly licensed driver in the due, lawful
and property pursuit of his trade, then such presumption shall not apply to the
driver.
Secs. 12-154—12-170.   Reserved.
ARTICLE V. OFFENSES INVOLVING PUBLIC PEACE AND ORDER
Sec. 12-171. Civil disturbances; proclamation of emergency.
   (a)   Mayor to impose necessary regulations by proclamation of emergency.
Whenever, in his judgment, the mayor determines that an emergency exists as a
result of mob action or other civil disturbances, or the threat thereof,
causing or likely to cause danger of injury or damages to persons or property,
he shall have the power to impose by proclamation of emergency any or all of
the following regulations necessary to preserve the peace and order of the
village:
      (1)   A curfew upon all or any portion of the village thereby requiring
all persons in such designated curfew areas to forthwith remove themselves from
and to remain off the public streets, alleys, parks or other public places
during the curfew period; provided, however, that physicians, nurses and
ambulance operators performing medical services, utility personnel maintaining
essential public services, firefighters and village authorized or requested law
enforcement officers and personnel may be exempted from such curfew.
      (2)   The closing of any business establishments anywhere within the
village for the period of the emergency, such businesses to include, but not to
be limited to, those selling alcoholic beverages and liquors, gasoline or
firearms.
      (3)   The designation of any public street, thoroughfare or vehicle
parking areas closed to motor vehicles and pedestrian traffic.
      (4)   Calling upon regular and auxiliary law enforcement agencies and
organizations within or without the village to assist in preserving and keeping
the peace within the village.
   (b)   Declaration of proclamation. Whenever an emergency as defined in
subsection (a) of this section exists, the mayor shall declare the existence by
means of a written declaration (proclamation) signed by him under oath, which
statement shall contain a finding that the standards herein set forth have been
met, setting forth facts to substantiate such findings constituting the
emergency, describing the nature of the emergency, and declaring that a state
of emergency exists. Such statement shall be filed with the clerk as soon as
practicable.
   (c)   Expiration and extension of emergency. Any emergency proclaimed in
accordance with the provisions of this section shall expire not later than the
adjournment of the first regular meeting of the board after the state of
emergency is declared, or upon the issuance of a proclamation determining an
emergency no longer exists, whichever occurs first, provided, however, that
such emergency may be extended for such additional periods of time as
determined necessary by resolution of the mayor and board of trustees.
   (d)   Violations. No person shall wilfully fail or refuse to comply with the
orders of duly authorized law enforcement officers or personnel charged with
the responsibility of the proclamation of emergency authorized herein.
(Code 1965, § 19-14)
Sec. 12-172. Disorderly places.
   (a)   No person shall keep or maintain any bawdy or disorderly house, or any
house or other place where any person is permitted or suffered to make an
improper noise or disturbance, or any house or other place where any minor is
permitted to drink intoxicating drinks of any kind, or play with dice,
dominoes, cards, balls or other articles used in gaming.
   (b)   No person owning or in possession, charge or control of any building
or premises shall use the same, or permit the use of the same, or rent the same
to be used for any business or employment, or for any purpose of pleasure or
recreation, if such use shall, from its noise or boisterous nature, disturb or
destroy the peace of the neighborhood in which such building or premises are
situated, or be dangerous or detrimental to health.
   (c)   It shall be unlawful for any person to rent, use or allow to be used
any yard, ground or grave or other real estate within the village for public
picnics or open air dances, to be conducted in such manner as to be an
annoyance or injury to the public.
(Code 1965, §§ 19-19, 19-20, 19-70)
   State law reference—Disorderly conduct, 720 ILCS 5/26-1.
Sec. 12-173. Disturbing the peace.
   (a)   No person shall make, aid, countenance, or assist in making any
improper noise, riot, disturbance, breach of peace, or diversion tending to the
breach of peace within the village.
   (b)   No person shall act in such unreasonable manner as to alarm or disturb
another and to provoke a breach of the peace.
   (c)   No person shall do or make any unreasonable or offensive act,
utterance, gesture or display which, under the circumstances, creates a clear
and present danger of a breach of peace or imminent threat of violence.
(Code 1965, § 19-18(1), (15), (18))
Sec. 12-174. Threatening, etc., language.
No person shall use any abusive, threatening, insulting, indecent, profane or
obscene language, or language calculated to occasion a breach of the peace.
(Code 1965, § 19-18(2))
Sec. 12-175. Fighting.
No person shall engage in, aid, or abet in any fight, quarrel or other
disturbance in the village.
(Code 1965, § 19-18(6))
Sec. 12-176. Annoying telephone calls.
No person shall, with intent to annoy another, make a telephone call, whether
or not conversation thereby ensues.
(Code 1965, § 19-18(16))
Sec. 12-177. Noises.
No person shall make or create loud or boisterous noises, whether by person,
actions or by electronic or mechanical amplification.
(Code 1965, § 19-18(14))
Sec. 12-178. Operation of amplification equipment.
It shall be unlawful for any person at any time to maintain, operate, use or
employ any electronic or mechanical amplification device or to make or allow
noises from any source whatsoever which may become loud and intolerable to the
ordinary person or which sound or noise shall be greater than eighty-five (85)
decibels as measured at the property line of such sound or noise on a sound
level meter according to standards presented by the American Standards
Association.
(Code 1965, § 19-2(d))
   State law reference—Noise pollution, 415 ILCS 5/23 et seq.
Sec. 12-179. Disturbances in, loitering at library.
It shall be unlawful for any person to create a disturbance or use loud,
boisterous language, or refuse to refrain from talking after being warned or
cautioned by the librarian or custodian in charge of the reading rooms of the
public library, or any of its branches; or to loiter in, upon, or around the
library reading rooms without having any business to transact or immediate use
such rooms.
(Code 1965, § 19-47)
Sec. 12-180. Unlawful assembly.
   (a)   No person shall assemble with three (3) or more persons for the
purpose of using force or violence to disturb the public peace.
   (b)   Persons shall not collect in bodies or crowds for unlawful purposes,
or for any purpose to the annoyance or disturbance of other persons.
   (c)   It shall be unlawful for any two (2) or more persons within the
village to assemble together for any unlawful purpose, or, being assembled, to
act in concert to do an unlawful act with force and violence against the
property of the village, or the person or property of another, or against the
peace or to the terror of citizens or other persons, or who shall make any
movement or preparation therefor.
   (d)   No person shall knowingly suffer or permit any assemblage for the
purpose of committing any unlawful act or breach of the peace or any riotous,
offensive or disorderly conduct in or upon the premises owned by him or under
his control within the village. (Code 1965, §§ 19-7, 19-18(3), (20))
   State law reference—Mob action, 720 ILCS 5/25-1.
Sec. 12-181. Disturbance of worship, schools.
No person shall interrupt or disturb any assembly of people met for worship of
God or any school or other assembly or procession of people met for lawful
purposes.
(Code 1965, § 19-7)
Sec. 12-182. Ethnic intimidation.
No person shall create a clear and present danger of a riot or assault,
battery, or other unlawful trespass against any person or group of persons
because of his race, religion, color, national origin, or ancestry, or create a
clear and present danger of arson, vandalism, defacement, or other unlawful
trespass against property because of the race, religion, color, national
origin, or ancestry of the owner, possessor, or authorized users of such
property, or, in the case of a cemetery, of the decedent buried therein.
(Code 1965, § 19-18(25))
   State law reference—Hate crimes, 720 ILCS 5/12-7.1.
Sec. 12-183. Under the influence in public.
No person shall appear in any public or semipublic place manifestly under the
influence of alcohol, narcotics or other drug, not therapeutically
administered, to the degree that he may endanger himself or other persons of
property, or annoy persons in his vicinity. (Code 1965, § 19-18(21))
Sec. 12-184. Residential picketing.
   (a)   The board of trustees finds and declares that people in a free society
have the right to quiet enjoyment of their homes; that stability of community
and family life cannot be maintained unless the right to privacy and a sense of
security and peace in the home are respected and encouraged; that residential
picketing, however just the cause inspiring it, disrupts home, family, communal
and neighborhood life; that residential picketing is inappropriate in our
society, where the jealously guarded rights of free speech and assembly have
always been associated with respect for the rights of others.
   (b)   It is unlawful to picket before or about the residence or dwelling of
any person.
(Code 1965, § 19-69)
   State law reference—Residential picketing, 720 ILCS 5/21.1-1 et seq.
Sec. 12-185. Nonresidential picketing.
   (a)   No person shall picket or demonstrate on a public way within one
hundred fifty (150) feet of any primary or secondary school building while the
school is in session and one-half hour before the school is in session and one-
half hour after the school session has been concluded; provided that this
subsection does not prohibit the peaceful picketing of any school involved in a
labor dispute.
   (b)   No person shall picket or demonstrate on a public way within one
hundred fifty (150) feet of any church, temple, synagogue or other place of
worship while services are being conducted and one-half hour before services
are to be conducted and one-half hour after services have been concluded;
provided that this subsection does not prohibit the peaceful picketing of any
church, temple, synagogue or other place of worship involved in a labor
dispute.
(Code 1965, § 19-18(23), (24))
Sec. 12-186. Unlawful games, plays.
No person shall engage in, use or exercise any juggling or other unlawful games
or plays.
(Code 1965, § 19-18(5))
Sec. 12-187. Lounging, loafing in public places.
No person shall obstruct or encumber any street corner, public way or other
public place in the village by lounging or loafing in or about the same after
being requested to move on by any police officer.
Sec. 12-188. Loudspeakers; sound trucks.
   (a)   Permit for amplification of sound. It shall be unlawful for any person
to maintain, operate, use or employ any loudspeaker, electronically or
mechanically operated, producing sound, which sound is amplified and heard over
any public street, public place or private property other than the property of
the person so maintaining, operating, using or employing the same, without
first having obtained a permit. Noise emanating from private property shall not
cause distress to persons on neighboring property. This subsection shall not
apply to emergency vehicles and vehicles of the public works department.
   (b)   Standards for issuance of permit. Any permit shall be issued only for
parades authorized by the board of trustees, political speeches, public
gatherings and matters of public issue. The permit shall be issued without fee
and subject to the following restrictions:
      (1)   No such amplification device shall be employed on or after 8:00
p.m. on any prevailing day and 8:00 a.m. the next day.
      (2)   No permittee shall use, operate, or employ such device within a
radius of 2 blocks from any hospital or rest home, or within a radius of 2
blocks of a church when such church is in session.
      (3)   No permittee shall allow any lewd, obscene, profane, indecent
language or sounds, advertisement or false representation of any matter to
emanate from such device.
      (4)   No such permittee shall allow the noise from such sound device to
be amplified greater than is tolerable to the human ear by an ordinary person
within hearing distance and, in any event, no greater than 85 decibels based on
sound levels measured with a sound level meter by such person at the source of
such sound, nor shall such noise cause distress to persons on neighboring
property.
Sec. 12-189. Musical instruments in streets.
The use of public streets, property or public places by an itinerant musician,
dancer or entertainer for pay or in the expectation of pay is prohibited in the
village. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any organized
musical society engaged in serenading, or to any civic or military parade.
Sec. 12-190. Games on streets, sidewalks.
It shall be unlawful to play any games upon any street, alley or sidewalk,
where such games cause unnecessary noise, or interfere with traffic or
pedestrians.
Sec. 12-191. Expectorating in public places.
It shall be unlawful for any person to expectorate or spit upon any sidewalk or
upon the floor of any public building or room used for public assemblies.
Sec. 12-192. Mobile Food Vendors
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain, own or operate as a
mobile food vendor or to sell any food on any public right-of-way.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain, own or operate as a
mobile food vendor on any private property.
Sec. 12-193. Penalties.
   Unless provided otherwise, any person who violates any provision of this
Article shall be punished as provided in Section
1-9. Any person who violates Sections
12-172 or
12-173 shall be punished by a fine of not less than $125 nor more than $500.
Each day any violation of any of the provisions referenced in this section
shall continue shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. No. 16-2007 § 12-19-07)
ARTICLE VI. OFFENSES INVOLVING PUBLIC MORALS
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 12-211. Drug paraphernalia.
   (a)   Except as otherwise authorized by or licensed through the Cannabis
Regulation and Tax Act or the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Pilot
Program Act, it shall be unlawful for any person to sell, possess, or give away
to any person any material, device, or substance whose main purpose is its use
in the smoking, injection, inhalation or other consumption of cannabis or a
controlled substance.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful to dispose of or throw away any hypodermic
needle, syringe, or needle used for the purpose of injection of a controlled
substance, or any substance medicinal, without first cutting or breaking the
same to make it unusable.
   (c)   For purposes of this section, the phrase "material, device, or
substance" shall include but is not limited to pot pipes, water pipes, roach
clips, cocaine spoons, syringes, and cigarette paper.
(Ord. No. 20-2019 §, 8-19-19)
Sec. 12-212. Public indecency.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to perform any of the following
acts in a public place:
      (1)   An act of sexual intercourse;
      (2)   A lewd exposure of the body done with the intent to arouse or to
satisfy the sexual desire of himself or any other person;
      (3)   A lewd fondling or caress of the body of another person of either
sex; or
      (4)   The act of defecation or urination. Any person who violates this
subsection shall be punished by a fine of not less than $125 nor more than
$500.
   (b)   The phrase "public place," for the purposes of this Section, means any
place where the conduct may reasonably be expected to be viewed by others.
(Code 1965, § 19-84) (Ord. No. 17-2007 § 1, 2-19-07)
   State law reference—Public indecency, 720 ILCS 5/11-9.
Sec. 12-213. Nudity; indecent attire.
It shall be unlawful for any person to appear in a state of nudity, or in any
indecent or lewd dress or condition in any public place, banquet room, hall or
private club, or in any such place to make any indecent exposure of his person
or private parts thereof or the private parts of another.
(Code 1965, § 19-61(b))
Sec. 12-214. Lewd conduct.
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct himself in any public place,
banquet room, hall or private club in a lewd or lascivious manner.
(Code 1965, § 19-61(b))
Sec. 12-215. Reserved.
Sec. 12-216. Possession of Cannabis.
   (a)   Except as otherwise authorized in the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act
or the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Pilot Program Act, it shall be
unlawful for any person to knowingly possess less than 100 grams of any
substance containing cannabis as defined by the Cannabis Regulation and Tax
Act. Provided, however, those persons possessing more than 30 grams and not
more than 100 grams of any substance of cannabis involving a second or
subsequent offense shall be processed through the courts by criminal complaint
or other instrument.
   (b)   Any person found in violation of the provisions of subsection (a)
shall be fined as follows:
      (1)   The fine for possession of 10 grams of any substance containing
cannabis or less shall be $100 for a first offense, $200 for a second offense,
and $400 for a third and each subsequent offense.
      (2)   The fine for possession of more than 10 grams but not more than 30
grams of any substance containing cannabis shall be $200 for a first offense,
$400 for a second offense, and $800 for a third and each subsequent offense.
      (3)   The fine for possession of more than 30 grams but not more than
1,000 grams of any substance containing cannabis shall be not less than $300
and not more than $1,500.
   (c)   Citations issued for a violation of this section may be processed
through administrative adjudication in accordance with Chapter 12, Article X of
the Evergreen Park Municipal Code.
(Ord. No. 15-2009 § 1, 5-4-09; Am. Ord. No. 30-2009 § 1, 12-7-09; Am. Ord. No.
22-2016 § 1, 8-15-16; Am. Ord. No. 4-2019 § 1, 2-4-19; Am. Ord. No. 20-2019 §
2, 8-19-19 )
Secs. 12-217—12-230. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. GAMBLING AND RELATED OFFENSES*
   *Cross references—Charitable games, § 11-9; raffles, § 11-256 et seq.;
permitting gambling in place where alcoholic liquor is sold, § 3-44.
   State law reference—Gambling and related offenses, 720 ILCS 5/28-1 et seq.
Sec. 12-231. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
   Gambling device shall mean any clock, tape machine, slot machine or other
machine or device for the reception of money or other thing of value on chance
or skill or upon the action of which money or other thing of value is staked,
hazarded, bet, won or lost; or any mechanism, furniture, fixture, equipment or
other device designed primarily for use in a gambling place. A "gambling
device" does not include:
      (1)   A coin-in-the-slot operated mechanical device played for amusement
which rewards the player with the right to replay such mechanical device, which
device is so construtted or devised as to make such result of the operation
thereof depend in part upon the skill of the player and which returns to the
player thereof no money, property or right to receive money or property.
      (2)   Vending machines by which full and adequate return is made for the
money invested and in which there is no element of chance or hazard.
      (3)   A crane game. For the purposes of this subsection (3), a "crane
game" is an amusement device involving skill, if it rewards the player
exclusively with merchandise contained within the amusement device proper and
limited to toys, novelties and prizes other than currency, each having a
wholesale value which is not more than seven (7) times the cost charged to play
the amusement device once or five dollars ($5.00), whichever is less.
   Lottery shall mean any scheme or procedure whereby one (1) or more prizes
are distributed by chance among persons who have paid or promised consideration
for a chance to win such prizes, whether such scheme or procedure is called a
lottery, raffle, gift, sale or some other name.
   Policy game shall mean any scheme or procedure whereby a person promises or
guarantees by any instrument, bill, certificate, writing, token or other device
that any particular number, character, ticket or certificate shall in the event
of any contingency in the nature of a lottery entitle the purchaser or holder
to receive money, property or evidence of debt.
(Code 1965, § 19-32)
   Cross reference—Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.
   State law reference—Similar provisions, 720 ILCS 5/28-2.
Sec. 12-232. Seizure of devices.
Every gambling device shall be subject to seizure and confiscation by any
member of the police force of the village.
(Code 1965, § 19-33)
   State law reference—Seizure of gambling devices and gambling funds, 720 ILCS
5/28-5.
Sec. 12-233. Gambling prohibited.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to commit the offense of gambling as
defined in 720 ILCS 5/28-1. Participants in activities allowed by the Video
Gaming Act, Sports Wagering Act, Bingo License and Tax Act, Illinois Lottery
Law, Raffles and Poker Runs Act, Charitable Games Act, Illinois Pull Tabs and
Jar Games Act, Riverboat Gambling Act, and such other activities as permitted
by 720 ILCS 5/28-1(b) shall not be guilty of gambling.
(Code 1965, §§ 19-30, 19-31) (Am. Ord. No. 10-2020 § 1, 10-19-20)
Sec. 12-234. Touting for gamblers.
No person shall tout, or act as a roper, steerer or capper for any gambling
room or house or attempt to do same on any public way within the village.
(Code 1965, § 19-18(9))
   State law reference—Similar provisions, 720 ILCS 5/28-1.
Sec. 12-235. Maintenance or keeping of establishment or place.
A "gambling place" is any real estate, vehicle, boat or other property
whatsoever used for the purposes of gambling. It shall be unlawful for any
person to knowingly permit any premises or property owned or occupied by him or
under his control to be used as a gambling place. When any premises is
determined by a court having jurisdiction to be a gambling place:
      (1)   Such premises is a public nuisance and may be proceeded against as
such;
      (2)   All licenses, permits or certificates issued by the village
authorizing the serving of food or liquor on such premises shall be void; and
no license, permit or certificate so cancelled shall be reissued for such
premises for a period of sixty (60) days thereafter; nor shall any person
convicted of keeping a gambling place be reissued such license for one (1) year
from his conviction; and
      (3)   Such premises of any person who knowingly permits thereon a
violation of any section of this division shall be held liable for, and may be
sold to pay any unsatisfied judgment that may be recovered and any unsatisfied
fine that may be levied hereunder.
(Code 1965, § 19-34)
   State law reference—Similar provisions, 720 ILCS 5/28-3.
Sec. 12-236. Amusement devices, cards or dice.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to possess, own, or operate any
coin-in-the-slot operated device which involves any game or amusement based
upon poker, blackjack, craps, any card game, or any dice game, whether or not
any element of skill, chance or hazard is involved.
   (b)   The term "coin-in-the-slot operated device" means any device operated
or operable by insertion of coins, tokens, chips or similar objects; or where
the number of games or plays is dependent upon payment or consideration of any
type.
(Ord. No. 14-1990, § 1, 6-4-90)
Sec. 12-237. Sweepstakes machines prohibited.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, or place into
operation, an electronic machine or device for the following purposes:
      (1)   To conduct sweepstakes through the use of an entertainment display,
including the entry process or the reveal of a prize; or
      (2)   To promote a sweepstakes that is conducted through the use of an
entertainment display, including the entry process or the reveal of a prize.
   (b)   For the purposes of this section, the following words shall have the
meanings ascribed to them below:
      Automatic amusement machine means any mechanical or electronic amusement
machine or device, the operation of which is governed or controlled by the
deposit of currency, money, credit, electronic currency, tokens or a similar
equivalent or other item of value, not including jukeboxes.
      Electronic machine or device means a mechanically, electrically or
electronically operated machine or device, that is owned, leased or otherwise
possessed by a sweepstakes sponsor or promoter, or any of the sweepstake
sponsor’s or promoter’s partners, affiliates, subsidiaries or contractors, that
is intended to be used by a sweepstakes entrant, that uses energy, and that is
capable of displaying information on a screen or other mechanism.
      Enter or entry means the act or process by which a person becomes
eligible to receive any prize offered in a sweepstakes.
      Entertainment display means visual information capable of being seen by a
sweepstakes entrant that takes the form of actual game play or simulated game
play of games, including, but not limited to, a poker game or any other kind of
playing card game; a bingo game; a craps game; a keno game; a lotto game; an
eight-liner game; a pot-of-gold game; a game based on or involving the random
or chance matching of different pictures, words, numbers or symbols not
dependent on the skill or dexterity of the player; a casino or gambling game;
and any other video game the outcome of which is not in whole or in part
dependent on the skill or dexterity of the player that is played in the course
or revealing a prize as a result of an entry into a sweepstakes.
      Prize means any gift, award, gratuity, goods, service, credit or anything
else of value, which may be transferred to a person, whether possession of the
prize is actually transferred, or placed on an account or other record as
evidence of the intent to transfer the prize.
      Sweepstakes means any game, advertising scheme or plan, or other
promotion, which, with or without payment of any consideration, a person may
enter to win or become eligible to receive any prize, the determination of
which is based upon an element of chance.
(Ord. 5-2021, § 1, 6-21-21)
Secs. 12-238—12-250. Reserved.
DIVISION 3. OBSCENITY AND RELATED OFFENSES*
   *State law reference—Obscenity and related offenses, 720 ILCS 5/11-20 et
seq.
Sec. 12-251. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
   Distribute shall mean to transfer possession of, whether with or without
consideration.
   Exhibit shall mean to show or display, offer or present for inspection or
produce in public so that it may be taken into possession or viewed by persons.
   Harmful to minors shall mean that quality of any description or
representation, in whatever form, of nudity, sexual conduct, sexual excitement,
or sado-masochistic abuse, when it:
      (1)   Predominantly appeals to the prurient, shameful or morbid interest
of minors;
      (2)   Is patently offensive to prevailing standards in the adult
community as a whole with respect to what is suitable material for minors; and
      (3)   Is utterly without redeeming social importance for minors.
   Knowingly shall mean having general knowledge of, or reason to know, or a
belief or ground for belief which warrants further inquiry of both:
      (1)   The character and content of any material described herein which is
reasonably susceptible of examination by the defendant.
      (2)   Being aware of the character of the matter or live conduct.
      (3)   The age of the minor; provided, however, that an honest mistake
shall constitute an excuse from liability hereunder if the defendant made a
reasonable bona fide attempt to ascertain the true age of such minor.
   Minor shall mean any person under the age of eighteen (18) years.
   Nudity shall mean the showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic
area or buttocks with less than a full opaque covering, or the showing of the
female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any portion thereof
below the top of the areola, or the depiction of covered male genitals in a
discernibly turgid state.
   Obscene shall mean that quality of any description or representation, in
whatever form, or nudity, sexual conduct, sexual excitement, or sado-
masochistic abuse:
      (1)   When taken as a whole to the average person applying contemporary
community standards in a patently offensive way:
         a.   Predominantly appeals to the prurient, shameful or morbid
interest of adults or special audiences, and
         b.   Is offensive with respect to what is suitable material.
      (2)   When taken as a whole lacks serious artistic, literary, scientific,
political, educational or other merits.
   Patron of a place of obscenity shall mean any person who shall patronize,
frequent, be found in, or be an inmate of any premises used for the unlawful
purposes set forth in this section.
   Sado-masochistic abuse shall mean flagellation or torture by or upon a
person clad in undergarments, a mask or bizarre costume, or the condition of
being fettered, bound or otherwise physically restrained on the part of one so
clothed.
   Sexual conduct shall mean acts of masturbation, excretory functions,
homosexuality, sexual intercourse, or physical contact with a person's clothed
or unclothed genitals, pubic area, buttocks or, if such person is a female,
breast, normal or perverted, actual or simulated.
   Sexual excitement shall mean the condition of human male or female genitals
when in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
   Theater, concert hall, or other similar establishment which is primarily
devoted to theatrical performances shall mean a building, playhouse, room, hall
or other place having permanently affixed seats so arranged that a body of
spectators can have an unobstructed view of the stage, upon which theatrical or
vaudeville performances or similar forms of artistic expression are presented,
and where such performances are not incidental to the promoting of the sale of
food, drink or other merchandise, for which a village license for a theater is
in full force and effect, and which performance, when taken as a whole, does
not lack serious, artistic, literary, scientific, political, or educational
value.
(Code 1965, § 19-62(a))
   Cross reference—Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.
Sec. 12-252. Selling, loaning, distributing or exhibition of literature or
films.
It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to sell, loan for monetary
consideration, distribute or exhibit:
   (1)   Any picture, photograph, drawing, sculpture, motion picture film or
similar visual representation or image of a person or portion of the human body
which depicts nudity, sexual conduct or sado-masochistic abuse and which is
obscene;
   (2)   Any book, pamphlet, magazine, printed matter however reproduced or
sound recording which contains any matter coming under the provisions of this
division, or explicit and detailed verbal descriptions or narrative accounts of
sexual excitement, sexual conduct or sado-masochistic abuse and which, taken as
a whole, is obscene; or
   (3)   Any material which is harmful to minors.
(Code 1965, § 19-62(b))
Sec. 12-253. Admission tickets, passes.
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly exhibit for a monetary
consideration or sell to any person an admission ticket or pass or admit a
person for a monetary consideration to premises whereon there is exhibited a
motion picture, live show, or other presentation which, in whole or in part,
depicts nudity, sexual conduct or sado-masochistic abuse and which is obscene.
(Code 1965, § 19-62(c))
Sec. 12-254. Knowingly admitting a person.
It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to admit any person to premises
whereon there is exhibited a motion picture, show, live, or other presentation
which, in whole or in part, depicts nudity, sexual conduct or sado-masochistic
abuse and which is obscene.
(Code 1965, § 19-62(d))
Sec. 12-255. Employing or having on premises a person exhibiting nudity.
It shall be unlawful for any person in a commercial establishment, place of
public accommodation or private club to employ or have on his premises any
person who exhibits nudity to his patrons.
(Code 1965, § 19-62(e))
Sec. 12-256. Person exhibiting nudity.
It shall be unlawful for any person to exhibit nudity in any commercial
establishment, place of public accommodation, banquet room, hall or private
club to the patrons thereof.
(Code 1965, § 19-62(0)
Sec. 12-257. Employees, entertainers in state of nudity.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person, while acting as a waiter,
waitress or entertainer in an establishment which serves food, beverages, or
food and beverages, including but not limited to alcoholic beverages, for
consumption on the premises of such establishment to:
      (1)   Expose his or her genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, natal cleft,
perineum, anal region or pubic hair region;
      (2)   Expose any device, costume or covering which gives the appearance
of or simulates the genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, natal cleft, perineum, anal
region or pubic hair region; or
      (3)   Expose any portion of the female breast at or below the areola
thereof.
A person shall be deemed to be a waiter, waitress or entertainer if such person
acts in that capacity without regard to whether or not such person is paid any
compensation by the management of the establishment in which the activity is
performed.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person, while participating in any live
act, demonstration, or exhibition in any public place, place open to the
public, or place open to public view to:
      (1)   Expose his or her genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, perineum, anal
region, or pubic hair region;
      (2)   Expose any device, costume or covering which gives the appearance
of or simulates the genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, perineum, anal region or
pubic hair region;
      (3)   Expose any portion of the female breast at or below the areola
thereof.
   (c)   It shall be unlawful for a person to cause, permit, procure, counsel
or assist any person to expose or simulate exposure prohibited in subsections
(a) and (b).
(Code 1965, § 19-62(g)—(i))
Sec. 12-258. Minors.
It shall be unlawful for any person:
      (1)   To knowingly sell or loan, for a monetary consideration, distribute
or exhibit to a minor any of the prohibited materials described in section
12-252.
      (2)   To knowingly, for a monetary consideration, exhibit, sell, or admit
a minor to a premises whereon the prohibited acts in section
12-253 are performed.
      (3)   To knowingly admit a minor to the premises whereon the prohibited
acts in section
12-254 are depicted.
      (4)   To knowingly exhibit for or without monetary consideration or
knowingly to sell to any person an admission ticket or pass or knowingly to
admit a person for or without monetary consideration to premises whereon there
is exhibited a motion picture, live show, or other presentation which, in whole
or in part, depicts nudity, sexual conduct or sado-masochistic abuse and which
is harmful to minors.
      (5)   Under eighteen (18) years of age to state falsely, either orally or
in writing, that he is not under the age of eighteen (18) years, or to present
an offer to any person any evidence of age and identity which is false or not
actually his own for the purpose of ordering, obtaining, viewing or otherwise
procuring or attempting to procure or view any of the prohibited materials and
unlawful acts set forth in sections 12-252 through 12-257(b).
      (6)   Under eighteen (18) years of age to be present on any premises
where any of the unlawful acts described in sections 12-252 through 12-257(b)
are being committed.
      (7)   In a commercial establishment, place of public accommodation, or
private club, to employ or have on his premises a minor who exhibits nudity to
his patrons.
      (8)   For any minor to exhibit nudity in any commercial establishment,
place of accommodation, or private club, to the patrons thereof.
(Code 1965, § 19-62(j))
Sec. 12-259. Exceptions.
   (a)   Nothing in this division shall prohibit any public library or any
library operated by an accredited institution of higher education from
circulating material to any person, provided such circulation is in aid of a
legitimate scientific or education purpose. It shall be an affirmative defense
in any prosecution for a violation of this section that the act charged was
committed in aid of legitimate scientific or educational purposes.
   (b)   The provisions of sections 12-255 through 12-257(b) shall not apply to
a theater, concert hall, or similar establishment which is primarily devoted to
theatrical performance.
   (c)   Nothing in this division shall prohibit any parent from distributing
to his child any of the unlawful materials described in section
12-252.
(Code 1965, § 19-62(k))
Sec. 12-260. Revocation of license.
The license, business regulation certificate or permit of any person or
employee thereof directly involved in violations of this division may be
revoked by the mayor. No such license business regulation certificate or permit
so revoked shall be reinstated until the lapse of a period of one (1) year
after such revocation. Such revocation may be in addition to any fine imposed.
(Code 1965, § 19-62(1))
Secs. 12-261—12-275. Reserved.
DIVISION 4. PROSTITUTION AND RELATED OFFENSES*
   *State law reference—Prostitution and related offenses, 720 ILCS 5/11-14 et
seq.
Sec. 12-276. Generally.
No person shall perform, offer or agree to perform any act of sexual
penetration as defined in section 12-12 of the Criminal Code of 1961 [III. Rev.
Stat. ch. 38, 1112-12-720 ILCS 5/12-12] for money, or any touching or fondling
of the sex organs of one (1) person by another person, for money or anything of
value, for the purpose of sexual arousal or gratification.
(Code 1965, § 19-77)
   State law reference—Similar provisions, 720 ILCS 5/11-14.
Sec. 12-277. Soliciting.
It shall be unlawful for any person to perform any of the following acts:
      (1)   Solicit another for the purpose of prostitution.
      (2)   Arrange or offer to arrange a meeting of persons for the purpose of
prostitution.
      (3)   Direct another to a place knowing such direction is for the purpose
of prostitution.
(Code 1965, § 19-78)
   State law reference—Similar provisions, 720 ILCS 5/11-15.
Sec. 12-278. Pandering.
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit the crime of pandering by
performing any of the following acts for money:
      (1)   Compelling a female to become a prostitute.
      (2)   Arranging or offering to arrange a situation in which a female may
practice prostitution.
(Code 1965, § 19-79)
   State law reference—Similar provisions, 720 ILCS 5/11-16.
Sec. 12-279. Enticing females or minors.
No person shall entice, influence or persuade any female to enter or frequent
any bawdy house, house of ill fame or assignation house or place used for the
practice of fornication or adultery, or to induce any minor to enter or
frequent, or allow any minor to enter or remain in such house or place in the
village.
(Code 1965, § 19-80)
Sec. 12-280. Pimping.
It shall be unlawful for any person to receive money or other property from a
prostitute, not for a lawful consideration, knowing it was earned in whole or
in part from the practice of prostitution.
(Code 1965, § 19-81)
   State law reference—Similar provisions, 720 ILCS 5/11-19.
Sec. 12-281. Keeping a place of prostitution.
It shall be unlawful for any person who has or exercises control over the use
of any place which could offer seclusion or shelter for the practice of
prostitution to perform any of the following acts:
      (1)   Knowingly grant or permit the use of such place for the purpose of
prostitution.
      (2)   Grant or permit the use of such place under circumstances from
which he could reasonably know that the place is used or is to be used for the
purposes of prostitution.
      (3)   Permit the continued use of a place after becoming aware of facts
or circumstances from which he should reasonably know that the place is being
used for purposes of prostitution.
(Code 1965, § 19-82)
   State law reference—Similar provisions, 720 ILCS 5/11-17.
Sec. 12-282. Patronizing a prostitute.
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit any of the following acts with a
person not his spouse:
      (1)   Engage in an act of sexual penetration as defined in section 12-12
of the Criminal Code of 1961 [Ill. Rev. Stat. ch. 38, ¶ 12-12-720 ILCS 5/12-12]
with a prostitute.
      (2)   Enter or remain in a place of prostitution with intent to engage in
an act of sexual penetration as defined in section 12-12 of the Criminal Code
of 1961 [III. Rev. Stat. ch. 38, ¶ 12-12-720 ILCS 5/12-12].
(Code 1965, § 19-83)
   State law reference—Similar provisions, 720 ILCS 5/11-18.
Secs. 12-283—12-300. Reserved.
ARTICLE VII. MINORS AND UNDERAGED PERSONS
Sec. 12-301. Parental responsibility.
   (a)   Offense. It shall be unlawful for the parent or legal guardian of any
unemancipated minor residing with such parent or legal guardian to fail to
exercise proper parental responsibility by allowing or permitting such minor to
commit any violation of a village ordinance or state statute concerning
vandalism, battery, curfew, disorderly conduct, fireworks, obscene conduct,
indecent exposure, trespass or possession of alcoholic liquor, cannabis or
controlled substances, or any other offense of wilful or malicious acts to
persons or property.
   (b)   Presumption. A parent or legal guardian shall be presumed to have
allowed or permitted a minor to have committed a violation of a village
ordinance or state statute under all of the following conditions:
      (1)   Such minor has been either adjudicated to be in violation of any
ordinance or state statute as described in subsection (a) above, or has been
charged with the violation of any ordinance or state statute as described in
subsection (a) above (except if found to be not guilty), or has incurred
nonjudicial sanctions from any peace officer, police officer, or conservator of
the peace resulting from an admission of guilt to an offense of an ordinance or
state statute as described in subsection (a) above; and
      (2)   Such parent or legal guardian has received a written notice by
certified mail (return receipt requested) or by personal service in
substantially the following form:
LEGAL NOTICE TO: (parents' names)
FROM: Village of Evergreen Park
You are hereby notified that (minor's name) has been involved with a violation
of an ordinance or State statute concerning vandalism, battery, curfew,
disorderly conduct, fireworks, obscene conduct, indecent exposure, trespass, or
possession of alcoholic liquor, or any other offense of willful or malicious
acts to persons or property.
If said minor is again involved with a violation of one of the above type
ordinances or State statutes you may be found guilty of the offense of Parental
Irresponsibility. Conviction for said offense can result in a fine of not less
than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). You
are hereby notified that you must exercise proper parental responsibility over
said minor by controlling his unlawful conduct.
      (3)   Such minor, within two (2) years of the receipt of such notice by
the parent or legal guardian, has been either adjudicated to have committed,
has been charged with the violation (except if found to be not guilty), or has
admitted to have committed any violation of any ordinance or state statute as
described in subsection (a) above, or has failed to stay clean from
disciplinary problems during that period.
   (c)   Definitions. The following terms shall have the meanings ascribed to
them for the purposes of this section:
      (1)   Legal guardian means a person appointed guardian or given custody
of a minor by a court, but it does not include a person appointed guardian or
given custody of a minor under the Juvenile Court Act of 1987 [705 ILCS 405-1/
1 et seq.], as amended, in the State of Illinois.
      (2)   Minor means any person who has not yet attained the age of eighteen
(18).
   (d)   Supervision. It is the policy of the village to permit the village
prosecutor to use the provisions of the Unified Code of Corrections [730 ILCS
5/1-1-1 et seq.], as amended, pertaining to supervision in order to further the
ends of justice, restitution, and purposes of this section.
   (e)   Court appearance of parents. It is the policy of the village that a
parent or legal guardian of a minor be notified and required to appear in court
whenever that minor is charged with a violation of an ordinance or state
statute which requires the minor's appearance in court. To this end, it is
hereby directed that a notice in substantially the following form be sent to
the parents or legal guardians of the minor:
LEGAL NOTICE TO: (parents' names)
FROM: Village of Evergreen Park
You are hereby notified that (minor's name) has been charged with an offense
which is a violation of a Village ordinance or State statute and which requires
the appearance of said minor in Court. You are further notified that one of the
parents of said minor must appear in Court before the case will be tried or be
disposed.
If you fail to appear, the Village Prosecutor has been directed to have issued
a subpoena to bring you into Court.
Failure to obey a subpoena can result in contempt of Court, with a fine or
imprisonment as the penalty.
The village prosecutor may issue subpoenas at any time and is hereby directed
to have subpoenas issued whenever a parent or legal guardian of a minor does
not appear in court after the first time such case has been before the court.
Sec. 12-302. Curfew.
   (a)   Definitions. For purposes of this Section the following terms,
phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning given therein. When
not inconsistent within the context, words used in the present tense include
the future, words in the plural number include the singular and words in the
singular include the plural. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not
merely directory.
   Emergency means an unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting
state that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is not limited
to, a fire, natural disaster, or automobile accident, or any situation
requiring immediate action to prevent serious injury to persons or property.
   Establishment means any privately-owned place of business operated for a
profit to which the public is invited, including but not limited to any place
of amusement or entertainment.
   Juvenile means any person sixteen (16) years of age or younger. Minor means
any person seventeen (17) years of age.
   Operator is any individual, firm, association, partnership, or corporation
operating, managing, or conducting any establishment. The term includes the
members or partners of an association or partnership and the officers of a
corporation.
   Parent is any person having legal custody of a juvenile/minor (i) as a
natural or adoptive parent, (ii) as a legal guardian,(iii) as a person who
stands in loco parentis, or (iv) as a person to whom legal custody has been
given by court order.
   Public Place means any place to which the public or a substantial group of
the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, common
areas, shopping centers, private businesses, streets, and similar areas that
are open to the use of the public.
   (b)   Curfew. It shall be unlawful for any juvenile/minor to be or remain in
or upon a public place within the Village of Evergreen Park during the
following hours:
      Between 11:30 p.m. Friday and 6:00 a.m. Saturday. Between 11:30 p.m.
Saturday and 6:00 a.m. Sunday.
      Between 10:30 p.m. on Sunday to Thursday, inclusive, and 6:00 a.m. on the
following day.
   (c)   Exceptions and Affirmative Defense. It shall not be a violation of
this section, and it shall otherwise be an affirmative defense if a juvenile/
minor is:
      (1)   Accompanied by the juvenile/minor's parent, custodian or guardian;
      (2)   Accompanied by an adult at least 21 years of age authorized by a
parent of such juvenile/minor to take said parent's place in accompanying said
juvenile/minor for a designated period of time and for purposes within a
specified area.
      (3)   When a juvenile/minor is on the sidewalk or property where the
juvenile/minor resides, or on either side of or across the street from the
place where the juvenile/minor resides and the adult owner or resident of that
property has given permission for the juvenile/minor to be there.
      (4)   When the juvenile/minor is married or has been married pursuant to
state law.
      (5)   In the case of an operator of an establishment, when the operator
has notified the police that a juvenile/minor was present on the premises of
the establishment during curfew hours and refused to leave.
      (6)   Participating in, going to, or returning from:
         a.   Lawful employment;
         b.   A school sanctioned activity;
         c.   An emergency situation, or errand of urgent necessity involving
the protection of persons or property;
         d.   An activity involving the exercise of the juvenile/minor' s
rights protected under the First Amendment of the United States Constitution
and Article 1, Section 3, 4, and 5 of the Illinois Constitution, or both, such
as freedom of speech, religion and the right of assembly; or
         e.   Engaged in the interstate or international travel originating
outside the State of Illinois or originating in the State of Illinois.
   (d)   Operator Responsibility. It shall be unlawful for any operator of an
establishment to knowingly permit a juvenile/minor to remain at the
establishment under circumstances not constituting an exception to, or
otherwise beyond the scope of, this Section. The term "knowingly" includes
knowledge that an operator should reasonably be expected to have concerning the
patrons of the establishment. The standard for "knowingly" shall be applied
through an objective test: whether a reasonable person in the operator's
position would have known that the patron was a juvenile/minor in violation of
this Section.
   (e)   Parental Responsibility. It shall be unlawful for a parent having
legal custody of a juvenile/minor knowingly to permit or by inefficient control
to allow the juvenile/minor to remain in any Village public place under
circumstances not constituting an exception to, or otherwise beyond the scope
of, this Section. The term "knowingly" includes knowledge that a parent should
reasonably be expected to have concerning the whereabouts of a juvenile/minor
in that parent's legal custody. It shall be no defense that a parent was
completely indifferent to the activities or conduct or whereabouts of such
juvenile/minor.
   (f)   Duties of Police Officers. It shall be the duties of the police
officer upon discovering any juvenile/minor, unattended by an adult, to:
      (1)   Inquire of such juvenile/minor their age, place of residence and
telephone number;
      (2)   Inquire as to why the juvenile/minor is out past curfew;
      (3)   Assess whether the activity the juvenile/minor is engaged in is/was
protected under this Section;
      (4)   Assess whether such an exception or defense is reasonable given the
surrounding circumstances, such as time elapsed from beginning or end of said
activity, allowing the juvenile/minor a reasonable amount of time to go to or
return from such activity without violating this Section.
After the above inquiries are made by the officer, and no exceptions or
defenses are applicable, it shall be the duties of the police officers to
promptly notify the parent, guardian, or custodian of such juvenile/minor has
been detained for violations of the provisions of this Section and to report to
the police station for the return of said juvenile/minor to their custody.
Whenever it is impractical to do so, the said juvenile/minor may be returned
forthwith to his home or to the person entitled to his custody.
Sec. 12-303. Children in dwelling of another without permission.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person over the age of sixteen (16) years
of age to allow any unemancipated minor to remain overnight in his dwelling
without the express permission and consent of the minor's parents, legal
guardian, person in loco parentis, or court.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person over the age of sixteen (16) years
of age to aid or encourage any unemancipated minor to remain away from his home
or family without the express permission and consent of the minor's parents,
legal guardian, person in loco parentis, or court.
Sec. 12-304. Cigarettes; sale, etc., to minors.
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or give away, directly or
indirectly, to any person under the age of eighteen (18) years any cigarettes,
tobacco, or any compounds of tobacco used in filling up or making up of a
cigarette or to give or sell any cigarette papers to minors.
Sec. 12-305. Junk dealers.
It shall be unlawful for any dealer in junk to receive by purchase or otherwise
any article or thing from any minor without the written consent of a parent or
guardian of such minor.
Sec. 12-306. Truancy.
   (a)   Purpose.
      (1)   School attendance, as mandated by Illinois School Code, is
essential for both a complete education and for the social development of the
child. Often, truancy is a manifestation of an underlying situation or problem
a student may be experiencing such as addiction, depression or social issues,
which may be addressed through proper diagnosis and counseling. Truancy has an
effect on society as a whole, which may be realized through parents missed work
time, truant children engaging in more severe or criminal activity or the
downgraded education of our population.
      (2)   The intent of this section is to address the issue of chronic
truancy regarding those students enrolled in schools located within the
corporate limits of the village and, if appropriate, mandate available services
as may be necessary to resolve the underlying issues of chronic truancy. The
goal of the village, in conjunction with the schools, is to provide assistance
to these students and have them resume their education.
   (b)   Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this
section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except when
the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
      Chronic Truancy means any chronic truant minor who has been absent on
more than one (1) occasion during a school year without cause or acceptable
excuse.
      Chronic Truant Minormeans a truant minor, to whom supportive services,
including prevention, diagnostic, intervention and remedial services,
alternative programs and other school and community resources, has been
provided and has failed to result in the cessation of habitual or ongoing
truant behavior, or has been offered and refused.
      Minor means a child who is seventeen (17) years of age or younger.
      Schoolmeans either a public or private educational institution fully
accredited or certified by the Illinois Department of Education.
      Truant Minormeans a minor in any school accredited or certified by the
Illinois Department of Education, located within the village, who is absent
without cause or an acceptable excuse from such attendance for a school day or
portion thereof.
   (c)   Prohibition of Chronic Truancy.  
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for a minor enrolled in any school located
within the village and subject to the compulsory attendance requirements of the
Illinois School Code to engage in chronic truancy.
      (2)   A chronic truant minor shall be identified to the Evergreen Park
Police Department by the minor's school, along with any and all information
detailing absences from school.
      (3)   Prior to a minor being cited under this section for chronic
truancy, the school must have provided supportive services, including
prevention, diagnostic, intervention and remedial services, alternative
programs and other school and community resources that have failed to result in
the cessation of habitual or ongoing truant behavior, or has been offered to
the student and refused.
   (d)   Parental responsibility. It shall be unlawful for any parent,
guardian, or person having custody or control of a minor enrolled in any school
located in the village to cause, permit or encourage a minor to become a
chronic truant minor or engage in chronic truancy.
   (e)   Excused absences. If a parent, guardian or person having legal custody
and control over a minor presents in writing to school officials within twenty-
four (24) hours after an occurrence or such other deadline as established by
the school, any of the following reasons for an absence, there is a rebuttable
presumption that it is a legitimate and acceptable excuse:
      (1)   Illness (if illness persists more than five (5) days, a doctor's
report will be required detailing the nature of the illness and the projected
return date of the student);
      (2)   Observance of a religious holiday;
      (3)   Death in the family;
      (4)   Family emergency;
      (5)   Any situation beyond the control of the minor as determined by the
student’s school officials; or
      (6)   Such other circumstances which cause reasonable concern to the
parent for the safety or health of the minor.
   (f)   Violation notice. Citations issued for violation of this section may
be processed through the administrative adjudication process as provided in
Chapter 12, Article X of the Evergreen Park Municipal Code.
(Ord. No. 8-2009, § 1, 2-16-09)
Secs. 12-307 – 12-325. Reserved.
ARTICLE VIII. OFFENSES AGAINST GOVERNMENTAL OPERATIONS
Sec. 12-326. Resisting an officer.
It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere willfully with, resist, delay,
impede, obstruct, molest or threaten to molest any officer of the village in
the exercise or performance of his official duties.
Sec. 12-327. Failure to obey officers.
No person shall refuse or fail to cease and desist any peaceful conduct or
activity likely to produce a breach of peace where there is an imminent threat
of violence, and where the police have made all reasonable efforts to protect
the otherwise peaceful conduct and activity, and have requested that such
conduct and activity be stopped and explained the request if there is time
Sec. 12-328. Failure to disperse.
No person shall fail to disperse after being ordered to do so by a person with
police authority.
Sec. 12-329. Assistance to police officer.
It shall be unlawful for any citizen over the age of eighteen (18) years to
refuse or neglect to render assistance to any police officer when called upon
for such assistance or aid in the suppression of riot or other unlawful
assemblage or in the arrest of any person who has committed an offense.
Sec. 12-330. Furnishing certain items to prisoners.
It shall be unlawful for any person to furnish or attempt to furnish or take
into jail or to deliver or attempt to deliver to any prisoner therein confined,
or in the custody of any officer, any weapon, tool, intoxicating liquors, drug
or other article without the consent of the officer in charge.
Sec. 12-331. Jail breaking.
No person shall break open any jail of the village, or in any manner directly
or indirectly aid or assist in or counsel or advise the breaking open of any
jail of the village.
Secs. 12-332 – 12-350. Reserved.
ARTICLE IX. OTHER OFFENSES
Sec. 12-351. False representation of person or insignia.
It shall be unlawful for any person to:
      (1)   Falsely represent himself to be an employee, officer, or a member
of any village agency or department, including, but not limited to, the fire,
police, building, public works and the emergency services and disaster
departments.
      (2)   Falsely represent himself to be an employee, officer, or member of
any school district, park district, sanitary district, public health district,
township, library district, county, state or any municipal corporation or body
politic.
      (3)   Falsely represent himself to be an employee, officer, or member of
any police, fire, fraternal, veteran, charitable, or nonprofit organization.
      (4)   Exhibit or use in any manner any decal, uniform, badge, or insignia
of a department of the village, school district, park district, sanitary
district, public health district, township, library district, county, state or
any municipal corporation or body politic, or any fraternal, veteran,
nonprofit, or charitable organization, or any department or agency thereof
without its authorization.
Sec. 12-352. Unlawful removal of metal tags and plates.
No person shall, without the consent of the owner or licensee, take, carry
away, detach or mutilate any metal plate, tag, badge or license worn by or
attached to any person, animal or vehicle or attached to any article, substance
or thing whatsoever as a mark of identification or otherwise in compliance with
the requirements of any provision of this Code or other village ordinance.
Sec. 12-353. Spirit mediumship.
   (a)   No person shall obtain any money or property from another by
fraudulent devices and practices in the name of, or by means of spirit
mediumship, palmistry, card reading, astrology, seership, or like crafty
science, or fortunetelling of any kind.
   (b)   No person shall hold or give any public or private meetings,
gatherings, circle or seance of any kind in the name of spiritualism or of any
other religious body, society or denomination, and therein practice or permit
to be practiced fraud or deception of any kind.
Sec. 12-354. Sales on streets.
Except as otherwise authorized by this Code or ordinance, no person shall sell,
attempt to sell, or offer for sale any goods, chattels, or personal or real
property of any kind upon any public way, streets or sidewalks of the village.
Sec. 12-355. Playing golf prohibited.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person at any time to play or practice
golf upon any public park, public right-of-way, or public property within the
village except that golf shall be permitted from designated tee areas at the
driving range owned by the village and Frisbee golf shall be permitted at the
Frisbee golf course owned by the village.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person to use the Village of Evergreen
Park driving range without paying the required fee therefor.
   (c)   It shall be unlawful for any person to use the Village of Evergreen
Park driving range for any purpose other than hitting practice balls from
designated tee areas.
(Am. Ord. No. 4-2015 § 1, 2-16-15)
Sec. 12-356. Unauthorized acts on trains, railroad facilities.
It shall be unlawful for any person to play or trespass on or about any
railroad track, depot, locomotive or car within this village or climb upon or
jump from any car or train of cars, or from one car to another.
Sec. 12-357. Spray paint.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or deliver any container
of spray paint to a person of age 18 years or younger within the village.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person of age 18 years or younger to
possess any container of spray paint within the village. It shall be an
affirmative defense that the person possessing the container of spray paint is
on private property that is his usual place of residence.
   (c)   It shall be unlawful for any person to possess any container of spray
paint on any public property, including but not limited to parks, streets,
alleys, parkways and sidewalks, within the village. It shall be an affirmative
defense that the person possessing the container of spray paint is either
working on an authorized project by the village, or the container has been
purchased, is in its original condition, and is in the trunk of an automobile.
Sec. 12-358. Laser Pointers.
   (a)   Possession by Minors Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person
under the age of 18 to possess a laser pointer except in the residence of that
person.
   (b)   Sale to Minors Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell
a laser pointer to any person under the age of 18.
   (c)   Use Outside of Buildings Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any
person to use a laser pointer in such a manner that the laser beam illuminates
on any person, animal, object or place located outside of the building where
the person using the laser pointer is located.
   (d)   Illumination of Persons Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any
person to use a laser pointer in such a manner that the laser beam illuminates
on any person.
   (e)   Illumination of Vehicle Operators Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for
any person to use a laser pointer in such a manner that the laser beam
illuminates the operator of a motor vehicle.
   (f)   Illumination of Law Enforcement Personnel Prohibited. It shall be
unlawful for any person to use a laser pointer in such a manner that the laser
beam illuminates a uniformed law enforcement officer.
   (g)   Use in Public Places Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person
located on the public right-of-way, street, alley, public park, or private
parking lot accessible to the public to use a laser pointer.
For purposes of this section, a "laser pointer" is any device which contains a
small diode laser that emits an intense beam of light, including but not
limited to Class 2 lasers, Class 3a lasers, Class 3b lasers, and Class 4
lasers.
ARTICLE X. ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION OF NON-VEHICULAR REGULATIONS VIOLATIONS
Sec. 12-370. Purpose.
The purpose of this Chapter is to provide a fair and efficient method of
enforcing the Village of Evergreen Park's ("Village") regulations through
administrative adjudication of charges of non-vehicular violations of the
Village Code. All provisions of the Village Code may be enforced through the
administrative adjudication system, provided the system shall have no authority
to impose a penalty of incarceration or adjudicate an offense under the
Illinois Motor Vehicle code which is a traffic regulation governing moving
vehicles, or to impose a fine in excess of $50,000.00. The Village reserves its
right to employ all other means and methods available under the law to enforce
its Village Code, including direct application to the Courts.
Section 1-2.1-2 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/1-2.1-2) allows home
rule municipalities to provide by ordinance for a system of administrative
adjudication of municipal code violations to the extent permitted by the
Illinois Constitution. The Village is a home rule municipality. The Illinois
Constitution provides that a home rule unit may exercise any power and perform
any function pertaining to its government and affairs (Illinois Constitution,
Art. VII, Sec. 6(a) (1970)). The Illinois Constitution also provides that a
home rule unit may exercise and perform concurrently with the State any power
or function of a home rule unit to the extent that the General Assembly by law
does not specifically limit the concurrent exercise or specifically declare the
State's exercise to be exclusive (Illinois Constitution, Art. VII, Sec. 6(i)
(1970)). The Illinois Constitution further provides that the powers and
functions of home rule units shall be construed liberally.
(Ord. No. 6-2007 § 1, 2-5-07)
Sec. 12-371. Administrative Composition.
The system of administrative adjudication of non-vehicular regulations
violations shall be composed of a Code Hearing Unit which shall be comprised of
a Hearing Officer, and may include any one or more of the following: an
Administrator, Computer Operator/System Coordinator and Hearing Room Personnel
(Deputy), with the power, authority and limitations as are hereinafter set
forth:
   (a)   Powers of the Hearing Officer. A Hearing Officer shall have all of the
powers granted to hearing officers under State law, set forth at 65 ILCS 5/1-
2.1-4, the provisions of which are incorporated herein by this reference,
including the power to:
      (1)   Preside over all administrative hearings as the adjudicator.
      (2)   Administer oaths. It shall be the duty of each respondent and
witness to rise and take the oath when called to do so by the Hearing Officer.
Any person who addresses the Hearing Officer to present evidence shall be
deemed to have taken the oath to be truthful and may be punished for not doing
so, as provided by law.
      (3)   Hear testimony and accept evidence that is relevant to the
existence of the Code Violation.
      (4)   Issue subpoenas to secure the attendance of witnesses and the
production of relevant papers or documentation upon the request of the parties
or their representatives.
      (5)   Rule upon objections and the admissibility of evidence.
      (6)   Preserve and authenticate the record of the hearing and all
exhibits and evidence introduced at the hearing.
      (7)   Issue a determination, based on the evidence presented at the
hearing, of whether a Village Code violation exists. The determination shall be
in writing and shall include a decision, and order setting forth the fine,
penalty, including remediation, or action with which the person found liable
must comply. The Hearing Officer’s findings may be made orally.
      (8)   Impose penalties consistent with applicable Village Code provisions
and assess costs upon finding a party liable for the charged violation.
Notwithstanding those violations for which the Illinois Municipal Code limits
the fine or penalty to $750.00 the Hearing Officer shall have the authority to
impose fines and penalties up to $50,000.00.
      (9)   Order the removal of persons whose conduct is disruptive to the
hearing process.
      (10)   In no event shall a hearing officer have the authority to:
         A.   Impose a penalty of incarceration.
         B.   Impose a fine in excess of $50,000.00.
         C.   The maximum mandatory fine under subsection (b), shall be
exclusive of costs of enforcement or costs imposed to secure compliance with
the municipality's ordinances and shall not be applicable to cases to enforce
the collection of any tax imposed and collected by the municipality.
      (11)   Request that the village prosecutor, village attorney, or other
attorney representing the village attend to formally prosecute particular
citations. In such a case, the Hearing Officer shall establish the order of
proof. However, the citation shall remain prima facie evidence of the offense
as provided in this Article.
   (b)   Powers of the Administrator. The Administrator shall be empowered and
is authorized and directed to:
      (1)   Operate and manage this administrative adjudication system.
      (2)   Adopt, distribute and process Village Code violation notices and
other notices as may be required to carry out the purpose of this Chapter.
      (3)   Collect monies paid as fines and/or penalties assessed after a
final determination of a Village Code violation.
      (4)   Promulgate rules and regulations reasonably required to operate and
maintain this administrative adjudication system.
      (5)   Collect unpaid fines and penalties and otherwise pursue all post-
judgment remedies available under law.
      (6)   Collect fines for Violation Notices issued as "P" tickets (as
provided for by Section 12-3(A)) prior to any adjudication hearing.
      (7)   Compromise or otherwise settle Violation Notices prior to a hearing
date. However, any such compromise should be made of record by the
Administrator on the date the Violation Notice was scheduled to appear for
hearing, with an explanation by the Administrator as to the reasons for such
compromise. The Hearing Officer is also required to approve any such compromise
or settlement at the hearing.
      (8)   Amend violation citations on their face to correct scrivener and
typographical errors, and to complete minor omissions and insert missing
information.
      (9)   Sign judgments.
   (c)   Powers of the System Coordinator. The System Coordinator/Computer
Operator shall operate and maintain computer programs for the administrative
adjudication system created hereunder, on a day-to-day basis, including but not
limited to:
      (1)   Input of violation notice information.
      (2)   Hearing and notice dates.
      (3)   Fine and penalty assessments and payments.
      (4)   Issue receipts for payment.
      (5)   Issue succeeding notices of hearing dates or court dates and/or
final determination of liability as directed by the Administrator or by the
Hearing Officer in accordance with the provisions hereinafter set forth.
      (6)   Keep accurate records of appearances and non-appearances at
administrative hearings, pleas entered, fines and penalties assessed and paid.
   (d)   Powers of the Hearing Room Personnel. The Hearing Room Personnel shall
be full-time, part-time or auxiliary police officers. The Hearing Room
Personnel shall:
      (1)   Maintain hearing room decorum.
      (2)   Have and carry out such authority as is granted to courtroom
deputies of the Circuit Court.
      (3)   Perform such other duties or acts as may reasonably be required to
maintain hearing room decorum as directed by the Hearing Officer, or by the
Administrator.
   (e)   Selection and Appointment of Personnel. The persons who shall hold the
positions of Administrator, Hearing Officer, Computer Operator/Systems
Coordinator, and Hearing Room Personnel under this Chapter shall be selected,
and appointed according to the following procedures:
      (1)   The Mayor is hereby authorized to appoint (a) person(s) to hold the
position of Hearing Officer.
      (2)   In making selections, the Mayor shall consider all pertinent
information, including at a minimum:
         A.   Candidate's ability to comply with the job descriptions as set
forth herein; and
         B.   Background and performance data made available to the Mayor on
file with the Village, or otherwise obtained by the Village; and
         C.   Whether the candidate meets the statutory criteria as an attorney
licensed to practice law in the State of Illinois for at least 3 years.
      (3)   Administrator, System Coordinator and Hearing Room Personnel:
         A.   The Mayor shall assign the duties of Administrator, System
Coordinator and Hearing Room Personnel to Village employees.
   (f)   Compensation. Compensation to be paid for any of the above-stated
positions shall be established annually by the Mayor and Board of Trustees.
(Ord. No. 6-2007 § 1, 2-5-07)
Sec. 12-372. Procedures.
The system of administrative adjudication of non-vehicular regulations
violations shall be conducted in accordance with the following procedures to
assure Defendants are afforded due process of law:
   (a)   Issuance of Violation Notices. Village Code violation notices
("Violation Notices") may be issued by any authorized person and shall contain
information and shall be served, certified and have evidentiary value as
hereinafter stated. Certain Violation Notices may be issued in the form of a
"P" ticket allowing the recipient to pay the stated fine prior to any hearing.
If the recipient fails to pay the required fine within the allotted time under
the "P" ticket, the Violation Notice will be processed through the
administrative adjudication system as otherwise provided for in this Article.
   (b)   Authorization. All full-time, part-time and auxiliary police officers
and other specifically appointed individuals including, but not limited to the
Village's Code Enforcement Unit shall have the authority to issue Violation
Notices.
   (c)   Detection of Violations. Any individual authorized to issue a
Violation Notice who detects a violation of any non-vehicular regulation shall
issue a Notice of Violation thereof and shall serve the Violation Notice as
herein provided.
   (d)   Content. Violation Notices shall contain, at a minimum:
      (1)   The date, time and place of the violation (date of issuance).
      (2)   The particular Village Code section or regulation violated.
      (3)   The common address of the building or property alleged to be in
violation (the "Cited Property"), if applicable.
      (4)   The signature and identification number, if applicable, of the
person issuing the Violation Notice.
      (5)   The date, time and place of the administrative hearing at which the
charge may be contested on its merits. This date shall be no less than 15 days
after the date of service of the violation notice. A hearing may be set at a
date less than 15 days after the date of service of the violation in an
emergency situation where the violation constitutes a threat to public
interest, safety or welfare.
      (6)   At statement of penalties for failure to appear at the hearing.
      (7)   If the Violation Notice is issued as a "P" ticket, the Notice shall
include the amount of the fine and the date required for payment of the fine.
The Notice under the "P" ticket shall also apprise the recipient that the
failure to pay the stated fine within the allotted time will operate to process
the Violation Notice within the administrative adjudication system as otherwise
provided for by this Article.
   (e)   Service of Violation Notices. Service of Violation Notices shall be
made in a manner reasonably calculated to give the defendant actual notice, by:
      (1)   Handing a copy of the Violation Notice to the person charged; or
      (2)   Delivering a copy of the Violation Notice to the person charged by
certified mail, return receipt. Such service shall be completed as of the date
of deposit in the United States Mail.
      (3)   If a Building Code violation is alleged where the person charged is
an owner or manager of the property, posting a copy on the Cited Property.
   (f)   Certification. The correctness of facts contained in the Violation
Notice shall be certified by the issuing person by:
      (1)   Signing his/her name to the Violation Notice at the time of
issuance; or
      (2)   In the case of a Violation Notice produced by a computer device, by
signing a single certificate, to be kept by the Administrator, attesting to the
correctness of all Violation Notices produced by the device while under his/her
control.
   (g)   Business Records. The original or complete copy of the Violation
Notice shall be retained and kept as a record in the ordinary course of Village
business.
   (h)   Prima Facie Evidence. Any Violation Notice issued, signed and served
in accordance herewith, or a complete copy of the notice, shall be deemed prima
facie correct and shall be considered prima facie evidence of the facts alleged
therein and shall be deemed to state a claim and meet the requirements of this
Chapter unless specifically stated otherwise by the Hearing Officer.
   (i)   Admissibility. The Violation Notices shall be admissible in any
subsequent administrative or legal proceeding.
(Ord. No. 6-2007 § 1, 2-5-07)
Sec. 12-373. Administrative Hearings.
An administrative hearing shall be held to adjudicate an alleged Village Code
violation on its merits, or to contest the validity of a Violation Notice.
Specifically, hearings shall be held to adjudicate alleged violations of all
Village Code sections except those that are excluded by law from the Village's
administrative adjudication system:
   (a)   Time and Date. Hearings shall be on the date, time and place as set
forth in Violation Notice issued and served.
   (b)   Recording. Hearings shall be tape recorded.
   (c)   Non-Appearance. Persons who do not appear on their scheduled hearing
date shall have a default judgment entered against them.
   (d)   Hearing Rights. Persons appearing to contest an alleged Violation Code
violation may be represented by counsel of their own choice at their own
expense, may present witnesses, may present testimony and documents, may cross
examine opposing witnesses, and may request the issuance of subpoenas to compel
the appearance of relevant witnesses or the production of relevant documents. A
party issuing a subpoena shall include witness fees at the same rate as for a
circuit court subpoena.
   (e)   Evidentiary Standard. The formal and technical rules of evidence do
not apply in an administrative hearing conducted in compliance with this
Article X. Evidence, including hearsay, may be admitted, pursuant to state law
set forth at 65 ILCS 5/1-2.1-6, if it is of the type commonly relied upon by
reasonably prudent persons in the conduct of their affairs. Village police
reports, inspection reports, records of state and other governmental agencies
shall be admissible, subject to rebuttal.
   (f)   Determination of Liability. Hearings shall result in a default
judgment, or a determination of liability or non-liability, made by the Hearing
Officer, who shall consider facts and/or testimony. The Hearing Officer shall,
upon a determination of liability, assess fines and penalties in accordance
with this Chapter and issue a notice of final determination that shall contain,
at a minimum, the following information and warnings:
      (1)   The decision and order of the Hearing Officer.
      (2)   A date by which the violation must be brought into compliance with
the Village Code.
      (3)   A statement that the unpaid fine and any penalty assessed is a debt
due and owing the Village.
      (4)   A warning that the findings, decision and order of the Hearing
Officer may be enforced in the same manner as a judgment entered by a court of
competent jurisdiction. And in the case in which a defendant fails to comply
with a judgment ordering the correction of a Village Code violation or imposing
any fine or other sanction as a result of the Village Code violation, a
statement that any expenses incurred by the Village to enforce the judgment,
including but not limited to, attorneys' fees, court costs and costs related to
property demolition or foreclosure, shall be a debt due and owing the
municipality and may be collected in accordance with applicable law.
      (5)   A notice of judgment entered by default shall be forwarded to any
person who fails to appear and shall contain the same information as a
determination of liability stating that the judgment may be set aside by the
Hearing Officer if, within 21 days of issuance of the judgment, a petition is
received stating what the Hearing Officer determines is good cause for failure
to appear. The Hearing Officer, upon making a determination of good cause shall
provide the petitioner with notice of a new hearing date or denial of the
petition. The default judgment shall state that it shall constitutes a final
determination of liability if such petition is not received, if the petition is
denied, or if after setting of a new hearing date the person fails to appear.
   (g)   Final Determination - The determination of liability shall constitute
a final determination for purposes of judicial review and shall be subject to
review under the Illinois Administrative Review Law as set forth in 735 ILCS 5/
3-101, et seq.
(Ord. No. 6-2007 § 1, 2-5-07)
Sec. 12-374. Administrative Review.
Administrative Review of final determinations issued by the Hearing Officer
under this Title shall be subject to the provisions of the Administrative
Review Law as is set forth in Section 735 ILCS 5/3-101 et seq. of the Illinois
Code of Civil Procedure which sections are incorporated herein by reference.
The Village shall specifically have the right to appeal a final determination,
regardless of whether the citation in question was formally prosecuted with the
presence of an attorney representing the Village. In such a case, the Village
shall retain independent counsel to prepare and file the administrative record
and appear on behalf of the Code Hearing Unit.
(Ord. No. 6-2007 § 1, 2-5-07)
Sec. 12-375. Judgment and collection.
   (a)   Enforcement. Upon expiration of the period in which judicial review
under the Illinois Administrative Review Law may be sought for a final
determination of a Village Code violation unless stayed by a court of competent
jurisdiction, the findings, decision and order of the Housing Officer may be
enforced in the same manner as a judgment entered by a court of competent
jurisdiction.
   (b)   Court Costs, Attorneys' Fees and Costs of Collection. In any case in
which a person has failed to comply with a Hearing Officer's judgment ordering
the correction of a Village Code violation or imposing any fine or other
sanction as a result of a Village Code violation, any expenses incurred by the
Village to enforce the judgment, including, but not limited to, attorneys'
fees, court costs, and costs related to property demolition or foreclosure,
after they are fixed by a court of competent jurisdiction or by the Hearing
Officer, shall be a debt due ad owing the Village and may be collected in
accordance with applicable law.
      (1)   Prior to any expenses being fixed by the Hearing Officer pursuant
to this subsection, the Village shall provide notice to the person that states
that the person shall appear at a hearing before the Hearing Officer to
determine whether the person has failed to comply with the judgment. The notice
shall set the date for such hearing, which shall not be less then 7 days from
the date that notice is served. If notice is served by mail, the 7-day period
shall begin on the date the notice was deposited in the mail.
      (2)   Upon being recorded in the manner required by Article 12 of the
Code of Civil Procedure (735 ILCS 5/12-101 et seq.) or by the Uniform
Commercial Code, a lien shall be imposed on the real estate or personal estate,
or both, of the person in the amount of any debt due and owing the Village
under this Section. The lien may be enforced in the same manner as a judgment
lien would be enforced in a court of competent jurisdiction.
(Ord. No. 6-2007 § 1, 2-5-07)
Sec. 12-376. Election of remedies non-exclusive.
Nothing contained in this Chapter shall prevent the Village from pursuing all
available remedies, allowed by law, to collect money judgments.
(Ord. No. 6-2007 § 1, 2-5-07)
Sec. 12-377. Conduct of those attending or near hearing.
No person, while in the presence of the Hearing Officer or during the hearing
process, shall knowingly do any act in such an unreasonable manner as to alarm
or disturb another and to provoke a breach of the peace. Any person believed to
be in violation of this section shall be prosecuted pursuant to this ordinance
in the Circuit Court of Cook County. Any person found in violation of this
section shall be fined not less than $50 or more than $500.
(Ord. No. 6-2007 § 1, 2-5-07)
Sec. 12-378. Schedule of fines for specific offenses.
Failure to pay a fine for a violation of Sections
3-2,
3-3,
3-4,
4-7,
4-12,
7-3,
7-121,
7-123,
7-124,
7-127,
7-128,
7-130,
11-320-
11-327,
12-96,
12-97(A),
12-172,
12-173 and
12-212(A)(4) on or before the first hearing date shall result in an increase of
the fine to $250. The fine shall be increased to $350 if it has not been paid
by the date scheduled to file a memorandum of judgment. In no event shall the
date to file a memorandum of judgment be sooner than 7 days after the first
hearing date.
(Ord. No. 6-2007 § 1, 2-5-07; Am. Ord. No. 21-2007 § 2, 3-19-07)
ARTICLE XI. SYNTHETIC DRUGS
Sec. 12-400. Definitions.
   For purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires different meaning:
   (a)   A product containing a synthetic cannabinoid, synthetic stimulant, or
synthetic hallucinogen or product(s) means any product containing a synthetic
cannabinoid, synthetic stimulant, and synthetic hallucinogen as those terms
defined herein such as, but not limited to, the following examples of brand
names or identifiers: Spice, Chronic Spice, Spice Gold, Spice Silver, K2, K2
Sky, K2 Solid Sex, K2 Orisha, K2 Amazonian Shelter, K2 Thai Dream, K3, K3
Legal, Stinger, Red X Dawn, Spike 99, Spicylicious, Zohai, Serenity, Genie,
Yucatan Fire, Earthquake, Mystery, Black Mamba, Mr. Nice Guy, Skunk, Pulse,
Ivory Wave, Pure Ivory, Purple Wave, Vanilla Sky, Bliss, Meow Meow, Zoom,
Sextacy, Molly's Plant Food, Purple Monkey Plant Food, Buzz Grow, 4MMC, m-Cat
and Energy 1.
   (b)   Synthetic cannabinoid means any laboratory-created compound that
functions similar to the active ingredient in marijuana, tetrahydrocannabinol
(THC), including, but not limited to, any quantity of a natural or synthetic
material, compound, mixture, preparation, substance and their analog (including
isomers, esters, ethers, salts, and salts of isomers) containing a cannabinoid
receptor agonist, such as:
      (1)   JWH-007 (1-pentyl-2-methyl-3-(1-naphthoyl)indole);
      (2)   JWH-015 ((2-Methyl-1-propyl-1H-indol-3-yl)-1-
naphthalenylmethanone);
      (3)   JWH-018 (1-pentyl-3-(1-naphthoyl)indole);
      (4)   JWH-019 (1-hexyl-3-(naphthalen-1-oyl)indole);
      (5)   JWH-073 (naphthalen-1-yl-(1-butylindol-3-yl)methanone);
      (6)   JWH-081 (4-methoxynaphthalen-1-yl-(1-pentylindol-3-yl)methanone);
      (7)   JWH-098 (4-methoxynaphthalen-1-yl-(1-pentyl-2-methylindol-3-
yl)methanone);
      (8)   JWH-122 (1-Pentyl-3-(4-methyl-1-naphthoyl)indole);
      (9)   JWH-164 (7-methoxynaphthalen-1-yl-(1-pentylindol-3-yl)methanone;
      (10)   JWH-200 (1-(2-morpholin-4-ylethyl)indol-3-yl)-naphthalen-1-
ylmethanone);
      (11)   JWH-203 (2-(2-chlorophenyl)-1-(1-pentylindol-3-yl)ethanone;
      (12)   JWH-210 (4-ethylnaphthalen-1-yl-(1-pentylindol-3-yl)methanone;
      (13)   JWH-250 (1-pentyl-3-(2-methoxyphenylacetyl)indole);
      (14)   JWH-251 (1-pentyl-3-(2-methylphenylacetyl)indole);
      (15)   JWH-398 (1-pentyl-3-(4-chloro-1-naphthoyl)indole);
      (16)   HU-210 ((6aR,10aR)-9-(Hydroxymethyl)-6,6-dimethyl-3-(2-
methyloctan-2-yl)-6a,7,10,10a-tetrahydrobenzo [c]chromen-1-ol);
      (17)   HU-211 ((6aS,10aS)-9-(Hydroxymethyl)-6,6-dimethyl-3-(2-
methyloctan-2-yl)-6a,7,10,10a-tetrahydrobenzo [c]chromen-1-ol);
      (18)   HU-308 ([(1R,2R,5R)-2-[2,6-dimethoxy-4-(2-methyloctan-2-
yl)phenyl]-7,7-dimethyl-4-bicyclo[3.1.1]hept-3-enyl] methanol);
      (19)   HU-331 ((3-hydroxy-2-[(1R,6R)-3-methyl-6-(1-methylethenyl)-2-
cyclohexen-1-yl]-5-pentyl-2,5-cyclohexadiene-1,4-dione);
      (20)   CP 55,940 (2-[(1R,2R,5R)-5-hydroxy-2-(3-hydroxypropyl)
cyclohexyl]- 5-(2-methyloctan-2-yl)phenol);
      (21)   CP 47,497 (2-[(1R,3S)-3-hydroxycyclohexyl]- 5- (2-methyloctan-2-
yl)phenol) and its homologues;
      (22)   WIN 55,212-2 ((R)-(+)-[2,3-Dihydro-5-methyl-3-(4-
morpholinylmethyl)pyrrolo [1,2,3-de)-1,4-benzoxazin-6-yl]-1-
nepthalenylmethanone);
      (23)   RCS-4 ((4-methoxyphenyl)(1-pentyl-1H-indol-3-yl)methanone);
      (24)   RCS-8 (1-(1-(2-cyclohexylethyl)-1H-indol-3-yl)-2-(2-
methoxyphenyl)ethanone).
   (c)   Synthetic stimulant means any compound that mimics the effects of any
federally controlled Schedule I substance such as cathinone, methcathinone,
MDMA and MDEA, including, but not limited to, any quantity of a natural or
synthetic material, compound, mixture, preparation, substance and their analog
(including salts, isomers, and salts of isomers) containing substances which
have a stimulant effect on the central nervous system, such as:
      (1)   3-Fluoromethcathinone;
      (2)   4-Fluoromethcathinone;
      (3)   3,4-Methylenedioxymethcathinone (other name: methylone, MDMC);
      (4)   3,4-Methylenedioxypyrovalerone (other name: MDPV);
      (5)   4-Methylmethcathinon (other names: mephedrone, 4-MMC);
      (6)   4-Methoxymethcathinone (other names: methedrone, bk-PMMA, PMMC);
      (7)   4-Ethylmethcathinone (other name: 4-EMC);
      (8)   Ethcatinone;
      (9)   Beta-keto-N-methylbenzodioxyolylpropylamine (other names: butylone,
bk-MBDB);
      (10)   Napthylpyrovalerone (other names: naphyrone, NRG-1);
      (11)   N.N-dimethylcathinone (other name: metamfepramone);
      (12)   Alpha-pyrrolidinopropiophenone (other name: alpha-PPP);
      (13)   4-methoxy-alpha-pyrrolidinopropiophenone (other name: MOPPP);
      (14)   3,4-mthylenedioxy-alpha-pyrrolidinopropiophenone (other name:
MDPPP);
      (15)   6,7-kihydro-5H-indeno(5,6-d)-1,3-dioxal-6amine) (other name:
MDAI);
      (16)   Any compound that is structurally derived from 2-amino-1-phenyl-1-
propanone by modification or substitution in any of the following ways:
         a.   In the phenyl ring to any extent with alkyl, alkoxy,
alkylenedioxy, haloalkyl, or halide substituents, whether or not further
substituted in the phenyl ring by one or more other univalent substituents;
         b.   At the 3-position with an alkyl substituent;
         c.   At the nitrogen atom with alkyl, dialkyl, benzyl, or
methoxybenzyl groups; or
         d.   By inclusion of the nitrogen atom in a cyclic structure.
   (d)   Synthetic hallucinogen means any compound that mimics the effects of
any federally controlled Schedule I substance, including but not limited to,
any quantity of a natural or synthetic material, compound, mixture,
preparation, substance and their analog (including salts, isomers, esters,
ethers and salts of isomers) containing substances which have a psychedelic/
hallucinogenic effect on the central nervous system and/or brain such as:
      (1)   2-(2,5-Dimethoxy-4-ethylphenyl)ethanamine(2C-E);
      (2)   2-(2,5-Dimethoxy-4-methylphenyl)ethanamine (2C-D);
      (3)   2-(4-Chloro-2,5-dimethoxyphenyl)ethanamine (2C-C);
      (4)   2-(4-Iodo-2,5-dimethoxyphenyl)ethanamine (2C-I);
      (5)   2-(4-Ethylthio)-2,5-dimethoxyphenyl)ethanamine (2C-I-2);
      (6)   2-(4(Isopropylthio)-2,5-dimethoxyphenyl)ethanamine (2C-T-4);
      (7)   2-(2,5-Dimethoxyphenyl)ethanamine (2C-H);
      (8)   2-(2,5-Dimethoxy-4-nitro-phenyl)ethanamine (2C-N);
      (9)   2-(2,5-Dimethoxy-4-(n)-propylphenyl)ethanamine (2C-P).
(Ord. No. 1-2012 § 2, 1-3-12)
Sec. 12-401. Sale or delivery.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale or deliver any
product containing a synthetic cannabinoid, synthetic stimulant or synthetic
hallucinogen.
(Ord. No. 1-2012 § 2, 1-3-12)
Sec. 12-402. Possession.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly possess a product
containing a synthetic cannabinoid, synthetic stimulant or synthetic
hallucinogen with the intent of using the product for ingestion, consumption,
inhaling, or intravenous use. In determining intent under this subsection, a
trier of fact may take into consideration, among other things: the proximity of
the product to drug paraphernalia; the presence of the product on or within
drug paraphernalia; the proximity of the product to a different controlled
substance; and whether or not the individual in possession of the product is
exhibiting physical effects commonly associated with being under the influence
of a controlled substance.
(Ord. No. 1-2012 § 2, 1-3-12)
Sec. 12-403. Use.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to be under the influence of a synthetic
cannabinoid, synthetic stimulant or synthetic hallucinogen.
(Ord. No. 1-2012 § 2, 1-3-12)
Sec. 12-404. Conflict.
   It is recognized that State of Illinois may criminalize the sale, possession
or use of some or all synthetic cannabinoids, synthetic stimulants or synthetic
hallucinogens governed by this Article. To the extent the General Assembly
passes any criminal laws banning or prohibiting the sale, possession or use of
a specific substance governed by this Article, the violator shall be charged
under the State statute and that part of this Article shall superseded but only
to the extent the State statute governs the same conduct for the same
substance.
(Ord. No. 1-2012 § 2, 1-3-12)
ARTICLE XII. PROHIBITED DRUGS
Sec. 12-420. Definitions.
   Cannabis: "Cannabis" means marijuana, hashish, and other substances that are
identified as including any parts of the plant Cannabis sativa and including
derivatives or subspecies, such as indica, of all strains of Cannabis, whether
growing or not; the seeds thereof, the resin extracted from any part of the
plant; and any compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation
of the plant, its seeds, or resin, including tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) and all
other naturally produced cannabinol derivatives, whether produced directly or
indirectly by extraction; however, "Cannabis" does not include the mature
stalks of the plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oil or cake made from the
seeds of the plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture,
or preparation of the mature stalks (except the resin extracted from it),
fiber, oil or cake, or the sterilized seed of the plant that is incapable of
germination. "Cannabis" does not include industrial hemp as defined and
authorized under the Industrial Hemp Act. "Cannabis" also means Cannabis
flower, concentrate, and Cannabis-infused products.
   Cannabis Concentrate: "Cannabis concentrate" means a product derived from
Cannabis that is produced by extracting cannabinoids, including
tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), from the plant through the use of propylene glycol,
glycerin, butter, olive oil, or other typical cooking fats; water, ice, or dry
ice; or butane, propane, CO2, ethanol, or isopropanol and with the intended use
of smoking or making a Cannabis-infused product. The use of any other solvent
is expressly prohibited unless and until it is approved by the Department of
Agriculture.
   Cannabis Infused Product: "Cannabis-infused product" means a beverage, food,
oil, ointment, tincture, topical formulation, or another product containing
Cannabis or Cannabis concentrate that is not intended to be smoked.
   Derived Psychoactive Cannabis Products or DPCP: any product containing or
infused with Cannabis or Cannabis concentrate that may cause a psychoactive
effect when consumed or ingested.
   Hemp-Derived THC Products or HDTP: any product that is intended for human or
animal consumption by any means including, without limitation: oral ingestion;
inhalation; smoking; and topical absorption; and contains a total THC
concentration greater than 0.3% by dry weight for any intermediate or finished
plant product or material, or for any product intended for consumption by
inhalation or smoking; or more than 0.5 milligrams per serving or individual
product unit, or more than two milligrams per retail package.
   Kratom: any parts of the plant Mitragyna speciosa, whether growing or not,
and any compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of
that plant, including but not limited to mitragynine and 7-hydroxymitragynine.
   Tetrahydrocannabinol or THC: any naturally occurring or synthetic
tetrahydrocannabinol, including its salts, isomers, and salts of isomers
whenever the existence of such salts, isomers, and salts of isomers is possible
within the specific chemical designation and any preparation, mixture, or
substance containing, or mixed or infused with, any detectable amount of
tetrahydrocannabinol or tetrahydrocannabolic acid, including, but not limited
to, delta-8-tetrahydrocannabinol, delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol, delta-10-
tetrahydrocannabinol, tetrahydrocannabolic acid, tetrahydrocannabipherol, or
hexahydrocannabinol, however derived. As used in this definition, "isomer"
means the optical, position, and geometric isomers.
(Ord. No. 06-2025, § 1, 4-7-25)
Sec. 12-421. Sale or Delivery.
   (a)   Prohibited Acts. It shall be unlawful for any business or person to
offer for sale or sell at retail the following: any Cannabis-infused product;
any DPCP; any DHTP; any product containing kratom; or any product containing
tianeptine. Any product advertised or labeled as containing Cannabis, Cannabis
concentrate, kratom, tianeptine, or any form of THC is presumed to be a product
prohibited by this article unless, in the case of a HDTP, it bears a
manufacturer's label that lists a concentration of all forms of THC not
exceeding the regulations of this article.
   (b)   Exceptions. The prohibitions of this article do not apply to:
      (1)   Any product approved by the United States Food and Drug
Administration for sale for any therapeutic purpose where such product is
marketed and sold solely for such an approved purpose.
      (2)   Any product regulated by the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis
Program Act (410 ILCS 130/1 et seq.) or the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act
(410 ILCS 705/1 et seq.), and any product sold by a dispensing organization
licensed pursuant to either Act.
      (3)   Retail sales fulfilled through delivery that are either (i)
delivered to a premises outside of the Village, or (ii) made by a business with
no physical location within the Village.
   (c)   Penalty. The penalty clause for this ordinance shall be Section 1-9 of
the Evergreen Park Municipal Code. Violations may be administered through the
provisions of Chapter 12, Miscellaneous Provisions and Offenses, Article X,
Administrative Adjudication of NonVehicular Regulations Violations, of the
Evergreen Park Municipal Code.
   (d)   Suspension or Revocation of License. In addition to any other penalty,
a business license may be suspended or revoked.
(Ord. No. 06-2025, § 1, 4-7-25)
Sec. 12-422. Possession.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly possess the following: any
Cannabis- infused product; any DPCP; any DHTP; any product containing kratom;
or any product containing tianeptine.
(Ord. No. 06-2025, § 1, 4-7-25)
Sec. 12-423. Use.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to be under the influence of the
following: any Cannabis-infused product; any DPCP; any DHTP; any product
containing kratom; or any product containing tianeptine.
(Ord. No. 06-2025, § 1, 4-7-25)
Chapter 13
MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
Art. I.   In General, §§ 13-1-13-35
Art. II.   Administration and Enforcement, §§ 13-36-13-125
   Div. 1. Generally, §§ 13-36-13-55
   Div. 2. Traffic Control Signs, Signals, Devices and Markings, §§ 13-56-13-75
   Div. 3. Violations and Penalties, §§ 13-76-13-90
   Div. 4. Traffic Safety Commission, §§ 13-91-13-125
Art. III.   Reserved
Art. IV.   General Rules of Vehicle Operation, §§ 13-156-13-200
   Div. 1. Generally, §§ 13-156-13-180
   Div. 2. Speed, §§ 13-181-13-200
Art. V .   Stopping, Standing or Parking, §§ 13-201-13-245
Art. VI.   Minibikes or Motor Bicycles, §§ 13-246-13-275
Art. VII.   Relocation of Vehicles, §§ 13-276-13-325
Art. VIII.   Bicycles, §§ 13-326-13-350
Art. IX.   Miscellaneous Rules, §§ 13-351-13-356
Art. X .   Administrative Adjudication of Violations of Traffic Regulations
Concerning the Standing, Parking or Condition of Vehicles, §§ 13-380-13-391
Art. XI.   Obstruction of Highway Grade Crossings, §§ 13-400-13-404
Art. XII.   Seizure and Impoundment of Motor Vehicles, §§ 13-405 - 13-499
Art. XIII.   Automated Traffic Law Enforcement System, §§ 13-500 - 13-512
Art. XIV.   Railroad Occurrences, §§ 13-601 - 13-605
ARTICLE 1. IN GENERAL
Sec. 13-1. Statutes adopted by reference.
   (a)   In lieu of using any section of or in addition to the regulations of
this chapter, the officer issuing the citation may issue a citation under any
of the sections of the Illinois Vehicle Code [625 ILCS 5/1-100 et seq.], from
time to time, which sections of the Illinois Vehicle Code, and all amendments
made from time to time, are hereby incorporated by reference as a part of this
chapter, and every numbered section in the Illinois Vehicle Code, shall be
referred to by the letters "EP" prefixing such section number. All citations so
issued shall be issued in the name of the village and referred to in the
uniform traffic ticket or complaint as an ordinance violation. The Illinois
Vehicle Code penalties for traffic violations shall apply to such ordinance
violations, unless modified or changed by this chapter.
   (b)   Any section in the Illinois Vehicle Code can be used in issuing
ordinance citations merely by using the IVC section and prefacing with the
letters "EP." For example, a school bus which does not have a signal device can
be cited as a violation of sec. EP 12-805, etc.
   (c)   Any section of the Illinois Vehicle Code for which a violation is
deemed a Class A misdemeanor shall be treated as a petty offense where such
offense has been designated as an ordinance violation under this chapter, and
any reference in the Illinois Vehicle Code to a “Class A Misdemeanor” shall be
deemed replaced by the words “petty offense” when written as an ordinance
violation under this chapter. Such violations shall be punishable by fine only
in an amount not to exceed $500.
(Am. Ord. No. 6-2018, § 1, 2-5-18)
Sec. 13-2. Traffic laws apply to persons riding animals or driving animal-drawn
vehicles.
Every person riding an animal or driving any animal-drawn vehicle upon a
roadway shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the
duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle by this chapter, except those
provisions of this chapter which by their very nature can have no application.
Sec. 13-3. Application of chapter to public officers, employees.
   (a)   The provisions of this chapter applicable to the drivers of vehicles
upon the highways shall apply to the drivers of all vehicles owned or operated
by the United States, this state or any county, city, town, district or any
other political subdivision of the state, except as provided in this section
and subject to such specific exceptions as set forth in this chapter with
reference to authorized emergency vehicles.
   (b)   Unless specifically made applicable, the provisions of this chapter
shall not apply to persons, motor vehicles and equipment while actually engaged
in work upon a highway but shall apply to such persons and vehicles when
traveling to or from such work.
Sec. 13-4. Application of chapter to authorized emergency vehicles.
   (a)   The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle, when responding to an
emergency call or when in the pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the
law or when responding to but not upon returning from a fire alarm, may
exercise the privileges set forth in this section, but subject to the
conditions herein stated.
   (b)   The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle may:
      (1)   Park or stand, irrespective of the provisions of this chapter.
      (2)   Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only after
slowing down as may be required and necessary for safe operation.
      (3)   Exceed the maximum speed limits so long as he does not endanger
life or property.
      (4)   Disregard regulations governing direction of movement or turning in
specified directions.
   (c)   The exceptions herein granted to an authorized emergency vehicle,
other than a police vehicle, shall apply only when the vehicle is making use of
either an audible signal when in motion or visual signals meeting the
requirements of law.
   (d)   All-terrain vehicles owned and operated by village and used by its
police and fire departments shall be deemed authorized emergency vehicles, and
may be operated on any street within the corporate limits of the village,
without a registration.
   (e)   The foregoing provisions do not relieve the driver of an authorized
emergency vehicle from the duty of driving with due regard for the safety of
all persons, nor do such provisions protect the driver from the consequences of
his reckless disregard for the safety of others.
(Code 1965, § 20-2(b)—(d)) (Am. Ord. No. 6-2015 § 1, 5-4-15)
   State law reference—Similar provisions, 625 ILCS 5/11-205(b)—(e).
Sec. 13-5. Vehicle to be licensed.
It shall be unlawful for any motor vehicle to be driven in, upon, or use any
street, parkway, sidewalk, public way, public alley, public property,
semipublic property, park or school grounds without having a license issued to
such vehicle by the state.
(Code 1965, § 20-101)
Sec. 13-6. Unlicensed motor vehicle a nuisance.
It shall be unlawful for any person to have in his possession a motor vehicle
for use which cannot be licensed by the secretary of state. The possession of
such vehicle by any person is hereby declared to be a nuisance.
(Code 1965, § 20-106)
   Cross reference—Nuisances generally, ch.
14.
   State law reference—Vehicle licensing and registration, 625 ILCS 5/3-101 et
seq.
Sec. 13-7. Evergreen Plaza Shopping Center traffic regulations.
   (a)   Pursuant to ordinance approving the agreement between the village and
Evergreen Park Associates, a state limited partnership, for the regulation of
traffic within the Evergreen Plaza Shopping Center, recorded September 4, 1974,
as Docket Number 22839377, the village agrees to establish and enforce the
provisions of this section regarding motor vehicle movement, parking and
control within the shopping center.
   (b)   The village hereby agrees to establish and enforce the following
regulations regarding motor vehicle movement, parking and control within the
parking lot of the owners:
      (1)   Permanent stop signs shall be posted at all exits into a public
highway from the parking lot and the driver of a motor vehicle emerging from
the shopping center into a public highway shall first come to a complete stop
at such sign prior to proceeding into the public highway.
      (2)   All motor vehicle movement shall be within the designated traffic
lanes and where marked by arrow or posted "One Way" no motor vehicle movement
shall be in the opposite direction.
      (3)   No motor vehicle shall be stopped or parked on the roadway or
driveway which lies directly in front of the stores or buildings.
      (4)   The stopping, standing or parking of any motor vehicle within the
parking lot during the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. shall be prohibited,
except that any motor vehicle having affixed thereto on the windshield a decal
or sticker constituting a parking permit issued by the owners shall not be
subject to this restriction.
      (5)   The stopping, standing or parking of a motor vehicle within the
shopping center by a person having no business to conduct with the business
establishments within the shopping center shall be prohibited.
      (6)   The stopping, standing or parking of motor vehicles by the
operators thereof for the purpose of congregating or meeting shall be
prohibited.
      (7)   No motor vehicle shall be so operated as to cause or produce
unnecessary loud, raucous, excessive or unusual noises by the playing of a
muffler cutout, by tire friction upon rapid turning or weaving or by spinning
of wheels from a standing or slow-moving position produced by sudden
unnecessary acceleration or by continuous unnecessary sound of a horn or other
noise or signal device.
      (8)   The stopping, standing or parking of a motor vehicle within a
designated fire lane, traffic lane or safety lane shall be prohibited and no
motor vehicle shall be left standing, stopped or parked within twenty (20) feet
in any direction from a fire hydrant, wall hydrant, water standpipes or fire
exit door.
      (9)   The stopping, standing or parking of a motor vehicle where so
marked with parking stripes shall be within the same and confined to such area.
      (10)   The stopping, standing or parking of a motor vehicle within five
hundred (500) feet of any fire or police vehicle that has responded to a call
or an alarm shall be prohibited.
      (11)   The operating of an unlicensed go-cart or other miniature vehicle
shall be prohibited.
      (12)   The maximum speed limit for any motor vehicle shall not exceed
fifteen (15) miles per hour.
      (13)   Any motor vehicle parked or abandoned during a snowstorm, flood,
fire or other public emergency, or found unattended in the parking area where
it constitutes an obstruction to traffic or where stopping, standing or parking
is prohibited shall be removed and stored by the village, and payment of
reasonable charges for such removal and storage shall be paid to the village by
the owner or operator of such vehicle.
   (c)   The Evergreen Plaza Shopping Center shall have the right to allow
parking of a vehicle bearing a special decal affixed to the windshield
identifying such vehicle as "Official Plaza Business" or "Plaza Employee,"
allowing parking in certain areas designated by the plaza.
   (d)   The Evergreen Plaza Shopping Center does hereby agree to erect and
post all necessary signs for the regulation of motor vehicle parking and
traffic as is necessary to carry out such regulations and does hereby agree to
bear the costs and expense of same and maintenance thereof.
(Code 1965, § 20-90)
Sec. 13-8. Violations.
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions provided
for in this chapter.
Secs. 13-9-13-35. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 13-36. Police to direct traffic.
Members of the police department are hereby authorized to direct all traffic in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter, or in emergencies as public
safety or convenience may require. Except in case of an emergency, it shall be
unlawful for any person not authorized by the chief of police to direct or
attempt to direct traffic.
Secs. 13-37-13-55. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNS, SIGNALS, DEVICES AND MARKINGS*
Sec. 13-56. Existing devices ratified.
The location of all traffic control signs, signals, devices and markings as of
the adoption date of this Code is ratified and confirmed.
Sec. 13-57. Erection of signs; traffic engineer designated.
   (a)   The Director of the Department of Public Works shall determine and
designate the character and location of all official signs which proport to
direct the manner of traffic. He shall post adequate signs where such signs may
be necessary for the effective enforcement of this chapter. All signs shall
conform to the state sign manual.
   (b)   The Director of the Department of Public Works shall act as the
traffic engineer to determine the installation and proper timing and
maintenance of traffic control devices, to conduct engineering analyses of
traffic accidents and to devise remedial measures, to conduct engineering
investigation of traffic conditions, to plan the operation of traffic on the
streets and highways of this village, to erect signs in conformance therewith,
and to cooperate with other village officials in the development of ways and
means to improve traffic conditions, and to carry out the additional powers and
duties imposed by this chapter and ordinances of this village.
Sec. 13-58. One-way streets.
The board of trustees may, from time to time, designate streets or parts of
streets on which traffic shall be permitted to move in one (1) direction only.
Whenever any such street is so designated or whenever the Director of the
Department of Public Works deems advisable that a street shall be one way, he
shall cause to be erected and maintained suitable signs, signals or markings
giving notice thereof.
Secs. 13-59-13-75. Reserved.
DIVISION 3. VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES
Sec. 13-76. Penalties.
Unless another penalty is expressly provided for in this division, the
violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punished by a fine of not
less than $50.00 nor more than $500.00 for each violation. Each day that a
violation occurs or continues shall constitute a separate violation. In the
alternative, the village may ask specifically for a penalty, including
imprisonment for a period not exceeding 6 months.
Secs. 13-77.—13-90. Reserved.
DIVISION 4. TRAFFIC SAFETY COMMISSION
Sec. 13-91. Established.
The traffic safety commission of the village is hereby established.
Sec. 13-92. Composition; appointment.
The traffic safety commission shall consist of 4 members who shall be appointed
by the mayor by and with consent of the board of trustees; the mayor and the
chief of police of the village shall be ex officio members of the
commission.   
Sec. 13-93. Qualifications.
The members of the traffic safety commission shall possess the qualifications
of the other officers of the village and shall be subject to removal from
office as shall other officers.
Sec. 13-94.   Terms of office of members.
The term of office of each member of the traffic safety commission shall be one
(1) year commencing on May first and expiring on April thirtieth of the
following year. All vacancies occurring in the commission shall be filled by
appointment for the remainder of the unexpired term.
Sec. 13-95.   Compensation of members.
Each member of the traffic safety commission shall receive such compensation as
the mayor and board of trustees shall fix by ordinance or resolution for each
meeting he attends, but such compensation shall not be paid for more than 12
meetings in any given fiscal year.
Sec. 13-96.   Secretary.
The traffic safety commission may employ a secretary or may designate one (1)
of its members to act as such. The secretary shall keep the minutes of its
proceedings and shall be custodian of all of its papers.
Sec. 13-97.   Election of officers.
The members of the traffic safety commission shall elect a chairman and
secretary.
Sec. 13-98. Powers.
The traffic safety commission shall act as an advisory board to the mayor and
board of trustees and shall make whatever recommendations it deems advisable to
promote the traffic safety and general welfare of the inhabitants of the
village. It shall make such investigations and recommendations concerning any
traffic matter referred to it by the mayor and board of trustees. It shall
assist and aid any other official or agency of the village in any matter
relating to its jurisdiction with reference to traffic safety as may from time
to time be presented to it.
Secs. 13-99—13-155. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. RESERVED
ARTICLE IV. GENERAL RULES OF VEHICLE OPERATION
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 13-156. Careless driving.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any vehicle upon a public way
or street negligently, heedlessly and without due caution or in a manner as to
endanger or likely to endanger any person or property.
Sec. 13-157. Obstruction of traffic.
   No vehicle shall be operated or allowed to remain upon any street in such a
manner as to form an unreasonable obstruction to the traffic thereon
Sec. 13-158. Driving off thoroughfare.
   No person shall ride or drive any vehicle for pleasure or business, on or
across any median strip or lawn where there is no regular approach to the same.
It shall be the duty of the owner or occupant of any premises or lot to
construct good and sufficient approaches to the sidewalk where the same is
necessarily crossed in gaining access to such premises or lot by any private
entrance
Sec. 13-159. U-turns prohibited on certain streets.
   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to turn such vehicle on
non-one-way streets between Western Avenue and Maplewood Avenue so as to
proceed in the opposite direction.
Sec. 13-160. Gross weight limitation on village streets.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to stand, park, drive or move a
vehicle if the maximum gross weight of the vehicle including load exceeds ten
thousand (10,000) pounds, upon any street in the village, except the following
arterial streets: 103rd Street; 95th Street; 87th Street; Western Avenue;
Kedzie Avenue and Pulaski Road.
   (b)   Vehicles in excess of the weight limitations set forth in subsection
(a) making pickups or deliveries shall remain on such restricted streets only
for such time as is reasonably necessary to make such pickup or delivery.
   (c)   Vehicles in excess of the weight limitations set forth in subsection
(a) making pickups or deliveries shall use the most direct route to and from
the arterial streets mentioned in subsection (a).
Sec. 13-161. Nonskid devices.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate upon any street any motor
vehicle equipped with any nonskid device so constructed that any rigid or
nonflexible portion thereof comes into contact with the pavement or roadway.
Secs. 13-162—13-180. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. SPEED
Sec. 13-181. Finding; prima facie limits.
   It is hereby determined upon the basis of a traffic investigation that the
speed permitted by state or county law outside of business and residence
districts as applicable upon the village streets, is greater than is reasonable
or safe under the conditions found to exist upon such streets. It is hereby
declared that the prima facie speed limit shall be twenty (20) miles per hour
as herein set forth on these streets or parts of streets herein designated at
the times herein specified when signs are erected giving notice thereof.
(Code 1965, § 20-21)
Sec. 13-182. Maximum limits generally; decrease of limits under hazardous
conditions.
   (a)   No person shall drive a vehicle upon any public highway in this
village at a speed greater than is reasonable and proper having regard to the
traffic and the use of the way or so to endanger of life or limb or injure the
property of any person. If the rate of speed of any motor vehicle operated upon
a public highway in this village where the same passes through the business
district exceeds thirty (30) miles an hour, or if the rate of speed of any such
motor vehicle operated on any public highway in this village where the same
passes through the residence district exceeds twenty (20) miles an hour, or the
posted speed limit, such rates of speed shall be prima facie evidence that the
person operating such motor vehicle is running at a rate of speed greater than
is reasonable and proper having regard to the traffic and use of the way or so
as to endanger the life or limb or injure the property of any person.
   (b)   The fact that the speed of a vehicle does not exceed the applicable
maximum speed limit does not relieve the driver from the duty to decrease speed
when approaching and crossing an intersection, when approaching and going
around a curve, when approaching a hillcrest, when traveling upon any narrow or
winding roadway, or when special hazard exists with respect to pedestrians or
other traffic or by reason of weather or highway conditions. Speed must be
decreased as may be necessary to avoid colliding with any person or vehicle on
or entering the highway in compliance with legal requirements and the duty of
all persons to use due care.
   (c)   In event of charge of violation of this section, the complaint, also
the summons or notice to appear, shall specify the speed at which the defendant
is alleged to have driven, also the prima facie speed applicable within the
district or at the location.
(Code 1965, § 20-22(a)—(c))
Sec. 13-183. Specific limits on specific streets.
Signs shall be posted describing the prima facie speed limits. The prima facie
speed limits on the streets within the village are as follows:
Name of Street                          Prima Facie Speed Limits (Miles per
                                        Hour)
103rd Street                            30
95th Street                             30
87th Street                             40
Western Avenue                          35
Kedzie Avenue from 87th Street to 91st  40
Street
Kedzie Avenue from 91st Street to 95th  35
Street
Kedzie Avenue from 95th Street to 103rd 30
Street
Pulaski Road from 91st Street to 95th   40
Street
Pulaski Road from 95th Street to 99th   35
Street
All other residential or business       20
streets
Except 91st Street to Western Avenue    30
California Avenue from 87th Street to   30
99th Street
California Avenue from 99th Street to   25
102nd Street
99th Street to Pulaski Road             30
Shopping centers and apartment areas    15
Lanes                                   15
Alleys                                  15
 
(Code 1965, § 20-22(d))
Secs. 13-184—13-200. Reserved.
ARTICLE V. STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING*
   *State law references—Stopping, standing and parking, 625 ILCS 5/11-1301 et
seq.; authority to regulate standing or parking, 625 ILCS 5/11-208(u 1(11;
liability for parking violations, 625 ILCS 5/11-1305, 5/11-1306.
Sec. 13-201. Violation of article provisions—Impounding of vehicles.
Every vehicle parked in violation of this article is hereby declared to be a
nuisance which may be abated by any police officer by removing and conveying
such vehicle to the vehicle pound or pounds designated by the chairman of the
police and fire department committee. Before the owner or person entitled to
possession of any legally impounded vehicle shall be permitted to remove the
same, he shall furnish evidence of ownership or right to possession, and shall
pay for the cost of towing or removal to the vehicle pound, and the cost of
storage for each day of fraction thereof in such pound.
(Code 1965, § 20-62)
   State law reference—Removal of vehicles, 625 ILCS 5/11-1302.
Sec. 13-202. Same—Citation on illegally parked vehicle.
Whenever any motor vehicle without driver is found parked or stopped in
violation of any of the restrictions imposed by ordinance of this village or by
state law, the officer finding such vehicle shall take its registration number
and may take any other information displayed on the vehicle or radio call to
the station, which may identify its owner or user, and shall conspicuously
affix to such vehicle a traffic citation as provided for in this chapter. (Code
1965, § 20-63)
Sec. 13-203. Same—Presumption in reference to illegal parking.
In any prosecution charging a violation of any law or regulation governing the
standing or parking of a vehicle, proof that the particular vehicle described
in the complaint was parked in violation of any such law or regulation,
together with proof that the defendant named in the complaint was at the time
of such parking the registered owner of such vehicle, shall constitute in
evidence a prima facie presumption that the registered owner of such vehicle
was the person who parked or placed such vehicle at the point where, and for
the time during which, such violation occurred. The lessor of any vehicle,
whether or not a registered owner or user, shall be responsible for such
parking violation and subject to the penalty therefor.
(Code 1965, § 20-64)
   State law reference—Liability of lessors of vehicles for parking violations,
625 ILCS 5/11-1305 et seq.
Sec. 13-204. Lights on parked vehicles.
   (a)   Whenever a vehicle is parked or stopped on a street during the times
between sunset and sunrise, or at any other time when there is not sufficient
light to render clearly discernible any vehicle on the street from a distance
of two hundred (200) feet, there shall be displayed upon the vehicle a parking
light on the front of such vehicle and at the rear of such vehicle.
   (b)   Any lighted driving lamps upon a parked vehicle shall be depressed or
dimmed. (Code 1965, § 20-53(a)(27))
   State law reference—Lights on parked vehicles, 625 ILCS 5/12-203.
Sec. 13-205. Tampering with standing vehicles.
No person other than a police officer shall start or cause to be started the
motor of any motor vehicle, or shift, change, or move the levers, brake,
starting device, gears or other mechanism of a standing motor vehicle to a
position other than that in which it was left by the owner or driver thereof,
or attempt to do so.
(Code 1965, § 20-53(b))
   State law reference—Moving parked vehicles, 625 ILCS 5/11-1303(b).
Sec. 13-206. Regulation of parking at specific locations.
   (a)   The board of trustees may from time to time designate areas in which
parking is prohibited, or prohibited during certain hours, or limited in time,
or otherwise regulated or restricted. It shall be the duty of the
superintendent of streets to erect, install and maintain suitable signs or
markings, giving notice of such regulations and restrictions. It shall be
unlawful for any person to violate or fail to comply with any such sign or
marking.
   (b)   This section shall not apply to the driver of any vehicle which is
disabled on the paved, improved or main traveled portion of a highway in such a
manner and to such extent that it is impossible to avoid stopping and
temporarily leaving such disabled vehicle in such position. (Code 1965, § 20-
52)
Sec. 13-207. Residential parking permit areas.
   (a)   The board of trustees may establish by motion or other action at a
meeting, areas to be designated as residential parking permit areas. Signs
shall be posted at the end of each block and in appropriate places in the
middle of the block stating that parking is allowed by residential permit only.
   (b)   It shall be illegal to park any vehicle in such area unless such
vehicle has a current residential parking permit displayed. The village shall
issue one (1) residential parking permit for each vehicle bearing an Evergreen
Park vehicle sticker and which is based from a residential unit on the street
designated residential parking permit area. Such permits shall be restricted to
use to the car for which it was issued.
   (c)   In addition, the village shall issue two (2) residential parking
permits for visitors to any residence in the residential parking permit area.
Any misuse of such permits shall render the same invalid and the same shall not
be issued to the person or household which originally held the same. Visitors'
parking is limited to the time that the person driving the visiting vehicle is
actually in the residence or on the property being visited.
   (d)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to any service or
delivery vehicle when used to provide services or to make deliveries to
residences within a residential parking permit area, provided that the parking
of such vehicle does not exceed the time the services or deliveries are being
made.
   (e)   The mayor is authorized to establish regulations to implement the
provisions of this section.
(Code 1965, § 20-65)
Sec. 13-208. Handicapped parking privileges.
   (a)   Any motor vehicle bearing registration plates, special decal or device
issued to a physically handicapped person pursuant to the Illinois Vehicle
Code, is exempt from any statute of the state or any ordinance of this village
imposing time limitations on parking, except limitations of one-half hour or
less, on any street or highway zone, or any parking lot or parking place which
are owned, leased, or owned and leased by the village, or in any village
parking facility, and such vehicle shall also be subject to the laws which
prohibit parking in "no stopping" and "no standing" zones in front of or near
fire hydrants, driveways, public building entrances and exits, bus stops and
loading areas, and such motor vehicle is prohibited from parking where the
motor vehicle constitutes a traffic hazard and the motor vehicle shall be moved
at the instruction and request of the law enforcement officer to a location
designated by such officer.
   (b)   Parking privileges granted by this section are strictly limited to the
person to whom the special registration plates, decal, or device were issued
and to qualified operators acting under his express direction while the
disabled person is present.
   (c)   Special decals shall be displayed on the front windshield and rear
window for easy visibility.
(Code 1965, § 20-61(e)—(g))
   State law reference—Similar provisions, 625 ILCS 5/11-1301.1.
Sec. 13-209. Snow routes designated.
   (a)   At any time during which an accumulation of two (2) inches of snowfall
occurs within a twenty-four-hour period in the village then all vehicles in
such village shall be required to comply with the following plan:
      (1)   All vehicles shall be parked on the even side of the street on even
days and on the odd side of the street on odd days.
      (2)   For the purpose of definition of this section, even and odd sides
of street shall pertain to even and odd house numbers.
      (3)   For the purpose of definition of this section, the term "day" shall
mean that day during which the accumulation takes place by 7:00 a.m.
   (b)   In addition to the foregoing there shall be established snow routes
within the village as follows: At any time during which an accumulation of two
(2) inches of snowfall or more within a twenty-four-hour period as above
defined occurs, it shall be unlawful for any person to stop, stand, park or
leave unattended a vehicle on the streets designated by the village board,
which streets are hereby designated as "snow routes."
(Code 1965, § 20-70)
Sec. 13-210. On controlled access highway.
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle except when necessary to avoid
conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the direction of a police
officer or traffic control device, at any controlled access highway.
(Code 1965, § 20-53(a)(20))
Sec. 13-211. Unauthorized use of parking places reserved for handicapped
persons.
   (a)   It shall be prohibited to park any motor vehicle which is not bearing
registration plates or decals issued to a handicapped person, as defined by
section 1-159.1 of the Illinois Vehicle Code [Ill. Rev. Stat. ch. 951/2, 111-
159.1-625 ILCS 5/1-159.1], pursuant to section 3-616 or 11-1301.2 of the
Illinois Vehicle Code [Ill. Rev. Stat. ch. 951/2, 11113-616, 11-1301.2-625 ILCS
5/3-616, 5/11-1301.2], or to a disabled veteran pursuant to section 3-609 of
the Illinois Vehicle Code [Ill. Rev. Stat. ch. 951/2, ¶ 3-609-625 ILCS 5/3-
609], as evidence that the vehicle is operated by or for a handicapped person
or disabled veteran, in any parking place, including any private or public
offstreet parking facility, specifically reserved, by the posting of an
official sign as designated under section 11-301 of the Illinois Vehicle Code
[Ill. Rev. Stat. ch. 951/2, ¶ 11-301-625 ILCS 5/11-301], for motor vehicles
bearing such registration plates.
   (b)   Any person or local authority owning or operating any public or
private offstreet parking facility may, after notifying the police or sheriff's
department, remove or cause to be removed to the nearest garage or other place
of safety any vehicle parked within a stall or space reserved for use by the
handicapped which does not display handicapped registration plates or a special
decal or device as required under this section.
   (c)   Any person found guilty of violating the provisions of this section
shall be fined fifty dollars ($50.00) in addition to any costs or charges
connected with the removal or storage of any motor vehicle authorized under
this section.
(Code 1965, § 20-61(a)—(d))
   State law reference—Similar provisions, 625 ILCS 5/11-1301.3.
Sec. 13-212. In median areas of divided highways.
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle except when necessary to avoid
conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the direction of a police
officer or traffic control device, in the area between roadways of a divided
highway, including cross-overs.
(Code 1965, § 20-53(a)(21))
Sec. 13-213. On parkways.
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle except when necessary to avoid
conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the direction of a police
officer or traffic control device on a parkway.
(Code 1965, § 20-53(a)(31))
Sec. 13-214. Parking within lanes.
In areas marked with lines indicating a lane, a vehicle shall be parked within
the lanes, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in
compliance with the direction of a police officer or traffic control device.
(Code 1965, § 20-53(a)(18))
Sec. 13-215. In alleys.
   (a)   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle, except when necessary
to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the direction of a
police officer or traffic control device, in any public alleyway behind all
property zoned or used as commercial (C, C-1 or C-2).
   (b)   Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in
compliance with the direction of a police officer or traffic control device, it
shall be unlawful for an operator of any vehicle to park within a public alley
for a longer period than is necessary for the reasonable expeditious loading
and unloading of such vehicles, in making pickups and deliveries, and in
receiving or discharging of passengers; or in such manner or under such
conditions as to leave available less than 12 feet of the width of the roadway
for the free movement of vehicular traffic.
Sec. 13-216. Fire lanes.
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle except when necessary to avoid
conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the direction of a police
officer or traffic control device within a lane marked as a fire lane, whether
on public or private property.
Sec. 13-217. Displaying vehicles, goods for sale.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle upon any street for the
purpose of displaying it for sale, or to park any vehicle upon which
merchandise is being offered to the public for sale.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person to park a motor vehicle displaying
a for sale sign, or any sign indicating that the vehicle is available for
purchase, on any street, alley, or on any private property, except that a
resident of a residential structure may park one (1) automobile on the property
where he resides, provided that not more than two (2) automobiles are offered
for sale from that residential structure during any calendar year. This
subsection shall not apply to motor vehicles located on property licensed and
zoned for motor vehicle sales.
Sec. 13-218. Loading, unloading generally.
Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance
with the direction of a police officer or traffic control device, it shall be
unlawful to park any vehicle, except a private passenger vehicle, with a
seating capacity of not more than 10 persons, on any street, for a longer
period than is necessary for the reasonably expeditious loading and unloading
of such vehicle making pickups and deliveries.
Sec. 13-219. Overtime parking generally.
Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance
with the direction of a police officer or traffic control device, it shall be
unlawful for an operator of any vehicle, including a motor vehicle, motorcycle,
trailer, semitrailer, truck tractor, road tractor, road or construction
equipment to park for a longer time than indicated on the roadway of a street
where signs have been posted limiting the time or prohibiting parking.
Sec. 13-220. Stopping, Standing or Parking in Private Lots.   
   (a)   Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires different meaning:
      Overnight shall mean at any time between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 6:00
a.m. for at least one (1) hour.
      Owners shall mean actual legal owner, the trust officer of a banking
institution having the right to manage and control such property, or a person
having the legal right, through lease or otherwise, to manage or control the
property.
      Parking lot shall mean any area, or areas, of land near or contiguous to
a school, church, hospital building, shopping center, commercial or industrial
facility, apartment complex, condominium complex, but not the public highways
or alleys, and used by the public as the means of access to and egress from
such buildings and the stores and business establishments at a shopping center,
and for the parking of motor vehicles.
      Shopping center means any premises having one or more stores or business
establishments in connection with which there is provided on privately-owned
property near or contiguous thereto an area, or areas, of land used by the
public as the means of access to and egress from the stores and business
establishments on such premises and for the parking of motor vehicles of
customers and patrons of such stores and business establishments on such
premises.
   (b)   Regulations. The following stopping, standing and parking regulations
may be enforced by the Village upon the election and agreement of the owner(s)
of any school, church, hospital building, shopping center, commercial or
industrial facility, apartment complex, or condominium complex, which shall be
recorded in the Office of the Cook County Clerk:
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to stop, leave standing, or to
park a motor vehicle, or for any registered owner of a motor vehicle to permit
the stopping, standing or parking of his/her motor vehicle, in a parking lot
except within a designated parking space.
      (2)   It shall be unlawful for any person to stop, leave standing, or to
park a motor vehicle, or for any registered owner of a motor vehicle to permit
the stopping, standing or parking of his/her motor vehicle, in a park space
reserved for persons with disabilities unless the vehicle is properly
displaying authorized disability license plates or decals and the person
operating the vehicle is the authorized holder of the disability license plates
or decals or transporting the authorized holder thereof.
      (3)   It shall be unlawful for any person to stop, leave standing, or to
park a motor vehicle, or for any registered owner of a motor vehicle to permit
the stopping, standing or parking of his/her motor vehicle, within a parking
lot during prohibited hours as posted in the parking lot. Provided, however,
any motor vehicle having affixed on the windshield a decal or sticker
constituting a parking permit issued by the owners shall not be subject to this
restriction.
      (4)   It shall be unlawful for any person to stop, leave standing, or to
park a motor vehicle, or for any registered owner of a motor vehicle to permit
the stopping, standing or parking of his/her motor vehicle, within a parking
lot for the purposes of congregating or meeting for personal reasons.
      (5)   It shall be unlawful for any person to stop, leave standing, or to
park a motor vehicle, or for any registered owner of a motor vehicle to permit
the stopping, standing or parking of his/her motor vehicle, within a designated
fire line or traffic lane or within twenty (20) feet in any direction of fire
hydrant, wall hydrant, water standpipe or a fire exit door.
      (6)   It shall be unlawful for any person to stop, leave standing, or to
park a motor vehicle, or for any registered owner of a motor vehicle to permit
the stopping, standing or parking of his/her motor vehicle, within an apartment
or condominium parking lot unless the occupants thereof are authorized guests
of the complex and the motor vehicle is parked in a designated "guest" parking
spot.
      (7)   It shall be unlawful for any person to stop, leave standing, or to
park a motor vehicle, or for any registered owner of a motor vehicle to permit
the stopping, standing or parking of his/her motor vehicle, within a parking
lot of a shopping center if the occupants are not present conducting business
at an establishment to which the parking lot serves.
      (8)   It shall be unlawful for any person to stop, leave standing, or to
park a motor vehicle, or for any registered owner of a motor vehicle to permit
the stopping, standing or parking of his/her motor vehicle, in a parking lot of
a shopping center overnight.
      (9)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle in a
parking lot of a shopping center in excess of fifteen (15) miles per hour or
the applicable posted or marked speed limit, whichever is less.
      (10)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle in
an aisle of a parking lot in a direction that is not in conformance with the
direction designated by signs, pavement markings, or the direction that will
permit entry into an adjacent parking space at an angle of less than ninety
(90) degrees.
      (11)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle in
a parking lot of a shopping center in violation of posted signs or pavement
markings.
      (12)   It shall be unlawful for any person operating a motor vehicle in a
parking lot of a shopping center to fail to come to a complete stop or yield at
a location/intersection controlled by a stop or yield sign or marking, as
applicable, before proceeding past a stop/yield line and, if none, a crosswalk
and, if none, a point on a plane extended in the aisle controlled thereby that
corresponds to the location of the stop/yield sign or marking.
      (13)   It shall be unlawful for any person operating a motor vehicle in a
parking aisle of a parking lot to fail to yield to a motor vehicle being driven
in a main aisle of the parking lot.
      (14)   It shall be unlawful for any person operating a motor vehicle to
exit a parking space and fail to yield to a motor vehicle being driven in an
aisle of the parking lot.
      (15)   It shall be unlawful for any person operating a motor vehicle in a
parking lot of a shopping center to fail to yield the right-of-way to any
pedestrian or cyclist in said parking lot, whether in a crosswalk or otherwise.
      (16)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle in
a parking lot of a shopping center without exercising due care to avoid
colliding with any pedestrian, cyclist, or other motor vehicle.
      (17)   It shall be unlawful for any registered owner of a motor vehicle
to permit the operation, driving, stopping, standing, or parking of his/her
motor vehicle in a parking lot of a shopping center in such a manner that would
be unlawful if operated, driven, stopped, left standing, or parked on a street
or highway as set forth in the Illinois Vehicle Code or the Municipal Code for
the Village of Evergreen Park.
      (18)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, drive, stop, leave
standing, or to park a motor vehicle in a parking lot of a shopping center in
such a manner that would be unlawful if operated, driven, stopped, left
standing, or parked on a street or highway as set forth in the Illinois Vehicle
Code or the Municipal Code for the Village of Evergreen Park.
   (c)   Penalty. Any person found to be in violation of any provision of this
section shall be guilty of petty offense and fined in accordance with the
schedule set forth in Section 13-388, Scheduling of Fines/Penalties. Provided,
however, any person found to be in violation of E.P.M.C. § 13-220(b)(2) shall
be fined in accordance with 625 ILCS 5/11-1301.3. Each day a violation occurs
or is permitted to continue constitutes a new and separate violation.
   (d)   Administration. Tickets issued for violating this section may be
administered through Chapter 13, Motor Vehicles and Traffic, Article X,
Administrative Adjudication of Violations of Traffic Regulations Concerning the
Standing, Stopping or Condition of Vehicles.
(Ord. No. 11-2011 § 1, 7-5-11; Am. Ord. No. 4-2025 § 1, 3-3-25)
Sec. 13-221. Parking of large vehicles prohibited.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful to park any of the following vehicles between the
hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of the following day on any public street,
alley, parkway, or public property; or on any property zoned single family
residential district or multi-family residential district:
      (1)   Any bus or school bus.
      (2)   Any tow truck.
      (3)   Any truck with a snow plow attached.
      (4)   Any trailer, including house, boat, or camping trailers which are
not self-propelled.
      (5)   Any commuter van designed for carrying more than 10 persons.
      (6)   Any road tractor.
      (7)   Any semitrailer.
      (8)   Any special hauling vehicle.
      (9)   Any tank vehicle.
      (10)   Any truck tractor.
      (11)   Any medical transport vehicle including ambulances, medical
carriers and rescue vehicles.
      (12)   Any truck or second division vehicle with a license plate
registration higher than Class B.
      (13)   Any recreational vehicle including camping, trailer, motor home,
mini motor home, travel trailer, truck camper or van camper (except that not
more than one such vehicle registered to an owner of the residence may be
parked on private property behind the front line of the residence thereon).
      (14)   Any truck with a Class B or lower license plate registration
(except that not more than one such vehicle registered to an owner of the
residence may be parked at the residence or on the public street).
      (15)   Any limousine (except that not more than one such vehicle
registered to an owner of the residence may be parked at the residence or on
the public street).
   (b)   The burden of proof in establishing the exception in (13), (14), and
(15) above shall be upon the person claiming such exception.
   (c)   The Mayor or Village Clerk shall have the authority to issue a special
parking permit for a period not to exceed 48 hours (and not more than 2 times
per year) to allow parking prohibited by this Section in the event of
unreasonable hardship.
Sec. 13-222. Reserved.
Sec. 13-223. Street cleaning.
Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance
with the direction of a police officer or traffic control device, it shall be
unlawful to park any vehicle upon any side of the roadway of a street during
the day and hours such roadway is being swept or cleaned by the village.
Official signs shall be posted by the public works director at least 4 hours
before work is to begin and during the hours and day such parking is
prohibited. Such signs may be temporary in nature but shall sufficiently inform
the public of the prohibited time of parking. The public works director is
hereby authorized to remove, at the expense of the owner, any vehicle parked in
violation of this section.
Sec. 13-224. Reserved.
Sec. 13-225. Special parking regulations for Little Company of Mary Hospital.
   (a)   The following special parking regulations shall apply to the area in
the vicinity of Little Company of Mary Hospital as outlined hereinafter:
      (1)   A "No Parking Any Time" zone on the north side of 95th Street to
extend from a point thirty (30) feet east of the Moraine Valley driveway
curbline to a point thirty (30) feet west of the west curb of the Little
Company of Mary Hospital parking lot's most easterly exit.
      (2)   A "No Parking Any Time" zone on the north side of 95th Street to
extend from a point thirty (30) feet east of the east curb of the west entrance
of the Little Company of Mary Hospital's parking lot (east of California
Avenue) on 95th Street to a point thirty (30) feet west of the west curbline of
the westerly entrance of such parking lot.
      (3)   A "No Parking Here to Corner" zone on the north side of 95th Street
to extend from a point thirty (30) feet east of the existing stop-and-go signal
on the northeast corner of 95th Street and California Avenue to the northeast
corner of 95th Street and California Avenue.
      (4)   A "No Parking Any Time" zone on the east side of California Avenue
to extend from the south curbline of 91st Street to the north curbline of 95th
Street.
      (5)   A "No Parking Any Time-Tow Away" zone on the west side of
California Avenue to extend from the south curbline of 93rd Place to the north
curbline of 95th Street.
      (6)   A "No Parking Any Time" zone on the north side of 95th Street to
extend from the west curbline of California Avenue to the east curbline of
Francisco Avenue.
   (b)   No person shall park a vehicle in violation of this section when
public notice hereof shall be duly indicated by an official sign or signs
erected on the streets hereinabove designated. Nothing herein shall be
construed to prohibit a vehicle from standing in an area restricted pursuant to
the provisions of this subsection for such period of time as is necessary for
the reasonable expeditious loading or unloading of passengers, provided such
loading or unloading shall not consume more than three (3) minutes; neither
shall any such prohibition be construed to apply to any ambulance, police,
utility or emergency vehicle while the operator thereof is engaged in the
necessary performance of emergency or police duties; nor shall it be construed
to prevent any vehicle from being brought to a stop to avoid a collision or
standing in compliance with the orders of any public officer or the direction
of any public officer or the direction of any traffic-control signals.
Sec. 13-226. Specific street restrictions.
It is unlawful for any person to park a motor vehicle in any of the following
places:
   California Avenue from 87th Street to the alley south of 87th Street and
from Mozart Street to Fairfield Avenue, during the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 9:00
a.m., except on Sundays and holidays.
   California Avenue from 87th Street to the alley south of 87th Street,
between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m., except on Sundays and holidays.
   Central Park Avenue, east side, from 101st Street to a point 310 feet north
of 103rd Street between 9:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m., Monday through Friday.
   Central Park Avenue, west side, from 101st Street to 103rd Street, from 9:00
a.m. to 3:00 p.m., Monday through Friday.
   Kedzie Avenue from 87th Street to 103rd Street, except in specifically
designated parallel parking zones.
   87th Street, within the improved portion, which limits more specifically are
approximately Central Park Avenue on the west and the Baltimore and Ohio
Chicago Terminal Railroad on the east, between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m., except
Sundays.
   87th Street from Mozart Street to Fairfield Avenue, between 7:00 a.m. and 9:
00 a.m., except on Sundays and holidays.
   91st Street, north side, from Kedzie Avenue to 125 feet east thereof. 91st
Street, north side, from Kedzie Avenue to 125 feet west thereof. 91st Street,
south side, from Kedzie Avenue to 30 feet east thereof. 91st Street, south
side, from Kedzie Avenue to 125 feet west thereof.
   95th Street, and on any side street within one hundred fifty (150) feet of
the south or north curb of 95th Street between the hours of 3:00 a.m. and 5:00
a.m., except vehicles of the first division.
   95th Street, north curbside, from Albany Avenue to Spaulding Avenue from 4:
00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m.
   95th Street, north curbside, from Springfield Avenue to Pulaski Road from 4:
00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m.
   95th Street, south curbside, from Spaulding Avenue to Kedzie Avenue and from
Kedzie Avenue to Albany Street from 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m.
   95th Street, south curbside, from Pulaski Road to Springfield Avenue from 7:
00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m.
   99th Street, north side, from a point one hundred twenty-five (125) feet
west of the west curbline of Kedzie Avenue to the northwest corner of 99th
Street and Kedzie Avenue.
   99th Street, south side, within one hundred twenty-five (125) feet of the
traffic light on the southwest corner of the intersection of 99th Street and
Kedzie Avenue.
   101st Street, south side, from Central Park Avenue to St. Louis Avenue,
between 9:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m., Monday through Friday.
   102nd Street, from Central Park Avenue to St. Louis Avenue between 9:00 a.m.
and 3:00 p.m., Monday through Friday.
(Code 1965, §§ 20-57, 20-57.1, 20-58, 20-59.1, 20-60)
Sec. 13-227. Stopping, Standing, Parking of Motor Vehicles on Residential Lots.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to stop, leave standing, or to
park any motor vehicle, or for any registered owner of a motor vehicle to
permit the stopping, standing or parking of his/her motor vehicle, on any
property used or zoned residential, except in a driveway or garage meeting the
construction standards and specifications of this code.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person owning or controlling any property
used or zoned residential to permit the stopping, standing or parking of a
motor vehicle on said property, except in a driveway or garage meeting the
construction standards and specifications of this code.
   (c)   Nothing in this section is intended to authorize the parking of a
motor vehicle on residential property when otherwise prohibited by this code.
   (d)   Any person found to be in violation of any provision of this section
shall be guilty of petty offense and fined in accordance with the schedule set
forth in Section 13-338, Scheduling of Fines/Penalties. Each day a violation
occurs or is permitted to continue constitutes a new and seperate violation.
(Ord. No. 08-2025, § 1, 4-7-25)
Secs. 13-228—13-245. Reserved.
ARTICLE VI. MINIBIKES OR MOTOR BICYCLES
Sec. 13-246. Definition.
In this article "vehicle" means any motorcycle, bicycle with motor attached,
power cycles or power scooters with a motor which produces not to exceed five
(5) brake horsepower, or which cannot be licensed by the state.
(Code 1965, § 20-100)
   Cross reference—Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.
Sec. 13-247. Liability of parents and guardians.
It shall be the duty of all police officers on discovering that any person who
has violated any of the provisions of this article is a person under the age of
seventeen (17) years to inquire as to the name, age, and last residence of such
person and to promptly notify the parent, guardian, or custodian of such child
that the child has been detained for violation of the provisions of this
article and to report to the police station for the return of such child to his
custody. Whenever it is impractical to do so, the child may be returned
forthwith to his home but in no case shall the motor vehicle being used by such
child be returned to him at that time. It is the duty of the parent, guardian,
or custodian of such child to recover such motor vehicle.
(Code 1965, § 20-105)
Sec. 13-248. Impounding of vehicles; liability of owner or registered owner.
Every vehicle which shall have been used in violation of any of the provisions
of this article is hereby declared to be a nuisance and may be summarily abated
by any police officer by removing and conveying, or causing the removal and
conveyance of such vehicle to the vehicle pound or pounds designated by the
mayor. For this purpose, any area adjacent to a police station may be declared
to be a vehicle pound. Before the owner or person entitled to possession of any
legally impounded vehicle shall be permitted to remove the same, he shall
furnish evidence of ownership or right to possession and shall pay for the cost
of towing or removal to the vehicle pound and the cost of storage for each day
or fraction thereof in the pound.
(Code 1965, § 20-104)
Sec. 13-249. Parental responsibility.
It shall be unlawful for any parent, guardian, custodian, or other person to
knowingly permit a person to violate any of the provisions of this chapter. It
shall be presumed that such parent, guardian, custodian, or any person
knowingly permits the violation when such child has committed his second
offense for violating the provisions of this or any other traffic ordinance or
law, whether or not found guilty.
(Code 1965, § 20-105(b))
Sec. 13-250. Unlawful to use.
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride, drive or be a passenger upon a
vehicle. (Code 1965, § 20-100)
Sec. 13-251. Driving in certain zoned areas prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any vehicle to be driven or for a person to drive the
same upon any public or private property not properly zoned for the use to
which such vehicle is being put or which is not incident to the zoned use, or
legally recognized as one of the uses permitted on such property.
(Code 1965, § 20-102)
Sec. 13-252. Driving in certain places prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any vehicle to be driven upon any public property,
semipublic property, park, or school property, except in those parts of such
property improved as driveways and recognized portions of the premises devoted
for ingress and egress for motor vehicles or used for parking incident to the
principal uses permitted on such property.
(Code 1965, § 20-103)
Secs. 13-253—13-275. Reserved.
ARTICLE VII. RELOCATION OF VEHICLES
Sec. 13-276. Definitions.
   The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement
of this article. Any term not defined herein shall have the meaning ascribed to
it in the Illinois Vehicle Code.
   Abandoned vehicle means:
      (1)   Any vehicle which has been left unattended on a public way for a
period of at least ten (10) hours in a state of disrepair rendering it
inoperable or capable of being driven in its condition;
      (2)   Any vehicle which has been left unattended on a public way without
state registration plates or a temporary state registration placard for two (2)
or more days; or
      (3)   Any vehicle that has not been moved or used for seven (7)
consecutive days or more and is apparently deserted.
   Apparently deserted means:
      (1)   A vehicle whose appearance is indicative of its possession being
disclaimed;
      (2)   A vehicle being found or parked in an area or location which is not
within one mile of its owner's residence; or
      (3)   A vehicle found in a condition which is not indicative of a
reasonable degree of care for the well-being of the vehicle or its contents.
   Expeditious repair means:
      (1)   The parts for repair have been ordered but are not yet available
for installation for reasons beyond the owner's control;
      (2)   The repairs to the vehicle shall be completed within thirty (30)
days; or
      (3)   The vehicle is inoperable because of a recent accident and the
owner is scheduled or intends to schedule the vehicle's repair and the vehicle
will be relocated off-premises for such repairs within thirty (30) days.
   Hazardous motor vehicle means any motor vehicle located on a public way
which by its condition or location constitutes a clear and present danger to
the safety of the public, an obstruction to the normal flow of traffic, an
obstruction to ingress/egress to/from any driveway, or which has been involved
in an accident and is disabled, or cannot be immediately moved by the owner of
the vehicle.
   Inoperable motor vehicle means any motor vehicle located on private property
and in public view for at least fourteen (14) days which cannot be driven
safely or legally due to the removal of the engine, wheels or other parts. An
inoperable motor vehicle shall not mean a vehicle that is temporarily
inoperable because repairs are under way provided that the repairs are
completed within fourteen (14) days. A motor vehicle that has not moved for
fourteen (14) consecutive days that is covered with a cover or tarp, or which
does not possess a valid and current motor vehicle license from the Village of
Evergreen Park, shall be presumed to be an inoperable motor vehicle.
   Owner means any person who holds legal title to the vehicle or a person
legally entitled to possess a vehicle as identified from the registration files
of the Illinois Secretary of State or other similar agency if registered
outside the State of Illinois.
   Public way means any public street or thoroughfare in the Village of
Evergreen Park.
(Ord. No. 27-2023 § 1, 11-20-23)
Sec. 13-277. Immediate relocation of motor vehicles.
   (a)   Members of the police department are authorized to cause the immediate
removal of a motor vehicle from any public way under the following
circumstances:
      (1)   When a vehicle qualifies as a hazardous motor vehicle;
      (2)   When an unattended vehicle is parked illegally in an officially
designated and marked "tow zone";
      (3)   When an unattended vehicle is parked illegally in an area
designated for handicapped users;
      (4)   When the location of a motor vehicle constitutes an obstruction to
emergency snow removal or street or sewer maintenance;
      (5)   When a vehicle is in violation of any provision of the Illinois
Vehicle Code which authorizes or requires (see, e.g., 625 ILCS 5/6-101 and 625
ILCS 5/4-203) the immediate towing and impoundment for that violation;
      (6)   When a vehicle is reported as being stolen;
      (7)   When a vehicle is subject to immediate relocation or removal under
the Criminal Code of 2012;
      (8)   When an officer believes immediate relocation is necessary in the
performance of community caretaking functions such as the protection of the
vehicle from damage or theft; or
      (9)   When towing or removal is necessary as an incident to an arrest.
   (b)   Members of the police department, when practical, should attempt to
notify the owner by telephone, or through other means, in order to allow the
person the opportunity to request a preliminary hearing or to claim or remove
the vehicle so as to avoid the expenses associated with a police ordered
relocation.
(Ord. No. 27-2023 § 1, 11-20-23)
Sec. 13-278. Relocation of other vehicles.
   Members of the police department are authorized to cause the removal of all
other motor vehicles from a public way under the following circumstances:
   (a)   When a vehicle qualifies as an abandoned vehicle;
   (b)   When a vehicle is parked in violation of any ordinance of the village
or any state law prohibiting the parking, standing or stopping in certain
places for a period of at least twenty-four (24) hours but is not located in a
designated "tow-zone", handicapped area, or does not otherwise qualify as being
abandoned or hazardous; or
   (c)   When the location of a motor vehicle constitutes an obstruction to
snow removal, street cleaning, or street or sewer maintenance, or another
planned event, and notice of such activities was posted in the vicinity for a
period of at least forty-eight (48) hours prior to the relocation.
(Ord. No. 27-2023 § 1, 11-20-23)
Sec. 13-279. Inoperable motor vehicles.
   Members of the police department are authorized to cause the removal of
inoperable motor vehicles from private property provided pre-relocation notices
and the opportunity to request a pre-location hearing has been provided. Pre-
relocation hearings attending the removal of inoperable motor vehicles from
private property shall be afforded in accordance with the procedures set forth
in Section 13-281. Provided, however, an owner of an inoperable vehicle shall
have seven (7) days after the delivery of a pre-relocation notice by letter to
request a hearing. A request for hearing stays the relocation of the vehicle
pending the hearing and decision. At the hearing, if a vehicle is determined to
be inoperable, an owner may request an extension of time for the vehicle's
relocation to a date not beyond thirty (30) days. Said extension shall be
granted upon a showing that the vehicle is being held for sale or expeditious
repair. After the hearing, a date shall be set by which the vehicle shall be
disposed of or enclosed. All requests or findings attending an extension shall
be documented in the Chief of Police's or other supervising officer's written
decision. In the event the vehicle is not disposed of or enclosed by the date
identified, the vehicle shall be relocated without further prior notice or
hearing assuming the circumstances have not changed warranting an additional
hearing. All owners of inoperable vehicles which are relocated from private
property shall be afforded process as specified in Section 13-282. Nothing in
this section shall be interpreted to create a duty on behalf of the village to
give prior notice and a hearing to an owner of an inoperable motor vehicle
before its relocation from private property if the vehicle poses an immediate
threat to the health, safety and welfare of the public due to its location or
condition.
(Ord. No. 27-2023 § 1, 11-20-23)
Sec. 13-280. Pre-relocation notice contents and service.
   When a vehicle is subject to relocation for being parked illegally,
abandoned, or being inoperable, the following pre-relocation notices shall be
provided:
   (a)   Sticker. A pre-relocation notice in the form of a sticker shall be
entitled "Notice of Intent to Tow", and shall be affixed to a window of the
vehicle which is proposed to be relocated. The sticker shall contain the date
and time of posting, the date and time at which the vehicle will be relocated,
the basis for the proposed relocation, the phone number of the police
department, and the owner's opportunity to request a preliminary hearing.
   (b)   Letter. A pre-location notice in the form of a letter shall be
delivered by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the address of the
owner of the vehicle as indicated in the most current registration list of the
Secretary of State. The notice shall advise the owner of the location of the
vehicle, the basis for the proposed relocation, the date and time at which the
vehicle will be relocated, the opportunity and manner in which a preliminary
hearing may be requested, and the location of the relocation facility operator
where the vehicle will be held if relocated.
(Ord. No. 27-2023 § 1, 11-20-23)
Sec. 13-281. Pre-relocation hearing procedures.
   An owner of a vehicle to be relocated pursuant to this article shall have
the right to request a preliminary hearing before the date and time identified
for the relocation of the vehicle or, if the vehicle has already been
relocated, within seven (7) business days after any notice was post-marked.
   (a)   Request for hearing. The owner may make a request for a pre-relocation
hearing to the police department in person, in writing, or by telephone. The
Chief of Police or any supervising officer must conduct a hearing within
twenty-four (24) hours after the request for a hearing is received. Provided,
however, if the date for the hearing falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or legal
holiday, the pre-relocation hearing may be held on the next business day
following the Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday. Notice of the date, time and
location of the pre-relocation hearing shall be provided to the owner. If a
request for a pre-relocation hearing is received by the village before the date
and time at which the vehicle was proposed to be relocated, the vehicle shall
not be relocated until a hearing and a decision is rendered by the Chief of
Police or other supervising officer. Nothing herein shall deprive an owner of a
post-tow hearing or the right to contest the vehicle's eligibility for
relocation during that proceeding.
   (b)   Hearing. For purposes of this section, the following shall apply to
pre-relocation hearings:
      (1)   All interested persons will be given a reasonable opportunity to be
heard at the pre-relocation hearing.
      (2)   The formal rules of evidence will not apply at the hearing, and
hearsay testimony will be allowed, and will be admissible.
      (3)   The Chief of Police or supervising officer's decision shall be
based upon the preponderance of evidence.
      (4)   Neither the Chief of Police nor a supervising officer shall preside
over a hearing regarding the relocation of a vehicle if he/she played a part in
the decision to designate or authorized the designation of that vehicle as
being eligible for relocation.
      (5)   If, at the conclusion of the hearing, the Chief of Police or
supervising officer determines that the vehicle is not eligible for relocation
under this article, an oral and written decision shall be issued and the
vehicle shall not be relocated. If the vehicle has already been relocated, the
Chief of Police or supervising officer shall issue a release and no charge
order to the owner which shall be brought to the relocation service facility.
The relocation facility operator shall release the vehicle immediately at no
expense to the owner. If the vehicle has already been released to the owner,
the Chief of Police or other supervising officer shall issue a refund order
requiring the relocation facility operator to refund any monies previously paid
by the owner for the vehicle's release. A written decision of the Chief of
Police's or supervising officer's determination shall be sent to the owner by
first-class mail no later than three (3) business days following the hearing.
      (6)   If, at the conclusion of the hearing, the Chief of Police or
supervising officer determines that the vehicle is/was eligible for relocation,
he or she shall orally transmit his or her decision to the owner. A written
decision shall also be issued to the owner by first-class mail no later than
three (3) business days following the hearing. The owner shall be provided with
a reasonable period of time after the decision to relocate the vehicle at his
or her own expense. In the event the owner does not relocate the vehicle, the
Chief of Police or supervising officer shall order the vehicle's relocation.
      (7)   No vehicle shall be relocated prior to the date and time of
relocation identified in the pre-tow notice.
(Ord. No. 27-2023 § 1, 11-20-23)
Sec. 13-282. Post-relocation hearing procedures.
   The following procedures shall apply to post-relocation hearings:
   (a)   Notice of hearing. Within twenty-four (24) hours after a vehicle is
relocated pursuant to this article, the village shall notify the owner of
record of the motor vehicle of such relocation, the location of the relocation
facility at which the vehicle is being held, instructions on how to obtain a
release of the vehicle, the ability to request a post-relocation hearing, and
the date, time and location of the post-relocation hearing where the owner may
contest the validity of the relocation. Such notice shall be mailed by
certified mail, return receipt requested, to the owner of record, as shown on
the records of the Secretary of State.
   (b)   Hearing. For purposes of this section, the following shall apply to
the owners hearing:
      (1)   Unless continued by order of the hearing officer, the hearing shall
be held within forty-five (45) days after the motor vehicle was seized.
      (2)   All interested persons will be given a reasonable opportunity to be
heard at the hearing.
      (3)   The formal rules of evidence will not apply at the hearing, and
hearsay testimony will be allowed, and will be admissible.
      (4)   The hearing officer's decision shall be based upon the
preponderance of evidence.
      (5)   If, after the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer
determines that the vehicle was not eligible for relocation under this article,
he or she shall issue a release and no charge order to the owner which shall be
brought to the relocation service facility. The relocation facility operator
shall release the vehicle immediately at no expense to the owner. If the
vehicle has already been released to the owner, the hearing officer shall issue
a refund order requiring the relocation facility operator to refund any monies
previously paid by the owner for the vehicle's release. A written decision of
the hearing officer's determination shall be sent to the owner by first-class
mail no later than three (3) business days following the hearing.
      (6)   If, after the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer
determines that the vehicle was properly relocated under the provisions of this
article, he or she shall issue a written determination of his or her findings
to the owner. The hearing officer's decision shall be sent by first-class mail
no later than three (3) business days following the hearing.
   (c)   Other process. When a person is issued a citation and he or she will
be afforded the opportunity to contest or challenge the propriety of a vehicle
relocation at an administrative hearing, the procedures established by the code
provisions governing the citation shall apply.
(Ord. No. 27-2023 § 1, 11-20-23)
Sec. 13-283. Release procedures.
   The following procedures shall apply for the release of relocated vehicles:
   (a)   Unless a vehicle is held pursuant to applicable state, federal or any
other law, or a court order or warrant that authorizes the continued
impoundment of the vehicle, the owner of a vehicle relocated under this article
may obtain the immediate release of the vehicle by paying the full amount of
all applicable towing and storage fees charged by the relocation facility
operator. Obtaining an immediate release of the vehicle through full payment
shall not affect an owner's right to contest the relocation.
   (b)   No vehicle shall be released to an owner by the relocation facility
operator before the village issues a release order. A release order may be
obtained from the Village of Evergreen Park Police Department upon a finding
that there is no other reason to delay the immediate release of the vehicle.
   (c)   No person shall be permitted to remove a relocated vehicle from the
custody of the relocation facility operator unless he or she has furnished
evidence of his or her identity and the right to possession of the vehicle and
sign a receipt for the vehicle.
(Ord. No. 27-2023 § 1, 11-20-23)
Sec. 13-284. Administrative review.
   The final decision of the hearing officer in a post-relocation hearing shall
be subject to the provisions of the Administrative Review Law as is set forth
in 735 ILCS 5/3-101, et seq.
(Ord. No. 27-2023 § 1, 11-20-23)
Sec. 13-285. Unclaimed vehicles.
   Vehicles which have been relocated and which remain unclaimed by the owner
shall be disposed of in accordance with the Illinois Vehicle Code.
(Ord. No. 27-2023 § 1, 11-20-23)
Sec. 13-286. Exceptions.
   The provisions of this article shall not apply to any vehicle parked in a
garage.
(Ord. No. 27-2023 § 1, 11-20-23)
Secs. 13-287—13-325. Reserved.
ARTICLE VIII. BICYCLES*
   *State law references—Bicycles, 625 ILCS 5/11-1501 et seq.; bicycle
regulations authorized, 625 ILCS 5/11-208(a)(8).
Sec. 13-326. Traffic laws applicable to persons riding.
Every person riding a bicycle upon a highway shall be granted all of the rights
and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle
by this chapter, except as to special regulations in this article and except as
to those provisions of this chapter which by their nature can have no
application.
(Code 1965, § 20-2(a))
   State law reference—Similar provisions, 625 ILCS 5/11-1502.
Sec. 13-327. Operation on sidewalks in business district.
No person riding a bicycle shall ride or operate a bicycle upon the sidewalk
within a business district.
(Code 1965, § 20-111(1))
   State law reference—Bicycles on sidewalks, 625 ILCS 5/11-1512.
Sec. 13-328. Prohibited on certain streets.
No person riding a bicycle shall ride a bicycle on the following streets:
   95th Street.
   Kedzie Avenue.
Sec. 13-329. Emerging from alley, driveway, etc.
No person riding a bicycle shall emerge from an alley, public or private
driveway or building upon a street, highway, sidewalk or sidewalk area without
yielding the right-of-way to all vehicles and pedestrians approaching on such
street, highway, sidewalk or sidewalk area.
Sec. 13-330. Releasing handlebars; acrobatic riding.
No person riding a bicycle shall remove both hands, except to give necessary
signals, from the handlebars or practice any acrobatic or fancy riding on any
public street or sidewalk.
Sec. 13-331. Attached vehicles.
No person riding a bicycle shall have attached to it any vehicle such as a
wagon, sled, coaster, or scooter.
Sec. 13-332. Riding in single file.
No person riding a bicycle shall ride in a group other than single file.
Sec. 13-333. Crossing certain intersections.
Upon reaching any of the following streets from a side street, the rider of a
bicycle shall dismount before crossing such street, look in both directions,
obey all traffic signals, and if the road is otherwise clear, shall proceed
across such street. Such streets are: Pulaski Road; Kedzie Avenue; 87th Street;
95th Street; Western Avenue and 103rd Street
Sec. 13-334. Parking.
Bicycle riders shall obey all parking regulations pertaining to motor vehicles
set forth in this chapter. In addition:
      (1)   A person shall not park or leave a bicycle upon a street or
sidewalk other than on the sidewalk at the curb line of the street;
      (2)   A bicycle parked on a sidewalk shall not impede the normal and
reasonable movement of pedestrians or other traffic.
Secs. 13-335—13-350. Reserved.
ARTICLE IX. MISCELLANEOUS RULES
Sec. 13-351. Reserved.
Sec. 13-352. Skitching.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person on the streets, public property,
or parking lots in the village to hitch a ride upon any other motor vehicle or
snowmobile by flipping or holding thereon, or attaching any ski, sled, bicycle,
skateboard, board, vehicle, or motor vehicle, to another motor vehicle or
snowmobile while the same is in motion, either by hand, rope or other means
(commonly called "skitching").
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person on any street riding a motorcycle
or any other vehicle to cling to or attach himself or his vehicle to any moving
motor vehicle or wagon.
   (c)   It shall be unlawful for any person driving a motor vehicle or
snowmobile to permit any of the unlawful acts mentioned in subsections (a) and
(b).
   (d)   The prohibition against skitching shall not be construed to include
the tow of disabled vehicles.
Sec. 13-353. Restrictions on use of coasters, roller skates, etc.
No person upon roller skates, or riding in or by means of any coaster, toy
vehicle, or similar device, shall go upon any roadway except while crossing a
street on a crosswalk and when so crossing such person shall be granted all of
the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to pedestrians.
This section shall not apply upon any street while set aside as a play street
as authorized by ordinance of this village.
(Code 1965, § 20-19)
Sec. 13-354. Riding outside vehicle.
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride upon the fender, running board or
outside of any vehicle.
(Code 1965, § 20-8)
Sec. 13-355. Loud or unnecessary noise.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful to operate a vehicle upon the street which makes
an unusually loud or unnecessary noise.
   (b)   Except as otherwise authorized by ordinance, no person shall use sound
amplification equipment or cause to be used a sound truck or vehicle with sound
amplification equipment in operation on the streets or public way of the
village at any time. Warning devices installed on authorized emergency
vehicles; horn or other warning devices on persons or on other vehicles used
only for traffic safety or public safety purposes, or such use in a duly
authorized scheduled event with a permit from the village, such as a parade,
public rally or gathering and sport events, are excepted from this subsection.
(Code 1965, § 20-16(a), (c))
Sec. 13-356. Street vendors.
Persons or vehicles vending on the streets or public ways are subject to the
following:
      (1)   No sound announcement of the presence of such person or vehicle
shall be used, except manually operated chimes, and no amplification device,
mechanical or electronic, shall be used. In any event the sound from such
manually operated chimes shall not become loud or intolerable to any person nor
shall it be greater than sixty-seven (67) decibels at the source of the sound
based on sound levels measured with a sound level meter, according to standards
prescribed by American Standards Association.
      (2)   No vending shall occur between dusk (as ascertained by the United
States Weather Bureau, or as posted in the daily newspaper) and the hour of 11:
00 a.m. the following morning, prevailing time.
(Code 1965, § 20-16)
Sec. 13-357. Repair of motor vehicles.
   (a)   Repair or maintenance of motor vehicles is prohibited on the public
right-of-way except for repairs necessary to make such vehicle operable within
24 hours after it has stopped working at that place. No vehicle shall be towed
or driven to any public right-of-way for the purpose of or where it is
ultimately repaired or maintained.
   (b)   Repair or maintenance of motor vehicles is prohibited on private
residential property except on vehicles owned by the occupants thereof and
bearing state registration plates and Village vehicle sticker evidencing that
the vehicle is registered at that address. No person may repair or maintain
motor vehicles of others on their property whether for compensation or not.
   (c)   Repair or maintenance does not include washing and waxing the exterior
or interior of a car, but does include body work, engine work, washing engines,
lubricant changes, and parts changes or installation. Public right-of-way
includes the streets, alleys, parkways, sidewalks, and property owned by the
Village. Private residential property includes all property used, in whole or
in part, for residential purposes regardless of the zoning of said property.
Sec. 13-358. Electronic Motorized Devices.
   (a)   Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, as used in this
section, shall have the following meanings ascribed to them unless the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
      Low-speed electronic bicycle means a bicycle equipped with fully operable
pedals and an electric motor of less than 750 watts that meets the requirements
of one of the following classes:
         (i)   Class I: an electric bicycle equipped with a motor that provides
assistance only when the rider is pedaling and that ceases to provide
assistance when the bicycle reaches a speed of 20 miles per hour; or,
         (ii)   Class II: an electric bicycle equipped with a motor that may be
used exclusively to propel the bicycle and that is not capable of providing
assistance when the bicycle reaches a speed of 20 miles per hour; or,
         (iii)   Class III: a bicycle equipped with a motor that provides
assistance only when the rider is pedaling and that ceases to provide
assistance when the bicycle reaches a speed of 28 miles per hour.
      A “low-speed electric bicycle” does not include a moped or a motor driven
cycle.
      High-speed electronic bicycle means a bicycle equipped with fully
operable pedals and an electric motor that provides assistance when the rider
is pedaling and that is capable of reaching speeds in excess of 28 miles per
hour. A high-speed electric bicycle shall not include a moped or a motor driven
cycle operated on a public street that is duly registered, complies with all
equipment regulations of the IVC, and is operated by a duly licensed operator.
      Low-speed electronic scooter means a device weighing less than 100
pounds, with two (2) or three (3) wheels, handlebars, and a floorboard that can
be stood upon while riding, that is solely powered by an electronic motor and
human power, and whose maximum speed, with or without human propulstion, is no
more than ten (10) miles per hour. A low-speed electronic scooter does not
include a moped or motor driven cycle.
      High-speed electronic scooter means a device weighting more or less than
100 pounds, with two (2) or three (3) wheels, handlebars, and a floorboard that
can be stood upon while riding, that is solely powered by an electronic motor
and human power, and whos maximum speed, with or without human propulstion, is
greater than ten (10) miles per hour. A “high-speed electric scooter” shall not
include a motor driven cycle operated on a public street that is duly
registered, complies with all equipment regulations of the IVC, and is operated
by a duly licensed operator.
      Other personal use vehicle means any other vehicle or device that is
powered in whole or part electronically or by internal combustion, or both,
that is not an electronic bicycle or electronic scooter, as defined in this
section, and is not otherwise required to be registered by the State of
Illinois under the Illinois Vehicle Code including, but not limited to,
motorized unicycles, motorized skateboards, motorized hoverboards, dirt bikes,
pocket bikes, all-terrain vehicles, recreational off-highway vehicles, and golf
carts.
   (b)   Locational Prohibitions.
      (1)   No low-speed electronic bicycle may be operated on any sidewalk,
trail, walking path, bicycle path, public parking lot, parkway, or public park
in the Village.
      (2)   No low-speed electronic scooter may be operated on any sidewalk,
trail, walking path, bicycle path, public parking lot, parkway, or public park
in the Village.
      (3)   No low-speed electronic bicycle or low-speed electronic scooter may
be operated on or across any public street having a posted speed limit of 25
miles per hour or greater.
      (4)   No high-speed electronic bicycle or high-speed electronic scooter
may be operated on any public street, sidewalk, trail, walking path, bicycle
path, public parking lot, public park, parkway, or other public property in the
Village.
      (5)   No other personal use vehicle may be operated on any public street,
sidewalk, trail, walking path, bicycle path, public parking lot, public park,
parkway, or other public property in the Village.
   (c)   Low-Speed Electronic Bicycles; Operating Requirements. Where not
otherwise prohibited on public property, the operation of all low-speed
electronic bicycles shall be permitted subject to the following:
      (1)   No person that does not possess a valid driver’s license shall
operate a low-speed electronic bicycle on any public street.
      (2)   No person shall operate a low-speed electronic bicycle on any
public street that:
         (i)   does not comply with equipment and manufacturing requirements
adopted by the United States Consumer Product Safety Commission under 16 CFR
1512; and,
         (ii)   does not have permanently affixed to the bicycle in a prominent
location a label shall containing, in Arial font in at least 9-point type, the
following information: (1) a classification number for the bicycle that
corresponds with a class under this section; (2) the bicycle’s top assisted
speed; and, (3) the bicycle’s motor wattage.
      (3)   No person shall operate a Class I low-speed electronic bicycle on
any public street that does not, when pedaling stops or when the bicycle
reaches a speed of 20 miles per hour, disengage or cease to make function the
electric motor.
      (4)   No person shall operate a Class II low-speed electronic bicycle on
any public street that does not, when brakes are applied or when the bicycle
reaches a speed of 20 miles per hour, disengage or cease to make function the
electric motor.
      (5)   No person shall operate a Class III low-speed electronic bicycle on
any public street that does not, when pedaling stops or when the bicycle
reaches a speed of 28 miles per hour, disengage or cease to make function the
electric motor.
      (6)   No person shall operate a low-speed electric bicycle on any public
street the speed capability or engagement of which has been tampered or
modified without replacing the label required under this subsection (c)(2)(
(ii).
      (7)   No person shall operate a low-speed electronic bicycle on any
public street at nighttime (30 minutes following sunset) that is not equipped
with and have operational a lamp on the front that emits a white light visible
from a distance of at least 500 feet to the front and with a red reflector on
the rear that is visible from all distances from 100 feet to 600 feet to the
rear when directly in front of lawful lower beams of headlamps on a motor
vehicle, except that a lamp emitting a steady or flashing red light visible
from a distance of 500 feet to the rear may be used in addition to or instead
of the red reflector.
      (8)   No person shall operate a low-speed electronic bicycle on any
public street that is not otherwise well-maintained and in good operating
condition.
      (9)   No person shall operate a low-speed electric bicycle on any public
street while carrying any package, bundle or article that prevents the operator
from safely maintaining control of the bicycle nor shall the person operate the
low-speed electronic bicycle while distracted in any way, including while using
a cell phone.
      (10)   No person shall operate a low-speed electronic bicycle on any
public street while carrying another person or animal thereupon.
      (11)   No personal operating a low-speed electronic bicycle on any public
street shall fail to yield to all other persons, animals, and devices on or
using said street.
      (12)   No person operating a low-speed electronic bicycle on any public
street shall fail to adhere to any other local, state, or federal law, rule,
regulation, or order governing the condition or movement of the same.
   (d)   Low-Speed Electronic Scooters; Operating Requirements. Where not
otherwise prohibited on public property, the operation of all low-speed
electronic scooters shall be permitted subject to the following.
      (1)   No person under the age of eighteen (18) shall operate a low-speed
electric scooter on any public street.
      (2)   No person that does not possess a valid driver’s license shall
operate a low-speed electronic scooter on any public street.
      (3)   No person shall operate a low-speed electronic scooter on any
public street that is not equipped with a brake that will adequately control
movement of and stop and hold the low-speed electric scooter.
      (4)   No person shall operate a low-speed electronic scooter on any
public street at nighttime (30 minutes following sunset) that is not equipped
with a lamp on the front that emits a white light visible from a distance of at
lest 500 feet to the front and with a red reflector on the rear that is visible
from all distances from 100 to 600 feet to the rear when directly in front of
lawful lower beams of headlamps on a motor vehicle, except that a lamp emitting
a steady or flashing red light visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear
may be used in addition to or instead of the red reflector; and,
      (5)   No person shall operate a low-speed electronic scooter on any
public street that is not otherwise well-maintained and in good operating
condition.
      (6)   No person shall operate a low-speed electric scooter on any public
street while carrying any package, bundle or article that prevents the operator
from safely maintaining control of the scooter nor shall the person operate the
low-speed electronic scooter while distracted in any way, including while using
a cell phone.
      (7)   No person shall operate a low-speed electric scooter on any public
street while carrying another person or an animal thereupon.
      (8)   No person operating a low-speed electronic scooter on any public
street shall fail to yield to all other persons, animals, and devices on or
using said street.
      (9)   No person operating a low-speed electronic scooter shall fail to
adhere to any other local, state, or federal law, rule, regulation, or ordering
governing the condition or movement of the same.
   (e)   Penalties. Any person violating any provision of this section shall be
fined in an amount of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and not more
than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each violation. Each day a violation
occurs or is permitted to continue shall constitute a new and separate offense.
   (f)   Administration. Violations of this section may be administered through
Chapter 12, Miscellaneous Provisions and Offenses, Article X, Administrative
Adjudication of Non- Vehicular Regulations Violations. Nothing in this section
shall be interpreted to limit the remedies or penalties available to the
Village of Evergreen Park.
(Ord. No. 19-2025, § 1, 8-18-25)
ARTICLE X.
ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION OF VIOLATIONS OF TRAFFIC REGULATIONS CONCERNING THE
STANDING, PARKING OR CONDITION OF VEHICLES
Sec. 13-380. Purpose.
The purpose of this Article is to provide a fair and efficient method of
enforcement of Village vehicular standing, parking, equipment and vehicle
sticker regulation violations, and other Village regulation violations as may
be allowed by law, through an administrative adjudication of said violations,
and to provide a schedule of uniform fines and penalties and authority and
procedures for collection of unpaid fines and penalties. The provisions of this
Article may be used in lieu of issuing a citation that requires an appearance
in the Fifth Municipal District Court on one of the Village's Traffic and
Ordinance Court dates. Notwithstanding any other provision in this Code, but
excepting the penalties as provided by Section
13-392, the fine schedule set out in this Article shall apply as the penalty
for all violations covered by the administrative adjudication system and no
amount greater than that set out herein shall be applied as a fine for any
violation hereunder. Pursuant to 625 ILCS 5/11-208.3(a), the provisions of this
Article shall apply to the following violations:
   (a)   Vehicular standing and parking violations, including the failure to
purchase or display a vehicle sticker; and
   (b)   Violations of any Village Code or Ordinance governing the condition or
use of equipment on a vehicle;
The aforementioned violations shall be collectively referred to as "vehicular
regulation violations" for purposes of this Article.
(Ord. No. 7-2007 § 1, 2-19-07)
Sec. 13-381. Administrative Composition.
The system of administrative adjudication of vehicular regulation violations
shall be composed of a Traffic Compliance Administrator, Hearing Officer,
Computer Operator/System Coordinator and Hearing Room Personnel (Deputy), with
the power, authority and limitations as are hereinafter set forth:
   (a)   Traffic Compliance Administrator Duties - He shall be empowered and is
hereby authorized and directed to:
      (1)   Operate and manage the system of administrative adjudication of
vehicular regulation violations.
      (2)   Adopt, distribute and process violation notices and other notices
as may be required under this Article or as may be reasonably required to carry
out the purpose of the Article.
      (3)   Collect moneys paid as fines or penalties assessed after a final
determination of vehicular regulation violation liability.
      (4)   Conduct hearings, as a Hearing Officer with the same power and
authority as is hereinafter set forth, during the absence or inability to serve
of an appointed Hearing Officer.
      (5)   Certify copies of final determinations of vehicular regulation
violation liability and factual reports verifying that the final determination
of vehicular regulation violation liability was issued in accordance with this
Code and 625 ILCS 5/11-208.3.
      (6)   Certify reports to the Secretary of State concerning initiation of
suspension of driving privileges in accordance with the provisions of this Code
and 625 ILCS 5/6-306.5.
      (7)   Certify to the Chief of Police the eligibility for immobilization
of any motor vehicle whose owner, notwithstanding any other provision in the
Municipal Code, has accumulated 5 or more unpaid determinations of liability
under this Article.
      (8)   Review determinations of vehicular regulation violation liability,
or the validity of notices of impending drivers license suspension, in an
administrative review capacity in accordance with the provisions of this Code.
      (9)   Promulgate rules and regulations reasonably required to operate and
maintain the administrative adjudication system hereby created.
      (10)   Collect unpaid fines and penalties by filing complaints in the
Circuit Court, or by selecting or appointing an individual or agency to act on
behalf of the Village in filing complaints, seeking judgments for unpaid fines
or penalties and pursue all post-judgment remedies available by current law.
      (11)   Amend violation citations on their face to correct scrivener and
typographical errors, and to complete minor omissions and insert missing
information.
      (12)   Sign judgments.
   (b)   Hearing Officer Duties - He shall be empowered and is hereby
authorized and directed to:
      (1)   Preside over the administrative hearing, established herein, as the
adjudicator.
      (2)   Administer oaths. It shall be the duty of each respondent and
witness to rise and take the oath when called to do so by the Hearing Officer.
Any person who addresses the Hearing Officer to present evidence shall be
deemed to have taken the oath to be truthful and may be punished for not doing
so, as provided by law.
      (3)   Issue subpoenas to secure the attendance of witnesses and
production of relevant papers or documents. A party issuing a subpoena shall
include witness fees at the same rate as for a circuit court subpoena.
      (4)   Assess fines and penalties for the violation of vehicular
regulations as are established in Section
13-388 hereof.
      (5)   Make final determinations of:
         A.   Vehicular regulation violation liability.
         B.   Validity of notices of impending drivers license suspension.
      (6)   Provide for the accurate recordation of the administrative
adjudication hearings.
      (7)   Issue certified notices to the Chief of Police regarding the
immobilization of vehicles whose owners have received 10 or more final
determinations of liability which remain unpaid.
      (8)   Order the removal and/or default of persons whose conduct is
disruptive to the hearing process.
      (9)   Request that the village prosecutor, village attorney, or other
attorney representing the village attend to formally prosecute particular
citations. In such a case, the Hearing Officer shall establish the order of
proof. However, the citation shall remain prima facie evidence of the offense
as provided in this Article.
   (c)   System Coordinator Duties - He is hereby authorized and directed to
operate and maintain the computer programs for the administrative adjudication
system hereby created, on a day to day basis, including but not limited to:
      (1)   Input of violation notice information.
      (2)   Input of hearing dates and notice dates.
      (3)   Input of fine and penalty assessments and payments.
      (4)   Issue payment receipts.
      (5)   Issue succeeding notices of hearing dates and/or final
determinations of liability or notices of impending drivers license
suspensions, as directed by the Traffic Compliance Administrative in accordance
with the provisions hereinafter set forth.
      (6)   Issue certified notices to the Secretary of State and Chief of
Police regarding persons who have received 10 or more final determinations of
liability which remain unpaid.
      (7)   Keep accurate records of appearances and non-appearances at
administrative hearings, pleas entered, fines and penalties assessed and paid.
   (d)   Hearing Room Personnel Duties - He is hereby authorized and directed
to:
      (1)   Maintain hearing room decorum.
      (2)   Have and execute authority as is granted to courtroom deputies of
the Circuit Court.
      (3)   Perform such other duties or acts as may reasonably be required and
as directed by the Hearing Office or Traffic Compliance Administrator.
This position shall be limited to full-time, part-time or auxiliary police
officers.
   (e)   Appointments - The Mayor shall assign the duties of Traffic Compliance
Administrator, System Coordinator and Hearing Room Personnel to Village
employees. The Mayor, with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees, is
hereby authorized to appoint persons to hold the position of Hearing Officer.
   (f)   Compensation, if any, to be paid for each of the above stated, except
the Hearing Officer, positions shall be as determined by the Mayor and Board of
Trustees in the annual Budget Ordinance.
   (g)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Village of Evergreen Park is hereby
authorized to enter into an intergovernmental agreement to establish and
implement the procedures provided for in this Article. Moreover, said
intergovernmental agreement is authorized to provide that the positions and
offices provided for herein may be selected and filled by the cooperating
municipality.
(Ord. No. 7-2007 § 1, 2-19-07)
Sec. 13-382. Procedures.
The system of administrative adjudication of vehicular regulation violations
shall be in accordance with the following procedures:
   (a) Violation Notice - vehicular regulation violation notices shall be
issued by the persons authorized herein and shall contain information and shall
be served, certificated and have evidentiary admissibility as is hereinafter
set forth.
   (b)   Authorization - All full-time, part-time and auxiliary police officers
as well as other specifically appointed individuals shall have the authority to
issue vehicular regulation violation notices.
   (c)   Detection of Violations - Any individual authorized hereby to issue
vehicular regulation violation notices and who detects such a violation shall
make service thereof as is hereinafter set forth.
   (d)   The vehicular regulation "Hang-On Violation Notice" shall contain, but
shall not be limited to, the following information:
      (1)   The date, time and place of the violation (date of issuance).
      (2)   The particular vehicular regulation violated.
      (3)   Vehicle make and state registration number.
      (4)   The fine and any penalty which may be assessed for late payment.
      (5)   The signature and identification number of the person issuing the
notice.
      (6)   A section entitled "Request for Hearing" which shall clearly set
forth that the registered owner, operate or lessee may appear at the initial
administrative hearing to contest the validity of the violation notice on the
date and at the time and place as specified in the "Hang-On Violation Notice"
by:
         A. Checking or placing a mark in a space provided and clearly
identified, "Request for Hearing".
         B . Placing his/her name and current address in the place provided.
         C.   Signing his/her name in the appropriate indicated place.
         D.   Filing the "Hang-On Violation Notice," with the "Request for
Hearing" portion fully completed, with the Traffic Compliance Administrator
postmarked by the 25th of the month, if the violation notice was issued between
the 1st through the 15th day of the month, or postmarked by the 10th of the
following month, if the violation notice was issued between the 16th and the
end of the month. The request shall be deemed filed upon receipt by the Traffic
Compliance Administrator.
      (7)   The date, time and place of an administrative hearing at which the
violation may be contested on its merits.
      (8)   That payment of the indicated fine and any late payment penalty
shall operate as a final disposition.
      (9)   A section entitled, "Request for Hearing - Non-Appearance", which
clearly sets forth that any registered owner, operator or lessee may appear at
the initial administrative hearing to contest the validity of the violation
notice without personally appearing by:
         A.   Checking or placing a mark in a space provided and clearly
identified, "Request for Hearing Non-appearance".
         B.   Place his/her name and current address in the place provided.
         C.   Signing his/her name in the appropriate indicated place.
         D.   Filing the violation notice with the "Request for Hearing - Non-
Appearance" portion fully completed, with the Traffic Compliance Administrator
postmarked by the 25th of the month, if the violation notice was issued between
the 1st through the 15th day of the month, or postmarked by the 10th of the
following month, if the violation notice was issued between the 16th and the
end of the month.
         E.   Filing a notarized statement of facts, specifying the grounds for
challenging the violation notice, with the Traffic Compliance Administrator
postmarked by the 25th of the month, if the violation notice was issued between
the 1st through the 15th day of the month, or postmarked by the 10th of the
following month, if the violation notice was issued between the 16th and the
end of the month.
         F.   A clearly marked statement that execution of the Request for
Hearing -Non-Appearance is a waiver of the person's right to a personal
appearance and that the adjudication will be made based upon the notarized
statement of facts submitted by the individual and the facts contained in the
violation notice.
   (e)   Service of the vehicular regulation violation notice shall be made by
the person issuing such notice by:
      (1)   affixing the original or a facsimile of the notice to any
unlawfully standing or parked vehicle or any vehicle found to be in an unlawful
condition, or
      (2)   handing the notice to the registered owner, operator or lessee of
the vehicle, if present.
   (f)   The correctness of facts contained in the vehicular regulation
violation notice shall be certified by the person issuing said notice by:
      (1)   Signing his/her name to the notice at the time of issuance, or
      (2)   In the case of a notice produced by a computer device, by signing a
single certificated, to be kept by the Traffic Compliance Administrator,
attesting to the correctness of all notices produced by the device while under
his/her control.
   (g)   The original or a facsimile of the vehicular regulation violation
notices shall be retained by the Traffic Compliance Administrator and kept as a
record in the ordinary course of business.
   (h)   Prima Facie Evidence of Correctness - Any vehicular regulation
violation notice issued, signed and served in accordance herewith, or a copy of
the notice, shall, pursuant to statute, be deemed prima facie correct and shall
be prima facie evidence of the correctness of the facts shown on the notice,
and shall be deemed to state a claim and meet the requirements of this Article
unless specifically stated otherwise by the Hearing Officer.
   (i)   Admissibility - The vehicular regulation violation notices shall be
admissible in any subsequent administrative or legal proceeding.
(Ord. No. 7-2007 § 1, 2-19-07)
Sec. 13-383. Administrative Hearings.
An administrative hearing to adjudicate the alleged vehicular regulation
violation on its merits or the validity of a notice of impending drivers
license suspension:
   (a)   Shall be granted to the registered owner, operator or lessee of the
"cited vehicle", pursuant to 625 ILLS 5/11-208.3 or 625 ILCS 5/6-306.5.
   (b)   Shall be on the date, at the time and at the place as is set forth in
the vehicular regulation violation notice ("Hang-On Violation Notice") issued
and served, as is set forth in any subsequent notice issued in accordance with
this Code or as is set by the Traffic Compliance Administrator and served upon
the registered owner, operator or lessee for hearings contesting the validity
of notices or of impending drivers license suspension.
   (c)   Shall be tape recorded.
   (d)   Shall include consideration of any written, notarized statement of
facts timely submitted by persons filing a "Request for Hearing - Non-
Appearance."
   (e)   Shall allow persons appearing to contest the alleged violation on its
merits to be represented by counsel at their own expense.
   (f)   Shall be subject to review as hereinafter set forth.
   (g)   Shall culminate in a determination of liability or non-liability, made
by the Hearing Officer, who shall consider facts and/or testimony without the
application of the formal or technical rules of evidence. Such determination
shall provide the opportunity to petition for administrative review as herein
explained. The Hearing Officer shall, upon a determination of liability, assess
fines and penalties in accordance with Section 13-388 hereof.
   (h)   Evidentiary Standard - The formal and technical rules of evidence do
not apply in an administrative hearing conducted in compliance with this
Article X. Evidence, including hearsay, may be admitted, pursuant to state law
set forth at 65 ILCS 5/1-2.1-6, if it is of the type commonly relied upon by
reasonably prudent persons in the conduct of their affairs. Village police
reports, inspection reports, records of state and other governmental agencies
shall be admissible, subject to rebuttal.
(Ord. No. 7-2007 § 1, 2-19-07)
Sec. 13-384. Additional Notice.
   (a)   Upon failure of the registered owner, operator or lessee of the "cited
vehicle" to appear at the initial administrative hearing indicated in the
vehicular regulation violation notice ("Hang-On Violation Notice") the Traffic
Compliance Administrator shall send or cause to be sent additional notices
which:
      (1)   Shall be sent to the registered owner or operator of the "cited
vehicle" at the address as is recorded with the Secretary of State.
      (2)   Shall be sent to the lessee of the "cited vehicle" at the address
last known to the lessor of the "cited vehicle" at the time of the lease.
      (3)   Shall be sent by first class mail, postage prepaid.
      (4)   Shall be complete as to service as of the date of deposit in the
United States mail.
      (5)   Shall contain, but not be limited to, the following information:
820
         A.   Date and location of violation cited in the vehicular regulation
violation notice.
         B.   Particular regulation violated.
         C.   Vehicle make and state registration.
         D.   Fine and any penalty that may be assessed for late payment.
         E.   Notice to the registered owner, operator or lessee of their
current status, other than paid in full.
         F.   Date, time and place of the second administrative hearing at
which the alleged violation may be contested on its merits.
         G.   A statement that failure to either pay the fine and any
applicable penalty, or failure to appear at the hearing on the date and at the
time and place specified, will result in a determination of vehicular
regulation violation liability for the "cited" violation in the amount of the
fine and penalty indicated.
         H.    A statement that upon the occurrence of a final determination of
vehicular violation liability and the exhaustion of, or the failure to exhaust,
available administrative and/or judicial procedures for review, any unpaid fine
or penalty will constitute a debt due and owning the Village. This statement
shall also advise said owner, operator or lessee of the time constraints in
relation to available administrative and judicial procedures for review.
   (b)   Upon failure of the registered owner, operator or lessee of the "cited
vehicle" to appear at the initial administrative hearing indicated in the
vehicular regulation violation notice ("Hang-On Violation Notice"), and after
failure to appear at the second hearing scheduled, a notice of determination of
vehicular regulation violation liability shall be sent detailing, the rights of
the offender to petition for the determination to be set aside on certain
grounds; and notice that 10 or more outstanding determinations and failure to
pay within 45 days will result in a report being sent to the Secretary of
State's office that the offender is eligible for license suspension. Such
notice shall inform the recipient that if 5 or more unpaid final determinations
of liability are outstanding the Chief of Police will be informed of the
vehicle's eligibility for immobilization.
(Ord. No. 7-2007 § 1, 2-19-07)
Sec. 13-385. Petitions to set aside default determinations.
A petition to set aside a determination of vehicular regulation violation
liability may be filed by a person due and owing an unpaid fine or penalty in
the manner an subject to the restrictions and grounds hereinafter set forth:
   (a)   A written petition to set aside a determination of liability must be
filed in the office of the Traffic Compliance Administrator within, but not
later than, 14 days from the date the determination of liability is made. Such
a petition may only be filed by a respondent who was found in default for
failure to appear.
   (b)   The Traffic Compliance Administrator shall act upon those petitions
timely filed and render a decision thereon.
   (c)   The grounds for setting aside a determination of liability shall be
limited to the following:
      (1)   The person against whom the determination of liability is made was
not the registered owner, operator or lessee of the "cited vehicle" on the date
the vehicular regulation violation notice was issued;
      (2)   The person has paid the fine or penalty prior to the determination
of liability for the violation(s) in question; or
      (3)   Excusable failure to appear at or request a new date for a hearing.
   (d)   Should the determination of liability be set aside, the Traffic
Compliance Administrator shall:
      (1)   Notify the registered owner, operator or lessee, as the case may
be, that the determination of liability has been set aside.
      (2)   Notify the registered owner, operator or lessee, as the case may
be, of a date, time and place fora hearing on the merits of the violation for
which determination of liability has been set aside.
      (3)   The notice referenced in subsection (1) and (2) above shall be sent
by first class mail, postage prepaid to the address set forth on the petition
to set aside the determination of liability.
      (4)   Service of the notices shall be complete on the date the notices
are deposited in the United States mail.
   (e)   Should the determination of liability not be set aside, the Traffic
Compliance Administrator, shall:
      (1)   Notify the registered owner, operator or lessee, as the case may
be, that the determination has not been set aside and is now deemed to be a
final determination reviewable by the Circuit Court under the Administrative
Review Law upon filing a lawsuit with the Circuit Court within 35 days of
receipt of the notice.
(Ord. No. 7-2007 § 1, 2-19-07)
Sec. 13-386. Final Determination of Liability.
A final determination of vehicular regulation violation liability shall occur:
   (a)   Following the failure to pay the fine or penalty after the Hearing
Officer's determination of vehicular regulation violation liability and the
exhaustion of or the failure to exhaust any administrative review procedures
hereinafter set forth.
   (b)   Where a person fails to appear at the second hearing to contest the
alleged violation(s) on the date and at the time and place specified in the
mailed notice, the Hearing Officer's determination of vehicular regulation
violation liability shall become final;
      (1)   Upon denial of a timely petition to set aside that determination
pursuant to Section 13-385; or
      (2)   Upon the expiration of the period for filing a petition pursuant to
Section 13-385 without a filing having been made.
(Ord. No. 7-2007 § 1, 2-19-07)
Sec. 13-387. Non-Appearance Procedures.
Individuals who have been served with a vehicular regulation violation notice
may contest the alleged violation on its merits, or may contest the validity
without personally appearing at an administrative hearing by:
   (a)   Completing, in full, the "Request for Hearing - Non-Appearance"
section of the "Hang-On Violation Notice", served upon him/her.
   (b)   Signing the "Request for Hearing - Non-Appearance" in the space
specified in the "Hang-on Violation Notice", and acknowledging that his/her
personal appearance is waived and submitting to an adjudication based upon the
notarized statement filed by him/her and the facts contained in the "Hang-On
Violation Notice".
   (c)   Filing the "Hang-On Violation Notice" with the "Request for Hearing -
Non-Appearance" section fully completed with the Traffic Compliance
Administrator postmarked by the 25th of the month, if the violation notice was
issued between the 1st through the 15th day of the month, or postmarked by the
10th of the following month, if the violation notice was issued between the
16th and the end of the month.
   (d)   Filing a notarized statement of facts specifying the grounds for
challenging the violation notice with the Traffic Compliance Administrator
postmarked by the 25th of the month, if the violation notice was issued between
the 16th and the end of the month.
   (e)   The Hearing Officer shall make an adjudication based upon the facts
set forth in the notarized statement of facts filed and the facts contained in
the "Hang-On Violation Notice".
   (f)   Notice of the determination of the Hearing Officer shall be served by
first class mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the address set forth in the
statement of facts submitted in the same manner as set forth in Section 13-384
(b).
   (g)   Persons who receive a determination of liability pursuant to a
"Request for Hearing -Non-Appearance" shall also have the opportunity to
petition for review and to claim in writing the defenses listed in Section 13-
385(c). Upon denial of a petition for such review or upon a hearing after such
petition is granted, a Final Determination shall issue indicating the offenders
right to file a lawsuit with the Circuit Court under the Administrative Review
Law within 35 days of receipt of the Final Determination.
   (h)   Service of the notice shall be complete on the date the notice is
placed in the United States mail.
(Ord. No. 7-2007 § 1, 2-19-07)
Sec. 13-388. Scheduling of Fines/Penalties.
The fines and penalties which shall be imposed for the violation of vehicular
regulations shall be as follows:
   (a)   Notwithstanding any other provisions to the contrary in this Code, for
violations of any Code provision regulating, restricting or prohibiting the
standing or parking of motor vehicles along the streets, by-ways, alleyways,
regulated parking lots or such other locations as may be controlled by off-
street parking agreements, located within the geographical boundaries of the
Village, including handicapped parking, for violations regarding the use or
condition of vehicular equipment and for violations regarding municipal vehicle
stickers, the fines shall be as set forth in the following schedule:
 
       Fine Schedule      General Fine *Handicapped or “Tow Zone” Fine
                          Amount       Amount
       Upon service of a
       "Hang-On Violation
Step 1 Notice" the fine   $65.00       *$350.00
       amount prior to or
       on the 1st Hearing
       Date shall be:
       Upon failure to
       pay the fine
Step 2 amount specified   $130.00      *$375.00
       in Step 1, the
       fine shall be:
       Upon failure to
       pay the fine
       amount specified
Step 3 in Step 2 prior to $200.00      *$400.00
       or on the 2nd
       Hearing Date, the
       fine amount shall
       be:
       Upon failure to
       pay the fine
       amount specified
Step 4 in Step 3 and      $250.00      *$425.00
       failing to appear
       at the 2nd
       Hearing, the fine
       amount shall be:
 
* For parking in a space reserved for handicapped persons in violation § 11-
1301.3 of the Illinois Vehicle Code and violations of any Section of the
Municipal Code involving the towing of a vehicle or which involve parking in a
“tow zone.”
   (b)   For any person who files a timely written request for hearing pursuant
to Section
13-382(d)(6), or who files a “Request for Hearing - Non-Appearance” pursuant to
Sections
13-382(d)(9) and
13-387, the fine amount shall be frozen at Step 1 until the first hearing or
requested hearing.
   (c)   The fines and penalties herein set forth shall be uniformly applied
for each violation of any Code provision regulating, restricting or prohibiting
the standing or parking of motor vehicles, the use or condition of vehicular
equipment, and the requirement for display of a municipal vehicle sticker
presently in effect or hereafter adopted.
(Ord. No. 7-2007 § 1, 2-19-07; Am. Ord. No. 31-2009 § 1, 12-7-09; Am. Ord. No.
30-2018 § 1, 11-5-18; Am. Ord. No. 22-2022, § 1, 9-6-22; Am. Ord. 3-2024 § 1,
1-16-24)
Sec. 13-389. Administrative Review.
Final determinations of vehicular regulation violation liability made pursuant
to this Article shall be subject to the provisions of the Administrative Review
Law as is set forth in 735 ILCS 5/3-101 et seq. The Village shall specifically
have the right to appeal a final determination, regardless of whether the
citation in question was formally prosecuted with the presence of an attorney
representing the Village. In such a case, the Village shall retain independent
counsel to prepare and file the administrative record and appear on behalf of
the Code Hearing Unit.
(Ord. No. 7-2007 § 1, 2-19-07)
Sec. 13-390. Debt to Municipality.
Any fine, penalty or part of any fine or any penalty assessed in accordance
with the provisions of this Article, and remaining unpaid after the exhaustion
of, or the failure to exhaust, administrative remedies and the conclusion of
any judicial review procedures, shall be a debt due and owing the Village and,
as such, may be collected in accordance with the applicable law. Payment in
full of any fine or penalty resulting from a violation under this Article shall
constitute a final disposition of that violation. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, any fine imposed by the Hearing Officer which remains unpaid after
the allotted time shall be increased to the maximum fine of $250.00. The
increase in the fine resulting from the non-payment within the allotted time
shall be self-effecting and shall not require additional notice to the violator
or a hearing increasing the fine amount.
(Ord. No. 7-2007 § 1, 2-19-07)
Sec. 13-391. Judgments.
The Traffic Compliance Administrator shall, following the expiration of the
period within which administrative review may be sought for a determination of
vehicular regulation violation liability take all necessary actions, execute
all required documents and appoint or retain any individual or agency deemed
appropriate to obtain a judgment against and collect moneys from the person(s)
who have been assessed fines or penalties which remain unpaid, and have become
a debt due and owing the Village, in accordance with the provisions of Section
13-390 and 625 ILCS 5/11-208.3, in the following manner:
   (a)   By filing a complaint in the Circuit Court paying for the entry of a
judgment against the person for whom a final determination of vehicular
regulation violation liability has been made. The complaint filed by the
Traffic Compliance Administrator or individual or agency on behalf of the
Village, seeking entry of a judgment against an individual for unpaid fines
and/or penalties pursuant to a final determination of vehicular regulation
violation liability, shall have attached to it:
      (1)   A certified copy of the final determination of vehicular regulation
violation liability.
      (2)   A certification that recites facts sufficient to show that the
final determination of vehicular regulation violation liability was issued in
accordance with this Code and 625 ILCS 5/11-208.3. Nothing shall prevent the
Village from consolidating multiple final determinations of vehicular
regulation violation liability in an action in the Circuit Court against an
individual. The summons and a copy of the complaint may be served upon the
person against whom a judgment is sought under the provisions of this Code by
any method provided under State Statute; or by certified mail, return receipt
requested, provided the total amount of fines and penalties for final
determination of vehicular regulation violation liability does not exceed
$2,500.00.
   (b)   By pursuing all available remedies, allowed by law, to collect money
judgments.
(Ord. No. 7-2007 § 1, 2-19-07)
Sec. 13-392. Conduct of those attending or near hearing.
No person, while in the presence of the Hearing Officer or during the hearing
process, shall knowingly do any act in such an unreasonable manner as to alarm
or disturb another and to provoke a breach of the peace. Any person believed to
be in violation of this section shall be prosecuted pursuant to this ordinance
in the Circuit Court of Cook County. Any person found in violation of this
section shall be fined not less than $50 or more than $500.
(Ord. No. 7-2007 § 1, 2-19-07)
ARTICLE XI. OBSTRUCTION OF HIGHWAY GRADE CROSSINGS
Sec. 13-400. Obstruction of Highway at Grade Crossing Prohibited (Non-Rush
Hour).
It shall be unlawful for a person to permit any train, railroad car or engine
to obstruct public travel at a railroad-highway grade crossing for a period in
excess of 10 minutes, except where such train or railroad car is continuously
moving or cannot be moved by reason of circumstances over which the person has
no reasonable control.
Sec. 13-401. Obstruction of Highway at Grade Crossing Prohibited (Rush Hour).
During the hours of 7:00 a.m. through 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. through 6:00 p.m.
it shall be unlawful for any person to permit any single train or railroad car
to obstruct public travel at a railroad-highway grade crossing in excess of a
total of 10 minutes during a 30 minute period, except where the train or
railroad car cannot be moved by reason or circumstances over which the person
has no reasonable control.
Sec. 13-402. Obstruction of Emergency Vehicles.
After receiving notification that railroad equipment is obstructing the
movement of an emergency vehicle at any railroad-highway grade crossing, it
shall be unlawful for a person to permit any train, railroad car or engine to
continue to obstruct the movement of the emergency vehicle except where the
train crew has taken immediate action to remove the obstruction.
Sec. 13-403. Notification of Obstruction.
Whenever a railroad-highway grade crossing has been obstructed in violation of
Section 13-400 or Section 13-401, the rail carrier responsible for the movement
of the railroad equipment causing the obstruction or responsible for the tracks
where the obstruction is occurring, shall notify the Evergreen Park Police
Department by telephone that an obstruction has occurred with an estimate of
the time that the obstruction will continue. No evidence obtained pursuant to
this notification may be used in the prosecution of a violation of Section 13-
400 or Section 13-401.
Sec. 13-404. Penalty For Obstruction in Excess of 10 Minutes.
Any person violating Section 13-400 or Section 13-401 shall be fined not less
than $200 nor more than $500 if the duration of the obstruction is in excess of
10 minutes but no longer than 15 minutes. If the duration of the obstruction
exceeds 15 minutes the violation shall be a business offense and the following
fines shall be imposed: if the duration of the obstruction is in excess of 15
minutes but no longer than 20 minutes, the fine shall be $500; if the duration
of the obstruction is in excess of 20 minutes but no longer than 25 minutes,
the fine shall be $700; if the duration of the obstruction is in excess of 25
minutes, but no longer than 30 minutes, the fine shall be $900; if the duration
of the obstruction is in excess of 30 minutes but no longer than 35 minutes,
the fine shall be $1,000; if the duration of the obstruction is in excess of 35
minutes, the fine shall be $1,000 plus an additional $500 for each 5 minutes of
obstruction in excess of 25 minutes of obstruction.
ARTICLE XII. SEIZURE AND IMPOUNDMENT OF MOTOR VEHICLES
Sec. 13-405. Definitions.
   For the purpose of this Article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   (a)   The term Controlled Substance means any substance as defined and
included in the schedules contained in Article II of the Illinois Controlled
Substance Act (720 ILCS 570/101, et seq.), as amended from time to time, and
cannabis as defined in § 3 of the Cannabis Control Act (720 ILCS 550/3), as
amended from time to time.
   (b)   The term Drug Paraphernalia means any equipment, product, and/or
materials as defined in § 2 of the Drug Paraphernalia Act (720 ILCS 600/2), as
amended from time to time.
   (c)   The term Driving Under the Influence means any violation as defined in
§ 11-501 of the Illinois Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/11-501), as amended from time
to time.
   (d)   The term Driving While License, Permit or Privilege to Operate a Motor
Vehicle is Suspended or Revoked means any violation as defined in §6-303 of the
Illinois Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/6-303), as amended from time to time.
   (e)   The term During or After the Commission of a Felony during or
returning from the commission of a felony as defined by Illinois and Federal
statute.
   (f)   The term Outstanding Criminal Warrant shall mean any valid and active
criminal warrant.
   (g)   The term Fleeing and Eluding a Peace Officer means any violation as
defined in § 11-204 of the Illinois Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/11-204), as
amended from time to time.
   (h)   The term Hearing Officer means a licensed attorney who is not an
officer or employee of the Village.
   (i)   The term Illegal Transportation of Open Alcohol means any violation as
defined in § 11-502 of the Illinois Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/11-502), as
amended from time to time.
   (j)   The term Loud Noise means any loudly audible noise that disturbs the
peace and comfort of any occupants of any nearby vehicle or property.
   (k)   The term Operation of a Motor Vehicle without a Valid Drivers License
means a violation of §6-101 and/or §6-303 of the Illinois Vehicle Code (625
ILCS 5/6-101 and 625 ILCS 5/6-303), as amended from time to time, where the
driver's license or driving privileges have been suspended, revoked, canceled,
never obtained, or previously had been obtained and have been expired for not
less than six (6) months.
   (l)   The term Owner of Record means the record titleholder to a motor
vehicle.
   (m)   The term Stolen Goods or Property means any goods or property
illegally obtained or not paid for with full consideration.
   (n)   The term Underage Possession of Alcohol means the possession of any
alcoholic beverage(s) without an individual of legal age being present and in
possession of said alcohol or without any exemptions under the law being
applicable.
   (o)   The term Unlawful Use of Weapons means a violation of § 24-1 of the
Criminal Code of 1961 (720 ILCS 5/24-1), as amended from time to time.
(Ord. No. 3-2006 § 1, 1-3-06; Am. Ord. No. 11-2009, § 1, 3-16-09)
Sec. 13-406. Violations.
   An owner of record shall be in violation of this Section if his/her vehicle
is used in conjunction with the following:
   (a)   Except as otherwise authorized in the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act
or the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Pilot Program Act, the possession
or delivery of a controlled substance or drug paraphernalia;
   (b)   Driving during or after the commission of a felony;
   (c)   Driving under the influence;
   (d)   Driving while license, permit or privilege to operate a motor vehicle
is suspended or revoked;
   (e)   Emission of any loud noise;
   (f)   Operating a vehicle with an outstanding criminal warrant;
   (g)   Fleeing and eluding a peace officer;
   (h)   Illegal transportation of open alcohol;
   (i)   Operation of a motor vehicle without a valid drivers license;
   (j)   Transportation or possession of stolen goods or property;
   (k)   Underage possession of alcohol;
   (l)   Unlawful use of weapons.
(Ord. No. 3-2006 § 1, 1-3-06; Am. Ord. No. 11-2009, § 1, 3-16-09; Am. Ord. 20-
2019 § 3, 8-19-19)
Sec. 13-407. Seizures and Impoundment of Vehicles.
   (a)   Whenever a police officer has probable cause to believe that a vehicle
is being used in violation of Section
13-406 he shall cause the seizure and impoundment of the vehicle to a facility
controlled by the Village or its agents. When the vehicle is towed, the police
officer shall notify any person identifying himself or herself as the owner of
the vehicle or any person who is found to be in control of the vehicle at the
time of the alleged violation, if there is such a person, of the fact of the
seizure and of the vehicle owner's right to request a preliminary hearing as
provided in this Article.
   (b)   No vehicle shall be seized or impounded under this Article unless the
police officer determines that such action is necessary and reasonable under
the circumstances including but not individual who is present on the scene, and
who has permission from the owner of the vehicle to drive the vehicle, and the
individual is otherwise capable of lawfully operating a motor vehicle in the
State of Illinois, the police officer shall allow that individual to remove the
vehicle without being subject to seizure and impoundment. Similarly, if the
vehicle is parked legally, and/or will not present a hazard to the public
safety or otherwise jeopardize the efficient movement of vehicular traffic at
its location, the officer shall permit the vehicle to remain at its location
without being seized or impounded pursuant to this Article. This determination
shall not apply when the vehicle is required to be seized or impounded due to
investigative measures or when a vehicle is seized or impounded pursuant to
another lawful purpose.
   (c)   When a vehicle is not seized or impounded pursuant to this Section,
the owner shall not be required to post the requisite Six Hundred Dollar
($600.00) bond as referenced in Section
13-408.
(Ord. No. 3-2006 § 1, 1-3-06; Am. Ord. No. 39-2006 § 1, 12-18-06; Am. Ord. No.
11-2009, § 1, 3-16-09; Am. Ord. No. 27-2009, § 1, 12-7-09)
Sec. 13-408. Posting a Bond.
   If a bond in the amount of Six Hundred Dollars ($600.00) is posted with the
Village, the impounded vehicle will be released to the owner of record, upon
the payment by the owner of record of the towing and storage costs. If a
penalty is imposed for a violation of this Article, the bond will be forfeited
to the Village; provided, in the event that a violation of this Article is not
proven, the bond will be returned to the person posting the bond. All bond
money posted pursuant to this Article will be held by the Village until the
hearing officer issues a decision, or, if there is a judicial review, until a
reviewing court issues a final decision.
(Ord. No. 3-2006 § 1, 1-3-06; Am. Ord. No. 27-2009, § 1, 12-7-09)
Sec. 13-409. Preliminary Hearing on Impoundment.
   Where the owner of a vehicle seized under the provisions of this Article
requests a preliminary hearing within twelve (12) hours after the seizure of
the motor vehicle, the Watch Commander or any supervising officer must conduct
a preliminary hearing within twenty-four (24) hours after the request for the
preliminary hearing is received by the Village; provided that if the date for
the hearing falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, the preliminary
hearing will be held on the next business day following the Saturday, Sunday or
legal holiday. No preliminary hearing shall be required or granted to an owner
whose vehicle was not seized or impounded pursuant to this Article. For
purposes of this Section, the following shall apply:
   (a)   All interested persons will be given a reasonable opportunity to be
heard at the preliminary hearing.
   (b)   The formal rules of evidence will not apply at the hearing, and
hearsay testimony will be allowed, and will be admissible.
   (c)   If, after the conclusion of the hearing, the Watch Commander or
supervising officer determines that there was probable cause to believe that
the vehicle was being used in violation of Section
13-406, and further determines that the seizure and impoundment of the vehicle
was proper under Section
13-407, he shall order the continued impoundment of the vehicle unless the
owner of the vehicle posts a cash bond with the Village in the amount of Six
Hundred Dollars ($600.00). Posting of the bond shall not relieve the owner from
paying any applicable towing and storage costs associated with the seizure and
impoundment of the vehicle.
   (d)   If the Watch Commander or supervising officer determines that there
was no probable cause to believe a violation of Section
13-406 occurred or otherwise determines that the vehicle should not have been
seized or impounded pursuant to Section
13-407, the motor vehicle will be returned to the owner of record of the
vehicle without the posting of the bond and without the costs associated with
the seizure and impoundment of the vehicle. A determination that the vehicle
should not have been seized or impounded pursuant to Section
13-407 has no bearing nor will relieve an owner of responsibility for violating
Section
13-406 of this Article.
(Ord. No. 3-2006 § 1, 1-3-06; Am. Ord. No. 39-2006 § 1, 12-18-06; Am. Ord. No.
11-2009, § 1, 3-16-09; Am. Ord. No. 27-2009, § 1, 12-7-09)
Sec. 13-410. Final Hearing.
   (a)   Notice of Hearing.  Any owner issued a citation for a violation of
Section
13-406 of this Article shall have the right to request a hearing to challenge
the citation and/or subsequent impoundment. Notice shall be given, to the owner
of record, of the ability to request a hearing. Such notice shall be mailed by
certified mail, return receipt requested, to the owner of record, as shown on
the records of the Illinois Secretary of State. Notice by certified mail need
not be given when the owner of the vehicle has been personally served with
notice, in written form, of his ability to apply for a hearing under subsection
(b). If the owner of the vehicle requests a hearing pursuant to subsection (b),
the Village, within forty-five (45) days, shall notify the owner of record of
the date, time and location of a hearing. Notice of the date, time and location
of the hearing shall be sent via regular mail.
   (b)   Requesting a Hearing.  Any person cited under this Article may apply
for a hearing when they believe that they or the person driving the vehicle was
not in violation of this Article at the time the citation was issued and/or
they otherwise believe that the impoundment of the vehicle was improper under
the circumstances. The application for a hearing shall be made no later than
seven (7) days after notice has been given either personally or by certified
mail, whichever is applicable in the given circumstance. The application to
request a hearing shall be provided by the Village at the time notice is given.
The bond will be forfeited in the event a hearing is not requested as provided
for in this ordinance.
   (c)   Hearing.  For purposes of this Section, the following shall apply to
the owners hearing:
      (1)   Unless continued by order of the hearing officer, the hearing shall
be held within sixty (60) days after the motor vehicle was seized.
      (2)   All interested persons will be given a reasonable opportunity to be
heard at the final hearing.
      (3)   If, after the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer
determines by a preponderance of the evidence that the vehicle was used in
violation of Section
13-406, and otherwise determines that the seizure and impoundment of the
vehicle was proper pursuant to Section
13-407, the hearing officer shall order the continued impoundment of the
vehicle until the owner of the vehicle pays to the Village a penalty in the
amount of Six Hundred Dollars ($600.00), plus the towing and storage costs. In
the event the vehicle was not impounded, an order shall be entered wherein the
owner of record shall be liable to the Village in the amount of Six Hundred
Dollars ($600.00). The penalty and costs shall be a debt due and owing to the
Village.
       (4)   If the owner of record fails to appear at the hearing, the hearing
officer shall enter an order of default in favor of the Village, which order
shall require the payment to the Village of an administrative penalty of Six
Hundred Dollars ($600.00).
      (5)   If the hearing officer determines that the vehicle was not used as
hereinabove provided in violation of Section
13-406, the motor vehicle will be returned to the owner of record of the
vehicle without any penalty or other costs, or, if a cash bond had previously
been posted, the cash bond shall be returned.
      (6)   If the hearing officer determines that the vehicle was used in
violation of Section
13-406, but determines that the vehicle was not properly subject to seizure or
impoundment under Section
13-407, the hearing officer shall enter a judgment against the owner in the
amount of Six Hundred Dollars ($600.00) and release the seized vehicle without
towing and storage costs and/or order the reimbursement of towing and storage
costs if the vehicle was previously released. The penalty shall be a debt due
and owing to the Village.
      (7)   The ticket issued shall constitute prima facie evidence that the
offense stated was committed.
(Ord. No. 3-2006 § 1, 1-3-06; Am. Ord. No. 19-2006 § 1, 5--06; Am. Ord. No. 23-
2006 § 1, 5-15-06; Am. Ord. No. 39-2006 § 1, 12-18-06; Am. Ord. No. 11-2009, §
1, 3-16-09; Am. Ord. No. 27-2009, § 1, 12-7-09)
Sec. 13-411. Unclaimed Vehicles.
   (a)   Any motor vehicle that is not claimed within thirty (30) days after
the expiration of the time in which the owner of record may seek judicial
review of the action of the Village under this Article, or the time at which a
final judgment is rendered in favor of the Village by a Court, or the time at
which a final administrative decision is rendered against an owner of record
who is in default, may be disposed of as an abandoned or unclaimed vehicle, as
otherwise provided by law.
   (b)   If the penalty and towing and storage costs are not paid within eighty
(80) days after a penalty is imposed pursuant to this Article, the vehicle
shall be deemed to be abandoned and may be disposed of in the manner provided
by law for the disposition of abandoned or unclaimed vehicles, unless a
petition for judicial review is filed with a court of proper jurisdiction.
Where a petition for judicial review of the hearing officer's determination is
filed and pending in a court of proper jurisdiction, the vehicle shall not be
deemed to be abandoned and shall not be sold. If the petition for judicial
review is resolved in favor of the Village, the vehicle shall be deemed
abandoned and may be disposed of by the Village if the penalty and towing and
storage costs are not paid within thirty (30) days after the date of the
Court's order.
(Ord. No. 3-2006 § 1, 1-3-06)
Sec. 13-412. Liability for Penalty and Costs.
   (a)   The owner of record of a motor vehicle that is seized or impounded
shall be liable to the Village for a penalty of Six Hundred Dollars ($600.00)
in addition to any fees for the towing and storage of the motor vehicle.
   (b)   Fees for towing and storage are established by the towing company, and
not by the Village, except where the motor vehicle is stored on Village
property, in which case the storage cost will be established by the Mayor or
the Chief of Police.
   (c)   A vehicle impounded pursuant to this Article shall remain impounded
until the earlier of the following occurs:
   (1)   The penalty is paid to the Village, and all towing and storage costs
are paid to the towing company; and
   (2)   A bond in amount equal to the liability of the Owner as herein
provided in Paragraph (a) above is posted with the Village and all applicable
towing and storage costs are paid to the towing company; and
   (3)   The vehicle is deemed abandoned, in which case the vehicle shall be
disposed of in the manner provided by law for the disposition of abandoned or
unclaimed vehicles.
   (4)   Except as otherwise specifically provided by law, no owner, lien
holder, or any other person shall be legally entitled to take possession of a
motor vehicle impounded under this Article until the penalty and all towing and
storage costs applicable under this Article have been paid in full.
(Ord. No. 3-2006 § 1, 1-3-06; Am. Ord. No. 39-2006 § 1, 12-18-06; Am. Ord. No.
27-2009, § 1, 12-7-09)
Secs. 13-413 – 13-499. Reserved.
ARTICLE XIII. AUTOMATED TRAFFIC LAW ENFORCEMENT SYSTEM
Sec. 13-500. Definitions.
    As used in this article, words or terms shall have the following meaning
unless the context or usage clearly indicates another meaning was intended:
   Administrator means the Village's Traffic Compliance Administrator and/or
his/her designee.
   Automated traffic law enforcement system means a device within the Village
of Evergreen Park with one or more motor vehicle sensors working in conjunction
with a red light signal to produce recorded images of motor vehicles entering
an intersection against a steady or flashing red signal indication in violation
of Section 11-306 of the Illinois Vehicle Code ("Code"), 625 ILCS 5/11-306, or
similar violation of the Evergreen Park Municipal Code. The automated traffic
law enforcement system shall not be used to enforce speed regulations.
   Automatic traffic law violation means a "disregarding a traffic control
device" violation or a "no turn on red" violation, as those terms are defined
in this section.
   Certified report means a report to the Illinois Secretary of State
concerning five or more unsatisfied automated traffic law violations.
   Code means Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/1-100, et seq.
   Disregarding a traffic control device means a failure to stop and remain
stopped before an intersection that is controlled by a red signal as provided
for in Section 11-306 of the Code. Disregarding a traffic control device, for
purposes of the automated traffic law enforcement system, shall not include:
(1) those instances when a motor vehicle comes to a complete stop and does not
enter the intersection, as defined by Section 1-132 of the Code, during the
cycle of the red signal unless one or more pedestrians or bicyclists are
present, even if the motor vehicle stops at a point past a stop line or
crosswalk where the driver is required to stop, as specified in Section 11-306
(c) of the Code, or similar violation of the Evergreen Park Municipal Code; or
(2) those instances where a motorcyclist enters an intersection against a red
signal indication when the red signal fails to change to green within a
reasonable period of time because of a signal malfunction or because the signal
has failed to detect the arrival of the motorcycle due to the motorcycle's size
or weight.
   No turn on red means failure to stop and remain stopped, and not proceeding
to turn right at, an intersection controlled by both a sign indicating "No turn
on red," or other similar language, and a red signal as provided for in Section
11-306 of the Code.
   Recorded images means images produced by the automated traffic law
enforcement system, which consist of either: two or more photographs; two or
more microphotographs; two or more electronic images; or a video recording
showing the motor vehicle and, on at least one image or portion of the
recording, clearly identifying the registration plate number of the motor
vehicle.
   Village means the Village of Evergreen Park, Cook County, Illinois.
(Ord. No. 23-2007 § 1, 4-2-07; Am. Ord. No. 6-2016 § 1, 3-7-16)
Sec. 13-501. System Established.
   There is established within the village an automated traffic law enforcement
system program.
   (a)   The village shall have the discretion to locate individual automated
traffic law enforcement systems at such intersections as may be deemed
appropriate.
   (b)   An intersection equipped with an automated traffic law enforcement
system shall be posted with a sign visible to approaching traffic indicating
that the intersection is being monitored by an automated traffic law
enforcement system.
   (c)    The village shall provide notice to drivers on its website of the
location of all intersections equipped with an automated traffic law
enforcement system. Any intersection equipped with an automated traffic law
enforcement system shall have a yellow change interval that conforms to the
Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (IMUTCD) published by the
Illinois Department of Transportation.
   (d)   The village shall conduct a statistical analysis to assess the safety
impact of each automated traffic law enforcement system at an in intersection
following installation of the system. The statistical analysis shall be based
upon the best available crash, traffic, and other data, and shall cover a
period of time before and after installation of the system sufficient to
provide a statistically valid comparison of safety impact. The statistical
analysis shall be consistent with professional judgment and acceptable industry
practice. The statistical analysis also shall be consistent with the data
required for valid comparisons of before and after conditions and shall be
conducted within a reasonable time period following the installation of the
automated traffic law enforcement system. If the statistical analysis for the
36 month period following installation of the system indicates that there has
been an increase in the rate of accidents at the approach to the intersection
monitored, additional studies shall be undertaken to determine the cause and
severity of the accidents, and the village may take any action that it
determines is necessary or appropriate to reduce the number or severity of the
accidents at the intersection.
(Ord. No. 6-2016 § 1, 3-7-16)
Sec. 13-502. Office of Traffic Compliance Administrator.
   There is hereby established the office of Traffic Compliance Administrator,
which shall be filled by appointment of the Mayor with the advice and consent
of the Trustees. The Administrator, or his or her designee, shall be authorized
to adopt, distribute and process violation notices and other notices required
by this article and the Code, collect money paid as fines and penalties for
automated traffic law violations, and administer the administrative
adjudication system for automated traffic law violations. The Administrator is
also authorized to draft and issue any certified reports to the Illinois
Secretary of State as required by this article and the Code. The Administrator
shall make the recorded images of a violation accessible to an alleged violator
by providing the alleged violator with a website address, accessible through
the Internet.
(Ord. No. 6-2016 § 1, 3-7-16)
Sec. 13-503. Violations.
   It shall be unlawful to "disregard a traffic control device" or violate a
"no turn on red" as those terms are defined in this article.
(Ord. No. 23-2007 § 1, 4-2-07; Am. Ord. No. 6-2016 § 1, 3-7-16)   
Sec. 13-504. Violation notice.
   (a)   When the automated traffic law enforcement system records a motor
vehicle violating Section
13-503 of this article, the Administrator shall issue a written violation
notice to the registered owner of the vehicle, which shall be mailed within 30
days after the Illinois Secretary of State notifies the village of the identity
of the registered owner of the vehicle, and in no event later than 90 days
following the violation. If any notice to an addressee is returned as
undeliverable, a second notice shall be sent to the last known address recorded
in a United States Post Office approved database of the owner of the cited
vehicle. The second notice shall be made via first class mail postage prepaid.
Service shall be complete on the date the notice is placed in the United States
mail.
   (b)   No person who is the lessor of a motor vehicle pursuant to a written
lease agreement shall be liable for an automated traffic law enforcement system
violation involving such motor vehicle during the period of the lease; provided
that upon the request of the Administrator received within 120 days after the
violation occurred, the lessor provides within 60 days after such receipt the
name and address of the lessee. The driver's license number of a lessee may be
subsequently individually requested by the Administrator if needed for
enforcement purposes. Upon the provision of information by the lessor, the
Administrator shall issue the violation notice to the lessee of the vehicle in
the same manner as it would issue a violation notice to a registered owner, and
the lessee may be held liable for the violation, and all other provisions
applicable to owners in this article shall apply to the lessee.
   (c)   Before a violation notice is issued, a determination must be made by a
technician employed or contracted by the village that, based on the inspection
of recorded images generated by the system, the motor vehicle was being
operated in violation of Section
13-503 of this article. Upon determination that the recorded image captures a
violation, a violation notice shall be issued and served upon the registered
vehicle owner in the manner provided for above. If the technician determines
that the vehicle entered the intersection as part of a funeral procession or in
order to yield the right-of-way to an emergency vehicle, a citation shall not
be issued. The Administrator, or his/her designee shall retain a copy of all
violation notices, recorded images and other correspondence mailed to the
registered owner of the motor vehicle. Such documents shall be kept in the
ordinary course of business. Each violation notice and the recorded images
shall constitute evidence of the facts contained in the notice and is
admissible in any proceeding relative to the violation, and shall be prima
facie evidence of a violation.
   (d)   The violation notice shall include the following information:
      (1)   The name and address of the registered owner or lessee of the
vehicle, as indicated by the records of the Secretary of State, or, if such
information is outdated or unattainable, then the last known address recorded
in a United States Post Office approved database;
      (2)   The make (only if discernable) and registration number of the motor
vehicle involved in the violation;
      (3)   The violation charged;
      (4)   The location where the violation occurred;
      (5)   The date and time of the violation;
      (6)   A copy of the recorded images;
      (7)   The amount of the civil fine imposed, and the date on which the
civil fine should be paid;
      (8)   A statement that recorded images constitute prima facie evidence of
a violation;
      (9)   A statement that a failure to pay the civil fine, or to contest
liability in a timely fashion, is an admission of liability and may result in
the suspension of driving privileges of the registered owner of the vehicle, as
well as the imposition of additional penalty of $100 for failure to pay the
original fine in a timely manner;
      (10)   A statement that the person may elect to proceed by paying the
fine or challenging the charge at the administrative hearing;
      (11)   A statement that the payment of any fine, and the payment of any
applicable penalty for late payment, shall operate as a final disposition of
the violation;
      (12)   A statement of how an administrative hearing may be requested; and
      (13)   A website address, accessible through the Internet, where the
person may view the recorded images of the violation.
(Ord. No. 23-2007 § 1, 4-2-07; Am. Ord. No. 6-2016 § 1, 3-7-16; Am. Ord. No.
18-2017, § 1, 11-6-17)
Sec. 13-505. Hearing.
   (a)   The registered owner or lessee of a motor vehicle being operated in
violation of Section
13-503 of this article may request a hearing in persona to challenge the
evidence or contest the citation by mail. The violation notice shall be prima
facie evidence of a violation, subject to rebuttal on the basis of applicable
defenses. Formal rules of evidence will not apply at the hearing. Hearings
shall be recorded, and the hearing officer shall be empowered to administer
oaths and to secure by subpoena both the attendance and testimony of witnesses
and the production of relevant book and papers. Persons appearing at the
hearing may be represented by counsel at their own expense. A registered owner
or lessee that fails to appear at a hearing which he/she has requested will be
found in default and a final determination will be entered.
   (b)   The following defenses are the only defenses that may be considered by
the Hearing Officer for a violation of Section
13-503 of this article:
      (1)   The operator of the vehicle was issued a Uniform Traffic Control
Citation by a police officer for the same incident;
      (2)   The motor vehicle or registration plates of the motor vehicle were
stolen before the violation occurred and not under the control of or in the
possession of the owner at the time of the violation. Provided, however, to
demonstrate that the motor vehicle or the registration plates were stolen
before the violation occurred and were not under the control or possession of
the owner at the time of the violation, the owner must submit proof that a
report concerning the stolen motor vehicle or registration plates was filed
with a law enforcement agency in a timely manner;
      (3)   The vehicle was leased to another, and within 60 days after the
citation was mailed to the lessor, lessor submitted to the village, together
with a copy of the lease agreement, the lessee's driver's license number, and
any additional information as may be required;
      (4)   The vehicle was an authorized emergency vehicle;
      (5)   The operator of the vehicle passed through the intersection when
the light was red in order to yield the right-of-way to an emergency vehicle or
as part of a funeral procession; or,
      (6)   The respondent was not the registered vehicle owner or lessee of
the cited vehicle at the time of the violation.
   (c)   Individuals who have been served with a Notice of Violation may
contest the validity of the violation, using the same available defenses as
stated above, without personally appearing at the administrative hearing. To do
so, the individual must complete, in full, the "Request for Hearing - Non-
Appearance" portion of the Notice of Violation. Additionally, the individual
shall submit a notarized statement of the facts that he is relying upon to
establish any one of the defenses referenced in Section 13-503 of this article.
The individual may also submit documentary evidence to be considered by the
Hearing Officer. By signing the "Request for Hearing - Non-Appearance" portion
of the Notice of Violation, the individual acknowledges that he is waiving the
right to appear personally before the Hearing Officer.
Any individual wishing to avail himself of this section must submit the
"Request for Hearing - Non-Appearance," and any other documentation to be
considered by the Hearing Officer, to the village, by the respond-by date
listed on the Notice of Violation. The Administrator shall forward all timely-
submitted materials to the Hearing Officer for review and determination. The
Hearing Officer shall make an adjudication based upon the facts set forth in
the notarized statement of facts filed, any additional documentary evidence,
and the facts contained in the Notice of Violation. Notice of the determination
of the Hearing Officer shall be served via first class mail, postage prepaid,
addressed to the registered owner at the address listed on the Illinois
Secretary of State database. Service of the notice shall be complete on the
date the notice is placed in the United States mail. Any individual may seek
review of the Hearing Officer's determination through the mechanisms provided
in this article.
   (d)   No additional fee shall be charged to an alleged violator for
exercising the right to an administrative hearing.
(Ord. No. 23-2007 § 1, 4-2-07; Am. Ord. No. 6-2016 § 1, 3-7-16; Am. Ord. No.
18-2017, § 2, 11-6-17)
Sec. 13-506. Final determination of liability.
   A final determination of an automated traffic law violation liability shall
occur under the following circumstances:
      (1)   Upon the failure to pay the fine or penalty after the Hearing
Officer's determination of liability and the exhaustion of or failure to
exhaust administrative review; or
      (2)   Where a person fails to appear at a hearing to contest the alleged
violation in the time and manner specified, the Hearing Officer's determination
shall become final upon the denial of a timely petition to set aside a
determination, or upon the expiration of the period for filing the petition
without a filing having been made.
(Ord. No. 23-2007 § 1, 4-2-07; Am. Ord. No. 6-2016 § 1, 3-7-16)
Sec. 13-507. Final determination of violation liability notice.
   A final determination of an automated traffic law violation notice shall be
sent following the final determination of automated traffic law violation
liability and the conclusion of judicial review. The notice shall include the
following information:
      (1)   A statement that the unpaid fine or penalty is a debt due and owing
the Village of Evergreen Park; and
      (2)   A warning that a failure to pay any fine or penalty due and owing
the Village of Evergreen Park may result in the filing of a petition in the
Circuit Court of Cook County to have unpaid fine or penalty rendered as a
judgment or may result in the suspension of the person's driver's license for
failure to pay fines or penalties for five or more automated traffic law
violations.
(Ord. No. 23-2007 § 1, 4-2-07; Am. Ord. No. 6-2016 § 1, 3-7-16)
Sec. 13-508. Petitions to set aside determination.
   (a)   A petition to set aside determination of an automated traffic law
violation must be filed with or mailed to the Administrator within ten days of
the date of mailing of the final determination of liability notice. The grounds
for the petition are limited to:
      (1)   The person was not the owner or lessee of the cited vehicle on the
date of the violation occurred;
      (2)   The person has paid the fine or penalty for the violation in
question; or
      (3)   Excusable failure to appear at or request a new date for a hearing.
   (b)   Upon receipt of a timely petition to set aside the determination of
liability, the Administrator, or his designee, shall review the petition to
determine if sufficient cause has been shown to set aside the determination. If
cause has been shown, the Administrator shall forward to the petitioner a new
hearing date on which the petitioner must appear to present his case on the
underlying violation. The Administrator shall notify the petitioner of his
decision to grant a hearing or deny the petition within 14 days of his
decision.
(Ord. No. 23-2007 § 1, 4-2-07; Am. Ord. No. 6-2016 § 1, 3-7-16)
Sec. 13-509. Notice of impending drivers license suspension.
   (a)   A notice of impending driver's license suspension shall be sent to the
person liable for failing to pay any fine or penalty that remains due and owing
on five or more automated traffic law violations. The notice shall state the
following information:
      (1)   The failure to pay the fine or penalty owing within 45 days of the
notice's date will result in the Administrator notifying the Illinois Secretary
of State that the person is eligible for initiation of suspension proceedings
under Section 6-306.5 of the Code; and
      (2)   A statement that the person may obtain a photostatic copy of the
original ticket imposing a fine or penalty by sending a self-addressed, stamped
envelope to the Administrator along with a request for the copy.
   (b)   The notice shall be sent via first class mail, postage prepaid, to the
address recorded with the Illinois Secretary of State or, if any notice to that
address is returned as undeliverable, to the last known address recorded in a
United States Post Office approved database.
(Ord. No. 23-2007 § 1, 4-2-07; Am. Ord. No. 6-2016 § 1, 3-7-16)
Sec. 13-510. Drivers license suspension.
   (a)   The Administrator, by certified report, shall request that the
Illinois Secretary of State suspend the driving privileges of an owner of a
registered vehicle or lessee who has failed to pay any fine or penalty due and
owing the Village of Evergreen Park as a result of five automated traffic law
violations. The report shall be certified and contain the following
information:
      (1)   The name, last known address as recorded with the Illinois
Secretary of State, as provided by the lessor of the cited vehicle at the time
of lease, or as recorded in a United States post office approved database if
any notice sent under this Section is returned as undeliverable, and driver's
license number of the person who failed to pay the fine or penalty, or who has
defaulted in a payment plan, and the registration number of any vehicle known
to be registered to such person in the State of Illinois;
      (2)   The name of the municipality making the report;
      (3)   A statement that a suspension notice has been sent to the person
named in the report at the address recorded with the Illinois Secretary of
State or at the last address known to the lessor of the cited vehicle at the
time of the lease or, if any notice is returned as undeliverable, at the last
known address recorded at a United States Post office approved database; the
date on which such notice was sent; and address to which such notice was sent;
and,
      (4)   An unique identifying reference number for each request of
suspension.
   (b)   The Administrator shall notify the Illinois Secretary of State
whenever a person named in the certified report has paid the previously
recorded fine or penalty, whenever the person has entered into a payment plan
pursuant to which the village has agreed to terminate the suspension, or
whenever the village determines that the original report was in error. A
certified copy of such notification shall also be given to the person named
therein upon request and at no additional charge.
(Ord. No. 23-2007 § 1, 4-2-07; Am. Ord. No. 6-2016 § 1, 3-7-16)
Sec. 13-511. Challenging the Accuracy of a Certified Report.
   (a)   If the Administrator provides a suspension notice and subsequently
makes a certified report to the Illinois Secretary of State, the vehicle owner
may challenge the accuracy of the certified report in writing.
   (b)   The vehicle owner shall submit to the Administrator a written
statement under oath, together with any supporting documentation, establishing
one of the following grounds for challenging the accuracy of the certified
report:
      (1)   That the person was not the owner or lessee of the subject vehicle
or vehicles receiving five or more automated traffic law violations on the date
or dates such violation(s) occurred; or
      (2)   That the person already paid the fine or penalty owing indicated on
the certified report.
   (c)   A statement challenging the accuracy of a certified report shall be
sent to the Administrator via certified mail, return receipt requested, or
hand-delivered to the Administrator within five days after the person receives
notice from the Illinois Secretary of State that the person's driver's license
will be suspended at the end of a specified period of time unless the secretary
is presented with notice from the village certifying that the fines or
penalties due and owing have been satisfied or that the inclusion of the
person's name on the certified report was in error.
(Ord. No. 6-2016 § 1, 3-7-16)
Sec. 13-512. Penalty.
   (a)   Any person violating Section
13-503 of this article shall be fined $100 for each offense.
   (b)   If a person fails to request a hearing and does not otherwise pay the
applicable fine indicated in the violation notice by the date specified (i.e.,
30 days after the violation notice date), or fails to pay the original fine
within 30 days after an administrative hearing, an additional penalty of $100
will be automatically assessed against the violator.
(Ord. No. 23-2007 § 1, 4-2-07; Am. Ord. No. 6-2016 § 1, 3-7-16)
Secs. 13-513 – 13-600.   Reserved.
ARTICLE XIV. RAILROAD OCCURRENCES
Sec. 13-601. Definitions.
   The following words, terms and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to
them, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
   Highway-railroad grade crossing means the intersection of a railroad track
and a highway, street, roadway, sidewalk or other public way, or any
combination of the above, designated or intended for vehicle or pedestrian
traffic, at the same grade level.
   Railroad occurrence means: 1) the activation of a safety device at a
highway-railroad grade crossing, indicating the presence or impending presence
of railroad traffic, when no train is present and is not promptly anticipated
at the intersection (i.e., false activation); 2) the continued activation of
safety devices after a train has left the vicinity of a highway-railroad grade
crossing and no other train is present or impending immediate arrival at the
intersection; or 3) a train is present in the highway-railroad grade crossing
but has stopped moving.
   Railroad occurrence response expense means any expense for personnel and
equipment involved in responding to a railroad occurrence. Responses include,
but are not limited to, police and auxiliary services, and services performed
by other departments or by a private contractor responding to a railroad
occurrence at the request of the Village of Evergreen Park.
   Responsible party means any person or entity owning, controlling, using,
operating, maintaining, having custody over, or conducting any activity upon
any land, infrastructure, facility, equipment, safety device, vehicles, cars or
trains, causing or contributing to a railroad occurrence.
   Safety device means any gate, light, bell, warning, or other signals at a
highway-railroad grade crossing that is meant or designed to give warning of
impending or present railroad traffic.
(Ord. No. 6-2014 § 2, 3-3-14; Am. Ord. 2-2024 § 1, 1-16-24)
Sec. 13-602. Railroad occurrence response.
   In the event of a railroad occurrence, the Chief of Police, or his or her
designee, shall immediately attempt to contact a responsible party to advise of
the railroad occurrence. Thereafter, or in conjunction therewith, personnel,
vehicles, and equipment shall be dispatched to the highway-railroad grade
crossing that is the site of the railroad occurrence, and to nearby street
intersections affected or anticipated to be affected by the railroad
occurrence, to perform traffic control duties to alleviate traffic congestion
and redirect traffic. Village officials from other departments shall cooperate
with the police department to provide personnel, vehicles, and equipment deemed
reasonably necessary to the performance of such traffic control duties.
(Ord. No. 6-2014 § 2, 3-3-14; Am. Ord. 2-2024 § 1, 1-16-24)
Sec. 13-603. Responsible party liability.
   It shall be the duty of any responsible party to reimburse the Village of
Evergreen Park for its railroad occurrence response expenses no later than 20
days after the issuance of an invoice detailing said expenses. The liability of
a responsible party shall be joint and severable.
(Ord. No. 6-2014 § 2, 3-3-14; Am. Ord. 2-2024 § 1, 1-16-24)
Sec. 13-604. Railroad occurrence response expenses.
   The Village of Evergreen Park shall be reimbursed for its railroad
occurrence response expenses at the following hourly rates:$90 per hour, or any
portion thereof, for other motor vehicles, including police squad cars,
responding to the occurrence; and $60 per hour, or any portion thereof after
the first hour, for personnel. All other expenses shall be billed at their
reasonable and customary rate.
(Ord. No. 6-2014 § 2, 3-3-14; Am. Ord. 2-2024 § 1, 1-16-24)
Sec. 13-605. Administration.
   Any responsible party violating the provisions of Section
13-603 shall be subject to a judgment in the amount of the Village of Evergreen
Park's railroad occurrence response expenses. Violations of Section
13-603 may be administered through the provisions of
Chapter 12, Miscellaneous Provisions and Offenses, Article X, Administrative
Adjudication of Non-Vehicular Regulations Violations, of the Evergreen Park
Municipal Code, or by any other means permitted by law. Nothing in this Article
shall be interpreted to limit the remedies or penalties available to Village of
Evergreen Park.
(Ord. No. 6-2014 § 2, 3-3-14; Am. Ord. 2-2024 § 1, 1-16-24)
Chapter 14
NUISANCES*
   *Cross references—Animals, ch.
4; health, ch.
9; businesses not to be nuisances, § 11-1; unlicensed motor vehicle declared
nuisance, § 13-6; solid waste, ch.
20; water, sewers and sewage disposal, ch.
24.
   State law references—Powers of home rule units, Ill. Const. art. VII, § 6;
nuisances, 740 ILCS 55/221 et seq.
Sec. 14-1. General provision.
In all cases in this Code where no provision is made defining what are
nuisances and how the same may be removed, abated, or prevented, in addition to
what may be declared such in this Code, those offenses which are known to the
common law of the land and such other offenses as may be set out in other
sections of this Code and state law as nuisances may, in case the same exist
within the village limits, be treated as such, and proceeded against as it is
provided in this Code, or any other law.
(Code 1965, § 19-55)
Sec. 14-2. Notice to abate.
   (a)   It shall be the duty of the building commissioner, or any other
officer authorized by the village, to serve notice in writing upon the owner,
occupant, agent or person in possession or control of any lot, building or
premises in or upon which any nuisance may be found, or who may be the owner or
cause of any such nuisance, other than the nuisance specified in section
14-10, requiring him to abate the same in such manner as he shall prescribe
within a reasonable time. It shall not be necessary in any case for the
building commissioner or such other officer to specify in his notice the manner
in which any nuisance shall be abated unless he shall deem it advisable so to
do. Such notice may be given or served by any officer who is so directed. If
the person so notified shall neglect or refuse to comply with the requirements
of such order by abating such nuisance within the time specified, such person
shall be fined as set forth in this Code.
   (b)   The notices referred to in and required by this section shall be in
the following form: TO: (Party to be notified)
YOU ARE NOTIFIED THAT AS OF (Day, Month, Year) that you are maintaining a
nuisance in Violation of Paragraph 14 of the Evergreen Park Municipal Code, in
that (here specify condition which violates ordinance).
YOU ARE FURTHER ADVISED THAT UNLESS YOU REMOVE (remedy or repair) THE AFORESAID
VIOLATION BY (Day, Month, Year) (not less than 7 days from the date of service
of the notice) you shall be held responsible for the full penalty of the law.
Signed                
      Title
   (c)   It shall be the duty of the building commissioner or such other
officer to proceed at once upon the expiration of the time specified in such
notice to cause such nuisance to be abated. Whenever the owner, occupant,
agent, or person in possession or control of any premises in or upon which any
nuisance may be found is unknown or cannot be found, the commissioner shall
proceed to abate such nuisance without notice; in either case, the expense of
such abatement shall be collected from the person who may have created,
continued, or suffered such nuisance to exist, in addition to any penalty or
fine.
(Code 1965, § 19-53)
Sec. 14-3. Discretionary manner of abatement.
Whenever any nuisance shall be found on any premises within the village, the
building commissioner or such other officer as authorized is hereby authorized,
in his discretion, to cause the same to be summarily abated in such manner as
he may direct.
(Code 1965, § 19-54)
Sec. 14-4. Inoperable refrigerators, appliances, etc.
Any person who shall abandon or discard in any place accessible to children any
cardboard box, cardboard carton, wooden box, crate or objects of a similar
nature, refrigerator, icebox or ice chest of a capacity of one and one-half
(11/2) cubic feet or more which has an attached lid or door which may be opened
or fastened shut by means of an attached latch, or who, being the owner,
lessee, or manager of any place or premises knowingly permits such cardboard
box, cardboard carton, wooden box, crate or objects of a similar nature,
refrigerator, icebox or ice chest to remain there in such condition shall be
guilty of an offense under this chapter and such condition shall be a nuisance.
Every day such violation continues shall be deemed a separate and distinct
offense. This section shall not prohibit garbage cans or garbage receptacles,
nor shall it apply where the door or lid is removed or the same crushed.
(Code 1965, § 19-56(a))
Sec. 14-5. Vehicles, structures, yards, lots, etc., as a nuisance.
No vehicle, structure, receptacle, yard, lot, premises, or part thereof, shall
be made, used, kept, maintained or operated in the village if such use,
keeping, maintaining, or operating shall be the occasion of any nuisance, or
shall be dangerous to life or detrimental to health. (Code 1965, § 19-57)
Sec. 14-6. Existing in connection with business, labor.
No substance, matter or thing of any kind whatsoever, which shall be dangerous
or detrimental to health, shall be allowed to exist in connection with any
business, or used therein, or used in any work or labor performed in the
village.
(Code 1965, § 19-58)
Sec. 14-7. Animals or other matter or substance.
No person shall bring into the village or keep therein for sale or otherwise,
either for food or for any other purpose, any dead or live animal, nor any
matter, substance, or thing which shall be a nuisance or which shall occasion a
nuisance in the village, or which may or shall be dangerous or detrimental to
health.
(Code 1965, § 19-59)
Sec. 14-8. Factory, yard, rendering establishment which becomes nauseous, foul
or offensive.
Any factory, yard, building or structure of any kind or rendering establishment
which shall become nauseous, foul or offensive is hereby declared a nuisance.
The person owning, maintaining or in possession or control of any such factory,
shop, yard, house, building, or structure shall be guilty of an offense under
this chapter. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during
or on which a violation occurs or continues or is permitted to continue.
(Code 1965, § 19-60)
Sec. 14-9. Junk and rodents, unsightly yard, etc.
It shall be unlawful for any person to store or keep any old articles or
materials which may be classified as junk adjacent to or in close proximity to
any schoolhouse, church, public park, public grounds, business building or
residence without first providing proper and tight buildings for the storage of
the same. The storing or accumulating of unsightly material of any kind,
including but not limited to garbage, metal, junk of every kind and character,
nonfunctioning motor vehicles, trash of every kind and nature on any property
or lot within the village is hereby prohibited. The storing or accumulation of
any condition which may or can become breeding grounds or harborage for or
attraction to insects, rodents, or other possible disease-carrying animals on
any property or lot within the village is prohibited.
(Code 1965, § 19-43)
Sec. 14-10. Weeds.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any owner, user, lessee or occupant or any
agent, servant, representative, custodian or employee of such owner, user,
lessee or occupant, of any lot or part of a lot to:
      (1)   Allow or maintain on such lot or part thereof any growth of weeds
(except noxious weeds) to a height of over eight (8) inches; and
      (2)   The growth of noxious weeds, as defined in section 2(5) of the
Illinois Noxious Weed Law [505 ILCS 100/2(5)], to any height.
   (b)   It shall be the duty of every owner to cut all noxious weeds at his
own expense. If such owner refuses or neglects to cut them, the village may
provide for the cutting of them, collect the reasonable cost thereof from the
owner, and file a lien as provided for in section 11-20-7 of the Illinois
Municipal Code [65 ILCS 5/11-20-71.
(Code 1965, § 19-104)
Chapter 15
PARKS AND RECREATION*
Art. I.    In General, §§ 15-1-15-25
Art. II.   Park Board, §§ 15-26-15-50
Art. III.   Park Rules, §§ 15-51-15-66
   *Cross reference—Director of recreational services, § 2-301 et seq.
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Secs. 15-1—15-25. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. PARK BOARD*
   *Cross reference—Boards and commissions generally, § 2-346 et seq.
Sec. 15-26. Created.
A park board is hereby created for the village, which board shall be known as
"The Park Board of the Village of Evergreen Park."
(Code 1965, § 21-1)
Sec. 15-27. Composition; appointment; qualifications of board.
   (a)   The park board shall consist of five (5) members, one (1) of which
shall be chairman. The mayor and the chairman of the plats, public grounds and
buildings committee of the board of trustees shall be members ex officio.
   (b)   The members of the park board shall be appointed by the mayor and
board of trustees voting jointly, and the mayor and board of trustees shall
appoint one (1) of such members as chairman of such board. No member shall be
eligible to be a member of the park board unless he shall be a resident of the
village and such members, except the chairman, shall have residence as follows:
      (1)   One (1) member in the area north of 95th Street and east of Kedzie
Avenue.
      (2)   One (1) member in the area north of 95th Street and west of Kedzie
Avenue.
      (3)   One (1) member in the area south of 95th Street and east of Kedzie
Avenue.
      (4)   One (1) member in the area south of 95th Street and west of Kedzie
Avenue.
   (c)   Should a member of the board cease to be a resident of the village,
his office shall become vacant.
(Code 1965, § 21-2)
Sec. 15-28. Terms of members.
The members of the park board shall be appointed to serve for terms of five (5)
years, and until their successors are appointed and qualified.
(Code 1965, § 21-3)
Sec. 15-29. Vacancies.
Any member of the park board may resign from his office. If a vacancy in office
occurs by reason of death, resignation or removal from office, the vacancy
shall be filled by appointment by the mayor and board of trustees voting
jointly for the remainder of the term of the office which has become vacant.
(Code 1965, § 21-4)
Sec. 15-30. Meetings.
Meetings of the park board shall be held in the village hall and shall be held
at such time or times as the board may prescribe, provided that meetings shall
be held not less often than once in each quarter.
(Code 1965, § 21-5)
Sec. 15-31. Compensation of members.
Each member of the park board shall receive such compensation as the mayor and
board of trustees shall fix by ordinance or resolution, and the chairman of the
board shall receive such compensation as the mayor and board of trustees shall
fix by ordinance or resolution, but such compensation shall not be paid for
more than twelve (12) meetings in any given fiscal year.
(Code 1965, § 21-7)
Sec. 15-32. Duties.
The park board authorized by this chapter shall have the power and duty:
      (1)   To prepare and recommend to the mayor and board of trustees a plan
for the acquisition, conduct, equipment and maintenance of park sites for the
village.
      (2)   To prepare and recommend to the mayor and board of trustees from
time to time, plans for specific improvements for park sites.
      (3)   To prepare and recommend to the mayor and board of trustees, not
later than June first of each year, a budget showing estimated cost of
equipment and maintenance of park sites for the fiscal year.
      (4)   To perform and carry out such duties and functions as shall he
assigned to them by the mayor and board of trustees by resolution.
(Code 1965, § 21-6)
Secs. 15.33—15-50. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. PARK RULES
Sec. 15-51. Scope.
Except as stated otherwise, the provisions of this article apply to public
parks and public playgrounds.
Sec. 15-52. Permit required.
   (a)   Whenever any group, association, organization or individual desires to
use any park facilities, including but not limited to tennis courts, football
fields or other recreational facilities for use such as picnics, parties,
theatrical or entertainment performances, the individual or in the alternative
if a group, a representative of such group, association or organization shall
first obtain a permit from the department of recreation for such purposes. The
mayor and board of trustees may adopt an application form to be used by the
department of recreation for such situations. Such permits shall be restricted
to residents of the village, if an individual, or to local groups, associations
or organizations, if the applicant is a group, association or organization.
   (b)   The department of recreation shall grant the application if it appears
that the individual, group, association or organization will not interfere with
the general use of the park by the individual members of the public and if the
individual, group, association or organization meets all other conditions
contained in the application. The application may contain a requirement for an
indemnity bond to protect the village from any liability of any kind or
character and to protect village property from damage.
Sec. 15-53. Weapons; missiles.
Persons are forbidden to carry firearms or other unlawful weapons as defined by
state law, or to throw stones or other missiles within any park or public
playground of the village.
Sec. 15-54. Hawking, peddling; other sales.
No person shall expose any article or thing for sale within any public park or
public playground, nor shall any hawking or peddling be allowed therein without
permission so to do in writing from the board of trustees.
Sec. 15-55. Disorderly conduct.
No threatening, abusive, insulting or indecent language shall be allowed in any
part of a public park or public playground; nor shall any conduct be permitted
whereby a breach of peace may be occasioned; nor shall any person play any game
of chance at or with any table or instrument of gaming; nor shall any person
commit any obscene or indecent act therein.
Sec. 15-56. Posting bills, etc.
No person shall paste or otherwise affix any bill, notice or other paper upon
any structure or thing within any park or public playground nor upon any of the
gates or enclosures thereof.
See. 15-57. Permit for use of musical instrument.
No person shall play upon any musical instrument within any park or public
playground without a permit from the mayor of the village, in writing.
Sec. 15-58. Bonfires.
No person shall light, make or use any bonfire in any park or public
playground.
Sec. 15-59. Protection of grass, shrubs, etc.
No person shall be allowed to play ball or other games likely to injure the
grass, lawn, turf or shrubbery in any of the village parks, except in such
places as may be provided for that purpose; nor shall any person cut, break or
in any way injure or deface, trees, shrubs, plants, turf or any of the
buildings, fences or other structures or property contained in any park or
public playground.
Sec. 15-60. Being intoxicated; selling liquors.
No intoxicated person shall enter, be or remain in any public park or
playground, nor shall any person bring into, sell, give away or drink any
intoxicating liquors in any public park or playground.
Sec. 15-61. Closing hours.
No person shall be in any public park or public playground after the hour of
10:00 p.m. or after the posted hour of closing, whichever is earlier, and
before 5:00 a.m. of the following morning.
Sec. 15-62. Glass containers prohibited in parks.
No person shall possess any glass container or glass bottle in any public park
or public playground.
Sec. 15-63. Entry into ponds prohibited.
   (a)   No person shall swim in any pond located on property owned by the
Village.
   (b)   No person shall enter into any pond located on property owned by the
Village.
   (c)   No person shall use any flotation device in any pond located on
property owned by the Village.
   (d)   No person shall fish in any pond located on property owned by the
Village.
   (e)   No person shall throw any object (including food) into any pond
located on property owned by the Village.
   (f)   No person shall use any raft, boat, float or other similar device on
any pond located on property owned by the Village.
(Ord. No. 16-2005 § 1, 6-6-05)
Sec. 15-64. Feeding prohibited.
No person shall feed any animal, bird, fowl, or fish on any property owned by
the Village.
(Ord. No. 16-2005 § 1, 6-6-05)
Sec. 15-65. Bicycles, skateboards, and roller blades prohibited.
No person shall bicycle, skateboard, roller blade, roller skate or use a
scooter on any property owned by the Village except in areas designated for
such use. Unless an area is paved and allowed for such use, then any person
performing a prohibited act shall be subject to forfeiture of the bicycle,
skateboard, roller blade, roller skate or scooter.
(Ord. No. 16-2005 § 1, 6-6-05)
Sec. 15-66. Motor vehicles prohibited.
No person shall drive or operate any vehicle (including cars, trucks,
motorcycles, motor scooters, motor vehicles, motorized pedal cycle, and go
carts) except in parking lots designated for such use on any property owned by
the Village. Nothing herein shall prohibit the use of a motorized wheelchair by
a person with disabilities.
(Ord. No. 16-2005 § 1, 6-6-05)
Chapter 16
PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS, ETC.
Art. I. In General, §§ 16-1-16-25
Art. II. Peddlers, §§ 16-26-16-75
   Div. 1. Generally, §§ 16-26-16-45
   Div. 2. License, §§ 16-46-16-75
Art. III. Solicitation Generally, §§ 16-76-16-100
Art. IV. Commercial Solicitors and Canvassers, §§ 16-101-16-150
   Div. 1. Generally, §§ 16-101-16-115
   Div. 2. Permit, §§ 16-116-16-150
Art. V. Charitable Solicitations, §§ 16-151-16-176
   Div. 1. Generally, §§ 16-151-16-170
   Div. 2. Permit, §§ 16-171-16-176
Art. VI. Non-Solicitation, §§ 16-180-16-182
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Secs. 16-1—16-25. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. PEDDLERS
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 16-26. Definition.
For the purposes of this article, every person who shall sell or offer for
sale, barter or exchange at retail when traveling from place to place on, along
or upon the streets or alleys of the village, or who shall sell and deliver
from any vehicle going from place to place, or who shall sell or vend from
automatic vending machines in stores, warehouses, shops, factories or other
places of business, any books, tickets for games, shows or sports, pictures,
photographs, goods, wares or merchandise, wood, vegetables, fruits, fruit
juices or other similar beverages, soft drinks, ice cream, candy, nuts, or
other confections, bakery goods, sandwiches, butter or country produce in the
village shall be deemed a peddler.
Sec. 16-27. Exemptions.
The provisions of this article shall not be construed to apply to any person
selling vegetables, fruits, berries, poultry or other products of his own farms
or premises, or to the sale of tickets for charitable purposes.
Sec. 16-28. Registration.
It shall be unlawful for any person to peddle at retail from place to place
within the village unless such person shall have registered within one (1) year
in a registration book provided for the purpose in the police department his
name and address, the address of the firm or corporation, if any, which he
represents, the names and addresses of not less than two (2) references as to
his moral character, honesty and integrity, together with a brief description
of the nature of the business in which he is engaged, and the kinds of goods or
property to be sold or solicited for, if any; and shall have submitted to the
department of police at least two (2) photographs, size one (1) inch by two and
one-half (2/2) inches and shall have permitted the police department to
fingerprint him. Each person so registered shall be provided with a card
bearing his name and address and a brief description of himself, signed by the
chief of police, which card he shall carry with him as evidence of his
registration.
Sec. 16-29. Identification of vehicles used by peddlers of food products.
Every wagon or vehicle used by peddlers of food products shall have displayed
upon each side thereof in plain print the name and address of the owner and the
kind of goods for sale.
Sec. 16-30. Assistants on vehicles.
Upon each vehicle used by any peddler, there shall be permitted only one (1)
helper or assistant to the driver or operator of such wagon or vehicle.
Sec. 16-31. Fraud and misrepresentation.
It shall be unlawful for any peddler to be guilty of any fraud, cheat,
misrepresentation or imposition or to violate, neglect or refuse to comply with
any of the provisions of this article.
Secs. 16-32—16-45. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. LICENSE
Sec. 16-46. Required; term.
Every person desiring to engage in or conduct business as a peddler shall,
before engaging in such business, obtain a license so to do. Such license shall
begin on May first of the year for which such license is issued and shall
terminate on April thirtieth the next year.
Sec. 16-47. Application generally.
Every person who desires a license as a peddler shall make application in
writing therefor to the village collector, setting out in such application the
full name and residence of the applicant and whether he desires to be licensed
as a peddler of vegetables, fruits, fruit juices or other similar beverages,
soft drinks, ice cream, candy, nuts or other confections, bakery goods,
sandwiches, or commodities from a basket or other like receptacles carried by
or maintained and operated by himself; to sell or barter any tickets for games,
shows or sports, or any thing of value; or to solicit orders for any such
articles. Such application shall also state in what commodity, article, thing
of value or merchandise such peddler intends to deal.
(Code 1965, § 26-4)
Sec. 16-48. Approval of application for food vendor's license.
The application for a license of every peddler of bakery goods, prepared foods,
confections, ice cream, beverages, fruit juices, butter, eggs and food or drink
of similar nature shall first be passed upon and a permit given for the
issuance of each license by the department of health. (Code 1965, § 26-5)
Sec. 16-49. Issuance.
Upon receipt of the application referred to in section
16-47 of this Code and the payment by such applicant to the village collector
of the license fee fixed for the particular form of license issued, the mayor
shall issue or cause to be issued to such applicant a license attested by the
village clerk authorizing such applicant to engage in and carry on the business
of a peddler of the kind stated in such application.
(Code 1965, § 26-6)
Sec. 16-50. Inspection prerequisite for vending machines used to dispense food.
No license to install vending machines for the automatic sale of foods and food
products shall be issued until after the machines and goods which they are to
contain and the premises in which such machines are to be used have been
inspected and approved by the department of health and a permit to procure a
license has been issued by the department of health.
(Code 1965, § 26-7)
Sec. 16-51. Fees for license to peddle from wagon or other vehicle.
The fee to be charged for a license to peddle from a wagon or other vehicle
propelled by mechanical power shall be seventy-five dollars ($75.00) per annum.
For each additional wagon or other vehicle used in and about his business, such
licensee shall pay an annual license fee of seventy-five dollars ($75.00).
(Code 1965, § 26-9)
Sec. 16-52. Fee for ticket dealers.
The fee for a person selling, bartering or exchanging any tickets for games,
shows or sports, or other things of value, shall be twenty-five dollars
($25.00) per annum. (Code 1965, § 26-10)
Sec. 16-53. Photographs; approval of police department prerequisite to granting
of license.
Every peddler shall be required to furnish two (2) satisfactory photos, size
one (1) inch by two and one-half (2 1/2) inches, of himself at the time the
license is applied for. Before any such license shall be granted, the applicant
therefor shall secure the written approval of the department of police, and one
(1) of the photos of the applicant shall be permanently filed in the records of
the department of police, and the other shall be carried by the applicant at
all times while transacting business in the village; provided, however, that no
wagon peddler shall be required to furnish photos in order to procure a
license.
(Code 1965, § 26-11)
Sec. 16-54. Badge.
Each peddler shall receive from the village, when his license is granted, a
badge bearing the license number, which badge shall be worn and conspicuously
displayed by the peddler on his outer garment at all times while engaged in
business in the village.
(Code 1965, § 26-12)
Sec. 16-55. Revocation.
Any license may be revoked by the village president for violation by the holder
thereof of any of the ordinances of the village or of any state or federal law
or whenever it appears that such licensee is guilty of either fraud or
misrepresentation under section
16-31. (Code 1965, § 26-17)
Secs. 16-56—16-75. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. SOLICITATION GENERALLY
Sec. 16-76. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
   Soliciting shall mean and include any one (1) or more of the following
activities:
      (1) Seeking to obtain orders for the purchase of goods, wares,
merchandise, foodstuffs, services of any kind, character or description
whatever, for any kind of consideration whatever.
      (2)   Seeking to obtain prospective customers for application or purchase
of insurance of any type, kind or character.
      (3)   Seeking to obtain subscriptions to books, magazines, periodicals,
newspapers and every other type or kind of publication.
      (4)   Seeking to obtain gifts or contributions of money, clothing or any
other valuable thing for the support or benefit of any religious, charitable or
nonprofit association, organization, corporation or project.
   Solicitor shall mean any person who engages in the activity of soliciting.
(Code 1965, § 26-50)
   Cross reference—Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.
Sec. 16-77. Village policy.
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the board of trustees that the
occupants of the residences in this village shall make the determination of
whether solicitors shall be, or shall not be, invited to their respective
residences.
(Code 1965, § 26-51)
Sec. 16-78. Notice regulating.
Every person desiring to secure the protection intended to be provided by this
article shall comply with this section. Notice of the determination by the
occupant of giving invitation to solicitors, or the refusal of invitation to
solicitors, to any residence, shall be given in the manner following:
      (1)   A weatherproof card, approximately two (2) inches by four (4)
inches in size, shall be exhibited upon or near the main entrance door to the
residence, indicating the determination by the occupant, containing the words:
"NO SOLICITORS."
      (2)   The letters shall be at least one-half inch in height. For the
purpose of uniformity, the cards shall be provided by the village clerk to
persons requesting, at the cost thereof.
      (3)   Such card so exhibited shall constitute sufficient notice to any
solicitor of the determination by the occupant of the residence of the
information contained thereon.
(Code 1965, § 26-52)
Sec. 16-79. Duty of solicitor to examine notice; depart when requested.
   (a)   It shall be the duty of every solicitor upon going into any premises
in the village upon which a residence is located to first examine the notice
provided for in section
16-78 if any is attached, and be governed by the statement contained on the
notice. If the notice states "no solicitors invited" or "no solicitors," then
the solicitor, whether registered or not, shall immediately and peacefully
depart from the premises.
   (b)   Any solicitor who has gained entrance to any residence, whether
invited or not, shall immediately and peacefully depart from the premises when
requested to do so by the occupant.
(Code 1965, § 26-53)
Sec. 16-80. Uninvited solicitors prohibited; nuisance; trespass.
It is unlawful and shall constitute a trespass and a nuisance for any person to
go upon any premises and ring the doorbell upon or near any door, or create any
sound in any other manner calculated to attract the attention of the occupant
of such residence, for the purpose of securing an audience with the occupant
thereof and engage in soliciting as herein defined, in defiance of the notice
exhibited at the residence in accordance with the provisions of section
16-78.
(Code 1965, § 26-54)
Sec. 16-81. Time restrictions.
All solicitors shall be governed by the time restriction set forth in section
16-101. (Code 1965, § 26-55)
Secs. 16-82—16-100. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. COMMERCIAL SOLICITORS AND CANVASSERS
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 16-101. Times when allowed; where operations allowed; penalty.
No person shall solicit or canvass, with or without a permit, except during the
hours of 11:00 a.m. through 7:00 p.m. on Monday through Friday, and during the
hours of 11:00 a.m. through 6:00 p.m. on Saturday. No soliciting or canvassing
is permitted anytime on a Sunday or a state holiday. All canvassing and
soliciting shall be carried on only at the front entrance of the premises.
(Code 1965, § 26-31(a)) (Ord. No. 29-2008 § 1, 12-15-08)
Sec. 16-102. Consent of occupants necessary to enter or remain on premises.
It shall be unlawful to enter any residential premises, or to remain therein,
for the purpose of selling or taking orders for any commodity or service or for
soliciting contributions or memberships of any nature, without the express or
implied consent of the occupant of such premises.
(Code 1965, § 26-26)
Sec. 16-103. Persons afflicted with contagious disease not to act as solicitors
or canvassers.
No person afflicted with, or a carrier of, any epidemic or contagious disease
shall act as solicitor or canvasser within the village.
(Code 1965, § 26-27)
Secs. 16-104—16-115. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. PERMIT
Sec. 16-116. Registration, permit required; scope of permit.
It shall be unlawful for any person to go in or upon any private residence,
apartment or premises in the village for the purpose of soliciting from the
occupants thereof, or to canvass orders for future delivery of goods, wares,
merchandise or services to be performed of any kind, character or description,
or for the purpose of offering to give or furnish or giving or furnishing any
goods, wares, merchandise or services to any such occupants to induce or invite
such orders, whether or not such person has, carries or exposes for sale a
sample of the subject of such sale, or whether he is collecting advance payment
on such sales or not and, further, whether or not such person for himself, or
for another person hires, leases, uses or occupies any building, structure,
tent, motel room, lodginghouse, apartment, shop, or any other place within the
village for the sole purpose of exhibiting samples or taking orders for future
delivery, without having first registered and applied for and received from the
chief of police a permit to do so. Only one (1) person shall solicit or canvass
under the terms of any permit provided for in this division, and no other
person shall solicit or canvass under the same permit as copartner, agent or
otherwise.
(Code 1965, § 26-20)
Sec. 16-117. Application.
Any person desiring to obtain such permit shall, prior to engaging in such
activity, register and make application therefor, over his signature, in
writing under oath to the chief of police on a form provided by the village in
which he shall give the following information:
      (1)   Name and address.
      (2)   The name and address or the person by whom he is employed or with
whom he is associated.
      (3)   The length of such employment or association.
      (4)   The place of residence and nature of employment of registrant
during the preceding twelve (12) months.
      (5)   The nature of the commodities, articles or services registrant is
selling or offering for sale or the purpose for which such registrant purposes
to canvass in the village.
      (6)   An estimate of the length of time and a statement of the part of
the village in which registrant will pursue his activities.
      (7)   The names and addresses of three (3) persons who have known
registrant for at least one (1) year and from whom registrant is willing that
inquiry be made to verify the facts stated by him.
      (8)   The personal description and complete identification of registrant
together with marks of physical identification, if any.
      (9)   The date or dates when he last engaged in activity as solicitor or
canvasser within the village, including the name and address of the person by
whom he was employed or with whom he was associated during such activity within
the village.
(Code 1965, § 26-21)
Sec. 16-118. Applicant to furnish evidence of character, photographs,
fingerprints, bond.
The application for a permit under this division shall be accompanied by such
credentials and other evidence of the good moral character and identity of the
applicant as may be reasonably required by the chief of police. In addition
thereto, such applicant shall furnish two (2) satisfactory photographs, size
one (1) inch by two and one-half (2'12) inches, of himself at the time the
permit is granted, and shall also furnish his fingerprints to the police
department at the time registration and application is made for the permit; and
such application shall be accompanied by a bond in the penal sum of five
hundred dollars ($500.00), executed by a surety company or by two (2)
responsible freeholders residing within the village, conditioned that all
goods, wares, merchandise or articles sold by such applicant shall be as
represented by him and that he will refund the purchase price of any goods,
wares, merchandise or articles sold by him which are not as represented. Any
person aggrieved by the action of any such applicant shall have the right of
action on the bond for the recovery of the money or damages or both.
(Code 1965, § 26-22)
Sec. 16-119. Verification of registration.
The chief of police shall promptly cause to be made such verification of the
facts stated by the registrant as the circumstances require, and shall complete
such verification in not more than fourteen (14) days after the filing of the
registration statement.
(Code 1965, § 26-23)
Sec. 16-120. Waiting period after registration.
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage as a solicitor or canvasser
within the village until a period of fourteen (14) days has elapsed from the
date on which he has registered and furnished the information required by this
article, unless prior to the expiration of such fourteen-day period the chief
of police advised the registrant that the facts stated by him in compliance
with the registration requirements in this division shall have been
sufficiently verified.
(Code 1965, § 26-24)
Sec. 16-121. Fee; expiration.
Before a permit shall be issued, the applicant shall pay to the Village Clerk a
permit fee of fifty dollars ($50.00). Each permit shall expire thirty (30) days
after its issuance.
(Code 1965, § 26-33) (Am. Ord. No. 18-2018 §1, 7-16-18)
Sec. 16-122. False information in application.
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage as a solicitor or canvasser
within the village if any of the information furnished by him as required by
this division, which is material to his character and responsibility or to the
activity he proposed to engage in, has been falsely stated.
(Code 1965, § 26-25)
Sec. 16-123. Carrying, exhibition of permit; display of badges.
   (a)   Each permit issued under this division shall be carried at all times
by the applicant to whom issued, when soliciting or canvassing in the village,
and shall be exhibited by such applicant whenever he shall be requested so to
do by any police officer or by any person solicited or canvassed.
   (b)   A badge in which the village shall have inserted one (1) of the
photographs furnished by the applicant shall be worn and conspicuously
displayed by the solicitor on his outer garments at all times when engaged in
such activity within the village.
(Code 1965, § 26-28)
Sec. 16-124. Use of photographs.
The chief of police shall file one (1) of the photographs of the applicant
permanently in the records of the police department. The other shall be
inserted in the badge to be furnished by the village, bearing the word
"SOLICITOR," which badge shall be worn by the applicant as hereinbefore
provided.
(Code 1965, § 26-29)
Sec. 16-125. Assignment, transfer of permit or badge.
Permits or badges issued pursuant to this division shall not be assigned or
transferred, nor shall they be used by any person other than the person to whom
they were issued. (Code 1965, § 26-30)
Sec. 16-126. Revocation.
Any permit issued under this division may be revoked by the mayor or the chief
of police for violation by the holder thereof of any of the ordinances of the
village, or of any state or federal law, or whenever the holder of such permits
shall cease to possess the character and qualifications required by this
division for the issuance of such permit.
(Code 1965, § 26-32)
Secs. 16-127—16-150. Reserved.
ARTICLE V. CHARITABLE SOLICITATIONS
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 16-151. Consent of occupants necessary to enter or remain on premises.
It shall be unlawful to enter any residential premises, or to remain therein,
for the purpose of selling or taking orders for any commodity or service or for
soliciting contributions or memberships of any nature, without the express or
implied consent of the occupant of such premises.
(Code 1965, § 26-43)
Sec. 16-152. Solicitation on highways.
   (a)   No person shall stand on a highway within the village for the purpose
of soliciting contributions from the occupant of any vehicle except as
specifically provided by this article. Solicitation on highways within the
village shall be allowed only at intersections where all traffic is required to
come to a full stop. In addition, the soliciting agency shall be:
      (1)   Registered with the attorney general as a charitable organization
as provided by the Solicitation for Charity Act [225 ILCS 46010.01 et seq.], as
amended.
      (2)   Engaged in a statewide fundraising activity.
      (3)   Liable for any injuries to any person or property during the
solicitation which is casually related to an act of ordinary negligence of the
soliciting agent.
   (b)   Any person engaged in the act of solicitation as provided in this
article shall be sixteen (16) years of age or more and shall be wearing a
highly visible vest. No person shall stand on or in the proximity of a highway
for the purpose of soliciting the watching or guarding of a vehicle while
parked or about to be parked on a highway.
(Code 1965, § 26-35(b))
Secs. 16-153—16-170. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. PERMIT
Sec. 16-171. Required.
No persons shall solicit funds from the general public upon the street,
sidewalk or public ways of the village, unless such solicitation is for a
charitable, civic, education or religious purpose which will serve or benefit
the entire village, and a permit has been issued by the village clerk
authorizing such solicitation.
(Code 1965, § 26-35(a))
Sec. 16-172. Application required by this division.
   (a)   An application for a permit required by this division shall be made
upon forms provided by the village. Such application shall be sworn to and
filed with the village clerk at least fifteen (15) days prior to the time for
which the permit is desired, and shall contain the following information, or in
lieu hereof a detailed statement of the reason or reasons why such information
cannot be furnished:
      (1)   The name and address or headquarters of the applicant.
      (2)   If the applicant is not an individual, the names and addresses of
the applicant's principal officers and managers and a copy of the resolution,
if any, authorizing such solicitation, certified to as a true and correct copy
of the original by the officer having charge of applicant's records.
      (3)   A specific statement, supported by reasons and, if available,
figures showing the need for the contributions to be solicited.
      (4)   The names and addresses of the persons by whom the receipts of such
solicitations shall be disbursed.
      (5)   The name and address of the persons who will be in direct charge of
conducting the solicitation and the names of all individuals connected or to be
connected with the proposed solicitation.
      (6)   An outline of the method or methods to be used in conducting the
solicitation and the time when it is desired to make such solicitation.
      (7)   A financial statement of the last preceding solicitation from the
public in the village by the applicant, giving the date of the solicitation,
the amount of money then raised, the expense of the solicitation and the final
distribution thereof.
      (8)   A statement to the effect that if a permit is granted it will not
be used or represented in any way as an endorsement by the village or by any
department or officer thereof.
      (9)   Such other information as might be reasonably required by the mayor
in order for him to determine the kind and character of the proposed
solicitation and whether it is in the interest of, and not inimical to, the
public welfare.
   (b)   If, while any application is then pending, there is any change in
fact, policy or method that would alter the information given in the
application, the applicant shall notify the village clerk in writing thereof
within twenty-four (24) hours after such change.
(Code 1965, § 26-36)
Sec. 16-173. Investigation of applications.
The village clerk shall cause such investigation to be made of the application
and the applicant as he deems necessary in order for him to perform his duties
under this division.
(Code 1965, § 26-37)
Sec. 16-174. Standards for issuance.
The village clerk shall issue a permit whenever he shall find the following
facts to exist:
      (1)   That the purpose for which the solicitation is to be made is a
legitimate charitable, educational, civic or religious one which will affect,
serve or benefit the entire village.
      (2)   That the solicitation from the general public is reasonably
required for the financing of such purpose.
      (3)   That the officers and managers of the applicant and the person who
will be in direct charge of or connected with the solicitation are all
responsible and reliable persons of good character or reputation for honesty
and integrity.
      (4)   That the method and time of the solicitation proposed are
reasonably designed and planned so as not to inconvenience the general public
using the streets, sidewalks and public ways of the village.
      (5)   That neither applicant nor any of its officers, managers or members
connected with the solicitation has engaged in any fraudulent transaction or
enterprise, and that the solicitation will not be a fraud upon the public.
      (6)   That the cost of raising the funds will be reasonable and that the
solicitation is prompted solely by a desire to finance the cause described in
the application and not for any private profit.
      (7)   That the statements made in the application are true.
(Code 1965, § 26-38)
Sec. 16-175. Contents of permit; transferability.
Permits issued under this division shall bear the name and address of the
person by whom the solicitation is to be made, the number of the permit, the
date issued, the date on which the solicitation is permitted, and a statement
that the permit does not constitute an endorsement by the village or by any of
its departments, officers or employees of the purpose or of the person
conducting the solicitation. All permits must be signed by the village clerk.
They shall be nontransferable.
(Code 1965, § 26-40)
Sec. 16-176. Credentials; solicitation for persons without permit.
   (a)   All persons to whom permits have been issued under this division shall
furnish proper credentials to their agents and solicitors for such
solicitation. Such credentials shall include the name of the permit holder, the
date, a statement describing the holder's charitable activity, a description of
the purpose of the solicitation, the signature of the permit holder or the
holder's chief executive officer, and the name, address, age, sex and signature
of the solicitor to whom such credentials are issued and the specific period of
time during which such solicitors are authorized to solicit on behalf of the
permit holder. A copy of such proposed credentials must be approved by the
village clerk as conforming to the requirements of this section before such
permit is issued. No person shall solicit under any permit granted hereunder
without the credentials required by this section and a facsimile copy of such
permit in his possession. Such credentials and facsimile copy of the permit
must be shown upon request to all persons solicited and to any police officer
of the village.
   (b)   No agent of a solicitor shall solicit contributions for any
charitable, civic, educational or religious purpose for any person in the
village unless such person has been granted a permit under the provisions of
this division.
(Code 1965, § 26-41)
ARTICLE VI. NON-SOLICITATION
Sec. 16-180. Definitions.
The following words shall have the meanings ascribed to them for the purposes
of this Article:
   (a)   Occupant means any person who lives, dwells, or resides at any real
estate. It shall be sufficient for purposes of this article that one occupant
of any real estate take an action, and nothing herein shall require or imply
that all occupants of any real estate must take an action.
   (b)   Owner means any person having any legal or equitable title to all or a
portion of any real estate. It shall be sufficient for purposes of this article
that one owner of any real estate take an action, and nothing herein shall
require or imply that all owners of any real estate must take an action.
   (c)   Person has the meaning ascribed to it in the Criminal Code of 1961, as
amended (720 ILCS 5/1-1 et seq.).
   (d)   Real Estate has the meaning ascribed to it in the Real Estate License
Act of 1983, as amended (225 ILCS 455/1 et seq.).
   (e)   Solicit means any communication with any owner or occupant of
residential real estate which is carried out by means of:
      (1)   in-person contacts at the real estate; or
      (2)   written material mailed or delivered at the real estate, such as
direct mail, leaflets or pamphlets; or
      (3)   telephonic contacts at the real estate; or
      (4)   electronic mail or other communications transmitted through
telephone lines such as facsimile transmissions and e-mail.
Sec. 16-181. Solicitation Prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit the owner or occupant of any
residential real estate at the residence of the owner or occupant after a non-
solicitation notice has been sent by the Village Clerk and received by that
person. This is an absolute liability offense which means that a person may be
guilty even though not acting with intent, knowledge, recklessness, or
negligence.
Sec. 16-182. Non-solicitation Notice.
Upon the request of any owner or occupant of residential real estate, the
Village Clerk shall prepare a non-solicitation notice advising that
solicitation at a specific residential real estate is prohibited. Such notice
shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the person whose
solicitation the owner or occupant wishes to prohibit. If the certified mail is
returned not delivered, then notice shall be sent by regular mail. A notice
received by any person at the address shall be adequate notice to the person to
whom the notice is addressed.
Chapter 17
PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT
Art. I.   In General, §§ 17-1--17-25
Art. II.   Business District, §§ 17-26--17-50
Art. III.   Condominiums, §§ 17-51--17-69
Art. IV.   Façade improvement program, § 17-70 - 17-73
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 17-1. House numbering.
Each house in the village shall be designated by a house number, which number
shall be visible in the front thereof and be of such size and clarity as to be
easily seen from the curbline of the street. A number shall be assigned to each
house by the building commissioner and shall be determined in accordance with
the numbering system currently prevailing in the City of Chicago, being merely
an extension thereof. The owner of any house or building in the village who
does not ascertain and post his house number in accordance with the provisions
of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
Sec. 17-2. Habitation of trailers and temporary structures; use prohibited;
exceptions.
It shall be unlawful for any person to use, occupy, habitate, operate or
maintain any temporary building, mobile home, house trailer, truck trailer,
trailer, recreational vehicle, prefabricated building, modular building, travel
trailer, motor home, relocatable building, trailer house, or any structure
mounted on wheels or supports or capable of being mounted on wheels or supports
which is movable by its own power or can be transported by another vehicle. The
following exceptions shall not be unlawful:
      (1)   Use for a temporary construction office during the period of actual
construction.
      (2)   Use as a replacement structure for a single-family residence
destroyed or damaged by fire, casualty, or act of God, but not for a period in
excess of one year.
      (3)   Use by a governmental agency or school district.
ARTICLE II. BUSINESS DISTRICTS
Sec. 17-26. Designation.
The Board of Trustees by ordinance may designate an area of the Village as a
business district when it finds and determines that such a designation will
facilitate the development of an area with sound and stable commercial growth
in order to promote the tax base of the Village and the enhancement of
employment opportunities.
Sec. 17-27. Powers.
In carrying out development or redevelopment within a business district, the
Board of Trustees shall have the following powers:
      (1)   To approve a business district plan.
      (2)   To approve all development and redevelopment proposals and
agreements for a business district.
      (3)   To exercise the use of eminent domain for the acquisition of real
and personal property.
      (4)   To acquire, manage, convey or otherwise dispose of real and
personal property.
      (5)   To apply for and accept capital grants and loans from the United
States and the State of Illinois, or any instrumentality of the United States
or the State.
      (6)   To borrow funds, make loans and make grants.
      (7)   To enter into contracts with any public or private agency or
person.
      (8)   To sell, lease, trade or improve real property.
      (9)   To employ all such persons as may be necessary for the planning,
administration and implementation of the business district.
      (10)   To expend such public funds as may be necessary for the planning,
execution and implementation of the business district.
      (11)   To establish procedures for the planning, execution and
implementation of the business district.
      (12)   To establish a tax increment finance district.
      (13)   To provide relocation benefits.
      (14)   To enter into intergovernmental cooperation agreements.
      (15)   To exercise such other powers as deemed necessary as a home rule
unit under Article VII of the Illinois Constitution.
ARTICLE III. CONDOMINIUMS
Sec. 17-51. Definitions.
The definitions in the Condominium Property Act (765 ILCS 605/1, et seq.) apply
to this article.
Sec. 17-52. Applicability.
This article shall apply to all divisions of land or property into residential
and commercial condominium units.
Sec. 17-53. Processing of condominium plat.
A plat for a proposed condominium development shall be processed
administratively and shall not require any public hearing, but shall require
approval of the Mayor and Board of Trustees.
Sec. 17-54. Plat approval, recordation.
No condominium plat shall be recorded without the prior approval of the
village; nor permits issued for the construction or conversion of the same
without such approval. No plat of a condominium shall be recorded without
complying with the requirements of this article.
Sec. 17-55. Condominium development specifications.
All new condominium developments shall comply with the following provisions:
      (1)   No unit in any condominium may be sold or transferred unless a
certificate of inspection has been issued by the Building Commissioner that
such condominium unit with respect to the conversion elements complies with the
provisions of this section. For that purpose, the applicant shall submit "as-
built" drawings of the architect and site development certified by a registered
architect.
      (2)   No certificate of inspection shall be issued, no sale of a unit
shall be made, and no condominium plat approved where the requirements of any
ordinance of the Village concerning any zoning, building, or subdivision
provision are not currently in compliance by the building located on the
property and by the common area.
      (3)   No building or land previously granted a variation to any zoning,
building, or subdivision ordinance shall be converted into condominiums unless
the current requirements of the applicable ordinance are met.
      (4)   All condominiums shall comply with the current regulations,
including open space and parking requirements, for the land use zone in which
they are located. Conversion of an existing building into condominiums shall
not require additional parking spaces to meet the current regulations, provided
that the use of the building is not intensified.
      (5)   All residential condominiums shall contain a minimum storage space
of 320 cubic feet for each efficiency or one-bedroom unit, plus an additional
storage of 160 cubic feet for each additional bedroom. All storage areas are to
be located in other than the condominium unit.
      (6)   A separate gas, electric, and water meter and shutoff valve shall
be provided for each unit. In a residential condominium a common water meter
may be provided for each building. Each unit shall have a separate hot water
heater, furnace and if provided, air conditioning system.
      (7)   All walls, ceilings, and floors separating units shall be
soundproof.
      (8)   Common garbage and trash disposal containers shall be provided in a
location screened from view in an area to avoid a minimum of noise and smell.
Pickup shall be at least twice weekly for all structures containing 12 or more
units.
      (9)   All residential condominium buildings shall provide a recreational
or assembly area of not less than 800 square feet for four units or less and an
additional 100 square feet for each unit over four.
      (10)   The Condominium Property Act (765 ILCS 605/1, et seq.).
The Mayor and Board of Trustees shall have the right to waive any of the above
requirements for new condominium developments.
   For conversion of existing buildings into condominiums, many of the above
requirements will not be physically or economically feasible. The Building
Commissioner shall make a report on compliance with the above specifications,
and the Mayor and Board of Trustees shall have the right to waive any such
requirements.
Sec. 17-56. Common elements.
All condominium associations shall be responsible for traffic and parking
control, snow removal, signing, sewers, water lines, and lighting. The village
shall have the right of easement to enter such common areas for the purpose of
emergency for fire, police, and enforcement of its ordinances and the plat
shall so provide. Such common area shall remain the property of the condominium
and the village shall not accept a dedication of these elements or the
responsibility of maintenance. The association shall maintain the public area
and parkway in a clean condition, free of debris, leaves and trash.
Sec. 17-57. Certificate of inspection.
Once a certificate of inspection has been issued, no new certificate of
inspection need be secured for the resale of any unit for which a certificate
of inspection has been previously issued, or for the sale or resale of any unit
which was originally designed and sold under the Condominium Property Act (766
ILCS 605/1, et seq.) if a certificate of occupancy has been issued with respect
thereto, unless one is requested by an owner of the village.
Secs. 17-58 - 17-69. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. FAÇADE IMPROVEMENT PROGRAM
Sec. 17-70. Façade Improvement Grant Program-95th Street TIF District.
   (a)   A façade improvement grant program is hereby implemented within the
95th Street TIF District to promote the continued use and maintenance of
commercial buildings in the Village and to provide for grants to business
property owners for façade improvements to existing buildings. The façade
improvement grant program shall be administered as follows:
      (1)   Grant Eligibility. To be eligible for a façade improvement grant, a
building must be used in whole or in part for retail or other commercial
purposes. Business property owners, or lessees with a term of not less than 5
years remaining on the lease, must propose to make at least $10,000 in eligible
improvements to be eligible for a façade improvement grant.
      (2)   Limit and Nature of Grant Award.
         (A)   Façade improvement grants will be issued to qualifying
applicants in a maximum amount not greater than 50% of the actual cost of the
eligible improvements, but not to exceed $100,000, as determined by the Mayor.
Façade improvements will only be reimbursed if made to the front of the
building facing 95th Street or to any side of the building the majority of
which is visible from 95th Street. The style and design of any proposed
improvement shall be subject to the approval of the Village.
         (B)   Façade improvement grants shall be in the form of a
reimbursement for such costs already incurred by the owner for the eligible
costs. Prior to receiving reimbursement, the owner must submit to an inspection
by the Building Commissioner of all eligible costs and must provide proof of
paid receipts, contractor and subcontractor sworn statements, and all
applicable lien waivers.
      (3)   Eligible Costs: The following façade improvement costs are eligible
for reimbursement from the façade improvement grant:
         (A)   Installation, repair, and replacement of exterior exit doors to
provide public access, meet current building and fire codes, or improve the
overall appearance of the building;
         (B)   Exterior cleaning of brick or stone;
         (C)   Repair, replacement, or addition of exterior shutters and
awnings, except for backlit or plastic awnings;
         (D)   Repair, replacement, and installation of exterior stairs,
porches, railings, and exit facilities;
         (E)   Tuckpointing or repair of exterior bricks;
         (F)   Repair of windows, frames, sills, glazing, replacement of glass,
and installation of new windows;
         (G)   Repair of cornices in order to replicate the building's original
façade;
         (H)   Repair, installation, replacement, or addition of any other
improvement the Building Commissioner deems appropriate in order to create a
uniformity of appearance throughout the 95th TIF District; or
         (I)   Landscaping and streetscape improvements including, but not
limited to brick pavers, lighting, and furnishings.
      (4)   Ineligible Costs. The following improvement costs are not eligible
for reimbursement from the façade improvement grant:
         (A)   Building permit fees and related costs;
         (B)   Extermination of insects, rodents, vermin and other pests;
         (C)   Title reports and legal fees;
         (D)   Acquisition of land or buildings;
         (E)   Air conditioning and heating facilities;
         (F)   Installation or repair of signs;
         (G)   Architect's fees; or
         (H)   Newly constructed or additions to existing buildings.
(Ord. No. 9-2007 § 1, 2-19-07; Am. Ord. No. 25-2022 § 1, 12-5-22)
Sec. 17-71.   Application; Required Submittals.
   (a)   Property owners shall submit the following application materials:
      (1)   One completed and original application form which shall include:
         (A)   Property owner’s name, address, and contact information;
         (B)   Common address and property identification number;
         (C)   Legal description of subject property;
         (D)   Current use of the property;
         (E)   Improvement information, including, without limitation:
            1.   Contractor information;
            2.   Cost estimate;
            3.   Façade area;
            4.   Requested amount of grant;
            5.   Proposed improvements;
            6.   Copies of the drawings of the proposed work, to scale and
preferably in color; and
            7.   Brief narrative description of the project;
         (F)   Pictures of façade and particular areas to be enhanced; and
         (G)   Proof of ownership of property.
(Ord. No. 9-2007 § 1, 2-19-07)
Sec. 17-72. Approval.
   (a)   The Building Commissioner shall review the application to determine
its completeness with the above requirements. If an application is deemed
complete, he shall submit a report to the Mayor detailing the facts, proposed
improvements, and requested assistance.
   (b)   In the event that the Building Commissioner finds that an application
is incomplete or that the proposed scope of improvements are ineligible or
partially ineligible for reimbursement under the façade improvement grant
program, he shall inform the applicant in writing of any such deficiency.
   (c)    Not later than 45 days after receipt of a completed application the
Building Commissioner shall issue a recommendation to the Mayor with respect to
the approval or denial thereof.
   (d)   The Mayor shall act upon the recommendation within 10 days thereafter
and determine the maximum amount of the façade improvement grant.
   (e)   Provided that the applicant completes all of the proposed façade
improvement work, pays for the same, submits paid contractor invoices, submits
waivers of lien, submits sworn contractor statement, and fulfills all
requirements of the Building Commissioner, the grant amount shall be paid to
the property owner for reimbursement of costs within 180 days after final
approval of the Building Commissioner, provided that there are adequate moneys
in the Special Tax Allocation Fund for the 95th Street TIF District.
(Ord. No. 9-2007 § 1, 2-19-07)
Sec. 17-73.   Repayment of Grant.
   (a)   In the event that the property which is the subject of a façade
improvement grant is sold within four years after payment of the grant, all or
a portion of the façade improvement grant shall be repaid to the Village based
upon the following schedule:
      (1)   Sale within 1 year               100% repayment
      (2)   Sale between 1 year and 2 years         75% repayment
      (3)   Sale between 2 years and 3 years         50% repayment
      (4)   Sale between 3 years and 4 years         25% repayment
      (5)   Sale after 4 years               0% repayment
   (b)   Acceptance of a façade improvement grant shall be deemed authority to
the Village to record a memorandum of the required repayment of façade
improvement grant under the provisions of this section.
(Ord. No. 9-2007 § 1, 2-19-07)
Chapter 18
POLICE
Art. I.   In General, §§ 18-1-18-25
Art. II.   Police Department, §§ 18-26-18-75
Art. III.   Auxiliary Police Officers, §§ 18-76-18-100
Art. IV.   Special Police, §§ 18-101-18-104
Art. V.   Part-Time Police, §§ 18-120-18-123
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Secs. 18-1—18-25. Reserved
ARTICLE II. POLICE DEPARTMENT
Sec. 18-26. Created.
The police department of the village is hereby created and shall consist of
such officers and employees as determined by the mayor and board of trustees.
Sec. 18-27. Police personnel.
   (a)   The classified service ranks and maximum number of full-time sworn
police officers in each rank is established as:
      Sergeant (17) including the Chief of Police, 2 Deputy Chiefs, 3 Captains,
and 7 Lieutenants)
      Patrol Officer (46)
   (b)   The number of personnel shown in (a) above are the maximum and not the
minimum number required to be employed. In the event that a person leaves the
services of the Police Department or is promoted, a vacancy shall not exist in
any rank, and no employee shall be hired or promoted, until such time as the
Mayor and Board of Trustees authorize the vacancy to be filled.
(Ord. No. 19-2008, § 1, 6-16-08; Am. Ord. No. 31-2008, § 1, 12-15-08; Am. Ord.
No. 19-2009, § 1, 9-8-09; Am. Ord. No. 11-2010, § 1, 8-16-10; Am. Ord. No. 10-
2014, § 1, 4-7-14)
Sec. 18-28. Village officials designated special police officers.
The following officials of the village are hereby designated as special police
officers: mayor, trustees, village clerk, village attorney, village prosecutor,
fire chief, building commissioner, health inspector and animal control warden.
Sec. 18-29. Rules, regulations.
The chief of police may adopt rules and regulations to govern the operation and
conduct of the police department.
Sec. 18-30. Removal, discharge and discipline.
   (a)   The chief of police and deputy chief of police are subject to removal,
discharge or discipline by the mayor, which removal, discharge or discipline
shall not be effective if overridden by a majority vote of the board of
trustees.
   (b)   Employees in the rank of sergeant and patrol officer are subject to
removal, discharge or discipline by the chief of police and the board of fire
and police commissioners under the provisions established in this Code.
   (c)   All duty assignments such as captain, lieutenant, detective, juvenile
officer, tactical officer, firearm training officer and arson investigator
shall be made by the Chief of Police. There is no property right in any duty
assignment.
(Am. Ord. No. 31-2008, § 2, 12-15-08; Am. Ord. No. 11-2010, § 2, 8-16-10)
Sec. 18-31. Certification prerequisite to employment.
   (a)   The village hereby elects to participate in the program provided for
in the Illinois Police Training Act [50 ILCS 705/1, et seq.].
   (b)   Before an individual may commence regular employment as a police
officer, he must have been certified by the Illinois Local Government Law
Enforcement Officers Training Board, as having successfully completed an
approved training course as provided in such act.
   (c)   Such basic training must be completed by the trainee within his
probationary period of 12 months.
Sec. 18-32. General duties and powers of police force.
   (a)   The several members of the police force of the village, including the
chief of police, shall devote their time and attention to the discharge of
their duties, according to the sections of this Code and ordinances and the
rules and regulations which the mayor and board of trustees and the board of
fire and police commissioners may adopt and prescribe.
   (b)   It shall be the duty of each member of the police force of the village
to preserve order, peace and quiet, and enforce the law, sections of this Code,
and ordinances throughout the village.
   (c)   It shall be the duty of every police officer to report to the chief of
police at such times and places as he may require, and at all times to obey the
orders and instructions of the chief of police.
(Code 1965, § 23-3)
Sec. 18-33. Intern program.
   (a)   Upon recommendation of the chief of police and approval by the mayor
and board of trustees, from time to time there shall be appointed certain
personnel as law enforcement interns who shall be individuals who are currently
undertaking studies at accredited universities, colleges or technical schools
in law enforcement work, and whose principal place of residence, other than
school residence, shall be the village. It shall be understood, however, that
this residence requirement may be waived by the mayor and board of trustees.
   (b)   The intern personnel shall be appointed for a period not to exceed one
(1) full school semester and shall be assigned to a section or department of
the police department of the village which will enable the intern to come into
contact with the overall facet of police function and police work. It shall be
understood that the term "school semester" shall constitute that period of time
which represents a semester in the school to which the intern has been a full-
time student.
   (c)   Intern personnel shall act as observers only and shall not be allowed
to engage in any police work or functions on behalf of the village. In addition
thereto, such interns shall be no less than eighteen (18) years of age and
shall provide the village with a total hold harmless agreement wherein they
shall hold the village harmless from any and all injuries or liabilities
sustained by them as a result of their internship with the village. In addition
thereto, the hold harmless and indemnification agreement shall further be
secured from the university, college or technical school which the intern is
attending. In addition, such intern personnel shall not receive remuneration
from the village during such internship.
   (d)   Upon completion of their internship, interns shall be given a
certificate of completion of internship together with a qualification report
submitted by their immediate supervisor and the chief of police during the
course of their internship. Such report shall be forwarded by the chief of
police to the university, college or technical school at which the intern is a
student. (Code 1965, § 23-36)
Sec. 18-34. Chief to prescribe uniform and badge.
The chief of police shall, with the consent of the mayor and board of trustees,
prescribe the proper uniform and badge for all regular and special police
officers, and shall make suitable regulations, under which they shall be
required to wear an appropriate uniform and badge, by which they may be known
and designated at all times.
(Code 1965, § 23-5)
Sec. 18-35. Seizure, custody of property.
   (a)   It shall be the duty of all police officers of the village to deliver
to the chief of police all property seized or found by them immediately after
the same shall come into their possession, which property, with the date of
delivery, a description of the same, and the name of the officer, shall be
entered into records to be kept for the purpose by the chief of police.
   (b)   The chief of police shall be the official custodian of all property
coming into the control and possession of the department.
(Code 1965, § 23-12)
Sec. 18-36. Reports by chief.
The chief of police shall make a full and complete report of the activities of
the police department to the village board and the board of fire and police
commissioners annually or as directed from time to time.
(Code 1965, § 23-20)
Secs. 18-37—18-75. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. AUXILIARY POLICE OFFICERS
Sec. 18-76. Appointment; number.
The mayor, with the advice and consent of the board of trustees, may appoint
auxiliary police officers in such number as the corporate authorities shall
from time to time deem necessary. Auxiliary police officers shall not be
conservators of the peace.
(Code 1965, § 23-39) (Ord. No. 36-2006 § 1, 11-20-06)
Sec. 18-77. Status; identification symbols; supervision.
   (a)   Status. Auxiliary police officers shall not be considered to be
members of the regular police department of the village and shall not
supplement members of the regular police department of the village in the
performance of their assigned and normal duties, except as otherwise provided
herein.
   (b)   Identification symbol. Identification symbols worn by the auxiliary
police officers shall be different and distinct from those used by the regular
police department.
   (c)   Supervision. Auxiliary police officers shall at all times during the
performance of their duties shall be subject to the direction and control of
the chief of police of the village. (Code 1965, § 23-40)
Sec. 18-78. Carrying firearms.
Auxiliary police officers shall not carry firearms except with the permission
of the Chief of Police on designated assignments while in uniform, and then
only if such officer has completed the required training promulgated by the
Illinois Law Enforcement Training and Standards Board.
(Code 1965, § 23-41) (Ord. No. 36-2006 § 1, 11-20-06)
Sec. 18-79. Powers and duties.
Auxiliary police officers shall have the following powers and duties when
properly assigned and on duty:
      (1)   To aid or direct traffic.
      (2)   To aid in control of natural or man-made disasters.
      (3)   To aid in case of civil disorder.
      (4)   To aid in crowd control.
      (5)   To assist in the observation and detention of prisoners.
      (6)   To patrol and guard public facilities and grounds.
(Code 1965, § 23-42) (Ord. No. 36-2006 § 1, 11-20-06)
Sec. 18-80. Training; fingerprinting; connection of certain crimes.
   No person shall be hired as an auxiliary police officer who has not been
fingerprinted or who has been convicted of a felony or other crime involving
moral turpitude.
(Code 1965, § 23-43) (Ord. No. 36-2006 § 1, 11-20-06)
Secs. 18-81—18-100. Reserved.
ARTICLE N. SPECIAL POLICE
Sec. 18-101. Appointment; compensation; application.
   (a)   The Chief of Police may, from time to time, appoint as many special
police officers as he shall deem necessary. The Chief of Police shall notify
the Mayor and Board of Trustees of all special police officers so appointed.
Unless the Mayor and Board of Trustees otherwise provide, special police
officers shall serve without compensation.
   (b)   Upon the petition of any person doing business in the village, the
chief may appoint special police officers or watchmen to watch the premises of
such petitioner, whose services shall be paid for by such petitioner and be
without expense to the village.
(Code 1965, § 23-32) (Ord. No. 36-2006 § 1, 11-20-06)
Sec. 18-102. Application of appointee; term; revocation.
   No person shall act as special police officer in the village or as watchman
patrolling or watching any building or buildings upon any public street in the
village, without first presenting application therefor on a form approved by
the department and thereupon receiving an appointment in writing, as such
special police officer or watchman, which appointment shall extend only for
such specific purpose and territory and during such time as shall be therein
limited, but in no case exceeding one (1) year from its date. Every such
appointment shall be revocable at any time by the mayor and board of trustees.
(Code 1965, § 23-33)
Sec. 18-103. Character.
   No person shall be appointed special police officer or watchman who shall
not, at the time of his appointment, furnish satisfactory evidence of
reliability and good moral character. (Code 1965, § 23-34)
Sec. 18-104. Records.
   The chief of police shall keep a full and complete record of all special
police officers appointed under this article and make report thereof to the
president from time to time regarding the expiration of such appointments.
(Code 1965, § 23-35)
ARTICLE V. PART-TIME POLICE
Sec. 18-120. Employment; compensation.
   The Mayor, with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees, may appoint
part-time police officers pursuant to provisions of this Article. Part-time
police officers shall receive such compensation as authorized by the Board
Trustees. Part-time police officers shall not be employed for more than 1,500
hours in any calendar year. No person shall be employed as a part-time police
officer who has served in the U.S. military unless having been honorably
discharged therefrom.
(Ord. No. 15-2012 § 1, 6-4-12)
Sec. 18-121. Discipline.
   Part-time police officers shall be under the jurisdiction of the Chief of
Police and may be discharged or disciplined at any time without notice, without
hearing, and without cause. Part-time police officers serve at the discretion
of the Board of Trustees, do not have any property rights in employment, and
may be removed by the Board of Trustees at any time. Part-time police officers
shall comply with all applicable rules issued for the Police Department.
Sec. 18-122. Hiring standards.
   Any person employed as a part-time police officer must meet the following
standards:
   (a)   Be of good moral character, of temperate habits, of sound health, and
physically and mentally able to perform assigned duties.
   (b)   Be at least 23 years of age.
   (c)   Maintain residency as required by Section
2-154 of the Evergreen Park Municipal Code.
   (d)   Meet fitness standards established by the Police Officer Wellness
Evaluation Report ("Power Test").
   (e)   Pass a medical examination.
   (f)   Possess a high school diploma or GED certificate.
   (g)   Possess a valid State of Illinois driver's license.
   (h)   Be a citizen of the United States.
   (i)   Not be indebted to the Village or be in default of payment of child
support or alimony pursuant to an order of court.
   (j)   Receive training and be certified as required under the
Intergovernmental Law Enforcement Officer's In-Service Training Act in
accordance with the procedures for part-time police officers established by the
Illinois Law Enforcement Training Standards Board.
   (k)   Not be convicted of any felony or misdemeanor, except those allowed
under 65 ILCS 5/10-2.1-6.
Sec. 18-123. Powers and duties.
   Part-time police officers shall possess powers of a police officer and may
be assigned to the following duties:
   (a)   To aid or direct traffic.
   (b)   To aid the control of disasters.
   (c)   To aid in case of civil disorder.
   (d)   To patrol the parks.
   (e)   To act as security for special events.
   (f)   To promote public safety through meetings with residents/businesses.
   (g)   To enforce non-police ordinances such as building, zoning, and lockup
keeper.
   (h)   To participate in a community relations program.
   (i)   To enforce such laws and ordinances as authorized under the laws of
the State of Illinois.
   Part-time police officers may not supervise or direct full-time police
officers and shall not be used as permanent replacements for permanent full-
time police officers.
Chapter 19
SIGNS
Sec. 19-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Evergreen Park Sign Ordinance."
Sec. 19-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to promote the use of signs in the village which
are safe, aesthetically pleasing, compatible with their surroundings and
legible in the circumstances in which they are seen. This chapter also
recognizes the need for a well-maintained and attractive physical appearance of
the community and the need for adequate business identification for the conduct
of competitive commerce. This chapter is also adopted for the purpose of
reducing sign or advertising distractions which may increase traffic accidents
by distracting driver's attention from the roadway.
Sec. 19-3.   Definitions.
   Terms used in this chapter unless the context otherwise indicates, mean as
follows:
   (a)   Animated Sign means any sign which includes action or motion.
   (b)   Attention-Getting Device includes all of the following: rope lighting,
flexible lighting, series lighting, animated and flashing lights, string
lights, cluster lights, ribbon lights, rotating lights, strobe lights, LED
lights which shine onto pedestrians or vehicles, flags, propeller signs,
spinning signs, streamers, search lights, and other signs on a temporary pole
anchored in or on the ground.
   (c)   Banner Sign means a temporary sign composed of lightweight material
either enclosed or not enclosed in a rigid frame, secured or mounted to an
existing structure.
   (d)   Canopy or Awning means a permanent roof-like shelter which may be
freestanding or extending from part or all of a building face and which is
constructed of durable material such as metal, cloth, glass or plastic.
Lettering must not exceed 20% of the total canopy area and are limited to
placement above windows and doors.
   (e)   Closed Sign means a sign in which more than 50 percent of the entire
area is solid or tightly enclosed or covered.
   (f)   Copy, Changeable or Message Board Sign means a sign on which the copy
changes automatically on a lampbank or through mechanical means, such as
electrical or electronic time and temperature units, or is changed manually in
the field in or upon the surface area of the sign.
   (g)   Directional Sign means a sign which directs or guides persons to an
establishment or to facilities intended to serve the public, including
entrances, exits, restrooms, public telephones, walkways, parking areas, full-
service and self-service gasoline pumps, and similar facilities, but which does
not identify the establishment itself or other goods or services available at
the establishment and does not contain other advertising messages.
   (h)   Flashing Sign means any sign which contains an intermittent, strobe,
running or flashing light source, or which produces the illusion of
intermittent, strobe, running or flashing light.
   (i)   Freestanding Sign means a sign, usually a pole sign, which is
completely supported by one or more posts physically attached to the ground. A
freestanding sign is a type of ground sign.
   (j)   Ground Sign means a sign supported by uprights or braces in or upon
the ground surface.
   (k)   Height means the vertical distance measured from the natural grade at
the base of the sign support to the highest point of the sign.
   (l)   Hologram Sign means a three-dimensional picture that is made on a
photographic film or plate without the use of a camera, that consists of a
pattern of interference produced by a split coherent beam of light and which
for viewing is illuminated with a coherent light from behind.
   (m)   Identification Sign means a sign which states the name of the business
or establishment, including either the national company or local proprietor,
and/or the address of a building.
   (n)   Illuminated Sign means any sign which emanates light either by means
of exposed tubing or lamps on its surface or by means of illumination
transmitted through the sign faces.
   (o)   Indirectly Illuminated Sign means any sign which reflects light from a
source intentionally directed upon it, for example by means of a flood light.
   (p)   Marquee sign means a sign attached to or hung from a marquee, canopy
or other covered structure, projecting from and supported by the building and
extending beyond the building wall.
   (q)   Nameplate means a sign which displays only the name and/or street
address of the occupant.
   (r)   Nonconforming Sign means any sign which was lawfully erected and
maintained prior to the adoption and effective date of this chapter and any
amendments hereto, which fails to conform to all applicable regulations and
restrictions of this Code, or a sign previously deemed to be nonconforming for
which a special permit has been issued.
   (s)   Off-Premises Sign (Off-Site Sign) means any sign that identifies a
business, person, activity, goods, products, services or facilities or that
directs persons to a different location from where the sign is located.
   (t)   On-Premises Sign (On-Site Sign) means any sign that identifies a
business, person, activity, goods, products, services or facilities that is
located on the same premises as the sign itself.
   (u)   Open Sign means a sign in which at least 50 percent of the enclosed
area is uncovered or open to the transmission of wind.
   (v)   Portable Sign means a sign, usually of a temporary nature, not
securely anchored to the ground or to a building or structure and which obtains
some or all of its structural stability with respect to wind or other normally
applied forces by means of its geometry or character.
   (w)   Projecting Sign means a display sign which is attached directly to the
building wall and which extends (usually perpendicular) from the face of the
wall more than 12 inches.
   (x)   Public Sign means a sign of a non-commercial nature and in the public
interest, erected by, or on the order of, a public officer in the performance
of a public duty, such as official signs and notices of any public or
governmental agency, or erected by or on the order of a court or public
officer, including official traffic signs authorized by the Illinois Compiled
Statutes or the Illinois Vehicle Code.
   (y)   Public Right-of-Way width means any dedicated street, alley or public
property.
   (z)   Roof Sign means a sign which is erected on the roof of the building.
   (aa)   Sight Triangle means the area of the corner lot closest to the
intersection which is kept free of visual impairment to allow full view of both
pedestrian and vehicular traffic. Marked by a point at which the two curb lines
intersect, measuring back 15 feet on each street front, and drawing a line
across the two back points to form a triangulated area. Only public signs, sign
poles less than 12 inches in diameter and signs higher than 10 feet may be
installed in this area.
   (bb)   Sign means any object, device, display or structure, or part thereof,
which is used primarily to advertise, identify, display or direct or attract
attention to an object, person, establishment, product, service, event or
location by any means including, without limitation, words, letters, figures,
designs, symbols, fixtures, colors, motion, illumination or projected images,
visible beyond the boundaries of the lot or parcel on which they are situated
or visible from any public thoroughfare or right of way. This includes, but is
not limited to, wall signs, freestanding signs, ground signs, window signs,
awning or canopy signs, marquees, changeable copy signs, message boards,
illuminated signs, moving signs, temporary signs, portable signs, pennants,
banners, streamers or any other attention-getting device, flag, or other
display, whether affixed to a building or erected elsewhere on the premises.
The term "sign" excludes those features of a building which are an integral
part of the building's design and structure.
   (cc)   Sign Area means the entire area of all sign faces, cumulatively,
including sign faces on which no copy is currently displayed.
   (dd)   Sign Face means that part of the sign which is or can be used to
identify, to advertise, to communicate information, or for visual
representation which attracts the attention of the public for any purpose. This
shall include any background material, panel, trim, color, and direct or self-
illumination that differentiates the sign from the building, structure,
backdrop surface, or object upon or against which it is placed. This shall not
include any portion of the support structure for the sign, provided that no
message, symbol, or any part of the aforementioned sign face criteria is placed
on or designed as part of the support structure.
   (ee)   Temporary Sign means a sign constructed of cloth, fabric or other
lightweight temporary material with or without a structural frame intended for
a limited period of display; including decoration displays for holidays or
public demonstrations.
   (ff)   Wall Sign means a sign which is painted on or directly attached to
the surface of a building wall and which extends not more than 12 inches from
the face of the wall, the face of the sign being substantially parallel to the
face of the building wall.
   (gg)   Window Sign means a sign that is installed inside, painted upon or
placed against a window for purposes of viewing from outside the premises, not
including merchandise located in a window display.
(Am. Ord. No. 23-2024 § 1, 8-19-24)
Sec. 19-4. Standards.
   (a)   Physical standards such as sign height and area contained herein are
to be construed as maximum standards.
   (b)   No sign can be located or maintained in any required parking area or
parking aisle.
   (c)   It is unlawful for any person to erect, construct, enlarge, move or
convert any sign in the village, or cause the same to be done, without first
obtaining any required sign permit from the building commissioner. No new sign
permit is required for signs which have previously been issued valid permits
and which conform with the requirements of this chapter on July 1, 1995 unless
the sign is hereafter permanently altered, relocated, or reinstalled. Every
sign permit issued shall become null and void if installation is not commenced
and completed within 180 days from the date of such permit.
Sec. 19-5. Permission of property owner.
No person shall erect, construct or maintain any sign upon any property,
structure or building without the prior written consent of the owner or person
entitled to possession of the property, structure or building, or authorized
representative. The written consent must accompany the application for a sign
permit.
Sec. 19-6. Sign permit application.
Application for a sign permit shall be made in writing on a form furnished by
the building commissioner, accompanied by the applicable fee and shall be
accompanied by the following information:
   (a)   A plat of survey showing the location of the sign.
   (b)   Two sets of plans and specifications showing the method of
construction and attachment of the sign. Plans must be signed and sealed by an
Illinois licensed structural engineer or an Illinois licensed architect.
   (c)   Written consent of the owner or lessee of the property and evidence of
ownership or leasehold interest.
   (d)   A current village contractor's license.
   (e)   An electrical permit if the sign is illuminated or uses electricity.
   (f)   Liability insurance with combined limits of not less than $500,000.
Permits shall be issued for the life of the sign, or any shorter period as
stated on the approved permit application by the building commissioner.
However, any permit may be revoked at any time by the building commissioner
upon finding that the sign violates any provision of this chapter or that the
permittee made false representations in securing the sign permit. No fee which
the permittee paid for the permit shall be refunded when a permit is revoked.
Sec. 19-7. Sign permit fees.
The permit fee for a sign shall be equal to 2% of the total cost of
construction of the sign plus any applicable electrical fees, but in no event
shall the permit fee be less than $100.00.
Sec. 19-8. Signs over public right-of-way.
   (a)   Projecting Signs. A projecting sign may be located over the public
right-of-way provided that the bottom edge of the sign is at least 10 feet
above the ground level and that the sign does not extend beyond a vertical
plane which is 2 feet inside of the curb line. A projecting sign extending over
the public right-of-way must have a face which is perpendicular to the building
to which it is attached.
   (b)   Freestanding Signs. A freestanding sign may be located over the public
right-of-way provided that the bottom edge of the sign is at least 10 feet
above the ground level and that the sign does not extend beyond a vertical
plane which is 2 feet inside of the curb line. A freestanding sign will not be
allowed to extend over the public right-of-way where there is adequate room on
the property such that the freestanding sign could be completely constructed on
private property.
   (c)   Canopy Signs or Awning Signs. A canopy or awning sign may be located
over the public right-of-way provided that the bottom edge of the sign is at
least eight feet above the ground level and that the sign does not extend
beyond a vertical plane which is 3 feet from the face of the building on which
it is constructed.
   (d)   Wall Signs. A wall sign may not extend over the public right-of-way.
Sec. 19-9. General construction and maintenance standards.
All signs shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with the following
limitations and requirements:
   (a)   BOCA Code. All signs shall be constructed in accordance with the
minimum requirements of Section 3102.0 of the BOCA National Building Code.
   (b)   Electrical Code. All signs which are illuminated or contain any
electrical parts shall be constructed in accordance with the electrical code of
the village.
   (c)   Access to Building and Roof No sign shall be erected so as to prevent
free ingress to or egress from any door or window, or any other point of access
into a building nor shall any sign be erected so as to impair access to the
roof of a building.
   (d)   Glass. All glass that is part of a sign shall be safety glass.
   (e)   Maintenance. Each sign shall painted and maintained as necessary to
prevent rusting, rotting, illegibility, or other deterioration. All broken or
missing parts shall be promptly replaced. All seams between panels or the
components of the sign shall be maintained in a closed condition.
   (f)   External Lighting. Any external lighting of signs shall be directed
away from the public right-of-way and from adjoining property.
   (g)   Identification. Every sign, other than a temporary sign, shall have
identification by name and telephone number of the company constructing and
maintaining such sign marked thereon.
Sec. 19-10 . Appearance standards.
All sign designs and lettering shall be approved by the building commissioner
to meet the following standards:
   (a)   Every sign shall have appropriate scale and proportion in its design
and in its visual relationship to buildings and surroundings.
   (b)   Every sign shall be designed as an integral architectural element of
the building, structure, or site to which it principally relates.
   (c)   The colors, materials, and lighting of every sign shall be harmonious
with the building, structure or site to which it principally relates. Opaque
backgrounds with illuminated lettering shall be preferred for internally
illuminated signs.
   (d)   The number of graphic elements on a sign shall be held to the minimum
needed to convey the sign's major message and shall be composed in proportion
to the area of the sign face.
   (e)   Each sign shall be compatible with signs on adjoining and neighboring
premises and shall not unreasonably obstruct the view of existing signs.
   (f)   Identification signs of a prototype design and corporation logos shall
conform to the appearance criteria required for all other signs.
Once a sign design and lettering has been approved by the building
commissioner, that sign shall be deemed to meet the provisions of this Section
unless its design and lettering is changed.
Sec. 19-11. Setback requirements.
The minimum setback requirements for all freestanding signs shall be as
follows:
   (a)   The minimum setback for the pole or support of the sign from the
right-of-way property line shall be one foot.
   (b)   Signs shall not be permitted in parkways.
   (c)   No signs may be permitted within a sight triangle, except for safety-
related signs.
Sec. 19-12. Prohibited signs.
   Except as specifically provided otherwise in this Chapter, the following
signs and displays shall be strictly prohibited throughout the Village:
   (a)   Portable signs except for new businesses for a maximum of 30 days.
   (b)   Signs which are painted directly onto any exterior wall of any
building or other structure.
   (c)   Signs in public rights of way which are not public signs or located on
permitted bus shelters.
   (d)   Attention-Getting Signs. Provided that Christmas lights and ornaments
shall be permitted during the period from Thanksgiving through ensuing January
15 and provided that holiday-themed and holy day-themed lights and displays are
allowed on the holiday and two days prior to and after the holiday.
   (e)   Signs attached to trees, fences, public utility poles, standpipes,
gutter drains or fire escapes, other than warning signs issued by government
officials or public utilities.
   (f)   Abandoned or defunct signs, including the posts or other supports
therefor, that advertise or identify an activity, business product or service
that is no longer conducted or available on the premises where such sign is
located. The property owner shall remove said sign within 30 days of
notification by the Building Department.
   (g)   Signs which move, rotate, change position, have moving parts, or
create the illusion of movement, whether the movement is caused by the wind or
mechanically, except for the rotation of barber poles and permissible
changeable copy signs.
   (h)   Hazardous signs. No signs shall be erected, relocated or maintained so
as to prevent free ingress or access from any door, window, fire escape,
driveway or utility lines.
   (i)   "A" frame, sandwich board, sidewalk or curb signs on the public right-
of-way.
   (j)   Projection signs which are suspended from or supported by a wall,
awning or canopy and which are approximately perpendicular thereto.
   (k)   Roof signs or any sign erected upon, against or directly above a roof
or on top of or above the parapet of a building, whichever forms the top line
of the building silhouette.
   (l)   Hologram signs which project off-site.
   (m)   Signs which contain advertising matter which is untruthful.
   (n)   Signs which emit an audible sound, odor or visible matter.
   (o)   Signs which by reason of their size, location, movement, content,
coloring or manner of illumination may be confused with or construed to be a
traffic-control sign, signal or device, or the light of an emergency or road
equipment vehicle, except where such sign is accessory to a parking area and
gives directions or instructions to drivers or pedestrians.
   (p)   Signs which hide or interfere with traffic flow or any street sign,
signal or device.
   (q)   Signs or any advertising device attached to or located on a parked
vehicle or trailer on a public right of way, public property or private
property for the basic purpose of providing advertising of products or services
or direct people to a business or activity located on the same or nearby
property or any other premises, except for temporary truckload sale signs.
   (r)   Off-premises (off-site) signs, such as billboards, but excluding
public directional signs.
   (s)   Signs which do not meet the standards of, or which otherwise violate,
the Highway Advertising Control Act of 1971 (225 ILCS 440/1, et seq.)
   (t)   Signs, other than canopy, awning, or marquee signs which project more
than 18 inches over any street, walkway, public way or public easement or
beyond alley lot lines, and which are less than 8 feet above grade.
   (u)   Signs which contain radio or microwave transmitters, or slots or boxes
for the distribution of pamphlets or similar materials.
(Ord. No. 5-2005 § 1, 3-7-05; Am. Ord. No. 23-2024 § 2, 8-19-24)
Sec. 19-13. Signs allowed in all zoning districts with permit.
The following signs shall be allowed in all zoning districts with a sign
permit, subject to any requirements in this chapter:
   (a)   Construction signs. One sign shall be permitted that lists the
building contractors, professional firms and lending institutions on sites
under construction. The sign shall be confined to the site of the construction,
construction shed, or trailer and shall be removed no later than 14 days after
the completion of the project. Construction signs for projects up to 10 acres
shall not exceed 12 square feet per acre, or 40 square feet, whichever is less.
For construction projects exceeding 10 acres, the sign shall not exceed 64
square feet. All construction signs shall be subject to annual review.
   (b)   Real Estate For Sale or Lease Signs Over 6 Square Feet. One temporary
real estate for sale or lease sign, located on the commercial real estate to be
sold or leased, shall be allowed for each lot or parcel. For a tract of
commercial real estate containing one acre or more, signs shall not exceed 40
square feet. For a tract of commercial real estate containing less than one
acre, a sign shall not exceed 6 square feet in area, except for tracts located
on major or minor arterial roads or major collector roads where signs up to 40
square feet are permitted.
   (c)   Not-for-Profit and Religious Signs. Name and informational signs, and
emblems of service clubs, places of worship and not-for-profit identification
signs shall be permitted, but shall not exceed one square foot in area for each
2 feet of lot line and adjoining a street with a maximum of 40 square feet.
Such sign or signs on a corner lot may face each street but the total area
shall not exceed a maximum of 40 feet per sign. Message boards are permitted to
occupy up to 50% of the sign face.
   (d)   Informational Signs for Public, Charitable or Religious Events.
Temporary signs announcing any public, charitable, educational or religious
event, up to a sign area of 40 square feet shall be permitted. Such signs shall
be allowed no more than 21 days prior to the event and must be removed within 7
days after the event.
   (e)   Integral Signs. Names of buildings, dates of erection, monumental
citations and commemorative tablets when carved into stone, concrete, or
similar material or made of bronze, aluminum or other permanent type
construction and made an integral part of the structure shall be permitted.
   (f)   Banners, Pennants and Hot Air Balloons. Banners, pennants and hot air
balloons are permitted for grand openings, sales, and other similar special
events on a temporary basis, for no more than 14 days at a time, and no more
than one time per year.
   (g)   Directional Signs. Directional signs shall be permitted, provided that
no such sign shall have a sign surface area larger than 8 square feet. The
maximum height of such sign shall be 3-1/2 feet.
   (h)   Signs Designating Parking Areas. Signs designating parking areas and
entrances and exits to parking areas, other than parking areas for single
family dwellings are permitted provided that:
      (1)   No more than one such sign shall be permitted that identifies each
parking lot.
      (2)   No more than one sign shall be permitted for each exit or entrance.
      (3)   No such sign shall exceed a sign surface area of 4 square feet.
Sec. 19-14. Signs allowed in all zoning districts without a permit.
The following signs shall be allowed in all zoning districts without a sign
permit, subject to any requirements in this chapter:
   (a)   Changing of the advertising copy or message on an existing approved
painted or printed sign, changeable copy sign or similar approved sign, whether
electrical, illuminated or nonilluminated or painted message, which is
specifically designed for the use of replaceable copy.
   (b)   Painting, repainting, cleaning or other normal maintenance and repair
of a sign (but not involving any structural component or electrical work) for
which a permit has been previously issued, so long as the sign is not otherwise
modified in any way. Replacement of the plastic face will be exempted from the
permit requirement, provide that it is due to breakage or deterioration of the
face.
   (c)   Changes in the content of a window display; window signs and window
promotional signs.
   (d)   Changes in the content of permitted temporary signs.
   (e)   Public signs.
   (f)   Signs painted on or attached to a truck, bus, trailer, or other
vehicle which is used in the normal course of a business which is not primarily
the display of the sign on the vehicle, and which is not parked overnight
visible to a public right-of-way.
   (g)   Tablets, grave markers, headstones, memorial statuary and plagues, or
other remembrances of persons or events which are noncommercial in nature.
   (h)   Any flag, emblem, or insignia of a government or non-commercial
enterprise, provided that it is not larger than 96 square feet and does not
amount to an attention-getting device for commercial purposes.
   (i)   No trespassing signs, warning signs (such as "Beware of Dog"),
notification signs for emergency personnel, and other such signs, provided that
the sign does not exceed 2 square feet in sign surface area and there are no
more than 2 such signs on the lot.
   (j)   Temporary window real estate, personal celebration, special events and
garage sale signs, subject to the following:
      (1)   No such sign shall exceed 6 square feet in sign surface area.
      (2)   No more than 2 temporary signs shall be placed on the property at
any one time, and no more than one temporary sign of a particular type shall be
placed on the property at any one time.
      (3)   No such sign shall be illuminated.
      (4)   The sign shall be erected and maintained in the interior of the
building on the property.
      (5)   The sign shall be erected no earlier than 30 days before, and shall
be removed no later than 7 days after the sale, rental or other event to which
it pertains.
      (6)   A temporary sale erected in connection with a rummage sale or
garage sale shall in no case be erected for a period longer than 3 days.
      (7)   A temporary sign erected in connection with a personal or family
celebration shall in no case be erected for a period longer than one week.
   (k)   Signs for candidates seeking public political office and for
referendum appearing on the ballot at any election shall be permitted up to a
total area of 16 square feet for each zoning lot and shall be located only on
private property. Political campaign signs shall not be displayed more than 30
days prior to and three days after the election for which intended.
   (l)   Signs for a public event at a location in the village conducted by a
unit of government not exceeding 8 square feet located on private property (not
on the public right-of-way and not on utility poles) for a period not earlier
than 10 days before the event nor two days after the event.
Sec. 19-15. Signs allowed in residential zoning districts.
In addition to those signs allowed in Sections 19-13 and 19-14 the following
signs shall be allowed in the "A" Single Family Residential District and "B"
Multi-Family Residential District, subject to any requirements in this chapter:
   (a)   Single Family Residential Nameplates. Two single family residential
name signs not exceeding 2 square feet in each area shall be permitted per
single family dwelling. Such signs shall be allowed on mailboxes, but shall
otherwise be located at least 6 feet from the nearest property line.
   (b)   Street Address Signs. Two street number signs not exceeding 2 square
feet in area shall be permitted in any residential district. Such signs shall
be allowed on mailboxes, and near doorways, but shall otherwise be located at
least 6 feet from the nearest property line.
   (c)   Multi-Family Building Nameplate and Identification Signs. In any
multiple family dwelling in which a rental office is permitted, 1 nameplate
sign and 1 identification sign shall be allowed at each vehicular entrance from
a public right-of-way and at each major public entrance to the dwelling for all
offices in the dwelling. The identification sign shall not exceed 20 square
feet. One residential nameplate sign not exceeding 2 square feet in each area
shall be permitted per dwelling unit. Identification signs shall be located at
least 6 feet from any property line, and the top of the sign shall not be over
5 feet above the ground, whether freestanding or on a building or structure.
The identification sign shall indicate only the name, address, telephone number
and rental information.
   (d)   Identification Signs for Institutional and Other Non-Residential Uses.
No more than 2 such signs per lot, parcel or tract shall be permitted, no more
than one of which shall be a changeable copy sign. The combined surface area of
all such signs on the property shall not exceed 60 square feet in sign surface
area, with no single sign exceeding 30 square feet in sign surface area. The
sign shall be located no closer than 15 feet to any other lot, parcel or tract.
Sec. 19-16. Signs allowed in commercial zoning districts.
In addition to those signs allowed in Sections
19-13 and
19-14 the following signs shall be allowed in "C" Commercial District, subject
to any requirements in this Chapter (including the regulations provided in
Section
19-18 which shall apply to auto dealers and gas stations):
   (a)   Freestanding Identification Signs. The maximum sign face area shall be
1 square foot per 1.5 lineal feet of frontage, up to 100 square feet. One
freestanding identification sign shall be allowed per lot, except for lots with
over 300 feet of frontage on a public right-of-way, which may have up to 2
freestanding signs, and except for corner lots with over 300 feet of frontage
on each public right-of-way or major privately owned circulation road, which
may have up to 1 freestanding sign per frontage, and for developments over
400,000 square feet, which may have 1 freestanding identification sign at each
major entrance. The maximum height of such sign shall be 24 feet provided that
the sign shall not be so low as to obstruct the traffic sight triangle. The
maximum thickness of such sign shall be 2 feet.
   (b)   Wall Signs. One wall sign shall be allowed for each side of the
building, not to exceed a total of 4 wall signs. A wall sign shall not be
permitted on any wall facing a residential structure, if the residential
structure is located within 300 feet thereof. The maximum sign area shall be
7.5% of the area of the first 2 stories of building elevation on which it is
placed, or in the case of a multi-tenant retail commercial building or multi-
owner office condominium, each tenant or owner may have a sign area not to
exceed 7.5% of the area of its leased exterior storefront. Commercial buildings
may have an entrance identification sign on a wall other than specified above,
provided that the entrance identification sign does not exceed 10 square feet
and is located on the wall within 10 feet of the primary public entrance which
leads directly into a lobby or waiting area. Wall signs may not cover any part
of a window or extend above the roof line. Canopy signs are considered wall
signs and: canopies must be opaque; lettering must not exceed 20% of the total
canopy area, subject to the other wall sign area limitations in this Chapter;
and canopies are limited to placement above windows and doors. Movie theaters
may have, as additional signs, attraction board wall signs. The traditional
marquee sign shall be permitted. The wall sign shall extend no further than 18
inches from the wall to which it is attached. Wall signs may not be painted
directly onto the exterior wall surface but must be attached in a metal frame.
   (c)   Window Signs. There shall be no limit to the number of window signs
provided that the total area of all window signs shall not exceed 50% of the
window glass area for that side of the building. Neon lettering shall be
permitted on window signs.
   (d)   Banners. Banners affixed to parking lot light poles shall be allowed
only on light poles bordering or parallel to the street with a maximum of 1 per
30 lineal feet. Banners shall be permitted on interior parking lot light poles.
(Ord. No. 5-2005 § 2, 3-7-05; Am. Ord. No. 2-2007 § 1, 1-2-07)
Sec. 19-17. Signs allowed for automobile dealers and automobile service
stations.
In addition to those signs identified in Sections 19-13 and 19-14 only the
following signs shall be allowed for automobile dealers and automobile service
stations, subject to any requirements in this chapter:
   (a)   Window Signs. There shall be no limit to the number of window signs,
provided however, that the total area of all window signs shall not exceed 50%
of the window glass area, which shall be calculated separately for each side of
the building. Neon lettering shall be permitted on window signs.
   (b)   Service Island Canopy Signs (automobile service stations only). Only 1
canopy sign shall be permitted facing each frontage. The gross surface area of
such sign shall not exceed 20% of the gross surface area of the face of the
canopy to which such sign is to be affixed. Such sign shall not project higher
than the top or below the bottom of the canopy to which such sign is to be
affixed.
   (c)   Service Island Identification Signs (automobile service stations
only). Service island identification signs may be permitted to indicate the
type of service offered, the price of gasoline, and other relevant information
or direction to persons using the automobile service station. However, no
advertising material shall be allowed on such signs. There shall not be more
than 1 service island identification sign for each service or pump island
located on the premises. The gross surface area of such sign shall not exceed 6
square feet for each exposed face nor exceed an aggregate gross surface area of
12 square feet. Such signs may be located adjacent to or within the service or
pump island to which it relates.
Sec. 19-18. Nonconforming signs.
Any sign legally in existence on July 1, 1995 which violates or does not
conform to its provisions shall be removed, altered, or replaced so as to
conform with the provisions of this ordinance by July 1, 2020. An unlawful sign
is not a nonconforming sign.
Sec. 19-19. Variations.
The Building Commissioner shall have the right to grant a variation or a waiver
to any provision of this chapter provided that the public convenience will be
served and where literal enforcement of this chapter will cause undue hardship.
The board of trustees reserves to itself the right to grant a variation or
waiver to any provision of this chapter by formal action at a public meeting.
Sec. 19-20. Real estate signs.
In addition to any sign authorized in all zoning districts without a permit,
the owner of a zoning lot which is in the process of being sold or rented, may
erect one free standing ground sign subject to the following:
   (a)   One sign only (whether a lawn sign or a window sign) per zoning lot is
permitted, such sign to have no more than two faces of information.
   (b)   The sign must be located on the zoning lot which is for sale or rent.
   (c)   Each face of the sign shall not exceed 6 square feet in area. The
maximum size of ground support shall be a 4" x 4" pole.
   (d)   The maximum height of the top of the sign is 5 feet above ground
level.
   (e)   The sign shall be located no closer than 10 feet from any side lot
line or front lot line (if space permits), or the sign shall be erected inside
of a window of the building. No sign may be attached to any building, fence,
tree, or other structure unless the lack of a front yard restricts the
placement of a ground sign, in which event the sign may be attached to the
building.
   (f)   The sign shall be unilluminated and shall not contain any moving
parts, flags, banners, lights, streamers or balloons.
   (g)   The content of the sign shall be limited to an indication that the
property on which the sign is located is for sale or for rent, the name of the
owner or agent thereof (such as, a real estate broker or real estate agent),
and a telephone number for inquiries. Signs indicating "Sold", "Rented" or
other similar phrases are not permitted.
   (h)   A "For Rent" sign shall not be erected unless there is a vacancy in
the property or a lease in the property is being terminated within 31 days
thereof.
   (i)   The sign must be removed within 48 hours after the property has been
sold or the vacancy has been rented.
Chapter 20
SOLID WASTE
Art. I. In General, §§ 20-1-20-30
Art. II. Scavengers; §§ 20-31-20-53
   Div. 1. Generally, §§ 20-31-20-50
   Div. 2. License, §§ 20-51-20-53
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 20-1. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
   Ashes shall mean and include all ashes of wood, coal, coke and residue
resulting from the combustion of any material or substance, and soot, cinders,
slag and charcoal.
   Garbage shall mean and include all wastes resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking and consumption of food and wastes from the handling,
storage and sale of produce.
   Landscape waste means accumulations of grass or shrubbery cuttings, leaves,
tree limbs and other materials accumulated as a result of the care of lawns,
shrubbery, vines and trees. Landscape waste also includes Christmas trees.
   Refuse shall mean and include all combustible trash, including, but not
limited to, paper, cartons, boxes, barrels, wood excelsior, tree branches, yard
trimmings, wood furniture, bedding, noncombustible trash, including, but not
limited to, metals, tin cans, metal furniture, dirt, small quantities of rock
and pieces of concrete, glass, crockery and other mineral waste.
Sec. 20-2. Receptacles required.
It shall be the duty of every owner or any occupant of any house, building flat
or apartment in the village where people reside, board or lodge, or where
animal or vegetable food is prepared or served at all times to furnish and
maintain in good order and repair an adequate number of receptacles or
containers to accommodate the normal accumulation of garbage and refuse.
Plastic bags of not less than twenty (20) gallons' capacity and a thickness of
0.0015 inches (1-1/2 mils) may be used for solid waste generated by residences.
Plastic bags shall not be used by any nonresidential occupancies.
Sec. 20-3. Location of receptacles.
It shall be the responsibility of the property owner or occupant of any house,
building, flat or apartment in the village where people reside to place garbage
and refuse containers at the curb line for collection not earlier than 6:00
p.m. of the day preceding collection day, and to remove empty containers to
their normal place of storage by 8:00 p.m. of the day of collection.
Sec. 20-4. Waste, Landscape Waste and Recycling Service Charge.
   (a)   The service charge for pickup of residential waste, landscape waste
and recyclables from each dwelling unit for single-family and two-family
residences shall be billed per quarterly period as follows:
      (1)   January 1, 2013 to December 31, 2013   $58.62
      (2)   January 1, 2014 to December 31, 2014   $60.51
      (3)   January 1, 2015 to December 31, 2015   $62.46
      (4)   January 1, 2016 to December 31, 2016   $64.50
      (5)   January 1, 2017 to December 31, 2017   $66.60
   (b)   The service charge for pickup of residential waste, landscape waste
and recyclables may be added to the water bill or sewer bill, and it shall be
the joint obligation of the owner of the property and the person receiving the
water or sewer bill to pay the service charge. Delinquent service charges for
the pickup of residential waste, landscape waste and recyclables are subject to
the same late fees charged for past due water and sewer user charges.
   (c)    The failure to pay the appropriate service charge under this section
may result in the village recording a lien against the property where such
service is provided and as set forth in Section
24-135 or Section
24-208 of this Code.
(Ord. No. 4-2005 § 1, 3-21-05; Am. Ord. No. 7-2009 § 1, 2-3-09; Am. Ord. 5-2013
§ 1, 1-22-13; Am. Ord. No. 6-2022, § 1, 4-18-22)
Sec. 20-5. Keeping garbage, etc.; maximum length of time.
It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any slops, swill, garbage, stable
droppings, offal, filth, refuse, animal or vegetable matter which is liable to
become putrid or offensive or injurious to health to remain on any premises
used or occupied by him for a longer period than twelve (12) hours at a time.
This section shall not apply to any such material that is to be placed for
collection by an unauthorized collector.
Sec. 20-6. Disposal of paper goods.
All newspapers, magazines, cartons or paperboard placed for collection must be
bundled, tied or placed in covered containers.
Sec. 20-7. Maintenance of alleys and easement areas; storage of garbage
containers, burners.
It shall be the responsibility of the appropriate property owner or resident to
maintain the alley or easement area free and clear of all refuse, manure,
discarded building material, logs or debris. Garbage and refuse containers used
for alley collection shall be stored at all times at the property line.
Sec. 20-8. Burning of combustible materials prohibited; exception;
incinerators.
No person shall bum or set fire to or cause to be burned or set fire to any
combustible material whatsoever upon any public or private property within the
village unless such material shall be burned within a gas-fired incinerator of
a type bearing underwriter approval and approved by the building commissioner
of the village. Such incinerator to be of a type that reduces all combustible
material to a fine ash and emits no smoke or odor.
Sec. 20-9. Brush and tree trimmings to be cut, bundled.
All brush and tree trimmings, limbs and branches placed for collection shall be
cut into sections of not more than three lineal feet and bundled or tied.
Sec. 20-10. Dumping grass or rubbish on public streets, property of others.
It shall be unlawful for any person to dump or deposit, or cause to be dumped
or deposited, rubbish, any grass, leaves, branches, or any other things in the
roadway, parkway, sidewalk, walkway or gutter of any public street or alley in
the village, or on private property without the consent of the owner. For the
purpose of this section, the term "rubbish" shall mean and include ashes,
garbage, refuse of any kind, tins, bottles, glass containers, unused food
parcels, papers or any other inert material commonly known as litter. Grass,
leaves and branches may be deposited in the public street at the curbline
during scheduled village pickup times.
Sec. 20-11. Wind-blown refuse.
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or leave any refuse or material
in such a place or condition that it can be blown by the wind so as to be
scattered or cause clouds of dust or particles. It shall be unlawful for any
person to permit the escape of soot, ashes or other solid products or results
of combustion so as to be wind-blown or scattered.
Sec. 20-12. Landscape waste, recycling prohibitions.
It shall be unlawful for any person to:
      (1)   Mix landscape waste with any other waste;
      (2)   Dump landscape waste on any property, except that landscape waste
may be spread or composted on the property from which it was collected;
      (3)   Place landscape waste in any container for collection unless that
type of container has been approved by the village;
      (4)   Compost landscape waste within 50 feet of any residential structure
located on another property;
      (5)   Burn any landscape waste;
      (6)   Place landscape waste into a collection container of another
person;
      (7)   Take any material which has been placed in a recycling bin or
container; or
      (8)   Take any newspaper or paper set out for recycling collection.
Sec. 20-13. Residential recyclers.
It shall be unlawful for any person, except under the provisions of a franchise
agreement, to collect or take any material from a recycling bin or container
from the public streets or alleys or by means of any vehicle operated on the
public streets or alleys. The provisions of this section shall not apply to
collection on private property from a commercial building.
Sec. 20-14. Scavenger Service-Required Recycling
   (a)   Every owner of a structure (other than a residential structure for
which the village provides scavenger service) shall provide for collection of
garbage, landscape waste, and recyclables. At a minimum, the recyclables to be
collected shall include glass containers (clear, amber and green), food and
beverage cans (aluminum, steel and tin), plastic containers (Society of
Plastics Industry Code 1-4), and old newspaper.
   (b)   Collection of garbage, landscape waste, and recyclables shall be
provided not less than once a week. Collection of landscape waste is required
only from April 1 through December 1 and only if the owner does not have a
landscape service maintain the property and haul away the landscape waste.
   (c)   It shall be unlawful for any person to supply garbage collection
services (scavenger services) to any such structure unless the owner thereof
has made provision for the collection of landscape waste and recyclables as
required herein. Nothing herein shall be construed to require an owner of a
structure to contract with any specific company for the provision of any
services nor to require that one company provide all of the required services.
ARTICLE II. SCAVENGERS
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 20-31. Definition.
For the purposes of this article, the term "scavenger" shall mean any person
engaged in the removal and disposal of table refuse or animal and vegetable
matter, usually known as garbage, from hotels, restaurants, cafes,
boardinghouses and other places not otherwise provided for by the village; or
the removal and disposal of ashes and cinders; or the removal of offal or
contents of catchbasins; or the removal and disposal of manure, swill or any
animal or vegetable refuse and wastes, including decaying animal matter and
fish from commission houses and other places where such decaying animal matter
and fish may accumulate; or the removal and disposal of refuse which shall be
taken to include all combustible trash, including, but not limited to, paper,
cartons, boxes, barrels, wood excelsior, tree branches, yard trimmings, wood
furniture, bedding; noncombustible trash, including, but not limited to,
metals, tin cans, metal furniture, dirt, small quantities of rock and pieces of
concrete, glass, crockery and other mineral waste.
Sec. 20-32. Enforcement of article.
The building commissioner and the health officer shall enforce the provisions
of this article and shall issue such reasonable orders in connection with the
carrying on of the business of a licensed scavenger as it deems necessary to
protect the health of the public.
Sec. 20-33. Removal by village.
Nothing in this article shall be construed to conflict with any existing or
future provisions of this Code, concerning the removal and disposal of dirt,
filth, litter, garbage, ashes, manure, offal, swill, dead animals, and other
material from the public ways by the village through its contractors or
otherwise.
(Code 1965, § 14-34)
Sec. 20-34. Manner of removing waste matter.
It shall be the duty of every contractor or scavenger, and his agents and
employees, who has contracted or undertaken to remove any diseased or dead
animal, offal, rubbish, garbage, dirt, street-sweepings or other filthy,
offensive or noxious substance, or is engaged in any such removal or in the
loading or unloading of any such substance, to do the same with dispatch and in
every particular in a manner as clean and free from offense and with as little
danger and prejudice to life and health as possible.
(Code 1965, § 14-26)
Sec. 20-35. Disposal of garbage, offal, etc.
The offensive matters described in section
20-31 shall under no circumstances be disposed of in any public dump or public
place within the village, nor in any manner or place other than is prescribed
by the health officer.
(Code 1965, § 14-27)
Sec. 20-36. Identification tag for customers.
   (a)   Every person licensed as a scavenger shall furnish to his customers a
placard, paper or tag, stating the name and address of the licensed scavenger,
preceded by the words "Private scavenger service rendered by," so that upon
demand by the building official, health officer or police officers of the
village, it can be ascertained what scavenger is employed.
   (b)   Upon the termination of any contract for scavenger service, it shall
be the duty of the licensee to remove any placard, paper, or tag which has been
issued to his customer. It shall be unlawful for any licensee to issue any
placard, paper or tag to anyone to whom he is not rendering service. It shall
be unlawful for anyone to display any placard, paper or tag on his premises,
unless he is holding a then existent bona fide contract with the licensee to
receive such service.
(Code 1965, § 14-31)
Sec. 20-37. Equipment, maintenance; leakage of contents.
All equipment used by a scavenger in the course of his business shall be kept
and maintained in good working condition. Such equipment shall be so
constructed and used so as to prevent the spillage or leakage of the contents
thereof onto public or private property in the village.
(Code 1965, § 14-32)
Secs. 20-38-20-50. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. LICENSE
Sec. 20-51. Required; exceptions.
No person shall engage in the business of scavenger, or be permitted to remove
and dispose of swill, offal, table refuse usually known as garbage, or any
other matter enumerated in section
20-31, without first having obtained a license so to do. No license shall be
required of any person for the removal of manure from his own premises. Any
person desiring to gather, remove, or dispose of garbage, decaying animal
matter, and fish, swill, or other animal or vegetable refuse and wastes from
his own premises without the aid of a licensed scavenger may do so only upon
the written permission of the building commissioner or health officer and then
only in the manner specified in such permit.
(Code 1965, § 14-28)
Sec. 20-52. Approval; maximum number issued.
No license for the operation of a scavenger business in the Village shall be
issued except upon the order of the Mayor and Board of Trustees who shall
determine whether or not the public welfare and convenience will be served and
benefitted. There may be issued and renewed under the direction of the Mayor
and Board of Trustees a maximum of twelve (12) scavenger licenses to such
applicants as the public interest requires.
(Code 1965, § 14-29) (Ord. No. 25-2005 § 1, 9-6-05; Am. Ord. 11-2013 § 1, 6-3-
13)
Sec. 20-53. Display.
Each person licensed as a scavenger shall receive from the village clerk, at
the time the license is issued, a copy of his license and a copy for each
vehicle used in the conduct of the business so licensed. Upon demand by the
building commissioner, health officer or police officers of the village, the
driver of such vehicle shall display his license.
(Code 1965, § 14-30)
Chapter 21
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Art. I.   In General, §§ 21-1-21-45
Art. II.   Reserved
Art. III.   Excavations, §§21-71-21-95
Art. IV.   Sidewalk Construction and Repair, §§ 21-96-21-125
Art. V.   Trees and Shrubs, §§ 21-126-21-155
Art. VI.   Vending Machines, §§ 21-156-21-190
Art. VII.   Advertising Benches, §§ 21-191-21-214
Art. VIII.   Sidewalk Assessments, §§ 21-210-21-220
Art. IX.   Standards for the Construction of Facilities in the Rights-of-Way,
§§ 21-221 - 21-249
Art. X.   Curb Cuts and Access to Village Rights-of-Way, §§ 21-250 - 21-253
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 21-1. Jurisdiction and control.
All streets, public alleys and thoroughfares in the village shall be the
property of the village under the control and management of the mayor and board
of trustees. No additional streets or alleys shall be created and no existing
streets or alleys shall be closed without the permission of the village board.
Sec. 21-2. Supervision, enforcement by street superintendent.
All public streets, alleys, sidewalks and other public ways in the village
shall be under the supervision of the superintendent of streets. He shall be
charged with the enforcement of all sections of this Code and ordinance
provisions relating to such public places (except traffic provisions and except
snow removal provisions as provided in section
21-16. Relative to such provisions on snow removal, the building commissioner
shall be responsible for the enforcement of such provisions).
Sec. 21-3. Construction-Permit required; application.
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct or lay any pavement or any
public street, alley or other public way, or to repair the same, without first
having secured a permit therefor. Applications for such permit shall be made to
the village clerk, and shall state the location of the intended pavement or
repair, the extent thereof, and the person who is to do the actual construction
work. No such permit shall be issued except on order of the village board.
Sec. 21-4. Same-Bond.
Each applicant for a permit required by section
21-3 shall file a bond in the amount of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) with
surety to be approved by the village board, conditioned to indemnify the
village for any loss or damage resulting from the work undertaken or the manner
of doing the same.
Sec. 21-5. Same-Specifications.
All street pavements shall be made in conformity with specifications laid down
or approved from time to time by the village board.
Sec. 21-6. Repairs.
All public street, alley and sidewalk pavement shall be kept in good repair.
Such repair work, whether done by the village or by abutting owner, shall be
under the supervision of the superintendent of streets.
See. 21-7.   Public property contiguous to private property-Improvement.
   (a)   The village hereby grants a revocable permission for each citizen to
beautify the portion of land owned by the village and located between his
premises and the adjoining curbline; provided, however, no encumbrance other
than bushes, grass, flowers, trees and decorative rocks shall be established
thereon. Fences, fence posts, wires, and any other type of encumbrance are
strictly prohibited.
   (b)   Such permission shall include all other rights of possession
exercisable against all but the duly appointed or elected representatives of
the village acting in official capacity.
Sec. 21-8. Same-Maintenance.
It shall be the duty of each person residing on property abutting on the
village streets to maintain the area between his lot line and the curbline free
from weeds and other noxious herbage or matter. Any person notified by the
superintendent of streets to remove such offensive matter from the area
fronting upon his place of residence shall be fined in accordance with section
1-9 of this Code for each day such offense continues within seven (7) days
after notification thereof.
Sec. 21-9. Barricades and lights—Required.
   (a)   Any person laying or repairing any pavement on a street, sidewalk or
other public place, or making an excavation in any such place, shall maintain
suitable barricades to prevent injury to any person or vehicle by reason of the
work. Such barricade shall be protected by lights at night.
   (b)   Any defects in any such pavement shall be barricaded to prevent any
such injury. Any person properly maintaining any opening or excavation in any
such place shall guard such opening or excavation while the same remains open
by proper barricades and lights. (Code 1965, § 27-14)
Sec. 21-10. Same—Disturbance.
It shall be unlawful for any person to disturb or interfere with any barricade
or lights lawfully placed to protect or mark any new pavement or excavation or
opening in any public street, alley or sidewalk.
(Code 1965, § 27-15)
Sec. 21-11. Openings.
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct or maintain any opening or
stairway in any public street, sidewalk or alley without a permit from the
board. All such lawfully maintained openings shall be guarded by a suitable
strong cover or a railing, subject to the approval of the superintendent of
streets.
(Code 1965, § 27-21)
Sec. 21-12. Injury to newly constructed pavement.
It shall be unlawful for any person to walk upon or drive any vehicle or animal
upon, or injure any newly laid street or sidewalk pavement while the same is
guarded by a warning sign or barricade, or to knowingly injure any soft, newly
laid pavement.
(Code 1965, § 27-22)
Sec. 21-13. Poles and wires.
It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or maintain any poles or wires on
or over any public street, alley or other public way without having first
secured permission from the board. (Code 1965, § 27-23)
Sec. 21-14. Gasoline pumps, tanks prohibited.
It is unlawful for any person to erect or maintain any gasoline pump or tank in
any public street, alley or sidewalk.
Sec. 21-15. Encroachments.
It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or maintain any building or
structure which encroaches upon any public street, alley or property.
(Code 1965, § 27-17)
Sec. 21-16. Deposit of materials.
It is unlawful for any person to deposit any material on a street or sidewalk.
(Code 1965, §§ 19-23, 27-19, 27-20)
Sec. 21-17. Clear view area.
   (a)   Defined. All residential corner lots shall have a designated clear
view area. This area is defined as the triangular portion of property which
exists when a distance of twelve (12) feet back from the inside walk
intersection in both an east-west and a north-south direction is taken and a
diagonal line through the two (2) points twelve (12) feet back from the inside
sidewalk intersection is made and continues through the public parkway to the
curb. Included in the clear view area is that portion of the public parkway
abutting the two (2) curbs, which make up the right angle portion of such clear
view area.
   (b)   Limitation on height of fences, bushes, shrubs. Within the clear view
area, continuous bushes, shrubs and non-see-through fences shall be limited to
a height of two and one-half (2 1/2) feet.
   (c)   Obstruction declared nuisance; abatement. Within the clear view area,
should any other bushes, shrubs, or trees obstruct the view of motorists, or
existing traffic signs, or in any way be maintained so as to be dangerous to
vehicular or pedestrian traffic at that intersection, such condition, upon
investigation by the building commissioner, shall be declared a nuisance and
shall be abated according to the provision made and provided for under chapter
14 of this Code.
(Code 1965, § 7-108(a)—(c))
Sec. 21-18. Parade permit required.
   (a)   The following terms are defined for the purposes of this section, as
follows:
      Business day means those days in which municipal offices are open for
conducting village business. A business day does not include Saturday, Sunday
or a holiday when the Village Hall is closed.
      Chief of Police means the chief of police.
      On-duty means any village employee, including a police officer, who is
scheduled to work on a specific day or shift as part of the employee's normal
working hours. A village employee is not on-duty if the employee was not
normally scheduled to work on that specific day or shift as part of the
employee's normal working hours, but was called in or scheduled to work on that
specific day or shift due to the demand for additional village personnel or
resources.
      Organization shall include any voluntary association entered into for the
purpose of organizing a parade.
      Parade means any march, procession or other similar activity consisting
of persons, animals, vehicles or things, or any combination thereof, upon any
public street, sidewalk, alley or other public place, which requires a street
closing or otherwise requires authorized village employees to stop or reroute
vehicular traffic because the parade will not or cannot comply with normal and
usual traffic regulations or controls.
      Parade organizer means the person listed on the permit application who is
designated as the responsible planner and on-site manager for the parade.
      Parade unit or unit means one (1) vehicle, one (1) float or one (1)
marching group.
      Person has the same meaning ascribed to that term in section
1-2.
      Traditional parade means a parade that has been conducted on or about a
certain date, on a substantially similar route, and in connection with a
specific holiday or consistent theme, for at least the prior five (5) years.
   (b)   No parade is permitted on any portion of the public way unless a
permit allowing such activity has been obtained from the chief of police. No
parade is permitted on the roadway of 95th Street without permission and
approval from the Illinois Department of Transportation.
   (c)   Except as provided in subsection (i), any person or organization
seeking to obtain a parade permit shall file an application with the chief of
police in the same calendar year as, and not less than fifteen (15) business
days before, the date for which the parade is proposed; provided that if the
requested permit is for a parade to be held in January, the application must be
filed not less than fifteen (15) business days before, and not more than one
year before, the date for which the parade is proposed. The chief of police
shall consider an application for a parade which is filed less than fifteen
(15) business days before the proposed event, where the purpose of such event
is a spontaneous response to a current event, or where other good and
compelling causes are shown.
   (d)   (1)    No person or organization may submit more than one (1)
application for the same parade date and route, or for a parade substantially
similar in theme or units described but requesting an alternate date or route,
whether using the same name, different names, or different affiliations that
the person or organization may control or be a member of.
      (2)   No person or organization may submit an application on behalf of
another person or entity that is also filing a parade application.
      (3)   Where a person or organization submits multiple applications for
the same parade date and route, or for a parade substantially similar in theme
or units described but requesting an alternate date or route, whether by using
one name or multiple names, that person or organization shall not be eligible
for such a permit and shall be in violation of this section.
      (4)   The chief of police is authorized to disregard any such multiple
applications and to deny any permit on the basis of a violation of this
subsection (d). Any applicant who disagrees with the chief of police's actions
hereunder may appeal, in the manner set forth in subsection (l).
   (e)   (1)   An application for a parade permit shall contain the following
information:
         (i)   the name, address, twenty-four (24)-hour contact telephone
number, and, if available the fax number and e-mail address, of the person
signing the application, and the organization with which that person is
affiliated or on whose behalf the person is applying, if applicable. If the
person is signing the application on behalf of an organization, evidence that
the person is authorized to sign the application on behalf of such
organization;
         (ii)   where an organization is involved in requesting a permit, the
name, address, twenty-four (24)-hour contact telephone number, and, if
available, the fax number and e-mail address, of the leaders of the
organization conducting the parade. If the applicant at a later date becomes
affiliated with an organization for purposes of producing a parade, this
information shall be submitted at such time;
         (iii)   the name, address, twenty-four (24)-hour contact telephone
number, and, if available, the fax number and e-mail address of the parade
organizer;
         (iv)   the date of the proposed parade and the hours that it will
begin and end;
         (v)   the location and exact street address of the assembly and
disbanding area, the time when the parade will begin to assemble and disband
and whether a permit has been obtained from the property owner to use the
assembly or disbanding area;
         (vi)   the approximate number of persons and vehicles, floats or other
units to participate in the parade and the basis on which this estimate is
made;
         (vii)   the route along which the parade will proceed and the
sidewalks or lanes of traffic it will occupy;
         (viii)   a list identifying the type and number of all animals that
applicant intends to have at the parade; and
         (ix)   a description of any sound amplification or other equipment
that is on wheels or too large to be carried by one (1) person, and a
description of the size and dimension of any sign, banner or other attention-
getting device that is too large to be carried by one person, to be used in
connection with the parade.
      (2)   As a condition of the permit, the permit holder shall keep all
information current. Any change in required information shall be reported to
the chief of police immediately.
      (3)   The application for a parade permit shall be accompanied by a non-
refundable processing fee of $50.
      (4)   The application shall be in a form and format as prescribed by the
chief of police in rules and regulations. The chief of police is authorized to
disregard any application filed not in compliance with such rules and
regulations and the application shall be returned to the applicant.
   (f)   The chief of police shall investigate the facts set out in the
application, in consultation with the police department, which shall be sent
copies of the application immediately upon receipt. Where the chief of police
determines that additional information on the factors set forth in subsection
(g)(1) - (4) is required, copies of the application and a request for such
information also shall be sent to any appropriate village department or other
governmental agency, including any sister agency. Where the chief of police
determines that any such entities may need to make advance preparations for the
parade, or may have information useful to planning for village services
supporting the event, a copy of the permit or an alternative form of notice
shall be sent to the appropriate village department, and any governmental
agency, including any sister agency, which may be affected by the parade.
Every February 1st the chief of police shall send to the mayor and board of
trustees a list of all parade permits granted which have not previously been
reported.
   (g)   After such investigation, the chief of police shall issue a permit
when the chief of police finds that:
      (1)   The parade will not substantially or unnecessarily interfere with
traffic in the area contiguous to the activity, or that, if the parade will
substantially interfere with such traffic, that there are available at the time
of the proposed parade sufficient village resources to mitigate the disruption;
      (2)   There are available at the time of the parade a sufficient number
of on-duty police officers, or other village employees authorized to regulate
traffic, to police and protect lawful participants in the parade and non-
participants from traffic-related hazards in light of the other demands for
police protection at the time of the proposed parade;
      (3)   The concentration of persons, animals, vehicles or things at the
assembly and disbanding areas and along the parade route will not prevent
proper fire and police protection or ambulance service;
      (4)   The parade will not interfere with the use of the requested area by
another party to whom a valid permit has been issued for the same area or
route, or does not conflict with another application, or with a traditional
parade;
      (5)   The parade will not be conducted for any purpose or in any manner
made unlawful elsewhere in this code or by any other local, state or federal
law; and
      (6)   The application contains sufficient information about the person or
organization applying for the permit, the parade organizer, and the proposed
date, time, location, route and number of participants.
   (h)   Subject to subsection (i), all applications for any parade permit
shall be processed on a first-in-time basis; provided that if there is a
conflict between two or more applications filed, the conflict shall be resolved
as follows:
      (1)   During the first five (5) business days of each calendar year, the
chief of police shall accept all applications for a parade permit filed without
giving priority to applications filed first in time; provided however that for
purposes of calculating the number of days required to take action or provide
notice pursuant to subsection (j), all applications filed within the first five
(5) business days of the calendar year shall be deemed as filed on the fifth
business day of the year.
      (2)   Where there is a conflict between two or more applications filed
during the first five (5) business days, or with an application for a
traditional parade, the chief of police shall first evaluate whether the
conflict could be resolved by assigning the applicants consecutive times on the
same day and route, giving consideration to the criteria set forth in
subsection (g)(1) - (4). If the chief of police finds that consecutive times
are appropriate, the chief of police shall notify each applicant that the
permit shall be granted for the specified alternative time. For those
applicants who are not assigned their requested time period, such notice shall
be treated as a denial and offer of alternative under subsection (k) for
purposes of the five (5)-business day time period in which to file an
acceptance or appeal.
Where consecutive times are not deemed appropriate and the conflict is with an
application for a traditional parade, the traditional parade shall receive the
permit in compliance with subsection (i).
      (3)   With respect to any remaining conflicts among permit applications,
the chief of police shall notify the applicants that the conflict shall be
resolved by lottery, and of the date, time and place of the lottery. Within
seven (7) days after the lottery, the applicants not chosen may submit
alternative preferences to the chief of police. Any requests for alternative
preferences submitted by applicants under this subsection shall be treated as a
new application, for purposes of all time limitations under this section, and
any conflicts arising among the alternative preferences shall be resolved in
accordance with the procedures set forth herein.
      (4)   Applications for a parade permit received during the first five (5)
business days of the calendar year shall be given priority over applications
received thereafter.
   (i)   For purposes of protecting the expectations and enjoyment of the
public, a traditional parade shall be given a preference to continue on the
traditional date and route of the parade. An application for a permit for a
traditional parade shall be filed between the 1st and 15th day of December in
the year prior to which the parade is to be held. Any application for a permit
for a traditional parade filed after such time shall lose the traditional
parade preference and shall be considered as an application for a non-
traditional parade permit and subject to subsection (h).
In addition to any other information required, the chief of police may request
an applicant for a traditional parade permit to provide information or
documentation that the parade for which the permit is requested meets the
criteria for a traditional parade.
Where the prior organizer of a traditional parade has been consistent and is
ascertainable, that person or organization shall be given the preference.
Where there is a dispute regarding which person or organization shall receive
the traditional parade preference for a certain date or route, the traditional
parade which has been in existence longer shall receive the permit.
Where two (2) or more applications are filed purporting to represent the prior
organizer of a traditional parade, or where there have been different
organizers over the past five (5) years, the chief of police may request those
involved to submit documentation to resolve such conflict. Where the chief of
police finds no clear resolution of the conflict, the chief of police shall
conduct a lottery to select the permittee, and shall notify each applicant in
writing by mail, fax or e-mail of the existence of the conflict and of the
date, time and place of the lottery.
Any applicant who disagrees with the chief of police's actions hereunder may
appeal, in the manner as set forth in subsection (l).
   (j)   (1)   The chief of police shall take action upon the application for a
parade permit, and provide notice thereof, for applications filed in January
within ten (10) business days after filing of an application, for all other
applications within seven (7) business days after the filing thereof or, if any
lottery is held, within seven (7) business days of the lottery, except that
where the purpose of such event is a spontaneous response to a current event,
or where other good and compelling cause is shown, the chief of police shall
act within two (2) business days.
      (2)   Notice shall be made in writing by mail, fax, or e-mail directed to
the applicant, stating the facts and conclusions which are the basis for any
denial of the permit and, if the action taken is setting a lottery date or
offering a consecutive time, then describing the conflict among application
requests. If the chief of police denies an application for failure to provide
sufficient information about the proposed route or the estimated number of
participants, he shall specify what additional information must be provided in
a new or amended application.
      (3)   In the event that the chief of police fails to take action within
the time prescribed in subsection (j)(1) after the date upon which the
application was filed, the application shall be deemed approved and the permit
deemed granted as to the time, date, location and route as set forth in the
application.
   (k)   When the chief of police denies an application for a parade permit,
the chief of police shall authorize the conduct of a parade on a date, at a
time, at a location, or over a route different from that named by the
applicant. This alternate permit shall, to the extent practicable, authorize an
event that will have comparable public visibility and a similar route, location
and date to that of the proposed parade. An applicant desiring to accept an
alternate parade permit shall, within five (5) business days after notice of
the action by the chief of police, file a written notice of acceptance with the
chief of police. Where the denial and alternate are based on a conflict between
applications for a parade permit, however, the procedures set forth in
subsection (h) shall apply.
The chief of police is empowered to limit the parade to the sidewalk or to one
or more traffic lanes of the street if it is determined that such limited area
is capable of accommodating the number of parade participants or parade units
anticipated, based upon the information submitted by the applicant and the
experience of previous comparable events, and such limitation shall not be
considered a denial.
   (l)   (1)   Any applicant who believes that his application for a permit is
wrongfully denied may file an appeal with the mayor within five (5) business
days of the date of notice of the chief of police's decision. If no appeal is
filed within five (5) business days of the date of notice of the chief of
police's decision, that decision shall be deemed final.
Upon the filing of such appeal, the mayor shall cause a hearing to be held
within five (5) business days and based upon the evidence contained in the
record of such hearing, either affirm or reverse the decision of the chief of
police.
Any final decision of the mayor shall be subject to judicial review in
accordance with applicable law.
In the event that the mayor fails to act within two (2) business days of the
conclusion of a hearing held under this section, the application for a permit
shall be deemed approved and the permit deemed granted as to the date, time,
location and route as set forth in the application.
      (2)   If there is not sufficient time to file the appeal in accordance
with the procedure set forth in this subsection, the decision by the chief of
police shall be deemed a final decision subject to judicial review in
accordance with applicable law.
   (m)   (1)   At least one (1) week prior to the scheduled parade, the parade
organizer shall submit to the chief of police a line of march, which shall list
all parade units in numerical order, with a description and an estimate of the
size or length of each unit. For any new parade, and for any parade for which
in the prior year the estimate of the number or size of units was substantially
inaccurate, the parade coordinator also shall be required to submit
documentation demonstrating the planned participation of the parade units. At
least one (1) week prior to the scheduled parade, the parade organizer shall
furnish to the chief of police documents demonstrating compliance with the
insurance requirement set forth in this section, if required.
      (2)   Where animals will participate or be involved in the parade, the
parade coordinator must provide: a veterinarian's certificate of good health
for each animal to be used; the name of the attending local veterinarian who
shall provide care for any sick or injured animals; a copy of the handler's
federal exhibitor's license for any animal identified in the Illinois Dangerous
Animal Act; and access to an animal ambulance.
In order to protect the health and safety of the public, village employees are
authorized to inspect animals prior to their use in the parade and to prohibit
the use of any animal found to be diseased or unhealthy, or which poses a
danger to public health and safety.
      (3)   The chief of police may establish in rules and regulations
provisions for the orderly conduct of the parade, including requiring the
parade units to proceed at a reasonable pace.
   (n)   (1)   The parade shall last no longer than two (2) hours and fifteen
(15) minutes, except that where a traditional parade consistently has lasted
longer and the chief of police determines that there is no traffic safety or
undue congestion problem in continuing to allow the longer time period, the
permit may provide for additional hours. The parade permit time may be reduced
by the chief of police after receipt of the parade lineup, where the number and
size of the planned parade units are not sufficient to fill the permit time
while proceeding at a reasonable pace, or may be reduced by the police
department on location, for the same reason, where the actual size and number
of parade units at the lineup are insufficient to require a two (2) hour and
fifteen (15) minute street closing. Once the last unit has started on the
parade route, the department of public works will begin cleaning the street,
and the police department will reopen the street to traffic as street cleaning
is completed. Once the last parade unit has completed the parade route, all
parade participants must disperse from the street so that it may be safely
cleaned and reopened to traffic.
      (2)   Where the parade permit was limited to the sidewalk or one lane of
traffic based on the estimated number of parade participants and parade units,
and in the event that the number of participants in attendance exceeds
anticipated levels, members of the police department are authorized to make
reasonable accommodation to increase the portion of the public way made
available in order to preserve public health and safety.
Alternatively, where the number or size of parade participants or parade units
participating are substantially less than expected, members of the police
department are authorized to limit the available portion of the public way,
where one (1) lane of traffic or the sidewalk is capable of accommodating the
number of participants and parade units present.
   (o)   The chief of police, in consultation with other village departments
and agencies, is authorized to promulgate rules and regulations to implement
this section.
   (p)   It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly interfere with any
person or organization lawfully conducting a parade.
   (q)   Any requirement for an application fee or obtaining insurance provided
for in this section shall be waived by the chief of police if the application
is for an activity protected by the 1st Amendment to the United States
Constitution and the requirement would be so financially burdensome that it
would preclude the applicant from applying for a parade permit for the proposed
activity. An application for a waiver of the application fee or insurance
requirement shall be made on a form prescribed by and contain reasonable proof
acceptable to, the chief of police.
   (r)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this section, or any of
the provisions of the regulations promulgated hereunder, shall be fined not
less than $200 nor more than $1,000, or may be subject to incarceration for up
to ten (10) days, or both. In addition to any other penalty or fine provided,
any person who sells or transfers a permit granted under this section shall be
barred from applying for another such permit for a period of three (3) years.
(Am. Ord. 10-2013 § 1, 5-20-13)
Sec. 21-19. Street and Parkway Repair Specifications.
   (a)   The director of the department of public works is hereby authorized to
promulgate specifications for the repair and installation of any village
street, alley, parkway, sidewalk, or right-of-way. In the event that such
specifications do not provide for a specific requirement for any item, then the
requirements of the Illinois Department of Transportation standard
specifications for road and bridge construction.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person to repair or install any village
street, alley, parkway, sidewalk, or right-of-way in violation of the
applicable specifications.
(Ord. 24-2008 § 1, 9-2-08)
ARTICLE II. RESERVED
ARTICLE III. EXCAVATIONS
Sec. 21-71. Permit required.
It shall be unlawful to open cut, excavate, auger or tunnel in any public
street, alley, sidewalk or other public place without a permit therefor.
Applications for such permits shall be made to the Water Department, and shall
specify the intended location and purpose of the excavation. A permit fee of
$50 shall be paid for each location being open cut, excavated, augured or
tunneled.
Sec. 21-72. Cash bond deposit.
The applicant shall pay for the cost of restoring such street, alley, sidewalk
or other public place and the surface thereof to the condition that existed
before the opening, excavation or tunnel was made. No such permit shall be
issued until the applicant has deposited with the village the sum of $1,000 for
each such opening, excavation or tunnel, which shall be deposited and used by
the village as a bond for the purpose of guaranteeing the restoration. The
applicant shall complete the restoration as soon as possible after notification
to and under the supervision of the Street Department.
Sec. 21-73. Cash bond refund.
In the event that the applicant fails to promptly restore such street, alley,
sidewalk or other public place, the village may use its own employees and
equipment and make reasonable charges therefor, or it may engage the services
of other persons and equipment and charge the cost thereof to the applicant;
plus an additional charge of 50% of the cost of such work for inspections. Any
balance of the deposit remaining after the deduction of such charges or costs
shall be returned to the applicant, and any charges over the deposit, collected
from said applicant. In case the applicant shall restore said street to its
original condition the applicant shall be entitled to the return of the deposit
upon request after one year from the date of restoration. Any deposit not
requested within two years after restoration shall be forfeited to the village.
ARTICLE IV. SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR
Sec. 21-96. Compliance with article provisions.
Except where sidewalks are to be laid in accordance with the provisions of
special assessment or special taxation ordinance, it shall be unlawful for any
person to construct, lay or rebuild any sidewalk on any portion of the public
ways of the village other than in compliance with the specifications
hereinafter prescribed. Each day that such sidewalk shall remain so
constructed, laid or rebuilt in violation of such specifications shall
constitute a separate and distinct offense.
Sec. 21-97. Permit required.
   (a)   No person shall build, rebuild, remove, repair or in any manner
disturb any sidewalk without first having obtained a permit from the village
collector, specifying the work to be done. Any violation of the terms of such
permit shall render the same null and void.
   (b)   It shall be the duty of police officers and the superintendent of
streets to see to it that no such work shall be undertaken, unless a permit
therefor has been obtained.
Sec. 21-98. Establishment of grade.
The grade for sidewalks constructed under this article shall be established by
the village engineer.
Sec. 21-99. Expansion joints.
Expansion joints shall be provided for by leaving a space one-half inch wide
between the walks and the curbs at street and alley returns and spaces one-half
inch wide at intervals of forty (40) feet in the sidewalk proper.
Sec. 21-100. Identifying mark on sidewalk.
   (a)   Before the top or finishing of concrete walks has set, the contractor
or person building the walk shall place in such walk in front of each lot or
parcel of property a stamp or plate giving the name and address of the
contractor or person building the walk and the year in which the work was done.
The top of such plate or stamp, which must not cover more than 54 square inches
of surface, shall be flush and even with the top of the finished walk, and must
be of a permanent character plainly stamped or firmly bedded in the concrete in
such a manner that it cannot become loose or be easily removed or defaced.
   (b)   Wherever one contractor or person has laid walks in front of 3 or more
adjoining lots or parcels of property in one continuous stretch, one of the
above-specified stamps placed in the walk at each end of such stretch of walk
will be sufficient.
ARTICLE V. TREES AND SHRUBS
Sec. 21-126. Tree Preservation.
   (a)   The purpose of this article is to set standards to preserve, protect
and enhance a diminishing natural resource, the portion of the urban forest
that is located on public land and to set standards for our urban forestry
during the development, construction and redevelopment processes. The complete
urban forest is comprised of trees across all land uses and ownership on public
and private land.
   (b)   The intent of this article is to recognize the services and function
that trees provide as a collective asset to the entire community and to state
the goals of the Village with respect to the protection, preservation, care and
planting of trees on public lands and tree preservation standards for
development, construction and re-development.
   (c)   Specific goals of this article are to:
      (1)   Protect, preserve and enhance the quality of life and general
welfare of the Village, its residents and its property owners; and conserve and
enhance the Village's natural, physical and aesthetic environment.
      (2)   Preserve, protect and enhance the urban forest to ensure that trees
are properly planted and maintained within the Village so that trees can
protect, enhance and preserve the quality of life for people within the
Village.
      (3)   Recognize that trees are an integral part of the infrastructure of
the Village and as such should be preserved, protected and cared for as other
critical Village infrastructure.
         (i)   Trees absorb pollution from the air;
         (ii)   Trees absorb and sequester carbon dioxide;
         (iii)   Trees absorb and filter pollution from stormwater run-off;
         (iv)   Trees produce oxygen;
         (v)   Trees reduce flooding;
         (vi)   Trees stabilize soils and reduce erosion;
         (vii)   Trees cool the surrounding area helping to reduce impacts due
to heat islands;
         (viii)   Trees reduce energy consumption by shielding structures from
harsh winds and sun;
         (ix)   Trees provide a buffer and screen against noise, light and
pollution;
         (x)   Trees improve property values;
         (xi)   Trees improve commercial district buyer traffic and purchasing;
         (xii)   Areas with trees have lower crime rates;
         (xiii)   Areas with trees have higher levels of community interaction;
         (xiv)   Trees provide important habitat for birds and other wildlife;
and
         (xv)   Trees protect and enhance our quality of life.
      (4)   Trees provide the Village collective benefits that extend beyond
property boundaries throughout the entire Village.
      (5)   Recognize that larger trees provide larger benefits. When a large
tree is removed and replaced with a smaller tree the benefits and services are
reduced.
      (6)   Recognize that some trees may have a condition that constitutes a
threat, danger or nuisance to the public or property within the Village or may
be dangerous to the health of other trees and vegetation in the Village.
(Ord. No. 07-2025, § 1, 4-21-25)
See. 21-127. Definitions.
   Applicant: An owner of a lot, parcel or tract of land for which an
application has been filed for a permit, subdivision, or any activity requiring
the issuance of a permit. A contractor is an agent, acting on behalf of the
Applicant - the landowner.
   Arborist: Any individual experienced in the profession of forestry or a
related field and is licensed or certified in forestry by an accredited
forestry industry body, e.g. International Society of Arboriculture.
   Buckthorn: An undesirable exotic invasive ornamental shrub introduced to
North America. This species inhabits woodlands and savannas where it dominates
the landscape prohibiting the development of native trees and plants. There are
6 species of buckthorn listed in the Illinois Exotic Weed Act, which prohibits
the sale, distribution or planting of this species, Rhamnus cathartica,
davurica, frangula, argula, utilis, and japonica.
   Building activity area: The portion of a property within which development
activity, including grading, excavation, storage of materials, construction
access and construction of both main buildings and unattached structures.
   Canopy: The upper portion of a tree sometimes called the crown.
   Conservancy or preservation area (easement): An area under legal restriction
within which the following requirements are enforced: (i) all existing
vegetation shall be preserved for the purpose of retaining the natural
character or special environmental state or control; (ii) any area with a
special designation providing screening from adjacent uses or a public or
private street; (iii) no plant material shall be removed from or planted in a
Conservancy or Preservation Area without a permit from the Village authorizing
removal or planting; (iv) Conservancy or Preservation Areas may be established
as part of the subdivision process or through the issuance of a special use
permit; (v) no undesignated structures, including fencing shall be located in a
Conservancy or Preservation Area; (vi) other restrictions as defined on the
plat; and (vii) in all instances the approved language on the plat shall
prevail.
   Cutting: (i) Felling or removal of a tree, or any procedure that results in
the death or substantial destruction of a tree; and (ii) Cutting that does not
include normal pruning or trimming of trees consistent with good forestry
practices.
   Damage: Impact or loss of function to any tree including but not limited to:
removal, root compaction, root removal, girdling, soil contamination, topping,
pruning more than 20% of the trees, canopy removal, bark removal, poisoning and
or/ actions resulting in the decline or death of a tree.
   Deciduous tree: A deciduous tree is one that loses most or all of its leaves
for part of the year.
   Development: Any proposed change in the use or character of land, including,
but not limited to the replacement of any structure or site improvements, e.g.
irrigation installation, driveway replacement, installation of a retaining wall
among others. When appropriate to the context, development may refer to the
receipt or necessity of any building, tree or site work permit.
   Diameter at breast height (DBH): The diameter of the trunk of the tree
measured in inches at a point 4.5 feet above ground line. This forestry
standard measurement is used for established and mature trees and is referred
to as "DBH".
   Environmental professional: A degreed environmental scientist, biologist,
botanist, forester, other similarly degreed and/or licensed plant professional
with at least 5 years' experience in planting and maintaining native plants and
their associated natural ecosystems.
   Evergreen tree: A tree that retains most of its leaves for most of the year.
   Forester: An individual trained and experienced in the profession of
forestry who has a forestry degree from an institution of advanced education.
   Infrastructure: The basic underlying framework or features that provide
collective services, including but not limited to roads, waterlines, storm
sewers, bioswales, and trees.
   Invasive species: An introduced or exotic species that significantly
modifies or disrupts the ecosystem in which it colonizes, e.g. buckthorn.
   Landscape contractor: A company or individual contracted to perform
landscape services.
   Landscaping professional: A registered landscape architect, horticulturalist
or other similarly degreed, experienced and/or licensed plant professional.
   Legacy Tree: A Legacy Tree is a tree identified on the Legacy Tree list and
which has been recorded as such by the Village. Legacy Trees are provided
special protection as outlined in the Legacy Tree Program.
   Natural amenity exception: A landscape and preservation plan intended as a
substitute for the replacement requirements.
   Nuisance trees: Nuisance trees are trees that may provide potential impacts
to other trees, people or structures. This would include, but not be limited
to, diseased, infested, structurally unsound trees or known invasive species.
   Parcel: A single parcel shall mean any lot of record, zoning lot or any
grouping of adjacent lots under single ownership, serving a principal structure
or use.
   Preferred tree list: A listing of tree species, identified in the Urban
Forestry Management Plan.
   Principal structure: The main structure on a lot or parcel in which the
primary permitted use by right occurs.
   Property owner: An individual or organization who owns property located
within the corporate limits of the Village.
   Regulated articles: Any insects at any living stage of development, any
quarantined materials such as wood products including, but not limited to
chips, limbs, lumber, firewood, contaminated soils, or any other product or
means of conveyance which may be determined by Federal or State Departments of
Agriculture to pose a risk of spread of any infestation or infection.
   Significant tree removal: Removal of a Legacy Tree or grouping or stand of
trees.
   Simple tree removal: Removal of a tree without other associated site impacts
or other site improvements.
   Site: That parcel of land for which a permit for landscaping or tree removal
is sought.
   Street tree: Any tree located on or within the public right-of-way or right-
of-way easement.
   Transplanting: The removal of any tree for replanting elsewhere.
   Tree: Any self-supporting woody plant, together with its root system, trunk
and canopy; growing upon the earth usually with one trunk, or a multi-stemmed
trunk system, supporting a definitely formed crown.
   Tree bank: A bank account established to receive and hold deposits for trees
which were damaged and/or removed. These funds, if not returned to the
Applicant, may be used to purchase and care for trees throughout the Village.
   Tree Care Ordinance: Ordinance No. 7-2025 of the Village.
   Tree permit: A written authorization from the Village authorizing the
applicant to conduct work which may or may not impact a tree.
   Tree preservation plan: A document required by a permit which identifies, by
common name and/or scientific name, certain species of trees of a specified DBH
within a particular area. The plan shall list all existing and proposed trees
and shall specifically state how each tree is proposed to be destroyed,
relocated, replaced, preserved at its present location, introduced into the
site from an off-site source, and whether the tree is to receive remediated
actions due to construction impacts, e.g. root pruning. The Village may provide
that the Tree Preservation Plan excludes those portions of the site which it
determines will not be affected by the activity. Any Tree Preservation Plan
must be dated within 36 months of the start date of the proposed activity.
   Tree removal: The cutting down, destruction, removal or relocation of any
tree, including damaging by poison or other direct or indirect action.
   Tree topping: A misunderstood practice to limit the height of trees by
cutting back tree branches especially at the crown's top causing a stubby
appearance, limited proper growth and promoting excessive shoots around the cut
areas which will ultimately weaken the tree branches, cause an abnormal shape
to the tree and possible death of the tree.
   Urban forestry management plan: A detailed plan developed and approved by
the Village under the direction of a certified arborist or forester which
protects this valuable infrastructure and outlines thoughtful strategies for
tree planting, selection, care and preservation for the Village and complies
with recognized national standards.
   Viable: A tree, which in the judgment of the Village, is capable of
sustaining its own life processes, unaided by man, for a reasonable period of
time.
(Ord. No. 07-2025, § 1, 4-21-25)
Sec. 21-128. Preservation.
   (a)   The Village shall retain at least one certified arborist. Any urban
forestry work completed by a contractor within the Village shall be under the
direction of a certified arborist. This individual is responsible for
enforcement and compliance of the Urban Forestry Management Plan.
   (b)   The Village shall complete a public urban forest inventory. The
inventory shall be maintained in a current state. The inventory is updated with
routine maintenance annually.
   (c)   The Village shall have an approved Urban Forestry Management Plan.
This plan shall be the framework for the protection, management and planting of
trees within the Village and shall support and clearly define regulations
identified in the Tree Care Ordinance. This plan may include the following:
      (1)   A defined ten-year urban forestry strategy with clearly identified
one, five, and ten years goals;
      (2)   Community canopy mapping identifying existing tree canopy and
priority locations for planting;
      (3)   A strategy for completion and maintenance of a tree inventory on
public property;
      (4)   Clear guidelines on tree species and age diversity;
      (5)   Clear identification of replacement value and requirements for tree
removal or damage;
      (6)   A preferred tree list.
      (7)   Clearly defined specifications for tree planting, pruning, and
impact reduction;
      (8)   A risk assessment and management program;
      (9)   A legacy tree preservation and protection program including a
legacy tree list;
      (10)   A strategy for management, preservation and protection of
naturalized areas;
      (11)   A strategy for administration and implementation of a volunteer
program;
      (12)   Clear identification of staff qualifications, training, support
and needs;
      (13)   Specifications for contracted labor and consulting;
      (14)   Clear identification of forestry equipment and resource needs; and
      (15)   A forestry budget with one, five and ten year commitments.
   (d)   The Village shall require that any Contractor, working for the Village
who may interact or have impact on the Village public property urban forest
utilize a certified arborist for all work pertaining to trees, including but
not limited to removal, pruning and planting activities. The contractor must
have a current certificate of insurance on file with the Village. This
certificate should evidence workers compensation, automobile and general
liability insurance coverage. Limits will be set by the Village and the Village
should be listed as a certificate holder. The certificate should also state
that the Village shall receive at least 30-days notice of cancellation or non-
renewal of an insurance.
   (e)   Legacy Trees are provided special protection by the Village and listed
in the Urban Forestry Management Plan.
   (f)   All tree planting, selection and management shall be in compliance
with the Urban Forestry Management Plan.
   (g)   It is recognized that diverse species and age structure of urban trees
throughout the Village are critical to the health of the forest structure and
protects the Village from catastrophic loss and improved longevity.
Specifications for species and age diversity, planting and management are
contained in the Urban Forestry Management Plan.
(Ord. No. 07-2025, § 1, 4-21-25)
Sec. 21-129. Planting.
   (a)   As outlined in the Urban Forestry Management Plan, the Village shall
plant, and recommend to private landowners, diverse species with the ratio of
not more than 20% of any one family, 10% of any one genus or 5% of any one
species, with the exception of naturalized areas where species selections are
based on the natural species assemblages as defined in the Urban Forestry
Management Plan. Diverse species composition protects the Village from
catastrophic loss.
   (b)   Acceptable and unacceptable species, along with small tree species
approved for underneath power lines, are listed in the Urban Forestry
Management Plan.
   (c)   All trees planted by the Village or their agent shall be planted in
accordance with the Urban Forestry Management Plan.
   (d)   Trees purchased by the Village shall meet the specifications required
in the Urban Forestry Management Plan.
   (e)   It shall be unlawful to plant any tree or shrub in the public right-
of-way, or on other publicly owned property, without prior approval from the
Village.
   (f)   It shall be unlawful to plant any tree under utility wires that is
anticipated to grow to a height that will interfere with the wires.
   (g)   The Village shall provide education and outreach to private landowners
on the need for species and age diversity, proper selection and planting
practices, and how to select species for particular sites.
(Ord. No. 07-2025, § 1, 4-21-25)
Sec. 21-130. Tree Care.
   (a)   Tree care within the Village, on public lands, shall comply with
requirements identified in the Urban Forestry Management Plan. It is
recommended that tree care on private property meet these same requirements.
   (b)   Best management practices recommend trees should be pruned on a
cyclical basis as preventive maintenance. Cyclical pruning ensures dead
branches, storm damaged limbs or unsightly growth are removed before becoming
hazardous or bad for the health of the tree. Proper pruning tree care should be
completed within every 7 years for each public tree.
   (c)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or employee to perform
topping of any street tree or other tree on public property. Trees severely
damaged by storms or other causes, or certain trees under utility wires or
other obstructions where other pruning practices are impractical, may be
exempted at the determination of the Village Arborist.
(Ord. No. 07-2025, § 1, 4-21-25)
Sec. 21-131. Tree Protection.
   (a)   Unless otherwise authorized by this article, it shall be unlawful for
any person to remove, injure or undertake any procedure which will cause death,
substantial damage, or create a hazard, to any public property tree without
first obtaining a Tree Permit from the Village. In the case of tree management
practices, these practices shall comply with the requirements identified in the
Urban Forestry Management Plan.
   (b)   Approved tree preservation plans are required prior to permits issued
for demolition and/or construction involving a principal structure. On sites
where demolition and construction projects are permitted, all trees not
approved for removal must be protected on site and in the parkway by protection
fencing prior to the start of any work or delivery of any materials to the
Building Activity Area. The approved Tree Preservation Plan shall be available
on the site throughout the entire construction period until final approvals for
all site work shall be received in writing.
   (c)   In instances where the activity requires the use of heavy equipment
and where that activity may impact trees on public or private property, all
appropriate tree protection measures must be taken and identified in the Tree
Preservation Plan. In addition, all tree protection measures shall be in
compliance with the Urban Forestry Management Plan.
(Ord. No. 07-2025, § 1, 4-21-25)
Sec. 21-132. Tree Removal.
   Tree removals are considered an impact to the entire Village, whether on
public or private land. It is clearly documented that larger trees provide
larger benefits and as such, tree removal fines are based on diameter. It is
recognized that the planting of smaller trees does not replace the value of
larger trees that are lost. It will take tens of years for that value to be
replaced and for that reason efforts should be made to preserve and protect
trees where they are growing.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any individual to remove or cause damage to
any tree located on public property without first receiving a Tree Permit from
the Village, except as provided for in this Tree Care Ordinance. Failure to
obtain a permit as required will result in a fine of $100 per inch of the
tree's diameter at breast height and shall be levied against that person or
entity primarily responsible for the tree removed or destroyed. This is in
addition to the required tree replacement as set forth in Section
21-133.
   (b)   No live, dead or dying tree, or grouping of trees, equal to 6 inches
or greater on public property may be removed without first obtaining a permit
from the Village.
   (c)   A nuisance tree is a tree that has already died, is in a state of
irrevocable decline, has the capacity to damage a person or thing or is an
invasive species. In the event of an emergency, and access to the Village is
not possible, a nuisance tree may be removed without a permit, however, the
individual removing the tree shall take photographs and memorialize the
nuisance situation prior to removal and shall follow up with a request for a
tree permit from the Village on the next business day.
   (d)   Any tree, taller than 20 feet or larger than 6 inches in diameter,
measured 12 inches above the ground, removed from a parcel or transplanted off
site must be replaced according to the regulations outlined in Section
21-133(c).
   (e)   All stump removals shall require underground utility locations prior
to any action.
   (f)   If a tree is removed or damaged which is not on the Tree Permit it
must be replaced as required herein.
   (g)   Removal of invasive woody plants such as buckthorn does not require a
permit and is encouraged. These invasive plants can quickly colonize an area
reducing the health and vitality of non-invasive plants. A list of unacceptable
woody plants is provided in the Urban Forestry Management Plan.
(Ord. No. 07-2025, § 1, 4-21-25)
Sec. 21-133. Tree Replacement.
   (a)   It is required that tree replacement species come from the Approved
Species List as provided in the Urban Forestry Management Plan.
   (b)   Any tree which is required to be removed or which has been damaged
shall require a bond to be posted until adequate replacements or remediation
can be made. Determination of extent of damage is at the sole discretion of the
Village.
   (c)   Any tree species removed, 6 inch DBH or 6 inch group of trees, which
is not identified on the invasive species list, but is identified on the
Preferred Species List, is required for replacement. All replacements shall be
located appropriately as confirmed by a certified arborist and as approved by
the Village.
      (1)   Commercial, Multi-Family and Planned Unit Development.
 
Diameter of Removed Tree Number of Replacement Trees
6" to 12"                2 trees at 2" or 1 tree at 4" diameter
13" to 25"               4 trees at 2" or 2 trees at 4" diameter
26" or greater           6 trees at 2" or 3 trees at 4" diameter
 
      (2)   Single Family Construction. Single family construction must be done
to avoid destruction or removal of trees taller than 20 feet or larger than 6
inches in diameter, measured 12 inches above the ground. Any such tree removed
or damaged should be replaced by a species compatible with the existing tree on
a one-for-one basis. The number of replacement trees will be limited to what
can be reasonably accommodated within the available lot area.
   (d)   When a tree removal is required as a result of any project, tree
replacement shall occur within the landscape season. In the event of weather
conditions or species-specific needs, which prohibit proper replacement of a
tree, the Village may issue written notice of an extension of up to 180 days
upon written request by the Applicant. If an extension is awarded to the
Applicant, the Applicant shall notify the Village when replacement is complete.
If, after the 30-day or awarded 180-day extension, the tree is not replaced or
the Applicant has not notified the Village that installation is complete, all
bonds shall be forfeited and the bond money shall be placed in the Tree Bank.
   (e)   All tree replacement plantings shall require an underground utility
location prior to planting.
   (f)   If the property where a removal has taken place does not have adequate
space to plant a replacement tree, then the Applicant shall be required to pay
the Village a dollar amount of $100 per inch of the tree's diameter at breast
height per tree. Funds shall be placed in the Tree Bank for tree replacement or
tree care in the Village.
   (g)   It shall be encouraged that any species identified on the invasive
species list be removed. There is no replacement requirement for these
removals.
(Ord. No. 07-2025, § 1, 4-21-25)
Sec. 21-134. Tree Preservation and Removal Plan for Significant Removals,
Construction and Development.
   An applicant seeking a permit for significant tree removals or tree removal
and planting related to construction and development of the principal structure
shall comply with all requirements of this article and the Urban Forestry
Management Plan.
(Ord. No. 07-2025, § 1, 4-21-25)
Sec. 21-135. Nuisance Trees.
   (a)   The following are hereby declared public nuisances:
      (l)   Any dead or dying tree, shrub, or other plant, whether located on
Village- owned property or on private property.
      (2)   Any otherwise healthy tree, shrub, or other plant, whether located
on Village-owned property or on private property, which harbors insects or
diseases which reasonably may be expected to injure or harm any tree, shrub, or
other plant.
      (3)   Any tree, shrub, or other plant, or portion thereof, whether
located on Village-owned property or on private property, which by reason of
location or condition constitutes an imminent danger to the health, safety, or
welfare of the general public.
      (4)   Any tree, shrub or other plant or portion thereof whether located
on Village-owned property or on private property which obstructs the free
passage of pedestrian or vehicular traffic or which obstructs a street light.
      (5)   Any tree, shrub or other plant or portion thereof whether located
on Village-owned property or on private property which dangerously obstructs
the view in the "visibility triangle" as such may be established by the Village
Arborist or Director of Public Works.
   (b)   No person shall unreasonably hinder, prevent, delay or interfere with
the Village Arborist, the Director of Public Works or his agents. The officers,
agents, servants and employees of the Village have the authority to enter onto
private property whereon there is located a tree, shrub, plant or plant part
that is suspected to be a public nuisance.
   (c)   The following are the prescribed means of abating public nuisances:
      (1)   Any public nuisance which is located on Village-owned property
shall be pruned, removed, or otherwise treated by the Village Arborist or the
Director of Public Works in whatever fashion is required to cause the abatement
of the nuisance within a reasonable time after its discovery.
      (2)   Any public nuisance which is located on private-owned property
shall be pruned, removed, or otherwise treated by the property owner or his/her
agent in whatever fashion is required to cause the abatement of the nuisance.
No property owner may be found guilty of violating this provision unless and
until the following requirements of notice have been satisfied:
         (i)   The Director of Public Works shall cause a written notice to be
personally served or sent by first class mail to the person to whom was sent
the tax bill for the general taxes for the last preceding year.
         (ii)   Such notice shall describe the kind of tree, shrub or other
plant or plant part which has been declared to be a public nuisance; its
location on the property; the reason for declaring it a nuisance.
         (iii)   Such notice shall describe the premises by legal description,
permanent index number, or by address.
         (iv)   Such notice shall state the actions that the property owner may
undertake to abate the nuisance.
         (v)   Such notice will require the elimination of the nuisance no less
than 30 days after the notice is delivered or sent to the person to whom was
sent the tax bill for the general taxes for the last preceding year.
         (vi)   Such notice may include a copy of this ordinance and a copy of
65 ILCS 5/11-20-11 and 65 ILCS 5/11-20-12.
      In the event that the nuisance is not abated by the date specified in the
notice, the Director of Public Works is authorized to cause the abatement of
said nuisance. The reasonable cost of such abatement shall be filed as a lien
against the property on which the nuisance was located. In addition, the
property owner of the property upon which the nuisance is located shall be
subject to prosecution under this Tree Care Ordinance. Nothing in this
provision shall be construed to exempt any person from the requirements of
obtaining permits under this Tree Care Ordinance.
      (3)   The Director of Public Works is empowered to cause the immediate
abatement of any public nuisance provided that the nuisance is determined by
the Village Arborist or Director of Public Works to be an immediate threat to
any person, or property.
      (4)   The Director of Public Works is hereby empowered to seek from any
court of competent jurisdiction an order directing immediate abatement of any
public nuisance.
(Ord. No. 07-2025, § 1, 4-21-25)
Sec. 21-136. Invasive Species Control.
   (a)   Invasive Woody Plants. Invasive plants cause ecological disruption to
natural ecosystems. The type of impact varies based on the species and the
traits of that species. The Woody Invasive Species List is included in the
Urban Forestry Management Plan. These species shall not be planted and should
be removed and controlled to reduce impacts to other vegetation.
      (1)   Typical impacts include:
         (i)   Chemical disturbance to the soil limiting development of other
species;
         (ii)   Dense plant growth limiting light to soil surface resulting in
exposed soil allowing erosion;
         (iii)   Displacement of naturally occurring species resulting in a
monoculture of invasive species and aggressive tendencies.
      (2)   The Village shall have implementation and outreach plan to educate
property owners of the potential impacts and remediation strategies, including
a suggested planting list of alternative species to assist property owners in
dealing with the problem. This plan is located in the Urban Forestry Management
Plan.
   (b)   Invasive Disease and Insects.
      (1)   Impacts to Trees. Invasive diseases and insects can create
significant stress to trees and in some instances kill trees. The Village has
developed a list of invasive diseases and insects that pose significant threats
to trees from information identified by State and Federal Departments of
Agriculture. This list is included in the Urban Forestry Management Plan.
      (2)   Private Property Owner Outreach. The Village shall have an
implementation and outreach plan to educate property owners of the potential
impacts and remediation strategies to help property tree owners in dealing with
pests or pathogens. This plan is located in the Urban Forestry Management Plan.
(Ord. No. 07-2025, § 1, 4-21-25)
Sec. 21-137. Village Arborist, Urban Forestry Management Plan.
   (a)   Village Arborist. The Village Arborist shall perform the following
duties:
      (1)   The Village Arborist along with the Director of Public Works shall
administer the Urban Forestry Management Plan.
      (2)   The Village Arborist shall perform whatever acts are necessary,
including the planting and maintenance of trees, the removal of undesirable
trees, shrubs, and other plants located on Village-owned property, to ensure
that all trees, shrubs and other plants located on Village-owned property
conform with the Urban Forestry Management Plan and this article. Pursuant to
this duty, the Director of Public Works, in accordance with normal Village
procedures regarding contracts, may arrange contractual agreements.
      (3)   With approval of the Village Arborist, the Building Department
shall issue permits and shall obtain as a condition precedent to the issuance
of such permits the written agreement of each person who applies for such
permits that he or she will comply with the requirements of this Chapter and
the Urban Forestry Management Plan. The Village Arborist and Director of Public
Works shall have the right to inspect all work performed pursuant to such
permits. If the Village Arborist or the Director of Public Works finds that the
work performed is not in compliance with the requirements of this Chapter and
the Urban Forestry Management Plan, the Director of Public Works shall provide
written notice of this finding to the permit applicant.
(Ord. No. 07-2025, § 1, 4-21-25)
Sec. 21-138. Tree Permit Application Procedure.
   An applicant for a simple tree removal or planting on public property shall
request in person or by phone and the Village arborist shall make an inspection
and render a determination. If a removal or planting is significant or in
conjunction with any type of development of the principal structure, then a
full tree preservation plan and inventory for the area to be impacted may be
required. The Village shall review the application. This review shall include
an inspection of the site and referral of the application for recommendation to
other appropriate administrative departments or agencies. The Village shall
render a decision on the application within 15 working days of its receipt of a
properly completed application.
(Ord. No. 07-2025, § 1, 4-21-25)
Sec. 21-139. Tree Permit Issuance.
   (a)   Issuance. The Village shall issue a Tree Permit upon approval of an
application and payment of a $50 fee.
   (b)   Time Limitation.
      (1)   A Tree Permit shall expire and become null and void if work
authorized is not commenced within one year from the date of the permit or if
such work when commenced is suspended or abandoned at any time for a period of
one year.
      (2)   If work has commenced and the Tree Permit becomes null and void or
expires because of a lack of progress or abandonment, a new Tree Permit for the
proposed tree removal, planting activity shall be obtained before proceeding
with further work.
(Ord. No. 07-2025, § 1, 4-21-25)
Sec. 21-140. Cash Bonds.
   (a)   If tree replacement is required by this article, then as a condition
of the Tree Permit, the Applicant shall submit a cash bond in the amount
determined by the Director of Public Works. The bond shall be held for the
purpose of assuring that the replacement trees are purchased and planted.
   (b)   If it is determined that practices which violate any portion of the
Evergreen Park Municipal Code have resulted in tree damage, then the Village
may require that a cash bond, as determined in accordance with this chapter,
shall be submitted at the time the violation occurs. The bond shall be held for
the purpose of assuring that all remedial actions to minimize tree damage are
taken, and for the purpose of assuring tree replacement should any damaged tree
die or show noticeable signs of decline as determined by a certified arborist.
   (c)   If the bond is posted for a tree and the property owner wishes to
transfer the property, then the bond shall be required to be paid before
transfer of the property or shall be refunded to the original property owner
once the bond requirements have been met.
(Ord. No. 07-2025, § 1, 4-21-25)
Sec. 21-141. Final Inspection.
   Final approval shall be issued when all relocation, replacement or
remediation of trees is completed and a final inspection has been conducted by
the Village. Should the Village determine that the season is inappropriate for
planting then relocation or replacement shall be deferred until the next
planting season. All bonds and fees will remain in the custody of the Village
until final inspection and approval has been provided in writing.
(Ord. No. 07-2025, § 1, 4-21-25)
Sec. 21-142. Compliance.
   The Village shall retain jurisdiction to ensure compliance with this article
and shall have the right to issue a stop work order for non-compliance. No stop
work order issued shall be removed by the Village unless the applicant has paid
a reinspection fee of $50.
(Ord. No. 07-2025, § 1, 4-21-25)
Sec. 21-143. Exceptions.
   If because of emergency weather or other casualty conditions a tree is
endangering health, safety or property and requires immediate removal, verbal
authorization may be given by the Village for the tree removal without
obtaining a written permit. Such verbal authorization shall later be confirmed
in writing by the Village.
(Ord. No. 07-2025, § 1, 4-21-25)
Sec. 21-144. Appeals for Variance.
   (a)   Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Village representative in
the enforcement of any terms or provisions of this article may, within 10
working days after the date of the decision, appeal to the Public Works
Committee by filing a written notice of appeal with the Village Clerk. The
notice of appeal shall set forth concisely the decision and the reasons or
grounds for the appeal. The Public Works Committee shall affirm, modify, or
reverse the decision by majority vote. Their decision shall be final and no
petition for rehearing or reconsideration shall be available. Reasonable notice
of the hearing shall be provided by the Village Clerk to all affected parties.
   (b)   An application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true
intent of this article or the rules legally adopted hereunder have been
incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this article do not fully apply, or
an equivalent form of construction is to be used. The Public Works Committee
shall grant variations from the strict application of any of the requirements
of this article in the case of exceptional conditions, whereby such strict
application would result in practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship that
would deprive the owner of reasonable use of the land or building involved. In
granting any variation, the Public Works Committee shall prescribe any
conditions that it deems to be necessary or desirable.
(Ord. No. 07-2025, § 1, 4-21-25)
Sec. 21-145. Civil Remedies.
   In addition to any other remedies provided by this article the Village shall
have the following judicial remedies available for violations of this article
or any permit condition promulgated under this article.
   (a)   The Village may institute a civil action in a court of competent
jurisdiction to establish liability and to recover damages for any injury
caused by the removal or damage of trees in contravention of the terms of this
article.
   (b)   The Village may institute a civil action in a court of competent
jurisdiction to seek injunctive relief to enforce compliance with this article
to enjoin any violation, and to seek injunctive relief to prevent irreparable
injury to the trees or properties encompassed by the terms of this article.
(Ord. No. 07-2025, § 1, 4-21-25)
Sec. 21-146. Penalty.
   Violations of this article may be administered through the provisions of
Chapter 12, Miscellaneous Provisions and Offenses, Article X, Administrative
Adjudication of Non-Vehicular Regulations Violations, of the Evergreen Park
Municipal Code, or by any other means permitted by law. Nothing in this article
shall be interpreted to limit the remedies or penalties available to the
Village.
(Ord. No. 07-2025, § 1, 4-21-25)
Sec. 21-147. Invalidity.
   If any paragraph, clause or provision of this ordinance shall be held
invalid, the invalidity thereof shall not affect any of the other provisions of
this ordinance.
(Ord. No. 07-2025, § 1, 4-21-25)
Sec. 21-148. Repealer and Passage.
   All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the provisions of
this ordinance are hereby repealed insofar as they conflict herewith. This
ordinance is authorized to be published in pamphlet form. This ordinance shall
be immediately in full force and effect after passage, approval, and
publication. This ordinance is authorized to published in pamphlet form.
(Ord. No. 07-2025, § 1, 4-21-25)
ARTICLE VI. VENDING MACHINES
Sec. 21-156. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
   Newsrack shall mean any vending machine the purpose of which is to dispense,
distribute or sell newspapers, magazines, books, pamphlets, periodicals, or
other literature.
   Parkway shall mean that area of the street between the nearest edge of the
pavement and the sidewalk; or in areas where there is no sidewalk, that area of
the street between the nearest edge of the pavement and the property line.
   Pavement shall mean that area of the street the primary purpose being for
the passage, parking or standing of motor vehicles. "Pavement" includes curbs,
gutters and any sewer structures.
   Sidewalk shall mean any paved surface the primary purpose being for the
passage of pedestrians, bicycles, tricycles, baby carriages or shopping carts.
   Street shall mean any area dedicated to public use for street, highway,
alley or roadway purposes, including but not limited to, the areas of pavement,
parkway and sidewalk.
   Vending machine shall mean any structure, rack, container or machine the
purpose of which is to dispense, distribute or sell, with or without charge,
any product, item, publication or service. "Vending machine" includes, but is
not limited to, telephone booths, telephones, soda machines, stamp machines,
candy machines, cigarette machines, toy machines, pinball machines, scales,
amusement devices and newsracks.
Sec. 21-157. Permit-Required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, maintain or operate any vending
machine on any street, except that newsracks may be placed, maintained and
operated after a permit has been granted under the provisions of this article.
Sec. 21-158. Same-Application; reasons for denial; issuance.
   (a)   Applications for newsracks shall be made on forms supplied by the
village clerk. Within 5 days of receipt of an application, the village clerk
shall grant a permit for the placement, maintenance and operation of a
newsrack, unless the newsrack is to be located in a manner which:
      (1)   Is within 15 feet of any fire hydrant or fire hose connection.
      (2)    Is within 15 feet of any intersecting pavement or driveway.
      (3)   Is within 50 feet of any railroad crossing.
      (4)   Is within 5 feet of any marked crosswalk.
      (5)   Is in a flower bed.
      (6)   Is on the pavement.
      (7)   Reduces the width of the sidewalk or other paved portions of the
parkway available for passage to less than 5 feet.
      (8)   Is within 10 feet of any door of a building.
      (9)   Is on the sidewalk or parkway on the same side of the street and
immediately adjacent to a no-parking zone or no-standing zone.
   (b)   All applications shall be granted or denied within 5 days after
receipt thereof. Upon the initial granting of a permit, the applicant shall pay
a $20 permit fee per location. The permit shall be automatically renewable upon
the payment of a ten-dollar annual permit fee, provided that the location of
the newsrack complies with this section.
Sec. 21-159. Same-Denial of application.
If an application for a permit required by this article is denied, the
applicant shall be notified why and may file appropriate litigation in court to
review the denial. During the period of litigation, the applicant may place,
maintain and operate the newsrack in question.
Sec. 21-160. Damage to public property.
   (a)   No person shall damage any public property in the placement,
maintenance or operation of any newsrack.
   (b)   No person shall chain or otherwise secure any newsrack to any tree,
light pole, sidewalk, parkway, traffic control device, or street sign.
Sec. 21-161. Involuntary removal of vending machine.
Any vending machine located in violation of any provision of this article is
subject to removal by the village only after the owner thereof has been given
the opportunity for a preremoval hearing. Prior to removal, the village clerk
shall give notice by mail addressed to the owner, which notice shall state why
the vending machine is in violation and give the owner seven days to remedy the
violation. If the owner feels that there is no violation, he may request a
hearing before the village clerk and present evidence, including measurements,
to the effect that no violation exists. If the village clerk determines that a
violation does exist, the owner shall have seven days to remedy the violation
after which the vending machine is subject to removal by the village if the
violations have not been corrected. The owner may file appropriate litigation
in court to review the finding of the violation. During the period of
litigation, the applicant may place, maintain and operate the newsrack in
question.
Sec. 21-162. Imminent danger, relocation.
The village may cause the immediate relocation of any vending machine not
located in a permitted position which creates an imminent danger of personal
injury or property damage to others or to the vending machine. Relocation shall
be to the nearest position necessary to remove the imminent danger.
Sec. 21-163. Private property.
Nothing in this article is intended to or shall govern any vending machine
located on private property.
ARTICLE VII. ADVERTISING BENCHES
Sec. 21-191. Advertising benches on private property.
It shall be unlawful for any person to place or maintain an advertising bench
on private property which does not advertise the activity or business located
thereon.
Sec. 21-192. Advertising benches on public property.
It shall be unlawful for any person to place or maintain an advertising bench
on public property (including any street or alley right-of-way) without having
a valid permit issued by the village.
Sec. 21-193. Permits and locations.
The village shall award a permit and enter into an agreement to the lowest
responsible bidder for the exclusive right to remove, construct, place and
maintain advertising benches at specified locations throughout the village. The
village shall designate all locations where advertising benches may be located;
however, no advertising bench will be permitted:
      (1)   In an alley or fire lane.
      (2)   Where the remaining width of the sidewalk would be less than four
feet.
      (3)   Within 30 inches of any curbline.
      (4)   Within 5 feet of any loading zone, driveway, fire lane or alley.
      (5)   Within 15 feet of any fire hydrant or standpipe.
      (6)   Within 3 feet of any pedestrian crosswalk.
      (7)   In line with and within 20 feet of any doorway or entranceway to
any private property or in a position that would otherwise interfere with or
impede exit from or entrance to private property.
      (8)   Within any bus shelter.
      (9)   Within 3 feet of a posted bus stop sign.
      (10)   Within a public park.
      (11)   In violation of any ordinance or state law.
The building commissioner of the village is authorized to establish bid
specifications.
Sec. 21-194. Permitted locations.
Advertising benches may be located only at the following locations in order to
provide seating for the benefit of the public health, safety and welfare:
      Southeast Corner 94th and Pulaski Road (1)
      Southwest Corner 87th and California Avenue (1)
      Southwest Corner 95th and St. Louis Avenue (1)
      Southwest Corner 95th and Homan Avenue (1)
      Southwest Corner 95th and Sacramento Avenue (1)
      Southwest Corner 95th and Francisco Avenue (1)
      Northwest Corner 101st and Kedzie Avenue (1)
      Southwest Corner 87th and Kedzie Avenue (2)
      Southeast Corner 87th and Kedzie Avenue (2)
      Northeast Corner 95th and California Avenue (2)
      Northwest Corner 99th and Kedzie Avenue (2)
Sec. 21-195. Advertising content.
No regulation or discrimination concerning the content of advertising on
advertising benches shall be permitted.
Sec. 21-196. Nonadvertising benches.
The village may permit the location of benches on the public way whenever
determined necessary for the convenience and comfort of the public, provided
that such benches do not have any advertising thereon and are not located in a
prohibited area as designated in Sec. 21-193.
ARTICLE VIII. SIDEWALK ASSESSMENTS
Sec. 21-210. Authority.
The village may provide for the construction and repair of sidewalks and assess
the cost thereof against the adjoining property owner pursuant to the
provisions of this article.
Sec. 21-211. Notice.
Whenever there is no sidewalk installed or when a sidewalk needs repair, the
superintendent of streets shall send a notice that the village intends to
construct or repair the sidewalk and assess the cost thereof against the
adjoining property owner. Said notice shall be sent by first class mail or
shall be served by personal delivery to the taxpayer of record as shown on the
books of the Cook County Treasurer's Office.
Sec. 21-212. Construction by adjoining property owner.
Within 15 days after sending of the notice from the village, the adjoining
property owner may cause the necessary construction or repair to be made after
receiving a permit from the village. In such event, the village shall not
assess any cost.
Sec. 21-213. Construction by village.
In the event that the adjoining property owner fails to construct or repair the
sidewalk within 15 days after sending of the notice from the village, the
village is authorized to cause the construction or repair of the sidewalk. Upon
completion thereof, the cost of construction or repair shall be determined by
the superintendent of streets.
Sec. 21-214. Assessment of costs and recording of lien.
In the event of new construction, 100% of the cost shall be assessed against
the adjoining property owner and in the event of repair, 50% of the cost shall
be assessed against the adjoining property owner. The village shall record a
lien for said amount against the adjoining property owner, which amount shall
bear interest at the rate of 7% per annum.
Sec. 21-215. Release of lien.
The village shall provide a release of lien upon payment of the assessed costs,
interest, and a $50 lien documentation and recording charge.
ARTICLE IX. STANDARDS FOR THE CONSTRUCTION OF FACILITIES IN THE RIGHTS-OF-WAY
Sec. 21-221. Purpose and Scope.
   (a)   Purpose.  The purpose of this Article is to establish policies and
procedures for constructing facilities in rights-of-way located within the
Village, which will provide public benefit consistent with the preservation of
the integrity, safe usage, and visual qualities of the rights-of-way and the
Village as a whole.
   (b)   Intent. In enacting this Article, the Village intends to exercise its
authority over the rights-of-way in the Village and, in particular, the use of
the public ways and property by utilities and wireless providers, by
establishing uniform standards to address issues presented by utility and
wireless facilities, including without limitation:
      (1)   Prevent interference with the use of streets, sidewalks, alleys,
parkways and other public ways and places;
      (2)   Prevent the creation of visual and physical obstructions and other
conditions that are hazardous to vehicular and pedestrian traffic;
      (3)   Prevent interference with the facilities and operations of the
Village’s utilities and of other utilities lawfully located in rights-of-way or
public property;
      (4)   Protect against environmental damage, including damage to trees,
from the installation of utility facilities;
      (5)   Protect against increased stormwater run-off due to structures and
materials that increase impermeable surfaces;
      (6)   Preserve the character of the neighborhoods in which facilities are
installed;
      (7)   Preserve open space, particularly the tree-lined parkways that
characterize the Village’s residential neighborhoods;
      (8)   Prevent visual blight from the proliferation of facilities in the
rights-of-way; and
      (9)   Assure the continued safe use and enjoyment of private properties
adjacent to facilities locations.
   (c)   Facilities Subject to This Article. This Article applies to all
facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the rights-
of-way within the jurisdiction of the Village. A facility lawfully established
prior to the effective date of this Article may continue to be maintained,
repaired and operated by the utility or wireless provider as presently
constructed and located, except as may be otherwise provided in any applicable
franchise, license or similar agreement.
   (d)   Franchises, Licenses, or Similar Agreements.  The Village, in its
discretion and as limited by law, may require utilities to enter into a
franchise, license or similar agreement for the privilege of locating their
facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within any right-of-
way. Utilities or wireless providers that are not required by law to enter into
such an agreement may request that the Village enter into such an agreement. In
such an agreement, the Village may provide for terms and conditions
inconsistent with this Article.
   (e)   Effect of Franchises, Licenses, or Similar Agreements.
      (1)   Utilities Other Than Telecommunications Providers. In the event
that a utility other than a telecommunications provider has a franchise,
license or similar agreement with the Village, such franchise, license or
similar agreement shall govern and control during the term of such agreement
and any lawful renewal or extension thereof.
      (2)   Telecommunications Providers. In the event of any conflict with, or
inconsistency between, the provisions of this Article and the provisions of any
franchise, license or similar agreement between the Village and any
telecommunications provider, the provisions of such franchise, license or
similar agreement shall govern and control during the term of such agreement
and any lawful renewal or extension thereof.
      (3)   Wireless Providers. Existing agreements between the Village and
wireless providers that relate to the collocation of small wireless facilities
in the right-of-way, including the collocation of small wireless facilities on
municipal utility poles, that are in effect on June 1, 2018, remain in effect
for all small wireless facilities collocated on the Village’s utility poles
pursuant to applications submitted to the Village before June 1, 2018, subject
to applicable termination provisions contained therein. Agreements entered into
after June 1, 2018, shall comply with this Article.
         A wireless provider that has an existing agreement with the Village on
the effective date of the Small Wireless Facilities Deployment Act, P.A. 100-
0585, may accept the rates, fees and terms that the Village has currently
adopted for the collocation of small wireless facilities or the installation of
new utility poles for the collocation of small wireless facilities that are the
subject of an application submitted two or more years after the effective date
of the Act by notifying the Village that it opts to accept such rates, fees and
terms. The existing agreement remains in effect, subject to applicable
termination provisions, for the small wireless facilities the wireless provider
has collocated on the Village’s utility poles pursuant to applications
submitted to the Village before the wireless provider provides such notice and
exercises its options under this paragraph.
   (f)   Conflicts with Other Articles. This Article supersedes all provisions
of the Code adopted prior hereto that are in conflict herewith, to the extent
of such conflict.
   (g)   Conflicts with State and Federal Laws.  In the event that applicable
federal or State laws or regulations conflict with the requirements of this
Article, the utility or wireless provider shall comply with the requirements of
this Article to the maximum extent possible without violating federal or State
laws or regulations.
   (h)   Sound Engineering Judgment. The Village shall use sound engineering
judgment when administering this Article and may vary the standards,
conditions, and requirements expressed in this Article when the Village so
determines. Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the ability of the
Village to regulate its rights-of-way for the protection of the public health,
safety and welfare.
(Ord. No. 40-2007 § 2, 11-5-07; Am. Ord. No. 23-2018 § 1, 8-20-18)
Sec. 21-222. Definitions.
   As used in this Article and unless the context clearly requires otherwise,
the words and terms listed shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this
Section. Any term not defined in this Section shall have the meaning ascribed
to it in 92 Ill. Adm. Code § 530.30, unless the context clearly requires
otherwise.
   AASHTO means American Association of State Highway and Transportation
Officials.
   ANSI means American National Standards Institute.
   Antenna means communications equipment that transmits or receives
electromagnetic radio frequency signals used in the provision of wireless
services.
   Applicable Codes means the uniform building, fire, electrical, plumbing or
mechanical codes adopted by a recognized national code organization or local
amendments to those codes, including the National Electric Safety Code.
   Applicant means a person applying for a permit under this Article.
   Application means a request submitted by an applicant to the Village for a
permit to install a utility or a wireless facility, or a request by a wireless
provider to install a new utility pole for collocation purposes.
   ASTM means American Society for Testing and Materials.
   Backfill means the methods or materials for replacing excavated material in
a trench or pit.
   Bore or Boring means to excavate an underground cylindrical cavity for the
insertion of a pipe or electrical conductor.
   Cable operator means that term as defined in 47 U.S.C. 522(5).
   Cable service means that term as defined in 47 U.S.C. 522(6).
   Cable system means that term as defined in 47 U.S.C. 522(7).
   Carrier Pipe means the pipe enclosing the liquid, gas or slurry to be
transported.
   Casing means a structural protective enclosure for transmittal devices such
as: carrier pipes, electrical conductors, and fiber optic devices.
   Clear Zone means the total roadside border area, starting at the edge of the
pavement, available for safe use by errant vehicles. This area may consist of a
shoulder, a recoverable slope, a non-recoverable slope, and a clear run-out
area. The desired width is dependent upon the traffic volumes and speeds, and
on the roadside geometry. Distances are specified in the AASHTO Roadside Design
Guide.
   Code means the Evergreen Park Municipal Code.
   Collocate or collocation means to install, mount, maintain, modify, operate
or replace wireless facilities on or adjacent to a wireless support structure
or utility pole.
   Communications service means cable service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 522(6),
as amended; information service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153(24), as amended;
mobile service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153(53), as amended; or wireless
service other than mobile service.
   Communications service provider means a cable operator, as defined in 47
U.S.C. 522(5), as amended; a provider of information service, as defined in 47
U.S.C. 153(24), as amended; a telecommunications carrier, as defined in 47
U.S.C. 153(51), as amended; or a wireless provider.
   Conductor means wire carrying electrical current.
   Conduit means a casing or encasement for wires or cables.
   Construction or Construct means the installation, repair, maintenance,
placement, alteration, enlargement, demolition, modification or abandonment in
place of facilities.
   Cover means the depth of earth or backfill over buried utility pipe or
conductor.
   Crossing Facility means a facility that crosses one or more right-of-way
lines of a right-of-way.
   Director of Public Works means the Director of Public Works of the Village,
or designee.
   Disrupt the Right-of-Way means for the purposes of this Article, any work
that obstructs the right-of-way or causes a material adverse effect on the use
of the right-of-way for its intended use. Such work may include, without
limitation, the following: excavating or other cutting; placement (whether
temporary or permanent) of materials, equipment, devices, or structures; damage
to vegetation; and compaction or loosening of the soil, and shall not include
the parking of vehicles or equipment in a manner that does not materially
obstruct the flow of traffic on a highway.
   Emergency means any immediate maintenance to the facility required for the
safety of the public using or in the vicinity of the right-of-way or immediate
maintenance required for the health and safety of the general public served by
the utility or wireless provider.
   Encasement means provision of a protective casing.
   Engineer means the Village Engineer, or designee.
   Equipment means materials, tools, implements, supplies, and/or other items
used to facilitate construction of facilities.
   Excavation means the making of a hole or cavity by removing material, or
laying bare by digging.
   Extra Heavy Pipe means pipe meeting ASTM standards for this pipe
designation.
   Facility means all structures, devices, objects, and materials (including,
but not limited to, track and rails, wires, ducts, fiber optic cable, antennas,
vaults, boxes, equipment enclosures, cabinets, pedestals, poles, conduits,
grates, covers, pipes, cables, and appurtenances thereto) located on, over,
above, along, upon, under, across, or within rights-of-way under this Article.
For purposes of this Article, the term facility shall not include any facility
owned or operated by the Village.
   FCC means the Federal Communications Commission of the United States.
   Fee means a one-time charge.
   Freestanding Facility means a facility that is not a crossing facility or a
parallel facility, such as an antenna, transformer, pump, or meter station.
   Hazardous Materials means any substance or material which, due to its
quantity, form, concentration, location, or other characteristics, is
determined by the Director of Public Works to pose an unreasonable and imminent
risk to the life, health or safety of persons or property or to the ecological
balance of the environment, including, but not limited to explosives,
radioactive materials, petroleum or petroleum products or gases, poisons,
etiology (biological) agents, flammables, corrosives or any substance
determined to be hazardous or toxic under any federal or state law, statute or
regulation.
   Highway means a specific type of right-of-way used for vehicular traffic
including rural or urban roads or streets. Highway includes all highway land
and improvements, including roadways, ditches and embankments, bridges,
drainage structures, signs, guardrails, protective structures and appurtenances
necessary or convenient for vehicle traffic.
   Historic District or Historic Landmark means a building, property, or site
or group of buildings, properties or sites that are either (i) listed in the
National Register of Historic Places or formally determined eligible for
listing by the Keeper of the National Register, the individual who has been
delegated the authority by the federal agency to list properties and determine
their eligibility for the National Register, in accordance with Section
VI.D.2.a.i. through Section VI.D.1.a.v of the Nationwide Programmatic
Agreement, codified at 47 CFR Part1, Appendix C; or (ii) designated as a
locally landmarked building, property, site, or historic district by an
ordinance adopted by the Village pursuant to a preservation program that meets
the requirements of the Certified Local Government Program of the Illinois
State Historic Preservation Office or where such certification of the
preservation program by the Illinois State Historic Preservation Office is
pending.
   Holder means a person or entity that has received authorization to offer or
provide cable or video service from the ICC pursuant to the Illinois Cable and
Video Competition Law, 220 ILCS 5/21-401, et seq.
   ICC means Illinois Commerce Commission.
   IDOT means Illinois Department of Transportation.
   Jacking means pushing a pipe horizontally under a roadway by mechanical
means with or without boring.
   Jetting means pushing a pipe through the earth using water under pressure to
create a cavity ahead of the pipe.
   Joint Use means the use of pole lines, trenches or other facilities by two
or more utilities or wireless providers.
   J.U.L.I.E. means the Joint Utility Locating Information for Excavators
utility notification program.
   Major Intersection means the intersection of two or more major arterial
highways.
   Occupancy means the presence of facilities on, over or under right-of-way.
   Parallel Facility means a facility that is generally parallel or
longitudinal to the centerline of a right-of-way.
   Parkway means any portion of the right-of-way not improved by street or
sidewalk.
   Pavement Cut means the removal of an area of pavement for access to facility
or for the construction of a facility.
   Permit means a written authorization required by the Village to perform an
action or initiate, continue or complete a project.
   Permittee means that entity to which a permit has been issued under this
Article.
   Person means an individual, corporation, limited liability company,
partnership, association, trust or other entity or organization.
   Petroleum Products Pipelines means pipelines carrying crude or refined
liquid petroleum products including, but not limited to, gasoline, distillates,
propane, butane, or coal-slurry.
   Practicable means that which is performable, feasible or possible, rather
than that which is simply convenient.
   Pressure means the internal force acting radially against the walls of a
carrier pipe expressed in pounds per square inch gauge (psig).
   Public Safety Agency means the functional division of the federal
government, the State, a unit of local government or a special purpose district
located in whole or in part within this State, that provides or has authority
to provide firefighting, police, ambulance, medical or other emergency services
to respond to and manage emergency incidents.
   Rate means a recurring charge.
   Restoration means the repair of a right-of-way, highway, roadway, or other
area disrupted by the construction of a facility.
   Right-of-Way or Rights-of-Way means the area on, below, or above a public
roadway, highway, street, public sidewalk, alley, or utility easement dedicated
for compatible use. Right-of-Way does not include Village-owned aerial lines.
   Roadway means that part of the highway that includes the pavement and
shoulders.
   Security Fund means that amount of security required pursuant to Section
21-232.
   Shoulder means a width of roadway, adjacent to the pavement, providing
lateral support to the pavement edge and providing an area for emergency
vehicular stops and storage of snow removed from the pavement.
   Small Wireless Facility means a wireless facility that meets both of the
following qualifications: (i) each antenna is located inside an enclosure of no
more than 6 cubic feet in volume or, in the case of an antenna that has exposed
elements, the antenna and all of its exposed elements could fit within an
imaginary enclosure of no more than 6 cubic feet; and (ii) all other wireless
equipment attached directly to a utility pole associated with the facility is
cumulatively no more than 25 cubic feet in volume. The following types of
associated ancillary equipment are not included in the calculation of equipment
volume: electric meter, concealment elements, telecommunications demarcation
box, ground-based enclosures, grounding equipment, power transfer switch, cut-
off switch, and vertical cable runs for the connection of power and other
services.
   Sound Engineering Judgment means a decision consistent with generally
accepted engineering principles, practices and experience.
   Telecommunications includes, but is not limited to, messages or information
transmitted through use of local, toll and wide area telephone service, channel
services, telegraph services, teletypewriter service, computer exchange
service, private line services, mobile radio services, cellular mobile
telecommunications services, stationary two-way radio, paging service and any
other form of mobile or portable one-way or two-way communications, and any
other transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar means,
between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio,
satellite, or similar facilities. “Private line” means a dedicated non-traffic
sensitive service for a single customer that entitles the customer to exclusive
or priority use of a communications channel, or a group of such channels, from
one or more specified locations to one or more other specified locations.
Telecommunications shall not include value added services in which computer
processing applications are used to act on the form, content, code and protocol
of the information for purposes other than transmission. “Telecommunications”
shall not include purchase of telecommunications by a telecommunications
service provider for use as a component part of the service provided by such
provider to the ultimate retail consumer who originates or terminates the end-
to-end communications. Telecommunications shall not include the provision of
cable services through a cable system as defined in the Cable Communications
Act of 1984 (47 U.S.C. Sections 521 and following), as now or hereafter
amended, or cable or other programming services subject to an open video system
fee payable to the Village through an open video system as defined in the Rules
of the Federal Communications Commission (47 C.F.R. §76.1500 and following), as
now or hereafter amended.
   Telecommunications Provider means any person that installs, owns, operates
or controls facilities in the right-of-way used or designed to be used to
transmit telecommunications in any form.
   Telecommunications Retailer means and includes every person engaged in
making sales of telecommunications at retail as defined herein.
   Trench means a relatively narrow open excavation for the installation of an
underground facility.
   Utility means the individual or entity owning or operating any facility as
defined in this Article, except that, for purposes of this Article, utility
shall not include a wireless provider applying to collocate, or already
collocating, a small wireless facility in the Village’s right-of-way.
   Vent means a pipe to allow the dissipation into the atmosphere of gases or
vapors from an underground casing.
   Video Service means that term as defined in section 21-201(v) of the
Illinois Cable and Video Competition Law of 2007, 220 ILCS 5/21-201(v).
   Village means the Village of Evergreen Park.
   Water Lines means Pipelines carrying raw or potable water.
   Wet Boring means boring using water under pressure at the cutting auger to
soften the earth and to provide a sluice for the excavated material.
   Wireless Facility means equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless
communications between user equipment and a communications network, including:
(i) equipment associated with wireless communications; and (ii) radio
transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup power
supplies, and comparable equipment, regardless of technological configuration.
Wireless facility includes small wireless facilities. Wireless facility does
not include: (i) the structure or improvements on, under or within which the
equipment is collocated; or (ii) wireline backhaul facilities, coaxial or fiber
optic cable that is between wireless support structure or utility poles or
coaxial, or fiber optic cable that is otherwise not immediately adjacent to or
directly associated with an antenna.
   Wireless Infrastructure Provider means any person authorized to provide
telecommunications service in the State that builds or installs wireless
communication transmission equipment, wireless facilities, wireless support
structures or utility poles and that is not a wireless services provider but is
acting as an agent or a contractor for a wireless services provider for the
application submitted to the Village.
   Wireless Provider means a wireless infrastructure provider or a wireless
services provider that is applying for a permit to collocate, or is already
collocating, a small wireless facility in the Village’s right-of-way.
   Wireless Services means any services provided to the general public,
including a particular class of customers, and made available on a
nondiscriminatory basis using licensed or unlicensed spectrum, whether at a
fixed location or mobile, provided using wireless facilities.
   Wireless Services Provider means a person who provides wireless services.
   Wireless Support Structure means a freestanding structure, such as a
monopole; tower, either guyed or self-supporting; billboard; or other existing
or proposed structure designed to support or capable of supporting wireless
facilities. Wireless support structure does not include a utility pole.
(Ord. No. 14-2016 § 1, 4-18-16; Am. Ord. No. 23-2018 § 2, 8-20-18)
Sec. 21-223. Annual Registration Required; Annual Recurring Rate for Wireless
Providers.
   (a)   Every utility or wireless provider that occupies right-of-way within
the Village shall register on January 1 of each year with the Director of
Public Works, providing the utility’s or wireless provider’s name, address and
regular business telephone and telecopy numbers, the name of one or more
contact persons who can act on behalf of the utility or wireless provider in
connection with emergencies involving the utility’s or wireless provider’s
facilities in the right-of-way and a 24-hour telephone number for each such
person, and evidence of insurance as required in Section
21-230, in the form of a certificate of insurance.
   (b)   A wireless provider shall pay to the Village an annual recurring rate
to collocate a small wireless facility on a municipal utility pole located in a
right-of-way that equals (i) $200 per year or (ii) the actual, direct and
reasonable costs related to the wireless provider’s use of space on the
municipal utility pole. If the Village has not billed the wireless provider
actual and direct costs, the fee shall be $200 payable on the first day after
the first annual anniversary of the issuance of the permit or notice of intent
to collocate, and on each annual anniversary date thereafter.
(Ord. No. 23-2018 § 1, 8-20-18)
Sec. 21-224 Permit Required; Applications Requirements.
   (a)   Permit Required.  No person shall construct any facility on, over,
above, along, upon, under, across, or within any right-of-way which (1) changes
the location of the facility, (2) adds a new facility, (3) disrupts the right-
of-way, or (4) materially increases the amount of area or space occupied by the
facility on, over, above, along, under across or within the right-of-way,
without first filing an application with the Director of Public Works and
obtaining a permit from the Village therefor, except as otherwise provided in
this Article. No permit shall be required for installation and maintenance of
service connections to customers’ premises where there will be no disruption of
the right-of-way.
   (b)   Permit Application. All applications for permits pursuant to this
Article shall be filed on a form provided by the Village and shall be filed in
such number of duplicate copies as the Village may designate. The applicant may
designate those portions of its application materials that it reasonably
believes contain proprietary or confidential information as “proprietary” or
“confidential” by clearly marking each page of such materials accordingly.
   (c)   Minimum General Application Requirements. The application shall be
made by the utility, wireless provider or duly authorized representative and
shall contain, at a minimum, the following:
      (1)   The utility’s or wireless provider’s name and address and telephone
and telecopy numbers;
      (2)   The applicant’s name and address, if different than the utility or
wireless provider, its telephone, telecopy numbers, e-mail address, and its
interest in the work;
      (3)   The names, addresses and telephone and telecopy numbers and e-mail
addresses of all professional consultants, if any, advising the applicant with
respect to the application;
      (4)   A general description of the proposed work and the purposes and
intent of the facility and the uses to which the facility will be put. The
scope and detail of such description shall be appropriate to the nature and
character of the work to be performed, with special emphasis on those matters
likely to be affected or impacted by the work proposed;
      (5)   Evidence that the utility or wireless provider has placed on file
with the Village:
         a.   A written traffic control plan demonstrating the protective
measures and devices that will be employed consistent with the Illinois Manual
on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, to prevent injury or damage to persons or
property and to minimize disruptions to efficient pedestrian and vehicular
traffic; and
         b.   An emergency contingency plan which shall specify the nature of
potential emergencies, including, without limitation, construction and
hazardous materials emergencies, and the intended response by the applicant.
The intended response shall include notification to the Village and shall
promote protection of the safety and convenience of the public. Compliance with
ICC regulations for emergency contingency plans constitutes compliance with
this Section unless the Village finds that additional information or assurances
are needed;
      (6)   Drawings, plans and specifications showing the work proposed,
including the certification of an engineer that such drawings, plans, and
specifications comply with applicable codes, rules, and regulations;
      (7)   Evidence of insurance as required in Section
21-230 of this Article;
      (8)   Evidence of posting of the security fund as required in Section
21-232 of this Article;
      (9)   The applicable application fee, as described in Section
21-225 of this Article;
      (10)   Any request for a variance from one or more provisions of this
Article (See Section
21-243); and
      (11)   Such additional information as may be reasonably required by the
Village.
   (d)   Supplemental Application Requirements for Specific Types of Utilities
or Wireless Providers. In addition to the requirements of Subsection (c) of
this Section, the permit application shall include the following items, as
applicable to the specific utility or wireless provider that is the subject of
the permit application:
      (1)   In the case of the installation of a new electric power,
communications, telecommunications, cable television service, video service or
natural gas distribution system, evidence that any “Certificate of Public
Convenience and Necessity” or other regulatory authorization that the applicant
is required by law to obtain, or that the applicant has elected to obtain, has
been issued by the ICC or other jurisdictional authority;
      (2)   In the case of natural gas systems, state the proposed pipe size,
design, construction class, and operating pressures;
      (3)   In the case of water lines, indicate that all requirements of the
Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, Division of Public Water Supplies,
have been satisfied;
      (4)   In the case of sewer line installations, indicate that the land and
water pollution requirements of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency,
Division of Water Pollution Control and the Metropolitan Water Reclamation
District have been satisfied; or
      (5)   In the case of petroleum products pipelines, state the type or
types of petroleum products, pipe size, maximum working pressure, and the
design standard to be followed.
   (e)   Consolidated Applications for Small Cell Wireless Facilities. An
applicant seeking to collocate small wireless facilities within the
jurisdiction of the Village shall be allowed, at the applicant’s discretion, to
file a consolidated application and receive a single permit for the collocation
of up to twenty-five (25) small wireless facilities if the collocations each
involve substantially the same type of small wireless facility and
substantially the same type of structure. If an application includes multiple
small wireless facilities, the Village may remove small wireless facility
collocations from the application and treat separately small wireless facility
collocations for which incomplete information has been provided or that do not
qualify for consolidated treatment or that are denied. The Village may issue
separate permits for each collocation that is approved in a consolidated
application.
   (f)   Applicant’s Duty to Update Information.  Throughout the entire permit
application review period and the construction period authorized by the permit,
any amendments to information contained in a permit application shall be
submitted by the utility or wireless provider in writing to the Village within
thirty (30) days after the change necessitating the amendment.
(Ord. No. 23-2018 § 1, 8-20-18)
Sec. 21-225 Application Fees.
   (a)   Utility Facility Application Fees. Unless otherwise provided by
franchise, license, or similar agreement, all applications by utilities for
permits pursuant to this Article shall be accompanied by a fee in the amount of
$1,000. No application fee is required to be paid by any electricity utility
that is paying the municipal electricity infrastructure maintenance fee
pursuant to the Electricity Infrastructure Maintenance Fee Act.
   (b)   Small Wireless Facilities Application Fees. The following fee schedule
shall apply to applications to install wireless facilities:
      (1)   Applicants shall pay an application fee of $650 for an application
to collocate a single small wireless facility on an existing utility pole or
wireless support structure, and $350 for each small wireless facility addressed
in a consolidated application to collocate more than one small wireless
facility on existing utility poles or wireless support structures.
      (2)   Applicants shall pay an application fee of $1,000 for each small
wireless facility addressed in an application that includes the installation of
a new utility pole for such collocation.
      (3)   The Village will not impose fees on wireless service providers for:
         a.   Routine maintenance;
         b.   The replacement of wireless facilities with wireless facilities
that are substantially similar, the same size, or smaller if the wireless
provider notifies the Village at least ten (10) days prior to the planned
replacement and includes equipment specifications for the replacement of
equipment consistent with Section
21-229; or
         c.   The installation, placement, maintenance, operation or
replacement of micro wireless facilities suspended on cables that are strung
between existing utility poles in compliance with applicable safety codes.
   (c)   Notwithstanding any contrary provision of State law or local
ordinance, applications pursuant to this Article shall be accompanied by the
required application fee. Application fees shall be nonrefundable.
(Ord. No. 23-2018 § 1, 8-20-18)
Sec. 21-226 Action on Permit Applications.
   (a)   Village Review of Utility Permit Applications. Completed permit
applications for utility facilities which contain all required documentation,
shall be examined by the Director of Public Works within a reasonable time
after filing. If the application does not conform to the requirements of
applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules, and regulations, the Director of
Public Works shall reject such application in writing, stating the reasons
therefor. If the Director of Public Works is satisfied that the proposed work
conforms to the requirements of this Article and applicable ordinances, codes,
laws, rules, and regulations, the Director of Public Works shall issue a permit
therefor as soon as practicable. In all instances, it shall be the duty of the
applicant to demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the Director of Public Works,
that the construction proposed under the application shall be in full
compliance with the requirements of this Article.
   (b)   Additional Village Review of Applications of Telecommunications
Retailers.
      (1)   Pursuant to Section 4 of the Telephone Company Act, 220 ILCS 65/4,
a telecommunications retailer shall notify the Village that it intends to
commence work governed by this Article for facilities for the provision of
telecommunications services. Such notice shall consist of plans,
specifications, and other documentation sufficient to demonstrate the purpose
and intent of the facilities, and shall be provided by the telecommunications
retailer to the Village not less than ten (10) days prior to the commencement
of work requiring no excavation and not less than thirty (30) days prior to the
commencement of work requiring excavation. The Director of Public Works shall
specify the portion of the right-of-way upon which the facility may be placed,
used and constructed.
      (2)   In the event that the Director of Public Works fails to provide
such specification of location to the telecommunications retailer within either
(i) ten (10) days after service of notice to the Village by the
telecommunications retailer in the case of work not involving excavation for
new construction or (ii) twenty-five (25) days after service of notice by the
telecommunications retailer in the case of work involving excavation for new
construction, the telecommunications retailer may commence work without
obtaining a permit under this Article.
      (3)   Upon the provision of such specification by the Village, where a
permit is required for work pursuant to Section
21-224 the telecommunications retailer shall submit to the Village an
application for a permit and any and all plans, specifications and
documentation available regarding the facility to be constructed. Such
application shall be subject to the requirements of Subsection (a) of this
Section.
   (c)   Additional Village Review of Applications of Holders of State
Authorization Under the Cable and Video Competition Law of 2007. Applications
by a utility that is a holder of a State-issued authorization under the Cable
and Video Competition Law of 2007 shall be deemed granted forty-five (45) days
after submission to the Village, unless otherwise acted upon by the Village,
provided the holder has complied with applicable Village codes, ordinances, and
regulations.
   (d)   Village Review of Wireless Provider Permit Applications. The Village
shall process applications for small wireless facilities as follows:
      (1)   The first completed application shall have priority over
applications received by different wireless facility applicants for collocation
on the same utility pole or wireless support structure.
      (2)   Within thirty (30) days after receiving an application, the Village
shall determine whether the application is complete and notify the applicant.
If an application is incomplete, the Village must specifically identify the
missing information. An application shall be deemed complete if the Village
fails to provide notification to the applicant within thirty (30) days after
all documents, information and fees specifically enumerated in the Village’s
permit application form are submitted by the applicant to the Village.
Processing deadlines are tolled from the time the Village sends the notice of
incompleteness to the time the applicant provides the missing information.
      (3)   An application to collocate a small wireless facility on an
existing utility pole or wireless support structure, or replacement of an
existing utility pole or wireless support structure shall be processed on a
nondiscriminatory basis and shall be deemed approved if the Village fails to
approve or deny the application within ninety (90) days after the submission of
a completed application. However, if an applicant intends to proceed with the
permitted activity on a deemed approved basis, the applicant shall notify the
Village in writing of its intention to invoke the deemed approved remedy no
sooner than seventy-five (75) days after the submission of a completed
application. The permit shall be deemed approved on the latter of the 90th day
after submission of the complete application or the 10th day after the receipt
of the deemed approved notice by the Village. The receipt of the deemed
approved notice shall not preclude the Village’s denial of the permit request
within the time limits as provided under this section.
      (4)   An application to collocate a small wireless facility that includes
the installation of a new utility pole shall be processed on a
nondiscriminatory basis and deemed approved if the Village fails to approve or
deny the application within 120 days after the submission of a completed
application. However, if an applicant intends to proceed with the permitted
activity on a deemed approved basis, the applicant shall notify the Village in
writing of its intention to invoke the deemed approved remedy no sooner than
105 days after the submission of a completed application. The permit shall be
deemed approved on the latter of the 120th day after submission of the complete
application or the 10th day after the receipt of the deemed approved notice by
the Village. The receipt of the deemed approved notice shall not preclude the
Village’s denial of the permit request within the time limits as provided under
this section.
      (5)   a.   The Village shall deny an application which does not meet the
requirements of this Article. If the Village determines that applicable codes,
ordinances or regulations that concern public safety, or the requirements of
Section
21-229, require that the utility pole or wireless support structure be replaced
before the requested collocation, approval shall be conditioned on the
replacement of the utility pole or wireless support structure at the cost of
the provider.
         b.   The Village shall document the basis for a denial, including the
specific code provisions or application conditions on which the denial is
based, and send the documentation to the applicant on or before the day the
Village denies an application. The applicant may cure the deficiencies
identified by the Village and resubmit the revised application once within
thirty (30) days after notice of denial is sent to the applicant without paying
an additional application fee. The Village shall approve or deny the revised
application within thirty (30) days after the applicant resubmits the
application or it is deemed approved. Failure to resubmit the revised
application within thirty (30) days of denial shall require the applicant to
submit a new application with applicable fees, and result in recommencement of
the Village’s review period.
         c.   The applicant must notify the Village in writing of its intention
to proceed with the permitted activity on a deemed approved basis, which may be
submitted with the revised application. Any review of a revised application
shall be limited to the deficiencies cited in the denial, except in cases in
which the cure requires the review of a new location, new or different
structure to be collocated upon, new antennas, or other wireless equipment
associated with the small wireless facility.
      (6)   Within thirty (30) days after an approved permit to collocate a
small wireless facility on a municipal utility pole, the Village and the
applicant shall enter into a Master Pole Attachment Agreement, provided by the
Village for the initial collocation on a municipal utility pole by the
application. For subsequent approved permits to collocate on a small wireless
facility or a municipal utility pole, the Village and the applicant shall enter
into a License Supplement of the Master Pole Attachment Agreement.
      (7)   Tolling. The time period for applications may be further tolled by:
         a.   An express written agreement by both the applicant and the
Village; or
         b.   A local, state or federal disaster declaration or similar
emergency that causes the delay.
(Ord. No. 23-2018 § 1, 8-20-18)
Sec. 21-227 Effect of Permit.
   (a)   Authority Granted; No Property Right or Other Interest Created. A
permit from the Village authorizes a permittee to undertake only certain
activities in accordance with this Article on rights-of-way, and does not
create a property right or grant authority to the permittee to impinge upon the
rights of others who may have an interest in the rights-of-way.
   (b)   Duration. 
      (1)   No permit issued under this Article shall be valid for a period
longer than six (6) months unless construction is actually begun within that
period and is thereafter diligently pursued to completion.
      (2)   For permits to collocate wireless facilities, the collocation must
be complete within 180 days after the issuance of the permit, unless the
Village and the wireless provider agree to extend the period or a delay is
cause by make-ready work for a municipal utility pole or by the lack of
commercial power or backhaul availability at the site, provided the wireless
provider has made a timely request within sixty (60) days after the issuance of
the permit for commercial power or backhaul services, and the additional time
to complete installation does not exceed 360 days after issuance of the permit.
Otherwise, the permit shall be void unless the Village grants an extension in
writing to the applicant.
      (3)   Permits to collocate small wireless facilities which meet the
timeliness requirements of the preceding paragraph shall be for a period of not
less than five (5) years, and the permit shall be renewed for equivalent
durations unless the Village makes a finding that the small wireless facilities
or the new or modified utility pole do not comply with the applicable Village
codes or any provision, condition or requirement contained in this Article.
   (c)   Pre-construction Meeting Required. No construction shall begin
pursuant to a permit issued under this Article prior to attendance by the
permittee and all major contractors and subcontractors who will perform any
work under the permit at a pre-construction meeting. The pre-construction
meeting shall be held at a date, time and place designated by the Village with
such Village representatives in attendance as the Village deems necessary. The
meeting shall be for the purpose of reviewing the work under the permit, and
reviewing special considerations necessary in the areas where work will occur,
including, without limitation, presence or absence of other facilities in the
area and their locations, procedures to avoid disruption of other facilities,
use of rights-of-way by the public during construction, and access and egress
by adjacent property owners.
   (d)   Compliance with All Laws Required. The issuance of a permit by the
Village does not excuse the permittee from complying with other requirements of
the Village and applicable statutes, laws, ordinances, rules, and regulations.
(Ord. No. 23-2018 § 1, 8-20-18)
Sec. 21-228 Revised Permit Drawings.
   In the event that the actual locations of any facilities deviate in any
material respect from the locations identified in the plans, drawings and
specifications submitted with the permit application, the permittee shall
submit a revised set of drawings or plans to the Village within ninety (90)
days after the completion of the permitted work. The revised drawings or plans
shall specifically identify where the locations of the actual facilities
deviate from the locations approved in the permit. If any deviation from the
permit also deviates from the requirements of this Article, it shall be treated
as a request for variance in accordance with Section
21-243. If the Village denies the request for a variance, then the permittee
shall either remove the facility from the right-of-way or modify the facility
so that it conforms to the permit and submit revised drawings or plans
therefor.
(Ord. No. 23-2018 § 1, 8-20-18)
Sec. 21-229 Collocation of Wireless Facilities.
   The following requirements and conditions, as outlined in this section
21-229, shall apply only to collocation of small wireless facilities, as
defined by this Article:
   (a)   Permitted Use. Collocation of small wireless facilities on municipal
utility poles is a permitted use in the right-of-way as long as such facilities
meet the requirements of this Article.
   (b)   Public Safety Space Reservation. The Village may reserve space on
municipal utility poles for future public safety uses, for the Village’s
electric utility uses, or both, but a reservation of space may not preclude the
collocation of a small wireless facility unless the Village reasonably
determines that the municipal utility pole cannot accommodate both uses.
   (c)   Installation and Maintenance. The wireless provider shall install,
maintain, repair and modify its small wireless facilities in a safe condition
and in good repair and in compliance with the requirements and conditions of
this Article. The wireless provider shall ensure that its employees, agents or
contractors that perform work in connection with its small wireless facilities
are adequately trained and skilled in accordance with all applicable industry
and governmental standards and regulations.
   (d)   Make-Ready Requirements.
      (1)   The Village may require make-ready work on an existing utility pole
to ensure structural integrity, compliance with an approved Village plan, or to
comply with any ordinance, law or regulation. The Village will not require more
make-ready work than required to meet applicable codes or industry standards.
Make-ready work may include work needed to accommodate additional public safety
communications needs that are identified in a documented and approved plan for
the deployment of public safety equipment as specified and included in an
existing or preliminary Village or public service agency plan. Fees for make-
ready work, including any municipal utility pole attachment, shall not exceed
actual costs or the amount charged to communications service providers for
similar work and shall not include any consultants’ fees or expenses for
municipal utility poles that do not support aerial facilities used to provide
communications services or electric service. Make-ready work, including any
pole replacement, shall be completed within sixty (60) days of written
acceptance of the good-faith estimate by the village at the wireless provider’s
sole cost and expense.
      (2)   For municipal utility poles that support aerial facilities used to
provide communications services or electric services, a wireless provider shall
comply with the process for make-ready work under 47 U.S.C. 224 and its
implementing regulations. Wireless providers shall follow a substantially
similar process for such make-ready work except to the extent that the timing
requirements are otherwise addressed by this Article. The good-faith estimate
of the person owning or controlling the Village’s utility pole for any make-
ready work necessary to enable the pole to support the requested collocation
shall include municipal utility pole replacement, if necessary. Make-ready work
for utility poles that support aerial facilities used to provide communications
services or electric services may include reasonable consultants’ fees and
expenses
   (e)   No Interference with Public Safety Communication Frequencies.
      (1)   The wireless provider’s operation of the small wireless facilities
shall not interfere with the frequencies used by a public safety agency for
public safety communications. A wireless provider shall install small wireless
facilities of the type and frequency that will not cause unacceptable
interference with a public safety agency’s communications equipment.
Unacceptable interference will be determined by and measured in accordance with
industry standards and the FCC’s regulations addressing unacceptable
interference to public safety spectrum or any other spectrum licensed by a
public safety agency.
      (2)   If a small wireless facility causes such interference, and the
wireless provider has been given written notice of the interference by the
public safety agency, the wireless provider, at its own expense, shall remedy
the interference in a manner consistent with the abatement and resolution
procedures for interference with public safety spectrum established by the FCC
including 47 CFR 22.970 through 47 CFR 22.973 and 47 CFR 90.672 through 47 CFR
90.675. The Village may terminate a permit for a small wireless facility based
on such interference if the wireless provider is not in compliance with the
Code of Federal Regulations. Failure to remedy the interference as required
herein shall constitute a public nuisance.
   (f)   Electric Distribution or Transmission Systems. The wireless provider
shall not collocate small wireless facilities on municipal utility poles that
are part of an electric distribution or transmission system within the
communication worker safety zone of the pole or the electric supply zone of the
pole. However, the antenna and support equipment of the small wireless facility
may be located in the communications space on the municipal utility pole and on
the top of the pole, if not otherwise unavailable, if the wireless provider
complies with applicable codes for work involving the top of the pole. For
purposes of this section, the terms “communications space”, “communication
worker safety zone”, and “electric supply zone” have the meanings given to
those terms in the National Electric Safety Code as published by the Institute
of Electrical and Electronics Engineers.
   (g)   Public Safety. The wireless provider shall comply with all applicable
codes and local code provisions or regulations that concern public safety.
   (h)   Design Standards. The wireless provider shall comply with written
design standards that are generally applicable for decorative utility poles, or
reasonable stealth, concealment and aesthetic requirements that are set forth
in any Village ordinance, written policy adopted by the Village, a
comprehensive plan or other written design plan that applies to other occupiers
of the rights-of-way, including on a historic landmark or in a historic
district.
   (i)   Alternate Placements. Except as provided in this Article, a wireless
provider shall not be required to collocate small wireless facilities on any
specific utility pole, or category of utility poles, or be required to
collocate multiple antenna systems on a single utility pole. However, with
respect to an application for the collocation of a small wireless facility
associated with a new utility pole, the Village may propose that the small
wireless facility be collocated on an existing utility pole or existing
wireless support structure within 100 feet of the proposed collocation, which
the applicant shall accept if it has the right to use the alternate structure
on reasonable terms and conditions, and the alternate location and structure
does not impose technical limits or additional material costs as determined by
the applicant. If the applicant refuses a collocation proposed by the Village,
the applicant shall provide written certification describing the property
rights, technical limits or material cost reasons the alternate location does
not satisfy the criteria in this paragraph.
   (j)   Height Limitations.
      (1)   The maximum height of a small wireless facility shall be no more
than ten (10) feet above the utility pole or wireless support structure on
which the small wireless facility is collocated.
      (2)   New or replacement utility poles or wireless support structures on
which small wireless facilities are collocated may not exceed the higher of:
         a.   Ten (10) feet in height above the tallest existing utility pole,
other than a utility pole supporting only wireless facilities, that is in place
on the date the application is submitted to the Village, that is located within
300 feet of the new or replacement utility pole or wireless support structure
and that is in the same right-of-way within the jurisdictional boundary of the
Village, provided the Village may designate which intersecting right-of-way
within 300 feet of the proposed utility pole or wireless support structures
shall control the height limitation for such facility; or
         b.   Forty-five (45) feet above ground level.
   (k)   Height Exceptions or Variances. If an applicant proposes a height for
a new or replacement pole in excess of the above height limitations on which
the small wireless facility has proposed for collocation, the applicant shall
apply for a variance in conformance with procedures, terms and conditions set
forth in Section
21-243.
   (l)   Contractual Design Requirements. The wireless provider shall comply
with requirements that are imposed by a contract between the Village and a
private property owner that concern design or construction standards applicable
to utility poles and ground-mounted equipment located in the right-of-way.
(Ord. No. 23-2018 § 1, 8-20-18)
Sec. 21-230 Insurance.
   (a)   Required Coverages and Limits for Utilities. Unless otherwise provided
by franchise, license, or similar agreement, each utility occupying the right-
of-way or constructing any facility in the right-of-way shall secure and
maintain the following liability insurance policies insuring the utility as
named insured and naming the Village, and its elected and appointed officers,
officials, agents, and employees as additional insureds on the policies listed
in paragraphs (1) and (2) below:
      (1)    Commercial general liability insurance, including premises-
operations, explosion, collapse, and underground hazard (commonly referred to
as “X,” “C,” and “U” coverages) and products-completed operations coverage with
limits not less than:
         a.   Five million dollars ($5,000,000) for bodily injury or death to
each person;
         b.    Five million dollars ($5,000,000) for property damage resulting
from any one accident; and
         c.   Five million dollars ($5,000,000) for all other types of
liability;
      (2)   Automobile liability for owned, non-owned and hired vehicles with a
combined single limit of one million dollars ($1,000,000) for personal injury
and property damage for each accident;
      (3)   Worker’s compensation with statutory limits; and
      (4)   Employer’s liability insurance with limits of not less than one
million dollars ($1,000,000) per employee and per accident.
         If the utility is not providing such insurance to protect the
contractors and subcontractors performing the work, then such contractors and
subcontractors shall comply with this section.
   (b)   Required Coverages and Limits for Wireless Providers. Wireless
providers shall carry, at the wireless provider’s own cost and expense, the
following insurance:
      (1)   Property insurance for its property’s replacement cost against all
risks;
      (2)   Worker’s compensation insurance, as required by law; or
      (3)   a.   Commercial general liability insurance with respect to its
activities on the right-of-way to afford minimum protection limits as described
in Section (a)(1) above.
         b.   The wireless provider shall include the Village as an additional
insured on the commercial general liability policy and provider certification
and documentation of inclusion of the Village in a commercial general liability
policy prior to the collocation or any wireless facility.
   (c)   Excess or Umbrella Policies. The coverages required by this Section
may be in any combination of primary, excess, and umbrella policies. Any excess
or umbrella policy must provide excess coverage over underlying insurance on a
following-form basis such that when any loss covered by the primary policy
exceeds the limits under the primary policy, the excess or umbrella policy
becomes effective to cover such loss.
   (d)   Copies Required.  The utility or wireless provider shall provide
copies of any of the policies required by this Section to the Village within
ten (10) days following receipt of a written request therefor from the Village.
   (e)   Maintenance and Renewal of Required Coverages.
      (1)   The insurance policies required by this Section shall contain the
following endorsement:
         “It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be
canceled nor the intention not to renew be stated until thirty (30) days after
receipt by the Village, by registered mail or certified mail, return receipt
requested, of a written notice addressed to the Village Mayor of such intent to
cancel or not to renew.”
      (2)   Within ten (10) days after receipt by the Village of said notice,
and in no event later than ten (10) days prior to said cancellation, the
utility or wireless provider shall obtain and furnish to the Village evidence
of replacement insurance policies meeting the requirements of this Section.
   (f)   Self-Insurance. A utility or wireless provider may self-insure all or
a portion of the insurance coverage and limit requirements required by
Subsections (a) and (b) of this Section. A utility or wireless provider that
self-insures is not required, to the extent of such self-insurance, to comply
with the requirement for the naming of additional insureds, or the requirements
of Subsections (c), (d) and (e) of this Section. A utility or wireless provider
that elects to self-insure shall provide to the Village evidence sufficient to
demonstrate its financial ability to self-insure the insurance coverage and
limit requirements required under Subsection (a) or (b) of this Section, such
as evidence that the utility or wireless provider is a “private self insurer”
under the Workers Compensation Act.
   (g)   Effect of Insurance and Self-Insurance on Utility’s or Wireless
Provider’s Liability. The legal liability of the utility or wireless provider
to the Village and any person for any of the matters that are the subject of
the insurance policies or self-insurance required by this Section shall not be
limited by such insurance policies or self-insurance or by the recovery of any
amounts thereunder.
   (h)   Insurance Companies. All insurance provided pursuant to this section
shall be affected under valid and enforceable policies, issued by insurers
legally able to conduct business with the licensee in the State of Illinois.
(Ord. No. 23-2018 § 1, 8-20-18)
Sec. 21-231 Indemnification.
   By occupying or constructing facilities in the right-of-way, a utility or
wireless provider shall be deemed to agree to defend, indemnify and hold the
Village and its elected and appointed officials and officers, employees, agents
and representatives harmless from and against any and all injuries, claims,
demands, judgments, damages, losses and expenses, including reasonable
attorney’s fees and costs of suit or defense, arising out of, resulting from or
alleged to arise out of or result from the negligent, careless or wrongful
acts, omissions, failures to act or misconduct of the utility or its
affiliates, officers, employees, agents, contractors or subcontractors in the
construction of facilities or occupancy of the rights-of-way, and in providing
or offering service over the facilities, whether such acts or omissions are
authorized, allowed or prohibited by this Article or by a franchise, license,
or similar agreement; provided, however, that the utility’s or wireless
provider’s indemnity obligations hereunder shall not apply to any injuries,
claims, demands, judgments, damages, losses or expenses arising out of or
resulting from the negligence, misconduct or breach of this Article by the
Village, its officials, officers, employees, agents or representatives.
(Ord. No. 23-2018 § 1, 8-20-18)
Sec. 21-232 Security.
   (a)   Purpose. The permittee shall establish a Security Fund in a form and
in an amount as set forth in this Section. The Security Fund shall be
continuously maintained in accordance with this Section at the permittee’s sole
cost and expense until the completion of the work authorized under the permit.
The Security Fund shall serve as security for:
      (1)   The faithful performance by the permittee of all the requirements
of this Article;
      (2)   Any expenditure, damage, or loss incurred by the Village occasioned
by the permittee’s failure to comply with any codes, rules, regulations,
orders, permits and other directives of the Village issued pursuant to this
Article; and
      (3)   The payment by permittee of all liens and all damages, claims,
costs, or expenses that the Village may pay or incur by reason of any action or
non-performance by permittee in violation of this Article including, without
limitation, any damage to public property or restoration work the permittee is
required by this Article to perform that the Village must perform itself or
have completed as a consequence solely of the permittee’s failure to perform or
complete, and all other payments due the Village from the permittee pursuant to
this Article or any other applicable law.
   (b)   Form.  The permittee shall provide the Security Fund to the Village in
the form, at the permittee’s election, of cash, a surety bond in a form
acceptable to the Village, or an unconditional letter of credit in a form
acceptable to the Village. Any surety bond or letter of credit provided
pursuant to this Subsection shall, at a minimum:
      (1)   Provide that it will not be canceled without prior notice to the
Village and the permittee;
      (2)   Not require the consent of the permittee prior to the collection by
the Village of any amounts covered by it; and
      (3)   Provide a location convenient to the Village and within the State
of Illinois at which it can be drawn.
   (c)   Amount. The dollar amount of the Security Fund shall be sufficient to
provide for the reasonably estimated cost to restore the right-of-way to at
least as good a condition as that existing prior to the construction under the
permit, as determined by the Director of Public Works, and may also include
reasonable, directly related costs that the Village estimates are likely to be
incurred if the permittee fails to perform such restoration. Where the
construction of facilities proposed under the permit will be performed in
phases in multiple locations in the Village, with each phase consisting of
construction of facilities in one location or a related group of locations, and
where construction in another phase will not be undertaken prior to substantial
completion of restoration in the previous phase or phases, the Director of
Public Works may, in the exercise of sound discretion, allow the permittee to
post a single amount of security which shall be applicable to each phase of the
construction under the permit. The amount of the Security Fund for phased
construction shall be equal to the greatest amount that would have been
required under the provisions of this Subsection (c) for any single phase.
   (d)   Withdrawals. The Village, upon fourteen (14) days’ advance written
notice clearly stating the reason for, and its intention to exercise withdrawal
rights under this Subsection, may withdraw an amount from the Security Fund,
provided that the permittee has not reimbursed the Village for such amount
within the fourteen (14) day notice period. Withdrawals may be made if the
permittee:
      (1)   Fails to make any payment required to be made by the permittee
hereunder;
      (2)   Fails to pay any liens relating to the facilities that are due and
unpaid;
      (3)   Fails to reimburse the Village for any damages, claims, costs or
expenses which the Village has been compelled to pay or incur by reason of any
action or non-performance by the permittee; or
      (4)   Fails to comply with any provision of this Article that the Village
determines can be remedied by an expenditure of an amount in the Security Fund.
   (e)   Replenishment. Within fourteen (14) days after receipt of written
notice from the Village that any amount has been withdrawn from the Security
Fund, the permittee shall restore the Security Fund to the amount specified in
Subsection (c) of this Section.
   (f)   Interest. The permittee may request that any and all interest accrued
on the amount in the Security Fund be returned to the permittee by the Village,
upon written request for said withdrawal to the Village, provided that any such
withdrawal does not reduce the Security Fund below the minimum balance required
in Subsection (c) of this Section.
   (g)   Closing and Return of Security Fund. Upon completion of the work
authorized under the permit, the permittee shall be entitled to the return of
the Security Fund, or such portion thereof as remains on deposit, within a
reasonable time after account is taken for all offsets necessary to compensate
the Village for failure by the permittee to comply with any provisions of this
Article or other applicable law. In the event of any revocation of the permit,
the Security Fund, and any and all accrued interest therein, shall become the
property of the Village to the extent necessary to cover any reasonable costs,
loss or damage incurred by the Village as a result of said revocation, provided
that any amounts in excess of said costs, loss or damage shall be refunded to
the permittee.
   (h)   Rights Not Limited. The rights reserved to the Village with respect to
the Security Fund are in addition to all other rights of the Village, whether
reserved by this Article or otherwise authorized by law, and no action,
proceeding or exercise of right with respect to said Security Fund shall affect
any other right the Village may have. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the
Village shall not be entitled to a double monetary recovery with respect to any
of its rights which may be infringed or otherwise violated.
(Ord. No. 23-2018 § 1, 8-20-18)
Sec. 21-233 Permit Suspension and Revocation.
   (a)   Village Right to Revoke Permit. The Village may revoke or suspend a
permit issued pursuant to this Article for one or more of the following
reasons:
      (1)   Fraudulent, false, misrepresenting, or materially incomplete
statements in the permit application;
      (2)   Non-compliance with this Article;
      (3)   Permittee’s physical presence or presence of permittee’s facilities
on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the rights-of-way
presents a direct or imminent threat to the public health, safety, or welfare;
or
      (4)   Permittee’s failure to construct the facilities substantially in
accordance with the permit and approved plans.
   (b)   Notice of Revocation or Suspension.  The Village shall send written
notice of its intent to revoke or suspend a permit issued pursuant to this
Article stating the reason or reasons for the revocation or suspension and the
alternatives available to permittee under this Section.
   (c)   Permittee Alternatives Upon Receipt of Notice of Revocation or
Suspension. Upon receipt of a written notice of revocation or suspension from
the Village, the permittee shall have the following options:
      (1)   Immediately provide the Village with evidence that no cause exists
for the revocation or suspension;
      (2)   Immediately correct, to the satisfaction of the Village, the
deficiencies stated in the written notice, providing written proof of such
correction to the Village within five (5) working days after receipt of the
written notice of revocation; or
      (3)   Immediately remove the facilities located on, over, above, along,
upon, under, across, or within the rights-of-way and restore the rights-of-way
to the satisfaction of the Village providing written proof of such removal to
the Village within ten (10) days after receipt of the written notice of
revocation.
      The Village may, in its discretion, for good cause shown, extend the time
periods provided in this Subsection.
   (d)   Stop Work Order. In addition to the issuance of a notice of revocation
or suspension, the Village may issue a stop work order immediately upon
discovery of any of the reasons for revocation set forth within Subsection (a)
of this Section.
   (e)   Failure or Refusal of the Permittee to Comply.  If the permittee fails
to comply with the provisions of Subsection (c) of this Section, the Village or
its designee may, at the option of the Village: (1) correct the deficiencies;
(2) upon not less than twenty (20) days notice to the permittee, remove the
subject facilities or equipment; or (3) after not less than thirty (30) days
notice to the permittee of failure to cure the non-compliance, deem them
abandoned and property of the Village. The permittee shall be liable in all
events to the Village for all costs of removal.
(Ord. No. 23-2018 § 1, 8-20-18)
Sec. 21-234. Change of Ownership or Owner’s Identity or Legal Status.
   (a)   Notification of Change. A utility or wireless provider shall notify
the Village no less than thirty (30) days prior to the transfer of ownership of
any facility in the right-of-way or change in identity of the utility or
wireless provider. The new owner of the utility, wireless provider or the
facility shall have all the obligations and privileges enjoyed by the former
owner under the permit, if any, and applicable laws, ordinances, rules and
regulations, including this Article, with respect to the work and facilities in
the right-of-way.
   (b)   Amended Permit. A new owner shall request that any current permit be
amended to show current ownership. If the new owner fails to have a new or
amended permit issued in its name, the new owner shall be presumed to have
accepted, and agreed to be bound by, the terms and conditions of the permit if
the new owner uses the facility or allows it to remain on the Village’s right-
of-way.
   (c)   Insurance and Bonding.  All required insurance coverage or bonding
must be changed to reflect the name of the new owner upon transfer.
(Ord. No. 23-2018 § 1, 8-20-18)
Sec. 21-235. General Construction Standards.
   (a)   Standards and Principles. All construction in the right-of-way shall
be consistent with applicable ordinances, codes, laws rules and regulations,
and commonly recognized and accepted traffic control and construction
principles, sound engineering judgment and, where applicable, the principles
and standards set forth in the following IDOT publications, as amended from
time to time:
      (1)   Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction;
      (2)   Supplemental Specifications and Recurring Special Provisions;
      (3)   Highway Design Manual;
      (4)   Highway Standards Manual;
      (5)   Standard Specifications for Traffic Control Items;
      (6)   Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (92 Ill. Adm.
Code § 545);
      (7)   Flagger’s Handbook; and
      (8)   Work Site Protection Manual for Daylight Maintenance Operations.
   (b)   Interpretation of Municipal Standards and Principles. If a discrepancy
exists between or among differing principles and standards required by this
Article, the Director of Public Works shall determine, in the exercise of sound
engineering judgment, which principles apply and such decision shall be final.
If requested, the Director of Public Works shall state which standard or
principle will apply to the construction, maintenance, or operation of a
facility in the future.
(Ord. No. 23-2018 § 1, 8-20-18)
Sec. 21-236. Traffic Control.
   (a)   Minimum Requirements. The Village’s minimum requirements for traffic
protection are contained in the Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control
Devices and this Code.
   (b)   Warning Signs, Protective Devices, and Flaggers. The utility or
wireless provider is responsible for providing and installing warning signs,
protective devices and flaggers, when necessary, meeting applicable federal,
state, and local requirements for protection of the public and the utility’s or
wireless provider’s workers when performing any work on the rights-of-way.
   (c)   Interference with Traffic. All work shall be phased so that there is
minimum interference with pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
   (d)   Notice When Access is Blocked. At least forty-eight (48) hours prior
to beginning work that will partially or completely block access to any
residence, business or institution, the utility or wireless provider shall
notify the resident, business or institution of the approximate beginning time
and duration of such work; provided, however, that in cases involving emergency
repairs pursuant to Section
21-242, the utility shall provide such notice as is practicable under the
circumstances.
   (e)   Compliance. The utility or wireless provider shall take immediate
action to correct any deficiencies in traffic protection requirements that are
brought to the utility’s or wireless provider’s attention by the Village.
(Ord. No. 23-2018 § 1, 8-20-18)
Sec. 21-237. Location of Facilities.
   (a)   General Requirements. In addition to location requirements applicable
to specific types of facilities, all facilities, regardless of type, shall be
subject to the general location requirements of this subsection.
      (1)   No Interference with Village Facilities. No facilities shall be
placed in any location if the Director of Public Works determines that the
proposed location will require the relocation or displacement of any of the
Village’s utility facilities or will otherwise interfere with the operation or
maintenance of any of the Village’s utility facilities.
      (2)   Minimum Interference and Impact. The proposed location shall cause
only the minimum possible interference with the use of the right-of-way and
shall cause only the minimum possible impact upon, and interference with the
rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin said right-of-
way.
      (3)   No Interference with Travel. No facility shall be placed in any
location that interferes with the usual travel on such right-of-way.
      (4)   No Limitations on Visibility. No facility shall be placed in any
location so as to limit visibility of or by users of the right-of-way.
   (b)   Size of Utility Facilities. For utility facilities only, the proposed
installation shall use the smallest suitable vaults, boxes, equipment
enclosures, power pedestals, and/or cabinets then in use by the facility owner,
regardless of location, for the particular application. Wireless facilities
shall comply with size limitations describe in Section
21-229.
   (c)   Parallel Facilities Located Within Highways.
      (1)   Overhead Parallel Facilities. An overhead parallel facility may be
located within the right-of-way lines of a highway only if:
         a.   Lines are located as near as practicable to the right-of-way line
and as nearly parallel to the right-of-way line as reasonable pole alignment
will permit;
         b.   Where pavement is curbed, poles are as remote as practicable from
the curb with a minimum distance of two feet (0.6 m) behind the face of the
curb, where available;
         c.   Where pavement is uncurbed, poles are as remote from pavement
edge as practicable with minimum distance of four feet (1.2 m) outside the
outer shoulder line of the roadway and are not within the clear zone;
         d.   No pole is located in the ditch line of a highway; and
         e.   Any ground-mounted appurtenance is located within one foot (0.3
m) of the right-of-way line or as near as possible to the right-of-way line.
      (2)   Underground Parallel Facilities. An underground parallel facility
may be located within the right-of-way lines of a highway only if:
         a.   The facility is located as near the right-of-way line as
practicable and not more than eight (8) feet (2.4 m) from and parallel to the
right-of-way line;
         b.   A new facility may be located under the paved portion of a
highway only if other locations are impracticable or inconsistent with sound
engineering judgment (e.g., a new cable may be installed in existing conduit
without disrupting the pavement); and
         c.   In the case of an underground power or communications line, the
facility shall be located as near the right-of-way line as practicable and not
more than five (5) feet (1.5 m) from the right-of-way line and any above-
grounded appurtenance shall be located within one foot (0.3 m) of the right-of-
way line or as near as practicable.
   (d)   Facilities Crossing Highways.
      (1)   No Future Disruption. The construction and design of crossing
facilities installed between the ditch lines or curb lines of Village highways
may require the incorporation of materials and protections (such as encasement
or additional cover) to avoid settlement or future repairs to the roadbed
resulting from the installation of such crossing facilities.
      (2)   Cattle Passes, Culverts, or Drainage Facilities. Crossing
facilities shall not be located in cattle passes, culverts, or drainage
facilities.
      (3)   90 Degree Crossing Required. Crossing facilities shall cross at or
as near to a ninety (90) degree angle to the centerline as practicable.
      (4)   Overhead Power or Communication Facility. An overhead power or
communication facility may cross a highway only if:
         a.   It has a minimum vertical line clearance as required by ICC’s
rules entitled, “Construction of Electric Power and Communication Lines” (83
Ill. Adm. Code 305);
         b.   Poles are located within one foot (0.3 m) of the right-of-way
line of the highway and outside of the clear zone; and
         c.   Overhead crossings at major intersections are avoided.
      (5)   Underground Power or Communication Facility. An underground power
or communication facility may cross a highway only if:
         a.   The design materials and construction methods will provide
maximum maintenance-free service life; and
         b.   Capacity for the utility’s foreseeable future expansion needs is
provided in the initial installation.
      (6)   Markers. The Village may require the utility or wireless provider
to provide a marker at each right-of-way line where an underground facility
other than a power or communication facility crosses a highway. Each marker
shall identify the type of facility, the utility or wireless provider, and an
emergency phone number. Markers may also be eliminated as provided in current
Federal regulations. (49 C.F.R. §192.707 (1989)).
   (e)   Utility Facilities to be Located Within Particular Rights-of-Way. The
Village may require that utility facilities be located within particular
rights-of-way that are not highways, rather than within particular highways.
    (f)   Freestanding Facilities.
      (1)   The Village may restrict the location and size of any freestanding
facility located within a right-of-way.
      (2)   The Village may require any freestanding facility located within a
right-of-way to be screened from view.
   (g)   Utility Facilities Installed Above Ground.  Above ground utility
facilities may be installed only if:
      (1)   No other existing facilities in the area are located underground;
      (2)   New underground installation is not technically feasible; and
      (3)   The proposed installation will be made at a location, and will
employ suitable design and materials, to provide the greatest protection of
aesthetic qualities of the area being traversed without adversely affecting
safety. Suitable designs include, but are not limited to, self-supporting
armless, single-pole construction with vertical configuration of conductors and
cable. Existing utility poles and light standards shall be used wherever
practicable; the installation of additional utility poles is strongly
discouraged.
   (h)   Utility Facility Attachments to Bridges or Roadway Structures.
      (1)   Utility facilities may be installed as attachments to bridges or
roadway structures only where the utility has demonstrated that all other means
of accommodating the facility are not practicable. Other means shall include,
but are not limited to, underground, underwater, independent poles, cable
supports and tower supports, all of which are completely separated from the
bridge or roadway structure. Facilities transmitting commodities that are
volatile, flammable, corrosive, or energized, especially those under
significant pressure or potential, present high degrees of risk and such
installations are not permitted.
      (2)   A utility shall include in its request to accommodate a facility
installation on a bridge or roadway structure supporting data demonstrating the
impracticability of alternate routing. Approval or disapproval of an
application for facility attachment to a bridge or roadway structure will be
based upon the following considerations:
         a.   The type, volume, pressure or voltage of the commodity to be
transmitted and an evaluation of the resulting risk to persons and property in
the event of damage to or failure of the facility;
         b.   The type, length, value, and relative importance of the highway
structure in the transportation system;
         c.   The alternative routings available to the utility and their
comparative practicability;
         d.   The proposed method of attachment;
         e.   The ability of the structure to bear the increased load of the
proposed facility;
         f.   The degree of interference with bridge maintenance and painting;
         g.   The effect on the visual quality of the structure; and
         h.   The public benefit expected from the utility service as compared
to the risk involved.
   (i)   Not Applicable to Wireless Providers. The requirement under
Subsections (g) and (h) of this Section are only applicable to utilities, and
shall not apply to small wireless facility applicants. Wireless provider
applying to collocate small wireless facilities in the Village’s rights-of-way
must comply with he requirements of Section
21-229.
   (j)   Appearance Standards.
      (1)   The Village may require that utilities or wireless providers
install screening or otherwise camouflage facilities in particular locations in
order to preserve visual quality.
      (2)   A facility may be constructed only if its construction does not
require extensive removal or alteration of trees or terrain features visible to
the right-of-way user or to adjacent residents and property owners, and if it
does not impair the aesthetic quality of the lands being traversed.
(Ord. No. 23-2018 § 1, 8-20-18)
Sec. 21-238. Construction Methods and Materials.
   (a)   Standards and Requirements for Particular Types of Construction
Methods.
      (1)   Boring or Jacking.
         a.   Pits and Shoring.  Boring or jacking under rights-of-way shall be
accomplished from pits located at a minimum distance specified by the Director
of Public Works from the edge of the pavement. Pits for boring or jacking shall
be excavated no more than forty-eight (48) hours in advance of boring or
jacking operations and backfilled within forty-eight (48) hours after boring or
jacking operations are completed. While pits are open, they shall be clearly
marked and protected by barricades. Shoring shall be designed, erected,
supported, braced, and maintained so that it will safely support all vertical
and lateral loads that may be imposed upon it during the boring or jacking
operation.
         b.   Wet Boring or Jetting. Wet boring or jetting shall not be
permitted under the roadway.
         c.   Borings with Diameters Greater Than 6 Inches. Borings over six
inches (0.15 m) in diameter shall be accomplished with an auger and following
pipe, and the diameter of the auger shall not exceed the outside diameter of
the following pipe by more than one inch (25 mm).
         d.   Borings with Diameters 6 Inches or Less. Borings of six inches or
less in diameter may be accomplished by either jacking, guided with auger, or
auger and following pipe method.
         e.   Tree Preservation. Any facility located within the drip line of
any tree designated by the Village to be preserved or protected shall be bored
under or around the root system.
      (2)   Trenching. Trenching for facility installation, repair, or
maintenance on rights-of-way shall be done in accord with the applicable
portions of Section 603 of IDOT’s “Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction.”
         a   Length.  The length of open trench shall be kept to the
practicable minimum consistent with requirements for pipe-line testing. Only
one-half of any intersection may have an open trench at any time unless special
permission is obtained from the Director of Public Works.
         b   Open Trench and Excavated Material. Open trench and windrowed
excavated material shall be protected as required by Chapter 6 of the Illinois
Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. Where practicable, the excavated
material shall be deposited between the roadway and the trench as added
protection. Excavated material shall not be allowed to remain on the paved
portion of the roadway. Where right-of-way width does not allow for windrowing
excavated material off the paved portion of the roadway, excavated material
shall be hauled to an off-road location.
         c.   Drip Line of Trees. The utility or wireless provider shall not
trench within the drip line of any tree designated by the Village to be
preserved.
      (3)   Backfilling.
         a.   Any pit, trench, or excavation created during the installation of
facilities shall be backfilled for its full width, depth, and length using
methods and materials in accordance with IDOT’s “Standard Specifications for
Road and Bridge Construction.” When excavated material is hauled away or is
unsuitable for backfill, suitable granular backfill shall be used.
         b.   For a period of three years from the date construction of a
facility is completed, the utility or wireless provider shall be responsible to
remove and restore any backfilled area that has settled due to construction of
the facility. If so ordered by the Director of Public Works, the utility or
wireless provider, at its expense, shall remove any pavement and backfill
material to the top of the installed facility, place and properly compact new
backfill material, and restore new pavement, sidewalk, curbs, and driveways to
the proper grades, as determined by the Director of Public Works.
      (4)   Pavement Cuts. Pavement cuts for facility installation or repair
shall be permitted on a highway only if that portion of the highway is closed
to traffic. If a variance to the limitation set forth in this paragraph 4) is
permitted under Section
21-243, the following requirements shall apply:
         a.   Any excavation under pavements shall be backfilled and compacted
as soon as practicable with granular material of CA-6 or CA-10 gradation, as
designated by the Director of Public Works.
         b.   Restoration of pavement, in kind, shall be accomplished as soon
as practicable, and temporary repair with bituminous mixture shall be provided
immediately. Any subsequent failure of either the temporary repair or the
restoration shall be rebuilt upon notification by the Village.
         c.   All saw cuts shall be full depth.
         d.   For all rights-of-way which have been reconstructed with a
concrete surface/base in the last seven (7) years, or resurfaced in the last
three (3) years, permits shall not be issued unless such work is determined to
be an emergency repair or other work considered necessary and unforeseen before
the time of the reconstruction or unless a pavement cut is necessary for a
J.U.L.I.E. locate.
      (5)   Encasement.
         a.   Casing pipe shall be designed to withstand the load of the
highway and any other superimposed loads. The casing shall be continuous either
by one-piece fabrication or by welding or jointed installation approved by the
Village.
         b.   The venting, if any, of any encasement shall extend within one
foot (0.3 m) of the right-of-way line. No above-ground vent pipes shall be
located in the area established as clear zone for that particular section of
the highway.
         c.   In the case of water main or service crossing, encasement shall
be furnished between bore pits unless continuous pipe or Village approved
jointed pipe is used under the roadway. Casing may be omitted only if pipe is
installed prior to highway construction and carrier pipe is continuous or
mechanical joints are of a type approved by the Village. Bell and spigot type
pipe shall be encased regardless of installation method.
         d.   In the case of gas pipelines of 60 psig or less, encasement may
be eliminated.
         e.   In the case of gas pipelines or petroleum products pipelines with
installations of more than 60 psig, encasement may be eliminated only if: (1)
extra heavy pipe is used that precludes future maintenance or repair and (2)
cathodic protection of the pipe is provided;
         f.   If encasement is eliminated for a gas or petroleum products
pipeline, the facility shall be located so as to provide that construction does
not disrupt the right-of-way.
      (6)   Minimum Cover of Underground Facilities.  Cover shall be provided
and maintained at least in the amount specified in the following table for
minimum cover for the type of facility:
 
TYPE OF FACILITY                      MINIMUM COVER
Electric Lines                        30 Inches (0.8 m)
Communication, Cable or Video Service 18 to 24 Inches (0.6 m, as determined by
Lines                                 Village
Gas or Petroleum Products             30 Inches (0.8 m)
Water Line                            Sufficient Cover to Provide Freeze
                                      Protection
Sanitary Sewer, Storm Sewer, or       Sufficient Cover to Provide Freeze
Drainage Line                         Protection
 
   (b)   Standards and Requirements for Particular Types of Facilities.
      (1)   Electric Power or Communication Lines.
         a.   Code Compliance. Electric power or communications facilities
within any right-of-way shall be constructed, operated, and maintained in
conformity with the provisions of 83 Ill. Adm. Code Part 305 (formerly General
Order 160 of the Illinois Commerce Commission) entitled “Rules for Construction
of Electric Power and Communications Lines,” and the National Electrical Safety
Code.
         b.   Overhead Facilities. Overhead power or communication facilities
shall use single pole construction and, where practicable, joint use of poles
shall be used. Utilities and wireless providers shall make every reasonable
effort to design the installation so guys and braces will not be needed.
Variances may be allowed if there is no feasible alternative and if guy wires
are equipped with guy guards for maximum visibility.
         c.   Underground Facilities. (1) Cable may be installed by trenching
or plowing, provided that special consideration is given to boring in order to
minimize damage when crossing improved entrances and side roads. (2) If a
crossing is installed by boring or jacking, encasement shall be provided
between jacking or bore pits. Encasement may be eliminated only if: (i) the
crossing is installed by the use of “moles,” “whip augers,” or other approved
method which compress the earth to make the opening for cable installation or
(ii) the installation is by the open trench method which is only permitted
prior to roadway construction. (3) Cable shall be grounded in accordance with
the National Electrical Safety Code.
         d.   Burial of Drops.  All temporary service drops placed between
November 1 of the prior year and March 15 of the current year, also known as
snowdrops, shall be buried by May 31 of the current year, weather permitting,
unless otherwise permitted by the Village. Weather permitting, utilities shall
bury all temporary drops, excluding snowdrops, within ten (10) business days
after placement.
      (2)   Underground Facilities Other than Electric Power or Communication
Lines.  Underground facilities other than electric power or communication lines
may be installed by:
         a.   The use of “moles,” “whip augers,” or other approved methods
which compress the earth to move the opening for the pipe;
         b.   Jacking or boring with vented encasement provided between the
ditch lines or toes of slopes of the highway;
         c.   Open trench with vented encasement between ultimate ditch lines
or toes of slopes, but only if prior to roadway construction; or
         d.   Tunneling with vented encasement, but only if installation is not
possible by other means.
      (3)   Gas Transmission, Distribution and Service.  Gas pipelines within
rights-of-way shall be constructed, maintained, and operated in a Village
approved manner and in conformance with the Federal Code of the Office of
Pipeline Safety Operations, Department of Transportation, Part 192 -
Transportation of Natural and Other Gas by Pipeline: Minimum Federal Safety
Standards (49 CFR § 192), IDOT’s “Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction,” and all other applicable laws, rules, and regulations.
      (4)   Petroleum Products Pipelines. Petroleum products pipelines within
rights-of-way shall conform to the applicable sections of ANSI Standard Code
for Pressure Piping. (Liquid Petroleum Transportation Piping Systems ANSI-
B 31.4).
      (5)   Waterlines, Sanitary Sewer Lines, Storm Water Sewer Lines or
Drainage Lines.  Water lines, sanitary sewer lines, storm sewer lines, and
drainage lines within rights-of-way shall meet or exceed the recommendations of
the current “Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in
Illinois.”
      (6)   Ground Mounted Appurtenances. Ground mounted appurtenances to
overhead or underground facilities, when permitted within a right-of-way, shall
be provided with a vegetation-free area extending one foot (305 mm) in width
beyond the appurtenance in all directions. The vegetation-free area may be
provided by an extension of the mounting pad, or by heavy duty plastic or
similar material approved by the Director of Public Works. With the approval of
the Director of Public Works, shrubbery surrounding the appurtenance may be
used in place of vegetation-free area. The housing for ground-mounted
appurtenances shall be painted a neutral color to blend with the surroundings.
    (c)   Materials.
      (1)   General Standards. The materials used in constructing facilities
within rights-of-way shall be those meeting the accepted standards of the
appropriate industry, the applicable portions of IDOT’s “Standards
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction,” the requirements of the
Illinois Commerce Commission, or the standards established by other official
regulatory agencies for the appropriate industry.
      (2)   Material Storage on Right-of-Way.  No material shall be stored on
the right-of-way without the prior written approval of the Director of Public
Works. When such storage is permitted, all pipe, conduit, wire, poles, cross
arms, or other materials shall be distributed along the right-of-way prior to
and during installation in a manner to minimize hazards to the public or an
obstacle to right-of-way maintenance or damage to the right-of-way and other
property. If material is to be stored on right-of-way, prior approval must be
obtained from the Village.
      (3)   Hazardous Materials. The plans submitted by the utility or wireless
provider to the Village shall identify any hazardous materials that may be
involved in the construction of the new facilities or removal of any existing
facilities.
   (d)   Operational Restrictions.
      (1)   Construction operations on rights-of-way may, at the discretion of
the Village, be required to be discontinued when such operations would create
hazards to traffic or the public health, safety, and welfare. Such operations
may also be required to be discontinued or restricted when conditions are such
that construction would result in extensive damage to the right-of-way or other
property.
      (2)   These restrictions may be waived by the Director of Public Works
when emergency work is required to restore vital utility services.
      (3)   Unless otherwise permitted by the Village, the hours of
construction are those set forth for the construction of buildings as provided
in the Code.
   (e)   Location of Existing Facilities.  Any utility or wireless provider
proposing to construct facilities in the Village shall contact J.U.L.I.E. and
ascertain the presence and location of existing above-ground and underground
facilities within the rights-of-way to be occupied by its proposed facilities.
The Village will make its permit records available to a utility or wireless
provider for the purpose of identifying possible facilities. When notified of
an excavation or when requested by the Village or by J.U.L.I.E., a utility or
wireless provider shall locate and physically mark its underground facilities
within 48 hours, excluding weekends and holidays, in accordance with the
Illinois Underground Facilities Damage Prevention Act (220 ILCS 50/1, et seq.)
(Ord. No. 23-2018 § 1, 8-20-18)
Sec. 21-239. Vegetation Control.
   (a)   Electric Utilities - Compliance with State Laws and Regulations. An
electric utility shall conduct all tree-trimming and vegetation control
activities in the right-of-way in accordance with applicable Illinois laws and
regulations, and additionally, with such local franchise or other agreement
with the Village as permitted by law.
   (b)   Other Utilities or Wireless Providers - Tree Trimming Permit Required.
Tree trimming that is done by any other utility or wireless provider with
facilities in the right-of-way and that is not performed pursuant to applicable
Illinois laws and regulations specifically governing same, shall not be
considered a normal maintenance operation, but shall require the application
for, and the issuance of, a permit, in addition to any other permit required
under this Article.
      (1)   Application for Tree Trimming Permit. Applications for tree
trimming permits shall include assurance that the work will be accomplished by
competent workers with supervision who are experienced in accepted tree pruning
practices. Tree trimming permits shall designate an expiration date in the
interest of assuring that the work will be expeditiously accomplished.
      (2)   Damage to Trees. Poor pruning practices resulting in damaged or
misshapen trees will not be tolerated and shall be grounds for cancellation of
the tree trimming permit and for assessment of damages. The Village will
require compensation for trees extensively damaged and for trees removed
without authorization. The formula developed by the International Society of
Arboriculture will be used as a basis for determining the compensation for
damaged trees or unauthorized removal of trees. The Village may require the
removal and replacement of trees if trimming or radical pruning would leave
them in an unacceptable condition.
   (c)   Specimen Trees or Trees of Special Significance. The Village may
require that special measures be taken to preserve specimen trees or trees of
special significance. The required measures may consist of higher poles, side
arm extensions, covered wire or other means.
   (d)   Chemical Use.
      (1)   Except as provided in the following paragraph, no utility or
wireless provider shall spray, inject or pour any chemicals on or near any
trees, shrubs or vegetation in the Village for any purpose, including the
control of growth, insects or disease.
      (2)   Spraying of any type of brush-killing chemicals will not be
permitted on rights-of-way unless the utility or wireless provider demonstrates
to the satisfaction of the Director of Public Works that such spraying is the
only practicable method of vegetation control.
(Ord. No. 23-2018 § 1, 8-20-18)
Sec. 21-240. Removal, Relocation, or Modifications of Facilities.
   (a)   Notice.  Within ninety (90) days following written notice from the
Village, a utility or wireless provider shall, at its own expense, protect,
support, temporarily or permanently disconnect, remove, relocate, change or
alter the position of any facilities within the rights-of-way whenever the
Village has determined that such removal, relocation, change or alteration, is
reasonably necessary for the construction, repair, maintenance, or installation
of any Village improvement in or upon, or the operations of the Village in or
upon, the rights-of-way.
   (b)   Removal of Unauthorized Facilities. Within thirty (30) days following
written notice from the Village, any utility or wireless provider that owns,
controls, or maintains any unauthorized facility or related appurtenances
within the rights-of-way shall, at its own expense, remove all or any part of
such facilities or appurtenances from the rights-of-way. A facility is
unauthorized and subject to removal in the following circumstances:
      (1)   Upon expiration or termination of the permittee’s license or
franchise, unless otherwise permitted by applicable law;
      (2)   If the facility was constructed or installed without the prior
grant of a license or franchise, if required;
      (3)   If the facility was constructed or installed without prior issuance
of a required permit in violation of this Article; or
      (4)   If the facility was constructed or installed at a location not
permitted by the permittee’s license or franchise.
   (c)   Emergency Removal or Relocation of Facilities.  The Village retains
the right and privilege to cut or move any facilities located within the
rights-of-way of the Village, as the Village may determine to be necessary,
appropriate or useful in response to any public health or safety emergency. If
circumstances permit, the municipality shall attempt to notify the utility or
wireless provider, if known, prior to cutting or removing a facility and shall
notify the utility or wireless provider, if known, after cutting or removing a
facility.
   (d)   Wireless Provider Options upon Removal of a Municipal Utility Pole.
The Village may eliminate above-ground utility poles as long as such decision
is made on a nondiscriminatory basis. In the event the Village chooses to
eliminate a utility pole upon which a small wireless facility is collocated,
the Village will either: (1) install and maintain a reasonable alternative
utility pole or wireless support structure for the collocation of the small
wireless facility, or (2) offer to sell the utility pole to the wireless
provider at a reasonable cost; or (3) allow the wireless provider to install
its own utility pole so it can maintain service from that location.
   (e)   Abandonment of Facilities. Upon abandonment of a facility within the
rights-of-way of the Village, the utility or wireless provider shall notify the
Village within ninety (90) days. Following receipt of such notice the Village
may direct the utility or wireless provider to remove all or any portion of the
facility if the Director of Public Works determines that such removal will be
in the best interest of the public health, safety and welfare. In the event
that the Village does not direct the utility or wireless provider that
abandoned the facility to remove it, by giving notice of abandonment to the
Village, the abandoning utility or wireless provider shall be deemed to consent
to the alteration or removal of all or any portion of the facility by another
utility, wireless provider or person.
   (f)    Small Wireless Facilities- Deemed Abandoned. A small wireless
facility that is not operated for a continuous period of twelve (12) months
shall be considered abandoned. The owner of the facility shall remove the small
wireless facility within ninety (90) days after receipt of written notice from
the Village notifying the wireless provider of the abandonment. The notice
shall be sent by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, by the
Village to the owner at the last known address of the wireless provider. If the
small wireless facility is not removed within ninety (90) days of such notice,
the Village may remove or cause the removal of such facility pursuant to the
terms of its pole attachment agreement for municipal utility poles or through
whatever actions are provided for abatement of nuisances or by other law for
removal and cost recovery.
(Ord. No. 23-2018 § 1, 8-20-18)
Sec. 21-241. Clean-up and Restoration.
   The utility or wireless provider shall remove all excess material and
restore all turf and terrain and other property within ten (10) days after any
portion of the rights-of-way are disturbed, damaged or destroyed due to
construction or maintenance by the utility or wireless provider, all to the
satisfaction of the Village. This includes restoration of entrances and side
roads. Restoration of roadway surfaces shall be made using materials and
methods approved by the Director of Public Works. Such cleanup and repair may
be required to consist of backfilling, regrading, reseeding, resodding, or any
other requirement to restore the right-of-way to a condition substantially
equivalent to that which existed prior to the commencement of the project. The
time period provided in this Section may be extended by the Director of Public
Works for good cause shown.
(Ord. No. 23-2018 § 1, 8-20-18)
Sec. 21-242. Maintenance and Emergency Maintenance.
   (a)   General.  Facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or
within rights-of-way are to be maintained by or for the utility or wireless
provider in a manner satisfactory to the Village and at the utility’s or
wireless provider’s expense.
   (b)   Emergency Maintenance Procedures. Emergencies may justify non-
compliance with normal procedures for securing a permit:
      (1)   If an emergency creates a hazard on the traveled portion of the
right-of-way, the utility or wireless provider shall take immediate steps to
provide all necessary protection for traffic on the highway or the public on
the right-of-way including the use of signs, lights, barricades or flaggers. If
a hazard does not exist on the traveled way, but the nature of the emergency is
such as to require the parking on the shoulder of equipment required in repair
operations, adequate signs and lights shall be provided. Parking on the
shoulder in such an emergency will only be permitted when no other means of
access to the facility is available.
      (2)   In an emergency, the utility or wireless provider shall, as soon as
possible, notify the Director of Public Works or his or her duly authorized
agent of the emergency, informing him or her as to what steps have been taken
for protection of the traveling public and what will be required to make the
necessary repairs. If the nature of the emergency is such as to interfere with
the free movement of traffic, the Village police shall be notified immediately.
      (3)   In an emergency, the utility or wireless provider shall use all
means at hand to complete repairs as rapidly as practicable and with the least
inconvenience to the traveling public.
   (c)   Emergency Repairs. The utility or wireless provider must file in
writing with the Village a description of the repairs undertaken in the right-
of-way within 48 hours after an emergency repair.
(Ord. No. 23-2018 § 1, 8-20-18)
Sec. 21-243. Variances.
   (a)   Request for Variance.  A utility or wireless provider requesting a
variance from one or more of the provisions of this Article must do so in
writing as a part of the permit application. The request shall identify each
provision of this Article from which a variance is requested and the reasons
why a variance should be granted.
   (b)   Authority to Grant Variances. The Director of Public Works shall
decide whether a variance is authorized for each provision of this Article
identified in the variance request on an individual basis.
   (c)   Conditions for Granting of Variance. The Director of Public Works may
authorize a variance only if the utility requesting the variance has
demonstrated that:
      (1)   One or more conditions not under the control of the utility or
wireless provider (such as terrain features or an irregular right-of-way line)
create a special hardship that would make enforcement of the provision
unreasonable, given the public purposes to be achieved by the provision; and
      (2)   All other designs, methods, materials, locations or facilities that
would conform with the provision from which a variance is requested are
impracticable in relation to the requested approach.
   (d)   Additional Conditions for Granting of a Variance.  As a condition for
authorizing a variance, the Director of Public Works may require the utility or
wireless provider requesting the variance to meet reasonable standards and
conditions that may or may not be expressly contained within this Article but
which carry out the purposes of this Article.
   (e)   Right to Appeal. Any utility or wireless provider aggrieved by any
order, requirement, decision or determination, including denial of a variance,
made by the Director of Public Works under the provisions of this Article shall
have the right to appeal to Mayor. The application for appeal shall be
submitted in writing to the Mayor within thirty (30) days after the date of
such order, requirement, decision or determination. The Mayor shall commence
his consideration of the appeal by offering a hearing not less than fourteen
(14) days after receipt of the appeal and shall make a final decision within
seven (7) days after such hearing.
(Ord. No. 23-2018 § 1, 8-20-18)
Sec. 21-244. Dispute Resolution for Small Wireless Facilities.
   The Circuit Court of Cook County shall have exclusive jurisdiction to
resolve all disputes arising under the Small Wireless Facilities Deployment
Act. Pending resolution of a dispute concerning rates for collocation of small
wireless facilities on municipal utility poles within the right-of-way, the
Village shall allow the collocating person to collocate on its poles at annual
rates of no more than $200 per year per municipal utility pole, with rates to
be determined upon final resolution of the dispute.
(Ord. No. 23-2018 § 1, 8-20-18)
Sec. 21-245. Penalties.
   Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with
any of the provisions of this Article shall be subject to fine in accordance
with the penalty provisions of Section
1-9 of the Code. There may be times when the Village will incur delay or other
costs, including third party claims, because the utility will not or cannot
perform its duties under its permit and this Article. Unless the utility or
wireless provider shows that another allocation of the cost of undertaking the
requested action is appropriate, the utility or wireless provider shall bear
the Village’s costs of damages and its costs of installing, maintaining,
modifying, relocating, or removing the facility that is the subject of the
permit. No other administrative agency or commission may review or overrule a
permit related cost apportionment of the Village. Sanctions may be imposed upon
a utility or wireless provider that does not pay the costs apportioned to it.
(Ord. No. 23-2018 § 1, 8-20-18)
Sec. 21-246. Enforcement.
   Nothing in this Article shall be construed as limiting any additional or
further remedies that the Village may have for enforcement of this Article.
(Ord. No. 23-2018 § 1, 8-20-18)
Secs. 21-247 - 21-249. Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. CURB CUTS AND ACCESS TO VILLAGE RIGHTS-OF-WAY
Sec. 21-250. Prohibited Activities.
   (a)   Curb cut. No person shall break or cut away any portion of any curb or
gutter on any village street, alley, or public right-of-way without first
securing a curb cut permit authorizing such construction.
   (b)   Establishing new driveway or access way. No person shall use,
establish or create a driveway or access way to any village street, alley, or
public right-of-way without first securing a curb cut permit authorizing the
establishment of such driveway or access way.
   (c)   Duplicate permits not required. A single curb cut permit may authorize
the curb cut and the creation of a new driveway or access way.
   (d)   Change in use or intensity of traffic. No person shall use any
existing driveway or access way to any village street, alley, or public right-
of-way (even if a curb cut permit has been issued therefor) if the change in
use of the property being serviced will increase or intensify the vehicular
traffic using such driveway or access way without first securing a curb cut
permit authorizing the change in use of such driveway or access way. The
granting of a curb cut permit only allows such vehicular traffic as indicated
in the application therefor and any intensity thereof shall require an
additional curb cut permit. The use of an existing driveway or access way for
which a curb cut permit has never been issued only allows such vehicular
traffic as exists on August 18, 2008 and any intensity thereof shall require an
additional curb cut permit.
   (e)   Sump pumps. Curb cuts for sump pump discharge are prohibited.
   (f)   State highways. No curb cut or access to a state highway shall be
permitted except as provided by a permit issued by the Illinois Department of
Transportation.
   (g)   County highways. No curb cut or access to a county highway shall be
permitted except as provided by a permit issued by Cook County Department of
Highways.
(Ord. 23-2008 § 1, 8-18-08)
Sec. 21-251. Procedure.
   (a)   Procedure. An application shall be filed for a curb cut permit with
the director of the department of public works upon such forms as required by
him or her.
   (b)   Fee. The fee for a curb cut permit shall be $5 per lineal foot.
(Ord. 23-2008 § 1, 8-18-08)
Sec. 21-252. Standards.
   Curb cut permits shall be issued in accordance with the following
guidelines:
   (a)   On major or collector streets, no curb cut permit shall be issued for
a location within 64 feet of the right-of-way line of any intersecting major or
collector street;
   (b)   On major, collector, or minor streets, no curb cut permit shall be
issued within 24 feet of the right-of-way line of any intersecting minor
street;
   (c)   On minor streets, no curb cut permit shall be issued within 24 feet of
the right-of-way of any intersecting major or collector street.
   (d)   No curb cut permit shall be issued within three feet of the lot line.
   (e)   No curb cut permit shall be issued within 20 feet of another curb cut
or driveway.
   (f)   For single-family residential property, no more than one curb cut or
driveway is permitted.
   (g)   No curb cut permit shall allow access to a commercial property from a
residential property.
   (h)   No curb cut permit shall allow access to allow access to a property
not within the village limits.
   (i)   No curb cut permit shall be issued if a dangerous traffic pattern or
danger to pedestrians would result.
   (j)   No curb cut permit shall be issued allowing a driveway in excess of 30
feet in width except that the maximum size for a driveway for a single-family
residential property shall be 20 feet in width.
The Director of the Department of Public Work is hereby authorized to vary the
above guidelines in the event that hardship is established not due to the
property owner or prior owners of the property.
(Ord. 23-2008 § 1, 8-18-08)
Sec. 21-253. Construction Standards.
   All construction of curb cuts, driveways, and access ways shall meet the
specifications provided by the director of the department of public works, or
in the absence of such specifications, shall meet the requirements of the
Illinois Department of Transportation standard specifications for road and
bridge construction.
(Ord. 23-2008 § 1, 8-18-08)
Chapter 22
SUBDIVISIONS
Art. I.   Plat Approval, §§ 22-1--22-10
Art. II.   Plat Requirements, §§ 22-11--22-20
Art. III.   Public Improvements, §§ 22-21--22-30
ARTICLE I. PLAT APPROVAL
Sec. 22-1. Plat required.
No land shall be divided, subdivided or resubdivided into lots or parcels
(including tax divisions) and no condominium units shall be created unless a
plat has been approved by ordinance passed by the board of trustees.
Sec. 22-2.    Form of plat.
The form of plat shall meet the requirements of the Plat Act (765 ILCS 205/0.01
et seq.).
Sec. 22-3. Public hearing.
A public hearing on any plat which does not conform to the requirements of the
Evergreen Park Zoning Code shall be conducted by the zoning board of appeals
and notice shall be provided as set forth in Article IV of the Evergreen Park
Zoning Code. No public hearing shall be required for a plat which conforms to
the requirements of the Evergreen Park Zoning Code. The board of trustees may
grant a variation to any provision of this chapter or any subdivision
requirement and shall take into consideration existing development in an effort
to foster economic development and growth within the village.
Sec. 22-4. Recording.
The final plat of subdivision shall be recorded by the village and shall not be
released after village approval is signed thereon until recorded.
Sec. 22-5.    Fees.
All fees incurred by the village in reviewing and recording the plat (including
engineering and legal fees) must be paid by the owner prior to recording.
ARTICLE II. PLAT REQUIREMENTS
Sec. 22-11. Lot sizes.
Minimum lot sizes are set forth in the Evergreen Park Zoning Code.
Sec. 22-12. Structures.
Except in non-residential districts, only one main structure may be located or
constructed on a lot. The village may condition the recording of a plat upon
the demolition of structures on the subdivided property.
Sec. 22-13. Design of residential structures.
Residential structures located on adjacent lots shall not be similar in design,
style and color. All residential structure design, style and color must be
approved by the building commissioner concurrent with the issuance of the
building permit.
Sec. 22-14. Residential driveway location.
Residential driveways located on adjacent lots shall not be contiguous to each
other except when necessary because of existing driveways, utility services or
except where landscaping of not less than 20 feet wide is located between the
driveways. All driveway locations must be approved by the building commissioner
concurrent with the issuance of the building permit.
Sec. 22-15. Dedication.
Right-of-way for public street and public alley (if required by the location)
shall be dedicated on the plat at no cost to the village.
Sec. 22-16. Easements.
All public utilities not located within the public right-of-way shall be
located in a public easement. Adequate provision shall be made on each plat for
public utility easements and private utility easements.
Sec. 22-17. Topography.
The topography of all lots and the elevation of structures to be constructed
thereon shall be determined and set by the building commissioner. If necessary
for drainage, the village may require the installation of rear yard storm sewer
catch basins, which condition shall be incorporated into the building permit.
ARTICLE III. PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS
Sec. 22-21. Public improvements.
No plat shall be recorded until such time as required public improvements have
been constructed, the construction has been guaranteed as provided in Sec. 22-
12 or the construction will be by the village pursuant to a special assessment
or a special service area. Every lot shall have access to a curb and gutter
public street, water and sanitary sewer supplied by the village.
The design of all public improvements shall be subject to the approval of the
village Engineer and shall take into consideration existing development in the
village. Where applicable, public improvements shall be constructed to meet the
Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction issued by the Illinois
Department of Transportation.
A five foot public sidewalk shall be constructed on all sides of the lot
bordering a public right-of-way and if the lot is a corner lot, the sidewalks
(even if existing) and curbs shall be made handicapped accessible. Sidewalk
construction is not a prerequisite to recording and such shall be a condition
of any building permit issued for the adjoining lot.
Sec. 22-22. Storm water retention.
All subdivisions shall comply with the applicable provisions of the
Metropolitan Water Reclamation District of Greater Chicago concerning storm
water retention.
Sec. 22-23. Letter of credit.
The construction of all public improvements must be guaranteed by a letter of
credit in an amount not less than 110% of the estimated cost of work, labor,
and materials. The letter of credit must be issued by a financial institution
authorized by state or federal law to issue letters of credit. The form of
letter of credit shall be approved by the village Attorney. The expiration date
of the letter of credit shall not be less than two years. Periodically, while
construction of public improvements is proceeding, the letter of credit may be
reduced by the amount of the public improvements constructed as approved by the
village Engineer, but no reduction shall cause the letter of credit to be less
than 10% of the total cost of such improvements.
Sec. 22-24. Public improvement warranty.
All public improvements not constructed by the village must be maintained and
warranted for a period of not less than 12 months following final completion of
all public improvements. Such warranty must be provided by means of a letter of
credit in an amount not less than 10% of the cost of such public improvements.
Sec. 22-25. Subdivision recapture agreements.
Whenever public improvements are required to be installed as a condition to the
recording of a plat, and where, in the opinion of the board of trustees, such
public improvements may be used for the benefit of property not in the
subdivision and such public improvements are to be dedicated to the public, the
board of trustees may by contract agree to reimburse and may reimburse a
portion of the cost of such public improvements from fees charged to the owners
of property not within the subdivision, but only when and as collected from
such owners. Any such subdivision recapture agreement shall be recorded and
shall serve as notice that use of the public improvements is not permitted
until payment of the recapture fee. Unless otherwise determined by the board of
trustees, the amount of the recapture fee shall be based upon the front footage
of the lot in relation to all property which can use the public improvements
and the cost of the public improvements, including land acquisition.
Chapter 24
WATER, SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL*
Art. I. In General, §§ 24.1-24-40
Art. II. Municipal Water System, §§ 24.41-24-155
   Div. 1. Generally, §§ 24-41-24-70 '
   Div. 2. Taps and Connections, §§ 24-71-24-100
   Div. 3. Meters, §§ 24-101-24-125
   Div. 4. User Rates and Charges, §§ 24-126-24-155
Art. III. Sewers and Sewage Disposal, §§ 24-156-24.241
   Div. 1. Generally, §§ 24-156-24-175
   Div. 2. Building Sewers and Connections, §§ 24-176-24-200
   Div. 3. User Rates and Charges, §§ 24-201-24-230
   Div. 4. Discharge and Use Restrictions, §§ 24-231-24-241
   Div. 5. Cost-sharing program, §§ 24-250
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
   *Cross references—Health, ch.
9; nuisances, ch.
14; solid waste, ch.
20; plumbing, § 5-136 et seq.
   State law reference—Powers of home rule units, Ill. Const. art. WI, § 6.
Sec. 24-1. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
   Department shall mean the sewer and water department.
   Superintendent shall mean the superintendent of the department.
(Code 1965, § 31-1)
   Cross reference—Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.
Sec. 24-2. Department established.
The waterworks system and sewerage system in the village shall be maintained
and operated together as a combined waterworks and sewerage system.
(Code 1965, § 31-1)
Sec. 24-3. Superintendent—Office created; duties.
   (a)   There shall be a superintendent of the department to be appointed by
the mayor and board of trustees, who shall have supervision over all buildings
and equipment used in the furnishing of water in the village, shall see that
the object and purposes of the department are carried out, and that the
combined waterworks and sewerage system is conducted on an economical,
business-like basis. For this purpose it shall be the duty of the
superintendent and all of the officers, employees and servants of the
department to enforce all the provisions of this chapter and to observe and
obey and carry out the orders and directions of the village board.
   (b)   Where the streets are required to be opened for repairs or extensions,
the superintendent shall cooperate with the superintendent of streets for the
protection of the public against accidents during such repairs and extensions.
He shall prepare and keep in his office a complete atlas of the waterworks and
sewerage system, with all valves, hydrants, water service connections and other
appurtenances distinctly recorded therein.
(Code 1965, § 31-2)
Sec. 24-4. Same—Monthly report.
The superintendent shall, upon the first of each and every month, or oftener if
required, submit a report in writing to the mayor and board of trustees of all
moneys collected by him, the account whereon collected, and of any and all
other matters connected with his office.
(Code 1965, § 31-3)
Sec. 24-5. Same—Books.
The superintendent shall keep, or cause to be kept, full and complete books of
accounts, showing in detail all moneys received by him, with dates and sources,
and all matters pertaining to his office in a clear and methodical manner. He
shall also keep such books as the mayor and board of trustees may from time to
time direct. All such books, accounts and papers pertaining to the office shall
at all times be open to the inspection of the mayor and board of trustees or
any member of committee thereof.
(Code 1965, § 31-4)
Sec. 24-6. Control of department.
The department, under the direction of the superintendent and such other
officers and employees as may be from time to time lawfully appointed, shall
have the supervision, management and control, subject to the mayor and board of
trustees, of the maintenance, enlargement and operation of the combined
waterworks and sewerage systems owned and controlled by the village, the
procuring and selling of water, and all matters and things connected with the
operation, maintenance and extension of the combined waterworks and sewerage
system, and preserving the property belonging thereto.
(Code 1965, § 31-5)
Sec. 24-7. Enforcement.
It shall be the duty of the superintendent and police of the village, and all
persons in the employ of the village having police power, to enforce the
provisions of all ordinances, rules and regulations respecting the sewer and
water system and to arrest or cause to be arrested all persons violating the
same.
(Code 1965, § 31-6)
Sec. 24-8. Compensation.
The superintendent and other officers and employees of the department shall
receive as compensation for their services amounts to be fixed by the board of
trustees from time to time.
Sec. 24-9. Department to read meters, collect rates, issue permits.
The superintendent, or such officer or employee of the department as he shall
direct, shall read water meters, collect the water rates and issue water
permits.
Sec. 24-10. Connection permit required.
No connection shall be made with the sewer and water system without a proper
permit from the department.
Sec. 24-11. Work; manner; supervision of superintendent.
All work done in the streets and alleys or public places of the village, in
connection with the sewer and water system, shall be done in a thorough and
workmanlike manner and shall be under the supervision and direction of the
superintendent and subject to his approval.
Sec. 24-12. Excavations.
All earth removed in excavating for sewer and water service pipes shall be
returned to the trenches from which it was taken and shall be replaced in
layers not exceeding six (6) inches in depth. Each layer shall be thoroughly
compacted by ramming, and the earth shall be moistened sufficiently to permit
the return of all the earth to the trenches by ramming as above specified. When
completed, the surface of the backfilling in the trenches shall not be higher
than the general surface of the ground on either side of same, and the roadways
of all streets shall be left, and shall be maintained for a period of one (1)
year, in as good condition for travel as they were before the commencement of
such work.
Sec. 24-13. Statement of work.
A complete statement in writing shall be made to the superintendent by the
person doing the work of all connections made with the sewer and water system.
Sec. 24-14. Outdoor water use restrictions.
   (a)   No person shall, during the period of May fifteenth through September
fifteenth, permit or sprinkle any lawn, garden or landscape area during the
hours of 12:00 midnight to 7:00 a.m., 11:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m., or 11:00 p.m. to
12:00 midnight. Lawn sprinkling shall not occur on consecutive days and is only
allowed on an odd/even basis - sprinkling is permitted on odd calendar days if
the last digit of the street address is an odd number or on even calendar days
if the last digit of the street address is an even number. New lawns less than
three months old are exempt from the foregoing restrictions.
   (b)   No person shall sprinkle any lawn, garden or landscape area during
prohibited hours after a temporary emergency water shortage is declared by the
mayor prohibiting the same.
   (c)   No person shall use water for any outside purpose, including but not
limited to, watering of lawns; watering of gardens; watering of landscaping;
washing of cars; washing of outside areas such as windows, buildings, sidewalks
or driveways; or filling of swimming pools during prohibited hours after a
temporary emergency water shortage is declared by the mayor prohibiting the
same.
   (d)   For the purposes of this section, the work "sprinkle" means the use of
any device for distributing water over an area not under the active control and
in the possession of a person such as by a mechanical or automatic sprinkler or
sprinkler system.
   (e)   For the purposes of this section, the word "watering" means the
distribution of water over an area under the active control and in the
possession of a person such as by hose or sprinkling can.
   (f)   All new and replacement sprinkler systems shall be equipped with a
WaterSense labeled irrigation controller and shall otherwise be in compliance
with Section 2.5(g) of the Illinois Plumbing License Law.
(Am. Ord. No. 21-2015 § 2, 9-8-15)
Sec. 24-15. Well Water.
   (a)   No person (including the Village and any other unit of government)
shall install any potable water supply well or use any well for the purpose of
obtaining a potable water supply in the Village.
   (b)   No person (including the Village and any other unit of government)
shall drill a well in order to obtain a potable water supply for use in or
outside of the Village.
   (c)   Well water may be used only for outdoor watering of lawn, garden and
landscape areas.
   (d)   No person shall connect any pipe containing water supplied by the
Village with water supplied from any well.
Secs. 24-16—24-40. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. MUNICIPAL WATER SYSTEM
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 24-41. Access to premises.
The superintendent and other authorized persons shall have free access to any
premises in which water is introduced for the purpose of examining the fixtures
and pipes at any time between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any day.
Sec. 24-42. Damage; village not liable.
All connections and water applied for under this article, and all the water
used hereunder, shall be upon the express condition that the village shall not
be liable, nor shall any claim be made against it for damage or injury caused
by reason of the breakage of any main, branches, service pipes, apparatus or
appurtenances connected with the system or plant; any part or portion of the
plant; for any interruption of the supply by reason of the breakage of
machinery; or by reason of stoppage, alteration, extension and renewals.
Sec. 24-43. Repairs; liability of owner or tenant; exception.
All repairs to service pipes and connections therefrom shall be at the expense
of the owner or tenant of the premises supplied, excepting repairs on the
section of the pipe included between the corporation cock at the main and the
curb cock in the parkway. (Code 1965, § 31-16)
Sec. 24-44. Equipment to be purchased from village.
All corporation cocks and goosenecks, curb cocks and buffalo or shutoff boxes
and meter boxes installed in connection with the water system of the village
must be purchased through the village.
(Code 1965, § 31-80)
Sec. 24-45. Obstructing access.
No person shall in any manner obstruct or cause to be obstructed the free
access of any duly authorized officer or employee of the village to any stop
cock, water meter, elevator dial, buffalo or shutoff box or connection with any
water main or service pipe by means of any coal, lumber, brick, building
material or by any other means or device whatsoever, or to use or prevent free
access thereto by such officer or employee whenever such officer or employee
shall desire access thereto.
(Code 1965, § 31-81)
Sec. 24-46. Breaking of seal.
No seal placed by the department for the protection of any meter, valve,
fitting or other water connection shall be defaced or broken except on written
authority from the superintendent.
(Code 1965, § 31-93)
Sec. 24-47. Persons not to supply other persons with water.
No person, whether owner or occupant, in possession or control of any building,
structure or premises into which water is supplied through the village sewer
system, shall be allowed, without permission from the mayor and board of
trustees of the village, to supply other persons or families, or to supply
water from such building or premises to any building, structure or premises,
violates any of the foregoing provisions of this section, the supply of water
to the building, structure or premises of such person shall be shut off and
stopped forthwith, and the water shall not again be turned on to such building,
structure or premises from which it was cut off until there shall have been
paid to the village such sum of money as the mayor and board of trustees of the
village shall deem properly due the village.
(Code 1965, § 31-18)
Sec. 24-48. Unauthorized persons turning on water.
No person not duly authorized to do so shall turn on any service cock or use
water therefrom when so turned on. Any person so using or wasting water in such
unlawful manner shall be liable to pay therefor at the regular water rates
without discount.
(Code 1965, § 31-20)
Sec. 24-49. Hydrants, plugs; personal use prohibited.
All hydrants or plugs placed in the village for fire purposes, are hereby
declared to be the public hydrants. No person, except such as have been
authorized by the board of trustees, shall open or draw water therefrom, or in
any manner interfere with same except in case of fire. (Code 1965, § 31-39)
Sec. 24-50. Obtaining service by fraudulent representations.
If after the water supply shall have been turned on to any building, structure
or premises, it shall be found by any officer or employee of the village, that
fraudulent representations have been made by an applicant for such water supply
or that water is being used in or upon such building, structure or premises for
purposes not set forth in the application made for such water supply, or that
there is wilful and unreasonable use or waste of water, the superintendent or
his duly authorized agent shall have the authority, and it shall be his duty,
to cut off and stop the supply of water to such building, structure or premises
forthwith, and the water shall not be turned on to such building, structure or
premises until the person responsible for such fraudulent representation or for
such use of water or wilful or unreasonable waste thereof shall pay to the
village such additional sum of money for such water supply or on account of
such unreasonable waste of water as the mayor and board of trustees shall find
properly to be due the village.
(Code 1965, § 31-19)
Sec. 24-51. Permit for alteration, change, etc., to meter, pipe.
No alteration, change of location or addition of any kind shall be made to any
water meter, water cock or service pipe, connected in any way with the supply
to any building or premises, without first obtaining a written permit from the
superintendent.
(Code 1965, § 31-28)
Secs. 24-52—24-70. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. TAPS AND CONNECTIONS
Sec. 24-71. Water connections required.
In all cases where a standard water main is installed in any street, alley or
other public way in the village, all water users located on any lot or parcel
of real estate fronting or abutting on any such street, alley or other public
way shall make or cause to be made connection to such standard water main and
pay the tapping charges therefor within six (6) months. Such users shall
discontinue, within the same period of time, any connection which they may have
had with any temporary water line.
(Code 1965, § 31-76)
Sec. 24-72. Special connections for fire purposes.
Any person, being a regular water consumer, may be permitted by the board of
trustees to make special connections with the street mains, together with
hydrants and house cocks, to be used in case of fire. For such permit, and for
all water used for fire purposes, there will be no charge, but all such work in
connection with the water system must be done by the village or under the
direction of the superintendent.
(Code 1965, § 31-11)
Sec. 24-73. Connection to system; permit required; application, issuance.
   (a)   Any person desiring to make any connection with the water system or
plant, or use water therefrom, shall first make application to the
superintendent upon a blank form or forms to be furnished by the department.
   (b)   The application shall contain an agreement on the part of the
applicant that all the rules and regulations, conditions and provisions of any
section of this Code or ordinance relating to the water and sewer system will
be complied with; that all water rates, assessments and rents, and all fines
and penalties assessed, charged or imposed against the applicant or the
property described in the application will be paid. When the applicant
hereunder has complied with all the provisions of this Code and ordinances of
the village, a permit shall then be issued by the superintendent authorizing
the connection to be made and specifying the size thereof.
(Code 1965, § 31-12)
Sec. 24-74. Authorization of work by permit; manner of making connection.
   (a)   All plumbing and plumbing work, and all excavating, filling and
replacement of pavement, shall be done by a plumber authorized by the
provisions of this Code and ordinances of the village to do such plumbing;
provided, however, all such replacement of pavement shall be done by the
village in accordance with the provisions of this Code or other applicable
ordinances. The permit shall authorize any such plumber to do such plumbing and
plumbing work as is described in the permit.
   (b)   No service pipe shall be laid or used to supply water to two (2) or
more distinct premises or buildings.
(Code 1965, § 31-13)
Sec. 24-75. Water permit fees.
   The Director of the Department of Public Works is hereby authorized to and
shall promulgate a schedule of fees for the connection to the Village water
system, purchase of materials and supplies, repairs, disconnections, and other
work performed by the Village. No connection shall be made to the Village water
system nor shall any water be drawn from the Village water system until all
fees are paid.
(Code 1965, § 31-59) (Ord. No. 18-2008, § 1, 6-16-08)
Sec. 24-76. Persons authorized to tap water main.
Whenever any permit authorizes a connection to a water main of the village, the
connection shall be made by a licensed plumbing contractor under the
supervision of an employee of the village designated by the Director or Deputy
Director of the Department of Public Works. Prior to making any connection, not
less than 24 hours notice shall be provided to the Department of Public Works
and the approval shall be given for the time for making the connection.
(Code 1965, § 31-77) (Ord. No. 7-2006 § 1, 2-6-06)
Sec. 24-77. Duty to install, maintain service pipe; minimum pipe size.
Every person supplied with water from the village water system shall, at his
own cost and expense, have installed and kept in repair all pipes leading from
the buffalo or shutoff box to his building, structure or premises which are
supplied with water through such service pipe. All service pipes laid from the
water main to the buffalo or shutoff box, and from the buffalo or shutoff box
to the building, structure or premises, shall not be less than one inch
internal diameter if installed after January 1, 2006.
(Code 1965, § 31-72) (Ord. No. 7-2006 § 1, 2-6-06)
Sec. 24-78. Size of connection to main.
No connection with any water main of the village shall be less than one inch if
installed after January 1, 2006.
(Code 1965, § 31-79) (Ord. No. 7-2006 § 1, 2-6-06)
Sec. 24-79. Maximum distance from trenches.
No water service shall be laid nearer than six (6) feet from a parallel trench.
(Code 1965, § 31-32)
Sec. 24-80. Goosenecks required; support.
A gooseneck shall be provided for each service pipe and must be supported by
means of brick built up from the bottom of the trench.
(Code 1965, § 31-33)
Sec. 24-81. Service pipe; installation, testing.
The installation of all service pipe must be done in a workmanlike manner,
under the supervision of the superintendent and shall withstand a test of one
hundred twenty-five (125) pounds pressure for a period of ten (10) minutes
without leaking.
(Code 1965, § 31-34)
Sec. 24-82. Shutoff box pipe.
The pipe to be used in construction of the service pipe from the shutoff box to
the meter shall be of lead pipe of the same specifications as prescribed for
the service pipe between the water main and the shutoff box.
(Code 1965, § 31-37)
Sec. 24-83. Buffalo boxes required; installation.
There shall be a shutoff provided for every connection or top which shutoff
must be in what is commonly called a buffalo box, located no closer than two
(2) feet from the outer sidewalk edge. Each and every meter shall be set in a
meter vault of not less than eighteen (18) inches in internal diameter with a
steel or cast iron lid or cover, except where there are heated basements in
which event the meter can be installed in such basement.
(Code 1965, § 31-36)
Sec. 24-84. Manner of installation of service pipes.
All service pipes shall be so laid so as to prevent freezing, breaking or
rupture by settling. (Code 1965, § 31-35)
Secs. 24-85—24-100. Reserved.
DIVISION 3. METERS
Sec. 24-101. Required; type; ownership.
   (a)   Required. All water consumers supplied by the village shall be
supplied through meters only.
   (b)   Type. The mayor and board of trustees shall in all cases determine the
kind and pattern of water meters to be adopted and no other kind shall be
installed at any time.
   (c)   Ownership. All meters, used in connection with the water system, shall
be and remain for all time the property of the village and shall be purchased
by the village.
(Code 1965, § 31-87)
Sec. 24-102. Interference with superintendent.
It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with, prevent or obstruct the
superintendent or such other person or inspector in his work under this
article. Every consumer of water shall take the water upon the conditions
prescribed in this article.
(Code 1965, § 31-88)
Sec. 24-103. Interfering with meters; stopcock or valve required.
After the meter is placed, only officers or employees of the department shall
be allowed to repair, remove or in any manner interfere with the same. A
stopcock or valve shall be placed on each side of the meter.
(Code 1965, § 31-89)
Sec. 24-104. Meter location.
Water meters shall be located at such place and in such manner as the village
through its board of trustees shall direct, and boxes or vaults in which such
meters are to be placed shall be in accordance with specifications to be
prescribed by the village. Such boxes or vaults must be so constructed as to
prevent freezing of water flowing through such meters. Vaults must be kept in
such condition so that meters may be read at any time.
(Code 1965, § 31-90)
Sec. 24-105. Repairs to meters; liability for damages.
The cost of keeping each meter in repair shall be paid by the person upon whose
application such meter was installed or repaired, as soon as the bill therefor
is presented. The person upon whose application any meter is installed shall be
liable for any breakage or any loss or damage to such meter in any way, except
by ordinary use and wear, and the cost of making good such loss or damage shall
be paid by the person upon whose application such meter was installed or
repaired as soon as the bill for same is presented, and the amount therefor
shall be a lien against the premises for which such meter was installed, to the
extent and with the same effect as water rates. If a water meter shall have
become worn out and unfit for use, the consumer may have a new meter installed
without charge to such person.
(Code 1965, § 31-91)
Sec. 24-106. Bypassing meters prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to bypass any water meters by any device
which permits the diversion of water around the meter. All water service pipes
shall be connected directly to the village-owned water meter in order to ensure
that all water coming from the water mains to the service pipes shall first
pass through the water meter before the water is consumed.
Secs. 24-107—24-125. Reserved.
DIVISION 4. USER RATES AND CHARGES
Sec. 24-126. Right to change rates.
Nothing in this article shall prevent the village from changing or altering the
provisions hereof, and the village shall have and retain authority from time to
time to change, increase, decrease or improve the system and plant, or any part
or portion thereof, or to establish new or different rates, regulations or
provisions concerning the use of the system or plant, or to alter, amend,
change or repeal the provisions of this article.
Sec. 24-127. Water rates.
   The rate for use of water supplied by the village shall be $11.18 per 1,000
gallons or fraction thereof, provided that the minimum quarterly charge shall
be $55.90. In the event that any water is used without being properly metered,
the village shall estimate the amount of water used and bill based upon that
estimate.
(Ord. No. 5-2006 § 1, 1-17-06; Am. Ord. No. § 43-2007 § 1, 12-17-07; Am. Ord.
No. 2-2009 § 1, 1-20-09; Am. Ord. No. 34-2009 § 1, 12-21-09; Am. Ord. No. 19-
2011 § 1, 12-19-11; Am. Ord. 3-2013 § 1, 1-22-13; Am. Ord. 32-2013 § 1, 12-16-
13; Am. Ord. 27-2014 § 1, 12-15-14; Am. Ord. No. 30-2023 § 1, 12-18-23)
Sec. 24-128. Rates during construction; contractors.
During construction of any building and before any water meter is installed as
herein provided, the contractor so constructing such building may be permitted
to use the village water supply by making application therefor and paying the
following fees:
      (1)   Single family dwelling            $250.00
      (2)   Multi family dwelling (6 units or less)      $350.00
      (3)   Multi family dwelling (7 units or more)   $450.00
      (4)   Commercial, office and industrial       $650.00
(Ord. No. 18-2008, § 2, 6-16-08)
Sec. 24-129. Payment of charges-When due; billing.
   (a)   All water charges shall be due and payable on or before the tenth day
after the date when the statements of such charges are rendered and shall
become delinquent if remaining unpaid thereafter.
   (b)   It shall be the duty of the superintendent of the department to cause
the statement for water and sewer charges to be delivered on the respective
dates thereof and at least every 3 months to each consumer of water.
Sec. 24-130. Penalty for late payment.
   All water charges not paid within 30 days of the due date shall be subject
to penalty of 10%.
(Ord. 21-2025, § 1, 9-2-25)
Sec. 24-131. Same-Liability.
   (a)   The owner of the premises supplied with water will be held responsible
for all water registered by the meter. No reduction shall be made or rebate
allowed to any consumer on account of leakage or alleged leakage in any pipe,
tank or other apparatus or device.
   (b)   Amy person or party who shall vacate any premises, or any party who
shall enter upon and occupy any premises, shall immediately, before vacating
such premises or removing to such premises, notify the water department and
secure reading of the meter.
Sec. 24-132. Disconnection for nonpayment.
Whenever any charges for water, sewer, or refuse service remain delinquent for
more than 30 days, the Village shall have the right to discontinue water
service to the premises. Before discontinuing water service, the Village shall
provide notice and the opportunity for a hearing concerning the delinquent
charges.
Sec. 24-133. Reconnection (turn on) fee.
   Whenever any water service shall have been turned off to a premises; whether
for nonpayment, at the customer’s request, or because the premises are vacant;
a fee of $125.00 shall be paid in order to reconnect and turn on the water
service.
(Ord. No. 4-2009 § 1, 1-20-09; Ord. No. 21-2025, § 2, 9-2-25)
Sec. 24-134. Delinquent charges.
No person owing any water, sewer, refuse, license, business regulation, or
other charges, fees, or taxes to the Village shall be supplied water service
until such time as all such charges, fees and taxes have been paid in full.
Sec. 24-135. Lien for unpaid charges.
   (a)    Whenever a bill for water and or for the pickup of residential waste,
landscape waste and recyclables remains unpaid for sixty (60) days after the
due date, the village may file with the Cook County Clerk a statement of lien
claim. This statement shall contain the legal description of the premises
served, a claim for the amount of the unpaid bill, charges subsequently
assessed to the period covered by the bill and an amount for attorney's fees
and filing fees related to the preparation of and recording of the lien notice.
At least fourteen (14) days prior to recording the notice of lien, the village
shall send by first class mail a notice of its intent to record a lien against
the property to the user and taxpayer of record. If the user whose bill is
unpaid is not the owner of the premises and the village has notice of the
property owner's contact information, notice shall be mailed to the owner of
the premises at the property owner's last known address.
   (b)   The failure of the village to record such lien or to mail such notice
or the failure of the owner to receive such notice shall not affect the right
to record a lien at a later date and to foreclose such lien.
   (c)   Property subject to a lien for unpaid charges may be foreclosed upon
as with statutory liens. The village attorney is hereby authorized and directed
to institute such proceedings in the name of the village in any court having
jurisdiction over such matters against any property for which the bill has
remained unpaid sixty (60) days after its due date and the lien has been
recorded.
(Ord. No. 6-2022, § 2, 4-18-22)
Secs. 24-136—24-155. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 24-156. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
   Administrator shall mean the administrator of the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency.
   Basic user charge shall mean the basic assessment levied on all users of the
public sewer system.
   BOD (denoting biochemical oxygen demand) shall mean the quantity of oxygen
utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory procedure in 5 days of twenty (20) degrees Celsius, expressed in
milligrams per liter.
   Building drain shall mean that part of the lowest piping of a drainage
system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes
inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer or other
approved point of discharge, beginning 5 feet (one and five-tenths (1.5)
meters) outside the inner face of the building wall.
   Building sewer shall mean the extension from the building drain to the
public sewer or other place of disposal.
   Capital improvement charge shall mean a charge levied on users to improve,
extend or reconstruct the sewage treatment works.
   Combined sewer shall mean a sewer which is designed and intended to receive
wastewater, stormwater, surface water and groundwater drainage.
   Commercial user shall mean and include transit lodging, retail and wholesale
establishments or places engaged in selling merchandise or rendering services.
   Commissioner shall mean the superintendent.
   Control manhole shall mean a structure located on a site from which
industrial wastes are discharged. Where feasible, the manhole shall have an
interior drop. The purpose of a "control manhole" is to provide access for the
village representative to sample and/or measure discharges.
   Debt service charge shall mean the amount to be paid each billing period for
payment of interest, principal and coverage of a loan, bond, etc., outstanding.
   Director shall mean the director of the Illinois Environmental Protection
Agency. Easement shall mean an acquired legal right for the specific use of
land owned by others. Effluent criteria are defined in any applicable NPDES
permit.
   Federal act shall mean the federal Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. 466, et seq.)
as amended, (Public Law 95-217).
   Federal grant shall mean the U.S. government's participation in the
financing of the construction of treatment works, as provided for by Title II-
Grants for Construction of Treatment works of the act and implementing
regulations.
   Floatable oil shall mean oil, fat or grease in a physical state such that it
will separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved
pretreatment facility. A wastewater shall be considered free of floatable fat
if it is properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with the
collection system.
   Garbage shall mean solid wastes from the domestic and commercial
preparation, cooking and dispensing of food and from the handling, storage and
sale of food.
   Industrial users shall include establishments engaged in manufacturing
activities involving the mechanical or chemical transformation of materials of
substance into products.
   Industrial waste shall mean any solid, liquid or gaseous substance
discharged, permitted to flow or escaping from any industrial, manufacturing,
commercial or business establishment or process or from the development,
recovery or processing of any natural resource as distinct from sanitary
sewage.
   Institutional governmental user shall mean and include schools, churches,
penal institutions and users associated with federal, state and local
governments.
   Local capital cost charge shall mean charges for costs other than the
operation, maintenance and replacement costs, i.e., debt service and capital
improvement costs.
   Major contributing industry shall mean an industrial user of the publicly
owned treatment works that:
      (1)   Has a flow of fifty thousand (50,000) gallons or more per average
workday;
      (2)   Has a flow greater than ten (10) percent of the flow carried by the
municipal system receiving the waste;
      (3)   Has in its waste a toxic pollutant in toxic amounts as defined in
standards issued under section 307(a) of the federal act; or
      (4)   Is found by the permit issuant authority, in connection with the
issuance of the NPDES permit to the publicly owned treatment works receiving
the waste, to have significant impact, either singly or in combination with
other contributing industries, on that treatment works or upon the quality or
effluent from that treatment works.
   Milligrams per liter shall mean a unit of the concentration of water or
wastewater constituent. It is one one-thousandth (0.001) g of the constituent
in one thousand (1,000) ml of water. It has replaced the unit formerly used
commonly, parts per million, to which it is approximately equivalent, in
reporting the results of water and wastewater analysis.
   MSD or metropolitan sanitary district shall mean the Metropolitan Sanitary
District of Greater Chicago and its User Charge Ordinance.
   Natural outlet shall mean any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake
or other body of surface water or groundwater.
   NPDES permit shall mean any permit or equivalent document or requirements
issued by the administrator, or, where appropriate, by the director, after
enactment of the Federal Clean Water Act to regulate the discharge of
pollutants pursuant to section 402 of the federal act.
   pH shall mean the logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen-ion
concentration expressed by one (1) of the procedures outlined in the IEPA
Division of Laboratory Methods.
   Population equivalent shall mean a term used to evaluate the impact of
industrial or other waste on a treatment works or stream. One (1) population
equivalent is one hundred (100) gallons of sewage per day, containing
seventeen-hundredths (0.17) pounds of BOD and twenty-hundredths (0.20) pounds
of suspended solids.
   ppm shall mean parts per million by weight.
   Pretreatment shall mean the treatment of wastewaters from sources before
introduction into the wastewater treatment works.
   Private sewage disposal system shall mean any privy, privy vault, septic
tank, septic field, cesspool or other facility intended or used for the
treatment or disposal of sewage which is not connected to a public sanitary
sewer.
   Properly shredded garbage shall mean the wastes from the preparation,
cooking, and dispensing of food and has been shredded to such a degree that all
particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing
in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch (1.27
centimeters) in any dimension.
   Public sewer shall mean a sewer provided by or subject to the jurisdiction
of the village. It shall also include sewers within or outside the village
boundaries that serve one (1) or more persons and ultimately discharge into the
village sanitary sewer system, even though those sewers may not have been
constructed with village funds.
   Replacement shall mean expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment,
accessories or appurtenances which are necessary during the useful life of the
treatment works to maintain the capacity and performance of which such works
were designed and constructed. The term "operation and maintenance" includes
replacement.
   Residential user shall mean all dwellings units such as homes, mobile homes,
apartments, permanent multifamily dwellings.
   Sanitary sewer shall mean a sewer that conveys sewage or industrial wastes,
or a combination of both, and into which stormwaters, surface waters and
groundwaters or polluted industrial wastes are not intentionally admitted.
   Sewage is used interchangeably with the term "wastewater."
   Sewer shall mean a pipe or conduit for conveying sewage or any other waste
liquids, including stormwater, surface water and groundwater drainage.
   Sewerage fund shall mean the principal accounting designation for all
revenues received in the operation of the sewerage system.
   Slug shall mean any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which in
concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds, for any
period of duration longer than fifteen (15) minutes, more than five (5) times
the average twenty-four-hour concentration or flows during normal operation.
   State act means the Antipollution Bond Act [30 ILCS 405/1 et seq.].
   State grant shall mean the state's participation in the financing of the
construction of treatment works, as provided for by the Antipollution Bond Act
[30 ILCS 405/1 et seq.], and for making such grants as filed with the secretary
of state.
   Storm sewer shall mean a sewer that carries stormwater, surface water and
groundwater drainage but excludes sewage and industrial wastes, other than
unpolluted cooling water.
   Stormwater runoff shall mean that portion of the precipitation that is
drained into the sewers.
   Surcharge shall mean the assessment, in addition to the basic user charge
and debt service charge, which is levied on those persons whose wastes are
greater in strength than the concentration values established in division 4 of
this article.
   Suspended solids (SS) shall mean solids that either float on the surface of
or are in suspension in water, sewage or industrial waste and which are
removable by a laboratory filtration device. Quantitative determination of
suspended solids shall be made in accordance with procedures set forth in the
IEPA Division of Laboratories Manual of Laboratory Methods.
   Unpolluted water shall mean water quality equal to or better than the
effluent criteria in effect or water that would not cause violation of
receiving water quality standards and would not be benefited by discharge to
the sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided.
   Useful life shall mean the estimated period during which the collection
system and/or treatment works will be operated.
   User charge shall mean a charge levied on users of treatment works for the
cost of operation, maintenance and replacement.
   User class shall mean the type of user: "residential," "institutional/
governmental," "commercial" or "industrial," as defined herein.
   Wastewater shall mean the spent water of a community. It may be a
combination of the liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial
buildings, industrial plants and institutions, together with any groundwater,
surface water and stormwater that may be present.
   Wastewater facilities shall mean the structures, equipment and processes
required to collect, carry away and treat domestic and industrial wastes and
transport effluent to a watercourse.
   Wastewater service charge shall be the charge per quarter or month levied on
all users of the wastewater facilities. The service charge shall be computed as
outlined in division 3 of this article and shall consist of the total or the
basic user charge, the local capital cost and a surcharge, if applicable.
   Wastewater treatment works shall mean an arrangement of devices and
structures for treating wastewater, industrial wastes and sludge. Sometimes
used as synonymous with "waste treatment plant" or "wastewater treatment plant"
or "pollution control plan."
   Water quality standards are defined in the Water Pollution Regulations of
Illinois.
   Watercourse shall mean a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either
continuously or intermittently.
(Code 1965, § 22-20)
   Cross reference—Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.
Sec. 24-157. Use of public sewers required.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be
deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property or in any area
under its jurisdiction, any human or animal excrement, garbage or other
objectionable waste.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge to any natural outlet
any sewage or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been
provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this article.
   (c)   It shall be unlawful for any person to construct or maintain any
private sewage disposal system.
   (d)   The owner of all structures and buildings used for human occupancy,
employment recreation or other purposes is hereby required at his expense to
connect such structures and buildings directly to the proper public sewer in
accordance with the provisions of this article by August 1, 1987.
   (e)   No structure or building shall be connected to a private sewage
disposal system after August 1, 1987.
(Code 1965, § 22-21)
Sec. 24-158. Powers and authority of inspectors.
   (a)   The commissioner and other duly authorized employees of the village,
the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, the metropolitan sanitary
district (MSD) and the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, bearing proper
credentials and identification, shall be permitted to enter all properties for
the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing, in
accordance with the provisions of this article and not in violation of any
constitutional provision.
   (b)   The commissioner or his representative shall have no authority to
inquire into any processes, including metallurgical, chemical, oil refining,
ceramic, paper or other industries, beyond that point having a direct bearing
on the kind and source of discharge to the sewers or waterways or facilities
for waste treatment.
   (c)   While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to
above, the commissioner of duly authorized employees of the village, the
Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, the metropolitan sanitary district
(MSD) and the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency shall observe all safety
rules applicable to the premises established by the company and the company
shall be held harmless for injury or death to the village employees. The
village shall indemnify the company against liability claims and demands for
personal injury or property damage asserted against the company and growing out
of the gauging and sampling operation, except as such may be caused by
negligence or failure of the company to maintain conditions.
   (d)   The company and other duly authorized employees of the village bearing
proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private
properties through which the village holds a duly negotiated easement for the
purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying
within such easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on such easement
shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement
pertaining to the private property involved.
(Code 1965, § 22-25)
Sec. 24-159. Protection of sewage works from damage.
No persons shall break, damage, destroy or tamper with any structure,
appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the sewage works without a permit.
(Code 1965, § 22-24)
Secs. 24-160—24-175. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS
Sec. 24-176. Permit; fee.
   (a)   No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or
opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof
without first obtaining a written permit from the commissioner.
   (b)   There shall be two (2) classes of building sewer permits:
      (1)   For residential, wastewater service.
      (2)   For commercial, institutional/governmental or industrial wastewater
service.
In either case, the owner or his agent shall make application on a permit
application form furnished by the village.
   (c)   The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans,
specifications or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the
Director of the Department of Public Works. A permit fee shall be paid at the
time of application.
   (d)   No person shall connect into the sanitary sewer system without a
permit from the Village, without having paid the permit fee, in violation of
any terms of the permit, or contrary to any plans, specifications or
information filed with the village.
   (e)   A building sewer permit shall only be issued and a sewer connection
shall only be allowed if it can be demonstrated that the downstream sewerage
facilities, including sewers, pump stations and wastewater treatment
facilities, have sufficient reserve capacity to adequately and efficiently
handle the additional anticipated waste load.
   (f)   The Director of the Department of Public Works is hereby authorized to
and shall promulgate a schedule of fees for the connection to the village
sanitary sewer system, purchase of materials and supplies, repairs,
disconnections, and other work performed by the village. No connection shall be
made to the village sanitary sewer system until all fees are paid.
(Code 1965, §§ 22-22(a), (c), 31-61(d)) (Ord. No. 30-2008 § 1, 12-15-08)
Sec. 24-177. Liability for expense.
All costs and expense incident to the installation and connection of the
building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the
village from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned
by the installation of the building sewer. (Code 1965, § 22-22(e))
Sec. 24-178. Separate, independent building sewers, exception.
A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building,
except that where one (1) building stands at the rear of another on an interior
lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear
building through an adjoining alley court, yard or driveway, the building sewer
from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole
considered as one (1) building sewer.
(Code 1965, § 22-22(f))
Sec. 24-179. Use of old building sewers.
Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they
are found, on examination and test by the commissioner, to meet all
requirements of this article.
(Code 1965, § 22-22(g))
Sec. 24-180. Specifications for materials, construction.
The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer and
the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing
and backfilling the trench shall all conform to the requirements of the
building and plumbing codes or other applicable rules and regulations of the
village. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof, the
materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the
American Society of Testing Materials, Water Pollution Control Federation
Manual of Practice No. 9 and Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main
Construction in Illinois shall apply.
(Code 1965, § 22-22(h))
Sec. 24-181. Point of connection; lifting of discharge.
Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an
elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building
drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage
carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and
discharged to the building sewer.
(Code 1965, § 22-22(i))
Sec. 24-182. Connection of runoff, groundwater sources.
No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation drains,
areaway drains or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building
sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a
public sanitary sewer.
(Code 1965, § 22-22(j))
Sec. 24-183. Standards for connection.
   (a)   The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall
conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing codes or other
applicable rules and regulations of the village or the procedures set forth in
appropriate specifications of the American Society of Testing Materials, Water
Pollution Control Federation Manual of Practice No. 9 and Standard
Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in Illinois. All such
connections shall be made gastight and watertight. Any deviation from the
prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the commissioner before
installation.
   (b)   The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the
commissioner when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to
the public sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the
commissioner.
(Code 1965, § 22-22(k), (1))
Sec. 24-184. Protection of excavations; restoration.
All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded
with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets,
sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in the course of the
work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the commissioner.
Secs. 24-185—24-200. Reserved.
DIVISION 3. USER RATES AND CHARGES
Sec. 24-201. Basis of charges; measurement.
   (a)   The wastewater service charge shall be based on water usage as
recorded by water meters.
   (b)   The volume of flow used for computing wastewater service charges shall
be the metered water consumption read to the lowest even increments of one
hundred (100) gallons.
      (1)   If the person discharging wastes into the public sewers procures
any part or all of his water from sources other than the public waterworks
system, all or part of which is discharged into the public sewers, the person
shall install and maintain, at his expense, water meters of a type approved by
the commissioner for the purpose of determining the volume of water obtained
from these other sources.
      (2)   Devices for measuring the volume of waste discharged may be
required by the commissioner if these volumes cannot otherwise be determined
from the metered water consumption records.
      (3)   Metering devices for determining the volume of waste shall be
installed, owned and maintained by the person. Following approval and
installation, such meters may not be removed, unless service is cancelled,
without the consent of the commissioner.
   (c)   The charges set forth in this article are village charges and are in
addition to any charges made by the metropolitan sanitary district under its
user charge ordinance or any other governmental agency.
Sec. 24-202. Purpose, components of service charge.
The wastewater service charge shall be levied to pay for the cost of operating,
maintaining, repairing, replacing and constructing additions to the sanitary
sewer system. It shall be comprised of two (2) elements, a user charge and a
debt service charge, which together shall equal the wastewater service charge.
At least thirty (30) days before the beginning of each fiscal year, the
adequacy of the wastewater charges shall be reviewed and the charges revised
accordingly by ordinance. After the beginning of each fiscal year, each user,
in conjunction with a regular bill for services, shall be notified of the rate
and that portion of the user charges which are attributable to wastewater
service.
Sec. 24-203. Sewer rates.
   The wastewater service charge for the use of and for service supplied by the
wastewater collection system shall consist of a basic user charge for the
operation and maintenance of the system, including replacement, capital
improvement and equipment replacement, plus a debt service charge, if any. The
basic user charge is established at $2.90 per 1,000 gallons of water billed to
the premises, provided that the minimum quarterly charge shall be $43.50.
(Ord. No. 6-2006 § 1, 1-17-06; Am. Ord. No. 44-2007 § 1, 12-17-07; Am. Ord. No.
1-2009 § 1, 1-20-09; Am. Ord. No. 35-2009 § 1, 12-21-09; Am. Ord. No. 20-2011 §
1, 12-19-11; Am. Ord. No. 4-2013 § 1, 1-22-13; Am. Ord. No. 26-2014 § 1, 12-15-
14; Am. Ord. No. 35-2018 § 1, 12-17-18; Am. Ord. No. 13-2020 § 1. 12-21-20; Am.
Ord. No. 24-2021 § 1, 12-6-21; Am. Ord. No. 3-2023 § 1, 2-6-23; Am. Ord. No.
31-2023 § 1, 12-18-23)
Sec. 24-204. Penalty for late payment.
The penalties for late payment shall be the same as the penalties for late
payment provided for water rate charges.
Sec. 24-205. Appeals.
The method for computation of rates and service charges established for
wastewater user charges in this article shall be made available to a user
within twenty (20) days of receipt of a written request for such. Any
disagreement over the method used or in the computation thereof shall, if
justified, be remedied by referral to a third independent party within twenty
(20) days after notification of a formal, written appeal outlining the
discrepancies.
Sec. 24-206. Billing procedures.
   (a)   Rates or charges for service shall be payable monthly or quarterly,
depending on the classification of service for which bills are rendered. The
owner of the premises, the occupant thereof and the user of the service shall
be jointly and severally liable to pay for the service to such premises; and
the service is furnished to the premises by the village only upon the condition
that the owner of the premises, occupant and user of the services are jointly
and severally liable therefor to the village.
   (b)   Charges for sewer service shall be added onto the bill for water
service and shall be sent out at the same time water bills are sent and subject
to the same late charge and penalties for late payment of water bills.
Sec. 24-207. Delinquent bills.
If the charges for sewer services are not paid within sixty (60) days of the
due date, such services shall be discontinued after notice and hearing and
shall not be reinstated until all claims are settled. Hearings shall be
conducted under the same format provided for water delinquencies.
Sec. 24-208. Lien on unpaid charges.
   (a)   Whenever a bill for sewer service and or for the pickup of residential
waste, landscape waste and recyclables remains unpaid for sixty (60) days after
the due date, the village may file with the Cook County Clerk a statement of
lien claim. This statement shall contain the legal description of the premises
served, a claim for the amount of the unpaid bill, charges subsequently
assessed to the period covered by the bill and an amount for attorney's fees
and filing fees related to the preparation of and recording of the lien notice.
At least fourteen (14) days prior to recording the notice of lien, the village
shall send by first class mail a notice of its intent to record a lien against
the property to the user and taxpayer of record. If the user whose bill is
unpaid is not the owner of the premises and the village has notice of the
property owner's contact information, notice shall be mailed to the owner of
the premises at the property owner's last known address.
   (b)   The failure of the village to record such lien or to mail such notice
or the failure of the owner to receive such notice shall not affect the right
to record a lien at a later date and to foreclose such lien.
   (c)   Property subject to a lien for unpaid charges may be foreclosed upon
as with statutory liens. The village attorney is hereby authorized and directed
to institute such proceedings in the name of the village in any court having
jurisdiction over such matters against any property for which the bill has
remained unpaid sixty (60) days after its due date and the lien has been
recorded.
(Code 1965, § 22-27(j), (k)) (Am. Ord. No. 6-2022, § 3, 4-18-22)
Sec. 24-209. Receipt, deposit of revenues.
   (a)   All revenues and monies derived from the operation of the sewage
system shall be deposited in the sewerage fund. All such revenues and monies
shall be held by the village treasurer separate and apart from his private
funds and separate and apart from all other funds of the village. All of such
sum, without any deductions whatever, shall be delivered to the village
treasurer not more than ten (10) days after receipt of the same or at such more
frequent intervals as may from time to time be directed by the mayor and board
of trustees.
   (b)   The village treasurer shall receive all such revenues from the sewage
system and all other funds and monies incident to the operation of such system,
as the same may be delivered to him, and deposit the same in the account of the
fund designated as the "sewerage fund."
(Code 1965, § 22-27(1))
Sec. 24-210. Accounts.
   (a)   The village treasurer shall establish a proper system of accounts and
shall keep proper books, records and accounts in which complete and correct
entries shall be made of all transactions relative to the sewerage system. At
regular annual intervals he shall cause to be made an audit by an independent
auditing concern of the books to show the receipts and disbursements of the
sewerage system.
   (b)   In addition to the above, the annual audit report shall include the
following:
      (1)   Billing data to show total number of gallons billed per fiscal
year.
      (2)   The number of users connected to the system.
      (3)   The number of nonmetered users.
      (4)   A list of users discharging nondomestic and industrial wastes and
volume of waste discharged.
(Code 1965, § 22-27(m))
Sec. 24-211. Access to records.
The IEPA and its authorized representative shall have access to any books,
documents, papers and records of the village which are applicable to the
village system of user charges or industrial cost recovery for the purpose of
making audit, examination, excerpts and transcriptions thereto to ensure
compliance with the terms of any federal grant or state grant.
(Code 1965, § 22-27(n))
Secs. 24-212—24-230. Reserved.
DIVISION 4. DISCHARGE AND USE RESTRICTIONS
Sec. 24-231. General prohibition.
All disposal by any person into the sewer system is unlawful, except thgse
discharges in compliance with federal standards promulgated pursuant to the
federal act and more stringent state and local standards.
(Code 1965, § 22-22(b))
Sec. 24-232. Entry of extraneous flows into sanitary sewer system.
   (a)   It is the purpose of this section that the entry of extraneous flows
into the sanitary sewer system be prohibited and be discontinued, where such
entry may be occurring accidentally or knowingly. Extraneous flows are those
flows, other than domestic sewage or industrial waste, consisting of
groundwaters, surface waters, stormwaters and other drainage or clear waters.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge or cause to be
discharged, directly or indirectly, into the sanitary sewer system of the
village any groundwaters, surface waters, stormwaters or any other extraneous
flows. It shall be unlawful for any person to make a connection or to maintain
or operate a connection which serves any home, building or any other
establishment, premises or facilities, and which contributes, directly or
indirectly, to the sanitary sewer of the village any groundwaters, surface
waters, stormwaters or any other extraneous flows.
   (c)   All drains or connections designed or intended to receive and
discharge groundwaters, surface waters, stormwaters and other drainage shall be
considered illegal connections if they discharge directly or indirectly into
the sanitary sewer system. Such illegal connections include, but are not
limited to, roof drains, downspouts, footing drains, areaway drains, drain
tiles (and sump pumps used to collect and discharge same), yard drains,
catchbasins and inlets, and such connections shall not be allowed to discharge
directly or indirectly into the sanitary sewers.
   (d)   The proper maintenance and operation of a building service sewer,
house connection or sanitary sewer line to the point of connection to the
municipal sanitary sewer system shall be the responsibility of the owner of the
premises served by such sanitary sewer pipes. Maintenance means keeping the
sanitary sewer connection, sewer lines or other sewer facilities or structures
in satisfactory working condition and in a good state of repair (including but
not limited to preventing any obstruction or extraneous materials or flows from
entering such facilities, protecting such facilities from any damage and
keeping the same free from defects or malfunctions), and making necessary
provisions and taking necessary precautions to assure that the sewer facilities
are at all times capable of satisfactorily performing the services and
adequately discharging the functions and producing the final results and
purposes such facilities are intended to perform, discharge or produce.
   (e)   All downspouts or roof drains (including gutters) shall discharge onto
the ground or into a dry well. Connections of downspouts or roof drains to a
storm sewer, sanitary sewer, or into the ground are prohibited, except that for
nonresidential structures connection may be made into a storm sewer provided
that a permit for such connection has been issued. No downspouts or roof drains
shall be connected to the sanitary sewers. Residential downspouts and roof
drains may be connected into a dry well only after approval by the building
commissioner. Footing drains shall be connected to sump pumps, and discharge
shall be made into storm sewers (nonresidential), drainage ditches or onto the
ground. No footing drains or drainage tile shall be connected to the sanitary
sewer. Floor drains in basements shall be connected directly to sanitary sewers
or to sump pumps which discharge to the sanitary sewer. Sump pumps installed to
receive and discharge groundwaters or stormwaters shall be connected to the
storm sewer (nonresidential) or discharge into a drainage ditch or onto the
ground. Sump pumps installed to receive and discharge floor drain flow or other
sanitary sewage shall be connected to the sanitary sewers. A sump pump shall be
used for one (1) function only, either the discharge of stormwaters or the
discharge of sanitary sewage. No window well or area way drains shall be
connected to the sanitary sewer. All water discharged onto the ground shall be
directed so as not to flood neighboring properties.
   (f)   A permit must be obtained on or before May 1, 1985, if required by
subsection (e). The fee for such permit shall be fifty dollars ($50.00), and
ten dollars ($10.00) for each reinspection required. If a permit is issued, a
decal or other indicia thereof shall be placed upon any downspout or roof drain
which is authorized to be connected into the storm sewer. No downspout or roof
drain shall be connected into the storm sewer unless the decal or other indicia
is displayed thereon. Once a permit has been granted, the village may require
an annual reinspection. It shall be the responsibility of the permittee to
protect any decal or indicia from becoming defaced.
   (g)   Any violation of subsection (e) must be corrected on or before May 1,
1985.
   (h)   Failure on the part of the property owner to comply with the
provisions of subsections (a), (b), (c), (d), (e) and (f) of this section shall
be considered a violation, which, upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine
of not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00), nor more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00). Each day shall constitute a separate violation.
(Code 1965, § 31-63)
Sec. 24-233. Discharge of stormwater, sanitary and industrial wastewater.
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any stormwater, sanitary and
industrial wastewater into any storm sewers constructed as part of the
permanent improvement of 87th Street within the limits of the village.
(Code 1965, § 31-62)
Sec. 24-234. Use of public sewers.
   (a)   No person shall discharge, or cause to be discharged, any stormwater,
surface water, groundwater roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated
cooling water or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer.
   (b)   Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to
such sewers as are specifically designated as combined sewers or storm sewers
or to a natural outlet approved by the commissioner. Industrial cooling water
or unpolluted process waters may be discharged, on approval of the
commissioner, to a storm sewer, combined water or natural outlet. Footing
drains shall be connected to sump pumps for further discharge into storm sewer
or drainage ditches.
(Code 1965, ** 22-9, 22-23(a), (b))
Sec. 24-235. Prohibited discharges.
   (a)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the
following described waters or wastes to any public sewers:
      (1)   Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid or gas.
      (2)   Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids
or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other
wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a
hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance or create any hazard in
the receiving waters of the sewage plant.
      (3)   Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or having any other
corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment
and personnel of the sewage works.
      (4)   Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable
of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with the
proper operation of the sewage works, such as, but not limited to, ashes,
cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar,
plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and
fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole
or ground by garbage grinders.
   (b)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following
described substances, materials, waters or wastes if it appears likely, in the
opinion of the commissioner, that such wastes can harm either the sewers'
sewage treatment process or equipment, having an adverse effect on the
receiving stream or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property or
constitute a nuisance. In forming his opinion as to the acceptability of these
wastes, the commissioner will give consideration to such factors as the
quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers,
materials of construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment
process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant, degree of treatability of
wastes in the sewage treatment plant and maximum limits established by
regulatory agencies. The substances prohibited are:
      (1)   Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one hundred
fifty (150) degrees Fahrenheit (sixty-five (65) degrees Celsius).
      (2)   Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous materials or
oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of one hundred (100) mg/1 or
containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures
between thirty-two (32) and one hundred fifty (150) degrees Fahrenheit (zero
and sixty-five (65) degrees Celsius).
      (3)   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation
and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths
horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or greater shall be subject to the review and
approval of the commissioner.
      (4)   Any waters or wastes containing strong acid, iron pickling wastes
or concentrated plating solution, whether neutralized or not.
      (5)   Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc, or
similar objectionable or toxic substances; or wastes exerting an excessive
chlorine requirement to such a degree that any such material received in the
composite sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds the limits established
by the commissioner for such materials.
      (6)   Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste- or odor-
producing substances in such concentrations exceeding limits which may be
established by the commissioner as necessary, after treatment of the composite
sewage, to meet the requirements of the state, federal or other public agencies
of jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters.
      (7)   Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or
concentration as may exceed limits established by the commissioner in
compliance with applicable state or federal regulations.
      (8)   Any wastes or waters having a pH in excess of 9.5.
      (9)   Any mercury or any of its compounds in excess of 0.0005 mg/1 as Hg
at any time, except as permitted by the commissioner in compliance with
applicable state and federal regulations.
      (10)   Any cyanide in excess of 0.01 mg/1 at any time, except as
permitted by the commissioner in compliance with applicable MSD, state and
federal regulations.
      (11)   Materials which exert or cause:
         a.   Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but
not limited to, fuller's earth, lime slurries and lime residues) or of
dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium
sulfate);
         b.   Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes
and vegetable tanning solutions);
         c.   Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand or chlorine requirements in
such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment
works;
         d.   Unusual volume of flow or concentrations of wastes constituting
slugs.
   (12)   Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to
treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed or are
amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant
effluent cannot meet the requirements of agencies having jurisdiction over
discharge to the receiving waters.
   (c)   The commissioner shall not issue a permit for any allowable discharge
under this section without a prior permit having been issued by the MSD for
such discharge. When a permit has been issued by the MSD, the commissioner may
waive the fee and adopt the MSD permit.
(Code 1965, § 22-23(c), (d))
Sec. 24-236. Discretionary authority of commissioner.
   (a)   If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be
discharged to the public sewers, which contain the substances or possess the
characteristics enumerated in section
24-235 or which are in violation of the standards for pretreatment provided in
40 CFR 402, June 26, 1978, and any amendments thereto, and which, in the
judgment of the commissioner, may have a deleterious effect upon the sewage
works, processes, equipment or receiving waters or which otherwise create a
hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the commissioner may:
      (1)   Reject the wastes;
      (2)   Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to
the public sewers;
      (3)   Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; or
      (4)   Require payment to cover the added costs of handling and treating
the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges.
   (b)   If the commissioner permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste
flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject
to the review and approval of the commissioner and subject to the requirements
of all applicable codes, ordinances and laws.
(Code 1965, § 22-23(e))
Sec. 24-237. Interceptors.
Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the
commissioner, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes, sand
or other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be
required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall
be of a type and capacity approved by the commissioner and shall be located as
to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.
(Code 1965, § 22-23(f))
Sec. 24-238. Maintenance of preliminary treatment facilities.
Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided, they
shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the
owner at his expense.
(Code 1965, § 22-23(g))
Sec. 24-239. Control manhole.
Each industry shall be required to install a control manhole; and, when
required by the commissioner, the owner of any property serviced by a building
sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole,
together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building
sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the wastes. Such
manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located and shall be
constructed in accordance with plans approved by the commissioner. The manhole
shall be installed by the owner at his expense and shall be maintained by him
so as to be safe and accessible at all times.
(Code 1965, § 22-23(h))
Sec. 24-240. Laboratory measurements, analyses.
   (a)   The owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying
industrial wastes shall provide laboratory measurements, tests and analyses of
waters and wastes to illustrate compliance with this article and any special
conditions for discharge established by the village or regulatory agencies
having jurisdiction over the discharge.
   (b)   The number, type and frequency of laboratory analyses to be performed
by the owner shall be as stipulated by the village; but no less than once per
year the industry must supply a complete analysis of the constituents of the
wastewater discharge to assure that compliance with the federal, state and
local standards are being met. The owner shall report the results of
measurements and laboratory analyses to the village at such times and in such a
manner as prescribed by the village. The owner shall bear the expense of all
measurements, analyses and reporting required by the village. At such times as
deemed necessary, the village reserves the right to take measurements and
samples for analysis by an outside service.
   (c)   All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters
and wastes to which reference is made in this division shall be determined in
accordance with the latest edition of IEPA Division of Laboratories Manual of
Laboratory Methods and shall be determined at the control manhole provided or
upon suitable samples taken at such control manhole. If no special manhole has
been required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest
downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer
is connected. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to
reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and to determine the
existence of hazards to life, limb and property. The particular analyses
involved will determine whether a twenty-four-hour composite of all outfalls of
a premises is appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples should be taken.
Normally, but not always, BOD and suspended solids analyses are obtained from
twenty-four-hour composites of all outfalls, whereas pHs are determined from
periodic grab samples.
(Code 1965, § 22-23(i), (j))
Sec. 24-241. Special agreements.
   No statement contained in this division shall be construed as preventing any
special agreement or arrangement between the village and any industrial
concern, whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be
accepted by the village for treatment, subject to payment therefor, in
accordance with this article, by the industrial concern, provided such payments
are in accordance with MSD, federal and state guidelines for user charge
system.
(Code 1965, § 22-23(k))
DIVISION 5. COST-SHARING PROGRAM
Sec. 24-250 Sewer back-up prevention program.
   (a)    Cost-sharing program. Subject to the terms and conditions established
in this section, a property owner who meets the eligibility standards of this
section may apply to the Village of Evergreen Park for reimbursement of a
portion of the costs associated with the installation of an overhead sewer.
   (b)   Terms and conditions of the program.
      (1)   Participants must meet the eligibility standards established by
this section.
      (2)   The maximum reimbursement for the initial installation of an
overhead sewer shall be 50% of the actual cost or $5,000.00, whichever is less,
provided that the Board of Trustees may change the maximum amount by motion in
the future.
      (3)   Only those costs associated with the initial installation of an
overhead sewer shall be considered eligible for reimbursement. No reimbursement
shall be allowed for the replacement, upgrade, repair or maintenance of an
overhead sewer.
      (4)   Reimbursements shall be available only if the Village of Evergreen
Park has allocated funds for such purpose in the annual budget. The Village of
Evergreen Park shall retain the sole and exclusive discretion to determine, for
each fiscal year, whether and to what extent the program shall be funded.
      (5)   The cost-sharing program is to be considered a voluntary
undertaking of the Village of Evergreen Park.   
      (6)   The Village of Evergreen Park reserves the right and shall be
entitled to terminate or suspend the cost-sharing program at any time for any
reason.
      (7)   The cost-sharing program shall not be construed as an assumption of
responsibility for, or legal liability arising from the design, installation,
operation, maintenance, repair or replacement of any private sewer line,
overhead sewer, including without limitation, any damages or injuries arising
from the failure or malfunction of such sewer line or overhead sewer.
      (8)   The cost-sharing program shall not be construed as a waiver of any
statutory or common law defense or immunity the Village of Evergreen Park may
be entitled to raise in response to any action or claim of liability for damage
to property or injury to person arising from the design, installation, use,
operation or maintenance of any public or private sewer line or of any overhead
sewer, including without limitation, damages or injuries arising from the
failure or malfunction of any such sewer line or overhead sewer.
   (c)   Eligibility standards. No person shall be eligible for reimbursement
under this cost-sharing program unless all of the following conditions are met:
      (1)   The applicant must be the owner of record of a single-family home
that was built before 1970, and not otherwise protected by an overhead sewer.
      (2)   The reimbursement request must be for the initial installation of
an overhead sewer. The cost of replacement, upgrade, repair or maintenance of
an existing overhead sewer is not eligible for reimbursement.
      (3)   The property owner, or a qualified contractor acting on the owner's
behalf, shall procure all necessary permits to install the overhead sewer. All
work shall comply with all applicable provisions of the Evergreen Park
Municipal Code, including all provisions relative to inspections, contractor
bonds or licenses. The property owner, or the owner's contractor, shall be
responsible for scheduling all necessary inspections. No reimbursement will be
made for work that does not pass all required inspections.
      (4)   The application for reimbursement shall be submitted with the
permit application for the installation of the overhead sewer. The application
form shall be provided by the Director of Public Works.
      (5)   The application for reimbursement shall include a waiver, signed by
the owner of record, waiving any and all claims against the Village of
Evergreen Park for damage to property or injuries to persons of any kind
arising from the installation, operation, maintenance or repair of the overhead
sewer, including without limitation, the failure or malfunction of the overhead
sewer. The statement of the waiver shall be prescribed by the Village of
Evergreen Park.
      (6)   The property owner shall arrange for a pre-construction inspection,
to be performed by the Village of Evergreen Park or its authorized agent, to
locate any prohibited sources of storm water inflow or infiltration to the
sanitary sewer system. If the inspection reveals any prohibited sources of
storm water inflow or infiltration to the sanitary sewer system, the property
owner shall correct it or cause it to be corrected, and arrange for a re-
inspection by the Village of Evergreen Park or its authorized agent. All
prohibited sources of storm water inflow or infiltration to the sanitary sewer
system shall be corrected before the applicant is eligible for reimbursement
under the cost-sharing program.
      (7)   No reimbursement shall be made until the work has been completed
and has passed the final inspection.
      (8)   No reimbursement shall be made unless the property owner provides
the Village with evidence, in the form of a signed and sworn contractor's
statement, certifying that the contractor has been paid in full for the
completed work by the property owner.
   (d)   Authority of Director. The Director of Public Works shall have the
authority and discretion to administer the cost-sharing program subject to the
control and direction of the Mayor and Board of Trustees. The Director of
Public Works shall establish administrative procedures as may be necessary to
implement the cost-sharing program, which shall include but not be limited to,
establishing administrative priorities for processing and granting
reimbursement requests based on factors such as the time of filing, time of
completion, location in a floodplain or in flood-prone areas, and availability
of funding.
(Ord. No. 11-2012 § 2, 5-7-12; Am. Ord. No. 15-2022, § 1, 8-15-22)
CHAPTER 25
EVERGREEN PARK ZONING CODE
ARTICLE I   GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Sec. 25-10   Title
   Sec. 25-11   Authority and Purposes
   Sec. 25-12   General Applicability
   Sec. 25-13   Provisions are Minimum Requirements
   Sec. 25-14   Provisions are Cumulative
   Sec. 25-15   Provisions are Not a Consent, License or Permit
   Sec. 25-16   Unlawful Uses and Structures are Not Validated
   Sec. 25-17   Penalties
ARTICLE II   TERMS
   Sec. 25-20   Word Usage
   Sec. 25-21   Definitions
ARTICLE III   ADMINISTRATION
   Sec. 25-30   Board of Trustees
   Sec. 25-31   Zoning Board of Appeals
   Sec. 25-32   Enforcement Officer
   Sec. 25-33   Site Plan Approval
   Sec. 25-34   Certificate of Zoning Compliance
   Sec. 25-35   Administrative Deviations in Residential Districts
ARTICLE IV   ZONING APPLICATIONS, HEARINGS AND APPROVALS
   Sec. 25-40   Applications
   Sec. 25-41   Public Hearings
ARTICLE V   ZONING DISTRICTS
   Sec. 25-50   Establishment of Districts, Zoning Map
   Sec. 25-51   District Boundaries
   Sec. 25-52   "A" Single Family Residential District
   Sec. 25-53   "B" Multi-Family Residential District
   Sec. 25-54   "C" Commercial District
   Sec. 25-55   "I" Cemetery District
   Sec. 25-58   "O" Open Space Recreation District
ARTICLE VI   SPECIAL USES, PLANNED DEVELOPMENTS
   Sec. 25-60   Special Use Permits
   Sec. 25-61   Planned Developments
ARTICLE VII   COMMUNITY RESIDENCES
   Sec. 25-70   Responsibility
   Sec. 25-71   Application for Community Residence Permits
   Sec. 25-72   Community Residence Permits7
ARTICLE VIII   PARKING
   Sec. 25-80   Minimum Parking Requirements
   Sec. 25-81   Computation
   Sec. 25-82   Parking Design and Maintenance1
ARTICLE IX   NONCONFORMITIES
   Sec. 25-90   General Provisions4
   Sec. 25-91   Nonconforming Uses of Land and Nonconforming Uses in Structures
Designed For a Permitted Use
   Sec. 25-92   Nonconforming Uses in Structures Not Designed For a Permitted
Use
   Sec. 25-93   Nonconforming Structures
   Sec. 25-94   Nonconforming Lots of Record
   Sec. 25-95   Nursing and Personal Care Facility
ARTICLE X   CANNABIS CULTIVATION AND DISPENSARIES
   Sec. 25-100   Purpose and Applicability
   Sec. 25-101   Procedure
   Sec. 25-102   Cannabis Dispensing Organization Components
   Sec. 25-103   Locational Restrictions
   Sec. 25-104   Cannabis Dispensing Organizations
   Sec. 25-105   Additional Requirements
ARTICLE I
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 25-10. Title.
This Code shall be known as the Evergreen Park Zoning Ordinance or the
Evergreen Park Zoning Code.
Sec. 25-11. Authority and Purposes.
This Code is adopted pursuant to the home rule authority of the Village for the
following purposes:
   A.   Land Use Patterns. The purposes of this Code related to land use
patterns are to:
      1.   Implement and foster the goals and policies of economic growth and
quality of residential neighborhoods; and
      2.   Establish a rational pattern of land uses and encourage the most
appropriate use of individual parcels of land in the Village; and
      3.    Encourage compatibility between different land uses; and
      4.   Provide for the gradual elimination of nonconforming uses that
adversely affect the character and value of permitted development; and
      5.   Protect the scale and character of the existing residential,
business, commercial, cemetery, industrial and office development areas of the
Village from the encroachment of incompatible uses; and
      6.   Encourage and enhance the preservation of natural resources,
aesthetic amenities, and natural features; and
      7.    Secure adequate natural light, clean air, privacy, a safe
environment, and convenience of access to property; and
      8.    Promote and protect the public health, safety, morals, and the
general welfare of the Village.
   B.   Public Infrastructure. The purposes of this Code related to public
infrastructure are to:
      1.   Facilitate the most efficient use of existing and planned public
facilities and utilities; and
      2.   Protect existing public facilities and utilities from being
overloaded due to excess development; and
      3.   Protect and enhance a pattern of interconnected streets and highways
that is unified, integrated, safe, effective, and efficient; and
      4.   Regulate use along arterial streets and highways to protect their
through-traffic function and capacity; and
      5.    Protect residential streets from degradation by nonresidential
traffic; and
      6.   Reduce congestion and promote safety on streets and highways by
limiting traffic generation through the control of land use intensity; and
      7.   Establish and regulate setback lines along streets, highways, and
property lines.
   C.   Justifiable Expectations and Taxable Value. The purposes of this Code
related to justifiable expectations and taxable value are to:
      1.   Protect and respect the justifiable reliance of existing residents,
business owners, and taxpayers on the continuation of existing, established
land use patterns; and
      2.   Protect and enhance the taxable value of land and buildings.
Sec. 25-12. General Applicability.
   A.   Territorial Application. This Code shall apply to all land, structures,
and uses within the corporate limits of the Village.
   B.    General Application. All structures erected hereafter, all uses of
land or structures established hereafter, all structural alterations or
relocations of existing structures occurring hereafter, and all enlargements
and extensions of, additions to, changes in, and relocations of existing uses
occurring hereafter shall be subject to all regulations of this Code applicable
to the zoning districts in which such land, structures, or uses are located.
Existing structures and uses that do not comply with the regulations of this
Code shall be subject to the provisions of this Code relating to
nonconformities.
   C.    General Prohibition. No structure, no use of any structure or land,
and no lot of record or zoning lot, now or hereafter existing, shall hereafter
be established, enlarged, extended, altered, moved, divided, or maintained in
any manner, except as authorized by the provisions of this Code and except in
compliance with the regulations of this Code. Without limiting the foregoing,
any such activity that would cause any existing structure not to comply with
this Code or that would create any parcel of land that could not be developed
in compliance with this Code shall be prohibited.
   D.    Special Prohibition: Multiple Uses on Same Zoning Lot.  No zoning lot
in any residential district in the Village shall be used for more than one
principal use or one principal structure.
Sec. 25-13. Provisions are Minimum Requirements.
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this Code shall be
held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health,
safety, comfort, morals, and general welfare, as set forth in the provisions
hereof establishing the intent and purpose of this Code in general and it's
various sections in particular. When the provisions of this Code impose greater
restrictions than those of any statute, other ordinances, or regulation, then
the provisions of this Code shall be controlling. When the provisions of any
statute, other ordinance, or regulation impose greater restrictions than this
Code, then the provisions of such statute, other ordinance, or regulation shall
be controlling.
Sec. 25-14. Provisions are Cumulative.
The provisions of this Code shall be interpreted to be cumulative of, and to
impose limitations in addition to, all other codes, laws, and ordinances in
existence or which may be passed governing any subject matter of this Code. The
several provisions of this Code also shall be interpreted to be cumulative of
each other. To the greatest extent possible, the provisions of this Code shall
be construed to be consistent with, and not in conflict with, the provisions of
such other codes, laws, and ordinances, and with each other, to the end that
all such provisions may be given their fullest application.
Sec. 25-15. Provisions are Not a Consent, License, or Permit.
The provisions of this Code shall not be interpreted to be, or to grant, a
consent, license, or permit to use any property or to establish, locate,
construct, or maintain any structure or use, or to carry on any trade,
industry, occupation, or activity.
Sec. 25-16. Unlawful Uses and Structures are Not Validated.
This Code shall not be interpreted to validate or make lawful any unlawful use
or structure existing upon the effective date of this Code. Any such unlawful
use or structure shall remain unlawful to the extent that said use or structure
is in conflict with the provisions of this Code.
Sec. 25-17. Penalties.
   A.   Any person who shall violate, disobey, omit, neglect or refuse to
comply with, or who shall resist enforcement of any provision of this Code
shall be subject to a fine of not less than $100.00 nor more than $1,000.00 for
each offense. Each day a violation continues to exist shall constitute a
separate offense.
   B.   In case any building or structure is erected, constructed,
reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted or maintained, or any building,
structure or land is used in violation of this Code or other regulations made
under authority conferred thereby, the Village, in addition to other remedies,
may institute any appropriate action or proceedings to prevent such unlawful
erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion,
maintenance or use, to restrain, correct or abate such violation, to prevent
the occupancy of such building, structure or land, to prevent any illegal act,
conduct, business or use in or about such premises.
ARTICLE II
TERMS
Sec. 25-20. Word Usage.
   A.   Tense and Form. Words used or defined in one tense or form shall
include other tenses and derivative forms.
   B.   Number. Words in the singular number shall include the plural number,
and words in the plural number shall include the singular number.
   C.   Gender. The masculine gender shall include the feminine and neuter. The
feminine gender shall include the masculine and neuter. The neuter gender shall
include the masculine and feminine.
   D.   Shall and May. The word "shall" is mandatory. The word "may" is
permissive.
   E.   Time. The time within which any act required by this Code is to be
performed shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last
day, unless the last day is a Saturday or Sunday or a holiday declared by the
Village, in which event it shall also be excluded.
   F.   Person. The word "person" includes individuals, firms, partnerships,
joint ventures, trusts, trustees, estates, corporations, associations, and any
other similar entities.
   G.   Used For. The phrase "used for" shall include intended for, designed
for, occupied for, maintained for, and arranged to be used or occupied for
whenever that interpretation would result in the regulation being more
restrictive in its application to any use or structure.
   H.   Village. The word "Village" means the Village of Evergreen Park,
Illinois.
   I.   County. The word "county" and the phrase "Cook County" mean the County
of Cook, Illinois.
   J.   Undefined Terms. Any word not defined in this Code shall have the
meaning given in any applicable Village Code or ordinance or, if none, in
Webster's New International Dictionary, Second Edition 1975, except for words
employed to refer to the permitted uses and special uses of this Code, which
shall be interpreted, insofar as applicable, in accordance with the meaning
established in the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, as amended
through the effective date of this Code.
   K.   Captions, Illustrations, and Tables. In case of any difference of
meaning or implication between the text of this Code and any caption,
illustration, or table, the text shall control.
 Sec. 25-21. Definitions.
When used in this Code, the following terms shall have the meanings herein
ascribed to them. The definitions contained in the Cannabis Regulation and Tax
Act, 410 ILCS 705/1-1 et seq., are hereby incorporated by reference, including
such changes as may be approved from time to time by the laws of the State of
Illinois.
   Accessory Use or Structure. A use or structure that: (1) is subordinate in
extent and purpose to, and serves, a principal use or structure; and (2) is
customarily found as an incident to such principal use or structure; and (3)
contributes to the comfort, convenience, or necessity of those occupying,
working at, or being served by such principal use or structure; and (4) except
as otherwise expressly authorized by the provisions of this Code, is located on
the same zoning lot as such principal use or structure; and (5) is under the
same ownership and control as such principal use or structure.
   Adult Book Store. An establishment having as a substantial or significant
portion of its stock in trade, books, magazines and other periodicals which are
distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting,
describing or relating to "Specified Sexual Activities" or "Specified
Anatomical Areas," or an establishment with a segment or section devoted to the
sale or display of such material.
   Adult Entertainment Cabaret. A public or private establishment which is
licensed to serve food or alcoholic beverages, which features topless dancers,
go-go dancers, exotic dancers, strippers, male or female impersonators or
similar entertainers.
   Adult Mini Motion Picture Theaters. An enclosed building with a capacity for
less than 50 persons used for presenting materials distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to
"Specified Sexual Activities" or "Specified Anatomical Areas," for observation
by patrons therein.
   Adult Motion Picture Theater. An enclosed building with a capacity of 50 or
more persons used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to "Specified Sexual
Activities" or "Specified Anatomical Areas," for observation by patrons
therein.
   Alley. A public right-of-way that affords only a secondary means of
vehicular access to abutting property.
   Area, see "Building Area."
   Area, Gross. The total land and water area included in a parcel that is the
subject of an application filed pursuant to this Code, excluding only property
located in public right-of-way or private easements of access or egress.
   Basement. A portion of a structure located partly underground but having
less than half its clear floor to ceiling height over more than half of its
floor area below grade.
   Block. A tract of land bounded by streets or by a combination of streets,
public lands, railroad rights-of-way, waterways, or boundary lines of the
Village.
   Board of Appeals. The Zoning Board of Appeals of the Village.
   Board of Trustees. The Mayor and the Board of Trustees of the Village.
   Building. Any structure designed or intended for the support, enclosure,
shelter, or protection of persons, animals, or property.
   Building Coverage. The percentage of a lot's area covered by any building or
structure, including without limitation all areas underneath a roof.
   Building Depth. The longest straight line that can be drawn through a
structure substantially parallel to the side or corner side lot lines of the
lot on which it is located.
   Building, Detached. A building surrounded entirely by open space.
   Building, Principal. A building in which is conducted the principal use of
the lot on which said building is situated.
   Building Width. The longest straight line that can be drawn through a
structure parallel to the front lot line.
   Business Use or Purpose. Any use permitted in a commercial district.
   Chapter. The Evergreen Park Zoning Code.
   Code. The Evergreen Park Zoning Code.
   Commercial Uses, see "Business Use."
   Community Residence. A group home or specialized residential care home
serving unrelated persons with disabilities living in a family-like setting and
constituting a single housekeeping unit. Community residence does not include a
residence which serves persons as an alternative to incarceration for a
criminal offense, or persons whose primary reason for placement is substance or
alcohol abuse or for treatment of a communicable disease.
   Community Residence-Small. A community residence serving 8 or fewer persons
with disabilities in a family-like atmosphere.
   Community Residence-Large. A community residence serving 9 to 15 persons
with disabilities.
   Corner Lot . A lot abutting upon two or more streets at their intersection
or junction or a lot bounded on two sides by a curving street where it is
possible to draw two intersecting tangents, one each commencing at each of the
two points of intersection of the lot lines and street line, which intersect
with each other to form an interior angle of less than 135 degrees.
   Depth of Lot. The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot
lines.
   Depth of Rear Yard . The mean horizontal distance between the rear line of
the building and the centerline of the alley, where an alley exists, otherwise
the rear lot line.
   Development. Any man-made change, other than maintenance of existing
structures, paved areas or utilities, to improved or unimproved real estate,
including, without limitation, the construction or installation of new, or
enlargement of existing, structures, streets, or utilities; dredging, filling,
drilling, mining, grading, paving, or excavating operations; and open storage
of materials.
   District. One or more sections of the Village for which the regulations
governing the height, area, and use of building and premises are the same.
   Driveway. A private access way that provides direct access from a street to
not more than one lot or one principal building or use.
   Dwelling, Single Family Attached. A dwelling composed of a row of two or
more adjoining dwelling units, each situated on a separate subdivision lot or
being a separate condominium unit capable of individual sale, and each of which
is separated from the others by one or more unpierced walls extending from
ground to roof, and each of which is provided with garage space sufficient for
at least two vehicles.
   Dwelling, Single Family Detached. A dwelling containing only one dwelling
unit, situated on a separate subdivision lot or being a separate condominium
unit capable of individual sale and completely surrounded by open space.
   Dwelling, Multiple Family. A dwelling, other than a single family attached
dwelling, containing two or more dwelling units.
   Dwelling Unit. Any room or group of rooms located within a dwelling forming
a single habitable unit with facilities that are used or intended to be used
for living, sleeping, cooking, eating, and sanitation by one family.
   Family. Either one or more persons occupying a premises and living as a
single housekeeping unit, and related to each other by birth, adoption or
marriage, and including domestic servants as distinguished from a group
occupying a boardinghouse, lodginghouse or hotel as defined in this section or,
for the purpose of community residences, the persons living together may be
unrelated.
   Fence. A barrier structure used as a boundary or as a means of protection,
confinement, or screening.
   Floor Area, Gross. The sum of the gross horizontal areas of all floors of a
building measured from the exterior face of the exterior walls, but not
including any floor with a ceiling height of less than 7 feet and cellar
floors.
   Floor Area, Net. The gross floor area of a building minus floor space
devoted to washrooms; elevator shafts and stairwells at each floor; floor space
and shafts used for mechanical, electrical, and plumbing equipment; floor space
devoted to off-street parking and loading; and basement, attic, and floor space
used only for storage and which is inaccessible to the public.
   Floor Area Ratio. The gross floor area of a building divided by the total
lot area of the zoning lot on which it is located.
   Garage. A structure, or part thereof, designed or used for the parking and
storage of vehicles at one or more levels.
   Height of Building. The vertical measurement taken from the mean level of
the ground around the building to the highest point of the roof, for flat roofs
and mansard roofs; and to a point halfway between the ridge level and the line
where the main wall-face and the roof slant meet, for hip, gable or gambrel
roofs.
   Home Occupation. Any occupation or profession, practiced by a member of the
family residing on the premises, and which occupation is clearly incidental and
secondary to the residential use of the dwelling; and in connection with which
there is no indication from the exterior, other than one unanimated,
nonilluminated sign of not more than one square foot in size, that the building
is being utilized in whole or in part for any purpose other than that of a
dwelling. No commodity is sold upon the premises and no commodity intended for
sale or use elsewhere is stored on the premises; no more than one person is
employed other than members of the family residing on the premises; and no
mechanical or electrical equipment is used except for telephones, calculators,
typewriters and computers. A professional person may use his residence for
consultation, emergency treatment or performance of religious rites. No
accessory building shall be used for such home occupation. Home occupations,
further, shall not utilize more than 25 percent of the total floor area of any
one story. No vehicle used in conjunction with the home occupation may be
parked on the premises, based at the premises, or parked on the public street
in the area of the premises, except for one passenger car designed for carrying
not more than 6 persons.
   Intensity of Use of Lot. That portion of the area of a lot which is occupied
by or which may be occupied by or which may be occupied under this Code by
building and accessory buildings.
   Line of Building. The boundary of any side of the building, excluding only
open porches not exceeding one story in height and glazed porches whose roof
line is not higher than 3 feet above the second floor level, or whose area
projected over the building lines does not exceed 200 square feet; steps and
terraces at or below the first floor level; balconies, canopies or cornices
projecting not more than 3-1/2 feet beyond the wall of the building.
   Lot. See "Lot of Record" and "Lot, Zoning". Unless the context indicates
otherwise, all references in this Code to a "lot" shall be deemed to mean a
"zoning lot".
   Lot Area. Only area within the lot lines shall be considered a part of a
lot, and streets and alleys are excluded in determining the dimensions of a lot
except where otherwise specifically stated.
   Lot Corner. A lot abutting upon two or more streets at their intersection or
junction or a lot bounded on two sides by a curving street where it is possible
to draw two intersecting tangents, one each commencing at each of the two
points of intersection of the lot lines and street line, which intersect with
each other to form an interior angle of less than 135 degrees.
   Lot Depth. The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot
lines.
   Lot Interior. A lot other than a corner lot.
   Lot Lines. The property lines bounding a lot.
   Lot Line, Corner Side. Any street line of a corner lot other than its front
lot line.
   Lot Line, Front. In the case of an interior lot abutting upon only one
street, the line separating such lot from such street; in the case of a through
lot, each line separating such lot from a street shall be considered a front
lot line; in the case of a corner lot, the shorter lot line separating such lot
from a street shall be considered to be the front lot line.
   Lot Line, Rear. That lot line that is parallel to and most distant from the
front lot line of the lot; provided, however, that in any case where no lot
line of at least 20 feet in length is parallel to the front lot line, an
imaginary line 20 feet in length, entirely within the lot, parallel to, and at
the maximum possible distance from, the front lot line shall be considered to
be the rear lot line.
   Lot Line, Side. Any lot line other than a front, corner-side, or rear lot
line.
   Lot of Record. A lot that is part of a subdivision, the properly approved
plat of which has been recorded in the office of the Recorder of Deeds or
Registrar of Titles of Cook County, Illinois, or a parcel of land separately
described in a recorded deed. A tax divided parcel is not a lot of record.
   Lot, Width of. The shortest horizontal distance between side lot lines
measured by a line passing through the point of the required front yard line
equidistant from the points where the front yard line intersects the side yard
lines (measured along the front yard line); provided, however, that the length
of the front lot line shall not be less than 80 percent of the required minimum
lot width.
   Lot, Zoning. A tract of land consisting of one or more lots of record under
single fee title ownership located entirely within a block and occupied by, or
designated by its owner or developer at the time of filing for any zoning
approval or building permit as a tract to be developed for, a principal
building and its accessory buildings, or a principal use, together with such
open spaces and yards as are designed and arranged, or required under this
Code, to be used with such building or use. Notwithstanding the foregoing, sale
of individual lots of record underlying individual dwelling units in an
attached or two-family dwelling, following issuance of a Certificate of
Occupancy for such dwelling, shall not prevent treatment of the tract of land
underlying such dwelling as a zoning lot and all applicable bulk, space, and
yard requirements shall be applied with respect to such dwelling and such
zoning lot rather than with respect to individually-owned dwelling units and
lots of record.
   Nonconforming Lot of Record. A lot of record that does not comply with the
lot requirements for any permitted use in the district in which it is located.
   Nonconforming Lot of Record, Legal. A nonconforming lot of record that: (a)
was created by a plat or deed recorded at a time when, and came into ownership
separate from adjoining tracts of land at a time when, the creation of a lot of
such size, shape, depth, and width at such location would not have been
prohibited by any ordinance or other regulation; and (b) has remained in
separate and individual ownership from adjoining tracts of land continuously
during the entire time that the creation of such a lot has been prohibited by
any applicable ordinance or other regulation.
   Nonconforming Structure. Any building or structure lawfully existing on the
effective date of this Code, or any amendment to it rendering such building or
structure nonconforming, that: (a) does not comply with all of the regulations
of this Code, or any such amendment thereto, governing parking, loading, or
bulk and space requirements for the zoning district in which such building or
structure is located; or (b) is located on a lot that does not, or is so
located on a lot as not to, comply with the yard or setback requirements for
the zoning district in which such building or structure is located; or (c) both
(a) and (b); except (d) any building containing more than one dwelling unit in
addition to the number permitted by the district regulations in the district
where it is located shall be deemed to be a nonconforming use rather than a
nonconforming structure.
   Nonconforming Use. Any use lawfully being made of any land, building or
structure, other than a sign, on the effective date of this Code, or any
amendment to it rendering such use nonconforming, that does not comply with all
of the regulations of this Code, or any such amendment hereto, governing use
for the zoning district in which such land. building or structure is located.
   Person With a Disability. Any individual whose disability:
   A.   Is attributable to mental, intellectual or physical impairments or a
combination of mental, intellectual or physical impairments;
   B.   Is likely to continue for a significant amount of time or indefinitely;
   C.   Results in functional limitations in 3 or more of the following areas
of major life activities:
      1.   Self care;
      2.   Receptive or expressive language;
      3.   Learning;
      4.   Mobility;
      5.   Self direction;
      6.    Capacity for independent living; and
      7.   Economic self-sufficiency.
   D.   Reflects the person's need for a combination and sequence of special
interdisciplinary or generic care, treatment or other services which are of
lifelong or extended duration.
   Principal Structure or Building. A structure or building on a zoning lot
intended to be utilized for a principal use and to which any other structure on
such lot must be accessory.
   Principal Use. The use of a zoning lot, whether a permitted or specifically
permitted use, designated by the owner of such lot as the primary or main use
of such lot and to which any other use on such lot must be accessory.
   Residential Structure. A structure containing one or more dwelling units.
   Setback. The distance between the front lot line and the building line.
   Sign. Any object, device, display, or structure, or part thereof, situated
outdoors or indoors, which is used to advertise, identify, display, direct, or
attract attention to an object, person, institution, organization, business,
product, service, event, or location by any means, including words, letters,
figures, designs, symbols, fixtures, colors, illumination, or projected images.
   Specified Sexual Activities. Is defined as:
   A.   Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal;
   B.   Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy;
   C.   Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic regions,
buttock or female breast.
   Specified Anatomical Area. Is defined as:
   A.   Less than completely and opaquely covered:
      1.   human genitals, pubic region;
      2.   buttock, and
      3.   female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola;
   B.   Human male genitals in a discernible turgid state, even if completely
and opaquely covered.
   Staff. Paid professional support staff provided by a sponsoring agency for a
community residence, either living with the residents on a 24-hour full-time
basis or non-live-in on a 24-hour shift basis or present whenever residents
with disabilities are present at the dwelling. Staff personnel are not to be
included in counting the number of disabled persons permitted in a residential
zoning district.
   Story. Except as otherwise specifically provided in this Code, that portion
of a building included between the surface on any floor and the surface of the
floor next above it, or if, there is no floor above, then the space between the
floor and the ceiling next above it. The floor of a story may split levels
provided that there is not more than four feet difference in elevation between
the different levels of the floor. When the floor area of the upper-most story
that has a floor-to-ceiling height of less than seven feet is more than 50
percent of the gross floor area of the story next below it, such upper-most
story shall be counted as one-half story. A basement shall be counted as one-
half story; a cellar shall not be counted as a story. Any area in which the
distance from one floor to the floor or ceiling above it is more than 16 feet
shall be deemed to consist of one story for each 16 feet of height or major
fraction thereof.
   Street. A thoroughfare furnishing principal means of access to abutting
property, used for public foot and vehicle traffic, other than an alley.
   Street line. The dividing line between a street and the lot. The front
street line shall be deemed to be the shortest street line.
   Street Wall. A main wall nearest to and facing on a street including sun
parlors but not including bay windows that do not constitute more than one-
third of the width of the frontage of the building, and not including ground
story porches and piazzas that are not closed in.
   Structural Alterations. Any change, other than incidental repairs, that
would prolong the life of the supporting members of a structure such as bearing
walls, columns, beams, girders, or foundations or that would alter the
dimensions or configurations of the roof or exterior walls of a structure or
that would increase either the gross or net floor area of a structure.
   Structure. Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires more
or less permanent location on the ground, or anything attached to something
having a permanent location of the ground, but not including paving or
surfacing of the ground. References to "structure" shall in all cases be deemed
to refer to both structures and buildings.
   Transitional Service Facility. An authorized and licensed dwelling operated
by a public or private agency duly authorized and licensed by any state agency
having authority to license and approve said facility that houses individuals
being cared for by the agency and deemed by the agency to be capable of living
and functioning in the community and that provides continuous professional
guidance.
   Use. The purpose of activity for which a structure or land is designed,
arranged, or intended, or for which it is occupied or maintained.
   Use, Permitted. A use that appears on the permitted use list of a particular
zoning district.
   Yard. A required open space on a lot between a lot line and a yard line that
is, except as otherwise expressly authorized by this Code, unoccupied and
unobstructed from grade to the sky.
   Yard, Corner Side. A yard extending from the front yard line to the rear
yard line between the corner side lot line of the lot and the corner side yard
line.
   Yard, Front. A yard extending across the entire front of a lot between the
front lot line of the lot and the front yard line.
   Yard, Rear. A yard extending across the entire rear of a lot between the
rear lot line of the lot and rear yard line.
   Yard, Required. The minimum yard depth designated in the regulations of this
Code establishing minimum front, corner side, side, and rear yard requirements
for various uses, structures, and districts.
   Yard, Side. A yard extending along a side lot line from the front yard to
the rear yard between the side lot line and the side yard line.
   Yard Line, Corner Side. A line drawn parallel to a corner side lot line at a
distance therefrom equal to the depth of the required corner side yard.
   Yard Line, Front. A line drawn parallel to a front lot line at a distance
therefrom equal to the depth of the required front yard.
   Yard Line, Rear. A line drawn parallel to a rear lot line at a distance
therefrom equal to the depth of the required rear yard.
   Yard Line, Side. A line drawn parallel to a side lot line at a distance
therefrom equal to the depth of the required side yard.
(Am. Ord. No. 4-2014 § 1, 2-3-14; Am. Ord. No. 16-2021 § 1, 10-4-21)
ARTICLE III
ADMINISTRATION
Sec. 25-30. Board of Trustees.
   A.   Jurisdiction. The Board of Trustees reserves to itself the final power
to determine and approve all zoning applications, including zoning amendments,
rezonings, map amendments, amendments to the Code, variations, special uses,
and planned developments.
   B.   Public Hearings. The Board of Trustees reserves the right to designate
another body, including itself, to hear and conduct any public hearing on a
zoning application.
   C.   Application. The Board of Trustees has the right to make a zoning
application with regard to any specific property within the Village and with
regard to any zoning amendments, rezonings, map amendments, amendments to the
Code, variations, special uses, and planned developments.
   D.   Requirements. The requirements of this Code shall not apply to any
zoning application made by the Village.
   E.   Ordinance Approval. In the event that the Board of Trustees passes an
ordinance approving a zoning application, such passage shall be conclusive
evidence that all procedural requirements and findings required by this Code
have been met, except with regard to published notice.
Sec. 25-31. Zoning Board of Appeals.
   A.   Creation; Membership. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall consist of
seven members appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the Board
of Trustees. The members shall serve for one-year terms and until their
successors have been appointed and qualified.
   B.   Chairman. The Mayor, with the advice and consent of the Board of
Trustees, shall name one member of the Zoning Board of Appeals as Chairman, to
preside at all meetings and hearings and to fulfill the customary functions of
that office. In the absence of the Chairman, a Temporary Chairman elected by
the Board of Appeals shall act as Chairman and shall have all the powers of the
Chairman.
   C.   Secretary and Minutes. The Mayor shall name a Secretary to the Zoning
Board of Appeals. The Secretary shall provide for the keeping of minutes of the
proceedings of the Zoning Board of Appeals, showing the vote of each member
upon every question or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and
shall maintain permanent records of all Zoning Board of Appeals meetings,
hearings, and proceedings and all correspondence of the Zoning Board of
Appeals.
   D.   Quorum and Necessary Vote. No business shall be transacted by the
Zoning Board of Appeals without a quorum, consisting of four members, being
present. The concurring vote of at least four members of the Zoning Board of
Appeals shall be necessary to pass any motion in favor of the applicant. Any
lesser vote on any such motion, even if a majority of those voting, shall be
considered a final decision denying the application. If less than a quorum is
present, the hearing may be adjourned from time to time.
   E.   Absent Members. No member absent from any portion of a hearing shall be
qualified to vote upon the matter heard unless that member shall first certify
on the record that he has reviewed the entire record of any such portion of the
hearing during which he was absent and has fully informed himself of the
essential facts and issues of the matter being heard so as to be able to cast
an informed and independent vote.
   F.   Meetings; Hearings; Procedures. Regular meetings of the Zoning Board of
Appeals shall be held at the call of the Chairman or as provided by rule of the
Zoning Board of Appeals. Special meetings shall be called at the request of the
Chairman or of any two members of the Zoning Board of Appeals or of the Board
of Trustees. All testimony at any hearing of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall
be given under oath. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall adopt its own rules of
procedure for the conduct of its business. Any rule so adopted that relates
solely to the conduct of the Zoning Board of Appeal's hearing and that is not
mandated by this Code may be waived by the Chairman.
   G.   Record. The transcript of testimony, if any; the minutes of the
Secretary; all applications, requests, exhibits, and papers filed in any
proceeding before the Zoning Board of Appeals; and the decision of the Zoning
Board of Appeals shall constitute the record. The Zoning Board of Appeals may
rely on the personal knowledge of its members, on its inspections of the
property, and on any reports available to it; provided, however, that reliance
on any specific factual matter or report shall be made a matter of record at
the public hearing and every party shall be afforded reasonable time to respond
to it.
   H.   Decisions. Every recommendation or decision of the Zoning Board of
Appeals shall be set forth in its minutes and may include findings of fact; may
refer to all the evidence in the record and to the exhibits, plans, or
specifications upon which such recommendation or decision is based; may specify
the reason or reasons for such recommendation or decision; may contain a
conclusion or statement separate from the findings of fact setting forth the
specific relief granted or denying relief or setting forth the recommendation
of the Zoning Board of Appeals; and may expressly set forth any limitations or
conditions recommended or imposed on any relief granted or recommended or work
or uses authorized.
   In any case where this Code provides that the failure of the Zoning Board of
Appeals to act shall be deemed a recommendation for grant or denial of an
application, such failure shall be considered to be a decision of the Zoning
Board of Appeals rendered on the day following the expiration of such fixed
period, notwithstanding the absence of required findings and conclusions.
   I.   Conflicts. No member of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall participate
in the hearing or disposition of any matter in which that member has a property
or pecuniary interest.
   J.   Appeals. An appeal from any final decision of the Zoning Board of
Appeals may be taken in the manner provided in Article III of the Illinois Code
of Civil Procedure pertaining to administrative review.
   K.   Jurisdiction and Authority. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall have the
following jurisdiction and authority:
      1.   To hear and decide appeals from, and to review orders, decisions, or
determinations made by the Building Commissioner and to that end have the power
of the Building Commissioner with respect to such order, decision, or
determination.
      2.   To hear, review, and offer its recommendations to the Board of
Trustees on applications for variations from the requirements of this Code.
      3.   To prepare and recommend a comprehensive plan, including an official
map, to the Board of Trustees, which, upon its adoption by the Board of
Trustees, shall be known as the "Official Comprehensive Plan" of the Village.
      4.   To review, prepare, and recommend to the Board of Trustees changes
in and amendments to the Official Plan, including the official map.
      5.   To initiate, hear, review, and offer its recommendations to the
Board of Trustees on applications for amendments to this Code.
      6.   To hear, review, and offer its recommendations to the Board of
Trustees on applications for special use permits.
      7.   To hear, review, and offer its recommendations to the Board of
Trustees on applications for planned development approval.
      8.   To hear, review, and offer its recommendations to the Board of
Trustees on applications for, or appeals from the Building Commissioner denial
of, Site Plan approval made to the Board of Trustees.
Sec. 25-32. Enforcement Officer.
The Building Commissioner shall be charged with and responsible for the
enforcement and interpretation of the provisions of this Code.
Sec. 25-33. Site Plan Approval.
   A.   Authority. Pursuant to the provisions of this Code, the Building
Commissioner, as a matter of original jurisdiction and in accordance with the
procedures and standards set out in this Section, may grant site plan approval
to uses and developments requiring such approval.
   B.   Purpose. The site plan approval process recognizes that even those uses
and developments that have been determined to be generally suitable for
location in a particular district are capable of adversely affecting the
purposes for which this Code was enacted unless careful consideration is given
to critical design elements. It is the purpose of this Section to provide a
vehicle for the review of the developer's attention to such elements.
   C.   Site Plan Approval Required. Site plan approval by the Building
Commissioner in accordance with this Section shall be required in connection
with the following development:
      1.   Any residential or commercial development or redevelopment, other
than for one single family detached dwelling unit, or any addition, expansion,
or accessory building in conjunction therewith.
      2.   Any residential or commercial development or redevelopment involving
an existing structure, other than one which does not change the outside walls
of the structure and other than for one single family detached dwelling unit.
      3.   Any residential or commercial development or redevelopment involving
the creation or expansion of a parking lot or loading zone.
   D.   Procedure.  
      1.   Preapplication Conference.
         (a)   Request. In any case where site plan approval is required, the
applicant may by letter request a preapplication conference, prior to filing
his application, with the Building Commissioner.
         (b)   Required Information. Such request shall include a brief and
general description of the nature, location, and extent of the proposed project
and a list of any professional consultants advising the prospective applicant
with respect to the proposed project.
         (c)   Procedure. Upon receipt of such request, the Building
Commissioner shall promptly schedule such conference and notify the applicant
and appropriate staff members of the time and place of such conference and of
the names and attend. The Building Commissioner or his designee shall conduct
such conference, and its purpose shall be to broadly acquaint all other parties
with the proposals, views, and concerns of all other parties at a time when
positions are still flexible and adjustment is still possible.
      2.   Building Commissioner Approvals.
         (a)   Action by Building Commissioner. Within 21 days after receipt by
the Building Commissioner of a properly completed application, including all
information and changes requested, the Building Commissioner shall cause such
application and the attached site plan to be reviewed, in terms of the
standards established by this Section. He then shall either: (i) approve the
site plan as submitted; or (ii) on the basis of written findings in accordance
with this Section, approve it subject to specific modifications; or (iii) on
the basis of such findings, deny approval of the site plan.
Immediately upon concluding review, the Building Commissioner shall return one
copy of the site plan to the applicant marked to show either approval, approval
subject to modifications which modifications shall be clearly and permanently
marked on such plans, or denial of approval. The Building Commissioner shall
maintain a similarly marked set of such plans for any further processing that
may be required. The failure of the Building Commissioner to act within such 21
days, or such further time to which the applicant may agree, shall be deemed to
be a decision approving the site plan as submitted.
         (b)   Effect of Building Commissioner's Action. The action of the
Building Commissioner in approving a site plan or in approving a site plan
subject to modifications that are acceptable to the applicant shall constitute
a final administrative action and shall not be subject to further review or
appeal. The action of the Building Commissioner in denying an application for
Site Plan Approval or in approving a site plan subject to modifications that
are not acceptable to the applicant (which action the applicant may treat as a
denial) shall not be considered final action by the Village but shall only be
authorization for the applicant to seek approval of the site plan from the
Zoning Board of Appeals by way of the appeal procedure set forth below.
         (c)   Appeals. Within 45 days after a denial of Site Plan approval by
the Building Commissioner, the applicant may seek approval of the site plan by
filing an application for appeal to the Zoning Board of Appeals.
      3.   Zoning Board of Appeals Approvals.
         (a)   Action by Building Commissioner in Appeal Cases. Upon receipt of
a properly completed application for an appeal of a denial of site plan
approval by the Building Commissioner, he shall forthwith transmit to the
Zoning Board of Appeals the application for appeal, the original application
for site plan approval, all papers constituting the record upon which the
Building Commissioner's denial was based, and a copy of the Building
Commissioner's decision denying the application for Site Plan approval.
         (b)   Public Hearing. A public hearing and formal notice is not
required by the Zoning Board of Appeals although its actions must be taken at a
public meeting.
         (c)   Action by Zoning Board of Appeals. Within 35 days after the
conclusion of the public meeting, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall approve the
site plan as submitted, or shall make modifications acceptable to the applicant
and approve such modified site plan, or shall disapprove it in the manner
hereinafter specified. The failure of the Zoning Board of Appeals to act within
such 35 days, or such further time to which the applicant may agree, shall be
deemed to be a decision denying site plan approval.
   E.   Standards for Site Plan Disapproval.
      1.   Standards. Neither the Building Commissioner nor the Zoning Board of
Appeals shall disapprove a site plan submitted pursuant to this Section except
on the basis of specific written findings directed to one or more of the
following standards:
         (a)   The application is incomplete in specified particulars or
contains or reveals violations of this Code or other applicable regulations
that the applicant, after written request, has failed or refused to supply or
correct.
         (b)   The application is submitted in connection with another
application, the approval of which is a condition precedent to the necessity
for site plan review, and the applicant has failed to secure approval of that
application.
         (c)   The site plan fails to adequately meet specified standards
required by this Code with respect to the proposed use or development,
including special use standards where applicable.
         (d)   The proposed site plan interferes with easements or rights-of-
way.
         (e)   The proposed site plan unreasonably destroys, damages,
detrimentally modifies, or interferes with the enjoyment of significant
natural, topographical, or physical features of the site.
         (f)   The proposed site plan is unreasonably injurious or detrimental
to the use and enjoyment of surrounding property.
         (g)   The proposed site plan creates undue traffic congestion or
hazard; in the public streets, or the circulation elements of the proposed site
plan unreasonably create hazards to safety on or off site or disjointed,
inefficient pedestrian or vehicular circulation paths on or off site.
         (h)   The screening of the site does not provide adequate shielding
from or for nearby uses.
         (i)   The proposed structures or landscaping are unreasonably lacking
amenity in relation to, or are incompatible with, nearby structures and uses.
         (j)   In the case of site plans submitted in connection with an
application for a special permit, the proposed site plan makes inadequate
provision for the creation or preservation of open space or for its continued
maintenance.
         (k)   The proposed site plan creates unreasonable drainage or erosion
problems or fails to fully and satisfactorily integrate the site into the
overall existing and planned drainage system serving the Village.
         (l)   The proposed site plan places unwarranted or unreasonable
burdens on specified utility systems serving the site or area or fails to fully
and satisfactorily integrate the site's utilities into the overall existing and
planned utility systems serving the Village.
         (m)   The proposed site plan otherwise adversely affects the public
health, safety, or general welfare.
      2.   Alternative Approaches. In citing any of the foregoing standards,
other than those of Subparagraphs 1(a) and 1(b), as the basis for disapproving
a site plan, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall suggest alternate site plan
approaches that could be developed to avoid the specified deficiency or shall
state the reasons why such deficiency cannot be avoided consistent with the
applicant's objectives.
   F.   Effect of Site Plan Approval. Approval of a site plan shall not
authorize the establishment or extension of any use nor the development,
construction, reconstruction, alteration, or moving of any building or
structure, but shall merely authorize the preparation, filing, and processing
of applications for any permits or approvals that may be required by the codes
and ordinances of the Village.
   A copy of every approved site plan shall be filed with the Building
Commissioner and the development of the site shall be in substantial conformity
with such approved and filed plan.
   G.   Limitations on Site Plan Approval. Subject to an extension of time
granted by the Building Commissioner, no site plan approval shall be valid for
a period longer than one year unless a Building Permit is issued and
construction is actually begun within that period and is thereafter diligently
pursued to completion or unless a Certificate of Zoning Compliance is issued
and a use commenced within that period.
   H.   Adjustments to Site Plan During Development. During the development of
the site, the Building Commissioner may authorize minor adjustments to a site
plan originally approved by him or the Zoning Board of Appeals when such
adjustments appear necessary in light of technical or engineering
considerations first discovered during actual development.
Sec. 25-34. Certificate of Zoning Compliance.
   A.   Authority. The Building Commissioner shall have authority to issue
Certificates of Zoning Compliance; provided, however, that no such certificate
shall be issued except in accordance with the provisions of this Section and
the provisions of the Building Code and Fire Code.
   B.   Purpose. For the purposes of this Code, the Certificate of Zoning
Compliance provides a procedure for the inspection of completed premises to
ensure their compliance with this Code and approved plans prior to commencement
of the use or occupancy of such premises. The certificate may also evidence
compliance with other provisions of the Evergreen Park Municipal Code as set
forth in those provisions. It is intended that the Certificate of Zoning
Compliance shall be issued in conjunction with a Certificate of Occupancy
pursuant to the Evergreen Park Building Code when such a Certificate of
Occupancy is required thereby.
   C.   Certificate Required. Unless a Certificate of Zoning Compliance shall
have first been obtained certifying compliance with the provisions of this
Code:
      1.   No structure, or addition thereto, constructed, reconstructed,
remodeled, altered, or moved after the effective date of this Code shall be
occupied or used for any purpose; and
      2.   No land vacant as of the effective date of this Code shall be used
or occupied for any purpose; and
      3.   Except for changes involving only substitution of occupants in
existing dwelling units, no use or occupancy of any land or structure shall be
changed to any other use or occupancy when such change involves construction,
remodeling, alteration, or moving, and
      4.   No home occupation shall be established or maintained.
   D.   Procedure.
      1.   Application. Applications for Certificates of Zoning Compliance
shall be filed with the Building Commissioner on forms supplied by the Village
and shall be accompanied by an application fee of $100.00. In any case where
the structure or use involved has been constructed or established pursuant to
any approval granted pursuant to this Code, the application shall be
accompanied by "as built" plans depicting the structure or use as built and
bearing the certificate of a surveyor, engineer, architect, land planner, or
owner-designer, as may be appropriate, certifying that the structure or use as
built conforms in all respects to the approval granted.
      2.   Action on Application. Within 10 days after the receipt of a
completed application, the Building Commissioner shall cause the subject
structure or premises to be inspected and shall take one of the following
actions based on such inspection:
         (a)   If all work has been completed and the structure and use thereof
are in full and complete compliance with all applicable provisions of this
Code, other relevant codes and ordinances of the Village, the applicant's plans
as approved, and any conditions attached to any approval issued pursuant to
this Code, the Building Commissioner shall issue a Certificate of Zoning
Compliance.
         (b)   If, however, all work is not complete or is in any manner not in
full compliance with all applicable requirements, the Building Commissioner
shall deny the application and shall inform the applicant in writing of the
specific deficiencies on which such denial is based, citing the particular
provisions of the codes and ordinances of the Village, the particular items in
the applicant's plans or the applicable special approval conditions with
respect to which compliance is lacking.
      3.   Contents of Certificate. In addition to the matters required to be
contained in a Certificate of Zoning Compliance pursuant to other applicable
provisions of the Evergreen Park Municipal Code, each Certificate of Zoning
Compliance issued pursuant to this Section shall state the specific use of the
subject property for which it is issued, shall identify the specific plans, if
any, pursuant to which it is issued, and shall set forth any conditions imposed
in connection with any approval granted pursuant to this Code.
      4.   Filing of Certificates. Every Certificate of Zoning Compliance
issued pursuant to this Section shall be kept on file in the Office of the
Building Commissioner.
   E.   Temporary Certificate of Zoning Compliance. Notwithstanding the
provisions of Paragraph D2 of this Section, when construction, reconstruction,
or alteration of a structure does not require the vacating of the structure, or
when parts of the structure are finished and ready for occupancy before the
completion of such construction, reconstruction, remodeling, or alteration and
are certified upon inspection to be safe for use or occupancy and to be in full
compliance with all applicable provisions of this Code, other relevant codes
and ordinances of the Village, the applicant's plans as approved and any
conditions attached to any approvals issued pursuant to this Code with respect
to such structure or its premises, a Temporary Certificate of Zoning Compliance
may be issued for a period not to exceed six months from its date, which
Temporary Certificate shall bear on its face, in bold type, a statement of its
temporary nature; provided, however, that no such Temporary Certificate shall
be issued pursuant to this Code unless said structure also qualifies for a
Temporary Certificate of Zoning Compliance issued pursuant to the Evergreen
Park Building Code.
   F.   Certificate of Zoning Compliance for Existing Uses. The Building
Commissioner may issue a Certificate of Zoning Compliance certifying the lawful
existence and use of any existing structure or use in the same manner, and
subject to the same standards and limitations, as authorized by this Section
with respect to new structures and uses. Such Certificate of Zoning Compliance
shall be prima facie evidence of the facts contained in it with respect to any
structure or use as of the date of its issue and remain effective for that
purpose for so long as neither the use or structure nor the applicable
provisions of this Code are changed.
   G.   Certificate of Zoning Compliance for Legal Nonconformities. The
Building Commissioner may issue a Certificate of Zoning Compliance certifying
the lawful existence and use of any nonconforming use, structure or lot in the
same manner, and subject to the same standards and limitations, as authorized
by this Section with respect to new structures and uses.
   H.   Void Certificates. Any Certificate of Zoning Compliance issued in
violation of the provisions of this Code, whether intentionally, negligently,
or innocently, shall be void ab initio and shall give rise to no rights
whatsoever.
 Sec. 25-35. Administrative Deviations in Residential Districts.
The Building Commissioner, with the consent of the Mayor, shall have the
authority to grant an administrative deviation, without any public hearing or
without any public notice, as follows:
   A.   Decrease side yard setback requirements and rear yard setback
requirements by not more than 1 foot on each side yard and the rear yard for
any accessory structure.
   B.    Decrease side yard setback requirements by not more than 1 foot on
each side yard for the principal structure.
   C.   Decrease rear yard setback requirements by not more than 5 feet for the
principal structure.
   D.   Decrease front yard setback requirements by not more than 5 feet for
the principal structure.
   E.   Decrease lot width requirements by not more than 2.5 feet provided that
any new residence shall be constructed with an attached 2-car garage, except
that a detached 2-car garage accessible only from a dedicated alley may be
permitted. A residence with a side drive is not permitted.
   F.   Decrease lot coverage requirements to not more than 45% of the lot
area.
   G.   Payment of $750 administrative processing fee.
ARTICLE IV
ZONING APPLICATIONS, HEARINGS, AND APPROVALS
Sec. 25-40. Applications.
   A.   Place of Filing. All applications shall be filed with the Village Clerk
except that applications requiring action by the Building Commissioner shall be
filed with him.
   B.   Form; Number; Scale. All applications filed pursuant to this Code shall
be on forms supplied by the Village and shall be filed in such number as
determined necessary in order to provide copies thereof to the Village. All
plans filed as part of any application shall be at a scale sufficient to permit
a clear and precise understanding of the contents of said plans.
   C.   Fees.
      1.   Fee Established; Lien. Every application filed pursuant to this Code
shall be subject to a minimum application fee as established from time to time
by the Board of Trustees to recover the actual costs, as hereinafter defined,
incurred by the Village in processing such application. In the event that the
actual costs exceed the minimum application fee, the balance shall be due
within 10 days after billing by the Village. The owner of the property subject
of the application and, if different, the applicant shall be jointly and
severally liable for the payment of said fee. By signing the application, the
owner shall be deemed to have agreed to pay such fee and to consent to the
filing and foreclosure of a lien on the subject property to ensure collection
of any such fee, plus the costs of collection, which has not been paid within
30 days following the mailing of a written demand for such payment to the owner
at the address shown on the application. Any lien filed pursuant to this
Subsection may be foreclosed in the manner provided by statute for mortgages or
mechanics liens.
       2.   Recoverable Costs. For purposes of establishing the application
fee, the actual costs incurred by the Village in processing an application
shall be deemed to consist of the following items of direct and indirect
expense:
         (a)   Legal Publication and posted sign (direct cost);
         (b)   Recording Secretarial Services (direct cost);
         (c)   Court Reporter (direct cost);
         (d)   Administrative Review and Preparation (hourly salary);
         (e)   Document Preparation and Review (hourly salary);
         (f)    Professional and Technical Consultant Services (direct cost);
         (g)   Legal Review, Consultation, and Advice (direct cost);
         (h)   Copy Reproduction (direct cost); and
         (i)   Document Recordation (direct cost).
      3.   Condition of all Applications, Approvals, and Permits; Time Periods.
No application filed pursuant to this Code shall be considered complete unless
and until all fees and deposits due pursuant to this Subsection have been paid.
Every approval granted and every permit issued pursuant to this Code, whether
or not expressly so conditioned, shall be deemed to be conditioned upon payment
of fees as required by this Subsection.
When this Code provides that the passage of time without decision or action
shall be deemed an approval or a recommendation for approval, all time periods
shall be tolled during any period of nonpayment, but shall otherwise continue
to run.
The failure to fully pay any such fee or deposit when due shall be grounds for
refusing to process an application and for denying or revoking any permit or
approval sought or issued with respect to the land or development to which the
unpaid fee or deposit relates.
      4.   Waiver. The Board of Trustees may waive any or all of an application
fee. No application fee shall apply to the Village or any elected official
thereof.
   D.   Minimum Data Requirements. Every application submitted pursuant to this
Code shall contain such information as is required by the Village from time to
time.
   E.   Special Data Requests. Every applicant shall submit other and
additional data, information, or documentation as the Building Commissioner or
the Zoning Board of Appeals may deem necessary or appropriate to a full and
proper consideration and disposition of the particular application.
   F.   Waiver of Application Requirements. The Building Commissioner and the
Zoning Board of Appeals have the right to waive any documentation required by
them or required in this code.
   G.   Withdrawal of Application. An applicant may withdraw an application at
any time prior to a final decision having been rendered with respect thereto.
Such withdrawal shall be without prejudice to the applicant's right to refile
such application, but any such refiling shall be treated as an entirely new
filing and shall be subject to the procedures and fees of this Code in the same
manner as any other new application. No refund of any fees shall be made by
reason of a withdrawn application.
Sec. 25-41. Public Hearings.
   A.    Setting Hearing. When the provisions of this Code require a public
hearing in connection with any application, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall
fix the date for the public hearing.
   B.    Notice. The following provisions are applicable to public hearings
conducted by the Zoning Board of Appeals:
      1.   Village Clerk to Give Notice. The Village Clerk shall cause notice
to be given of public hearings in the form and manner and to the persons herein
specified.
      2.   Content of Notice. All notices shall include the date, time and
place of such hearing, a description of the matter to be heard or considered,
the address or particular location of the subject property, and a legal
description of the subject property where the application is not filed by the
Village.
      3.   Published Notice. The Village shall give notice of every public
hearing by publication not less than 15 nor more than 30 days in advance of the
hearing date in a newspaper having general circulation within the Village.
      4.   Mailed Notice. The Village shall give notice of every public hearing
by mail not less than 10 nor more than 30 days in advance of the hearing date
to all persons listed on the Village water billing records for property located
within 200 feet of the applicant's property.
      5.   Posted Notice. The Village may post a notice on the property
indicating that a zoning application is pending with regard to any rezoning or
subdivision. The applicant shall permit such posted notice and shall not remove
the same.
      6.   Village Applications. The only notice required with regard to an
application made by the Village is published notice.
      7.   Improper Notice. The failure to provide any notice, other than the
published notice, shall not affect the jurisdiction or proceedings conducted on
an application at a public hearing.
      8.   Continued Public Hearing. No notice of a continued public hearing or
a matter referred back to the Zoning Board of Appeals by the Board of Trustees
is required.
   C.   Conduct of Hearings.
      1.   Rights of All Persons. Any person may appear and testify at a public
hearing, either in person or by a duly authorized agent or attorney, and may
submit documentary evidence; provided, however, that the hearing body may
exclude irrelevant, immaterial, or unduly repetitious evidence.
      2.   Adjournment of Hearing. The body conducting the hearing may at any
time, on its own motion or at the request of any person, adjourn the hearing
for a reasonable time and to a fixed date, time, and place, for the purpose of
giving further notice, taking further evidence, gathering further information,
deliberating further, or for such other reason as the hearing body may find to
be sufficient.
      3.   Testimony to be Sworn. All testimony at any hearing shall be given
under oath.
      4.   Right to Submit Written Statements. Any person may at any time prior
to the commencement of a hearing hereunder, or during such hearing, or within
such time as may be allowed by the hearing body following such hearing, submit
written statements in support of or in opposition to the application being
heard. Such statements shall be subscribed and sworn before an officer
authorized to administer oaths and shall be made a part of the public record of
the hearing.
ARTICLE V
ZONING DISTRICTS
Sec. 25-50. Establishment of Districts, Zoning Map.
To carry out the purposes of this Code, the Village is hereby divided into the
following zoning districts:
   "A" Single Family Residential District.
   "B" Multi-Family Residential District.
   "C" Commercial District.
   "I" Cemetery District.
   "O" Open Space Recreation District.
The location and boundaries of the zoning districts established by this Code
are as shown on the map entitled "Zoning Map of the Village of Evergreen Park"
which is incorporated herein by reference. All notations, references, and other
information shown on the Zoning Map, and all amendments thereto, shall be as
much a part of this Code as if specifically set forth and literally described
herein.
Sec. 25-51. District Boundaries.
In the event that any uncertainty exists with respect to the intended
boundaries of the various districts as shown on the Zoning Map, the following
rules shall apply:
   A.   The district boundaries are the centerlines of highways, streets,
alleys, waterways, railroads, and other rights-of-way unless otherwise
indicated. When the designation of a boundary line on the Zoning Map coincides
with the location of any such right-of-way, the centerline of such right-of-way
shall be construed to be the boundary of such district.
   B.   When a district boundary does not coincide with the location of the
centerline of any right-of-way but does coincide with a lot line, such lot line
shall be construed to be the boundary of such district.
   C.   When a district boundary does not coincide with the location of the
centerline of any right-of-way or lot line, the district boundary shall be
determined by the use of the scale shown on the Zoning Map.
Sec. 25-52. "A" Single Family Residential District.
   A.   Permitted Uses. The following uses and no others, are permitted as of
right in the "A" Single Family Residential District.
      1.   Single-family detached dwellings.
      2.   Public libraries.
      3.   Public parks and recreational facilities.
      4.   Municipal-owned facilities.
      5.   Small community residences provided that they are located not less
than 1,000 feet from another community residence.
      6.   One garage and one storage shed per zoning lot, and the storage shed
must be located to the rear of the principal structure on the zoning lot.
      7.   Home occupations.
   B.   Bulk, Yard and Space Requirements. The following requirements apply to
all uses in the "A" Single Family Residential District.
      1.   Building Height. The maximum height of any structure is 35 feet.
      2.   Lot Area. Each zoning lot shall contain not less than 4,400 square
feet.
      3.   Lot Width. Each zoning lot shall have a lot width of not less than
40 feet measured at the front of the main building and the rear of the main
building.
      4.   Front Yard. Each zoning lot shall have a front yard of not less than
25 feet except that the Building Commissioner may establish a front yard of not
less than 20 feet in order to conform to the front yard of the main buildings
on neighboring lots on the same side of the street between the nearest
intersections.
      5.   Rear Yard. Each zoning lot shall have a rear yard of not less than
25 feet, except that the rear yard on a corner lot which abuts another rear
yard or an alley shall be not less than 10 feet if there is no dedicated alley
adjacent thereto and shall be not less than 3 feet if there is a dedicated
alley adjacent thereto. An accessory building may be located within the rear
yard but not less than 3 feet from the rear lot line, but an accessory building
cannot be constructed in a public or private utility easement without
permission of the easement holder.
      6.   Side Yard. Each zoning lot shall have 2 side yards each of which
shall be 10% of the lot width but not less than 4 feet. The side yard on a
corner lot shall be increased by the Building Commissioner to conform to the
front yards and side yards of buildings on neighboring lots on the same side of
the street between the nearest intersections. An accessory building may be
located within an interior side yard but not less than 3 feet from the side lot
line.
      7.    Lot Coverage. No zoning lot shall have a lot coverage for all
buildings and structures thereon in excess of 40% of the lot area except that
the lot coverage may be increased to 45% if all buildings and structures are
constructed on a slab such that there is no habitable crawl space, basement or
sub-basement. In determining lot coverage for a lot of less than 40 feet, the
Building Commissioner shall reserve 440 square feet for an accessory garage
unless the residence being constructed contains a 2-car attached garage or an
accessory garage is being constructed. On any interior zoning lot having a lot
width of less than 40 feet, an accessory garage may only be constructed at the
rear of the lot and only have access from an alley.
      8.   Required Yard Encroachments.  For the purpose of determining
compliance with any required yard, no part of any building or structure shall
be permitted to protrude or cantilever into a required side yard except that an
encroachment by a chimney, roof, eaves, gutters, awnings, canopies, air
conditioning equipment, or bay windows shall be permitted provided that it
remains at least 3 feet from any side yard lot line. An open porch (a porch
which may have a roof and screens, but not windows), balcony, uncovered deck,
and swimming pool may encroach into a required rear yard, but no closer than 10
feet from the rear yard lot line and no closer than 3 feet from any side yard
lot line. An uncovered porch (a porch which does not have a roof) with a floor
not more than 5 feet above grade, stairs, bay windows, awnings over windows,
canopies over entrances, eaves, roof overhangs, and gutters may encroach into
the required front yard, but no closer than 15 feet from the front yard lot
line and no closer than 3 feet from any side yard lot line. Any encroachment
permitted above shall be excluded from the calculation of allowable lot
coverage in Section
25-52 B. 7.
(Ord. No. 20-2009 § 1, 9-21-09)
Sec. 25-53. "B" Multi-Family Residential District.
   A.   Permitted Uses. The following uses and no others, are permitted as of
right in the "B" Multi-Family Residential District.
      1.   Single-family detached dwellings.
      2.   Single-family attached dwellings.
      3.   Multi-family dwellings.
      4.   Municipal-owned facilities.
      5.   Churches, temples and places of worship.
      6.   Hospitals.
      7.   Small community residences provided that they are located not less
than 1,000 feet from another community residence.
      8.   Large community residences provided that they are located not less
than 1,000 feet from another community residence.
      9.   One garage and one storage shed per zoning lot, and the storage shed
must be located to the rear of the principal structure on the zoning lot.
      10.   Home occupations.
   B.   Bulk, Yard and Space Requirements. The following requirements apply to
all uses in the "B" Multi-Family Residential District.
      1.   Building Height. The maximum height of any structure is 35 feet,
except for churches, temples, places of worship and hospitals which have a
maximum height of 65 feet.
        2.   Lot Area. Each zoning lot shall contain not less than 4,400 square
feet.
      3.   Lot Width. Each zoning lot shall have a lot width of not less than
40 feet measured at the front of the main building and the rear of the main
building.
      4.   Front Yard. Each zoning lot shall have a front yard of not less than
25 feet except that the Building Commissioner may establish a front yard of not
less than 20 feet in order to conform to the front yard of the main buildings
on neighboring lots on the same side of the street between the nearest
intersections.
      5.   Rear Yard. Each zoning lot shall have a rear yard of not less than
25 feet. An accessory building may be located within the rear yard but not less
than 3 feet from the rear lot line.
      6.   Side Yard. Each zoning lot shall have 2 side yards each of which
shall be 10% of the lot width but not less than 4 feet. The side yard on a
corner lot shall be increased by the Building Commissioner to conform to the
front yards and side yards of buildings on neighboring lots on the same side of
the street between the nearest intersections. An accessory building may be
located within an interior side yard but not less than 3 feet from the side lot
line.
      7.    Lot Coverage. No zoning lot shall have a lot coverage for all
buildings and structures thereon in excess of 35% of the lot area except that
the lot coverage may be increased to 45% if all buildings and structures are
constructed on a slab such that there is no crawl space, basement or sub-
basement. In determining lot coverage for a lot of less than 40 feet, the
Building Commissioner shall reserve 440 square feet for an accessory garage
unless the residence being constructed contains a 2-car attached garage or an
accessory garage is being constructed. On any interior zoning lot having a lot
width of less than 40 feet, an accessory garage may only be constructed at the
rear of the lot and only have access from an alley.
      8.   Required Yard Encroachments. For the purpose of determining
compliance with any required yard, no part of any building or structure shall
be permitted to protrude or cantilever into a required yard except that an
encroachment by a chimney, uncovered porch, uncovered deck, roof, eaves,
gutters, awnings, canopies, air conditioning equipment, balconies, or bay
windows shall be permitted provided that it remains at least 3 feet from any
side yard lot line.
      9.   Intensity of Use. For each dwelling unit a minimum lot area of 2,000
square feet is required.
      10.   Size of Dwelling Unit. The minimum size of each dwelling unit in a
multi-family structure shall be 1,000 square feet.
Sec. 25-54. "C" Commercial District.
   A.   Permitted Uses. The following uses and no others, are permitted as of
right in the "C" Commercial District. In interpreting the use designations,
reference should be made to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual. SIC
codes are given in parentheses following each use listing, when available.
   Construction, Special Trade Contractors:
      1.   Plumbing, Heating, and Air-Conditioning Contractors and Showrooms
(171)
      2.   Painting & Paper Hanging Contractors & Showrooms (172)
      3.   Electrical Work Contractors (173)
      4.   Terrazzo, Tile, Marble, and Mosaic Work Contractors (1743)
      5.   Carpentry and Floor Work Contractors (175)
      6.   Roofing, Siding, and Sheet Metal Work Contractors (176)
      7.   Glass and Glazing Work Contractors and Showrooms (1793)
      8.   Special Trade Contractors not elsewhere classified (1799)
   Printing, Publishing, and Allied Industries:
      11.   Commercial Printing (275) and Photocopying
   Retail Trade:
      21.   Stationery and Office Supply Stores (5112)
      22.   Lumber and Other Building Materials Dealers (521) when conducted
wholly within a building
      23.   Paint, Glass, and Wallpaper Stores (523)
      24.   Hardware Stores (525)
      25.   Retail Nurseries, Lawn, and Garden Supply Stores (526)
      26.   Department Stores (531)
      27.   Variety Stores (533)
      28.   Miscellaneous General Merchandise Stores (539)
      29.   Food Stores (54)
      30.   New and Used Motor Vehicle Dealers (551)
      31.    Home Supply Stores (44131), but not including retail auto supply
stores
      32.   Boat Dealers (555)
      33.   Apparel and Accessory Stores (56)
      34.   Home Furniture and Home Furnishings Stores (571)
      35.   Household Appliance Stores (572)
      36.   Radio, Television, Consumer Electronics, and Music Stores (573)
      37.   Eating Places (5812), including carry-out and drive-thru windows
but not including drive-in establishments
      38.    Drinking Places (5813) accessory to eating places
      39.   Drug Stores and Proprietary Stores (591)
      40.   Used Merchandise Stores but not including pawn shops (593)
      41.   Sporting Good Stores and Bicycle Shops (5941)
      42.   Book Stores (5942)
      43.   Stationery Stores (5943)
      44.   Jewelry Stores (5944)
      45.   Hobby, Toy, and Game Shops (5945)
      46.   Camera and Photographic Supply Stores (5946)
      47.   Gift, Novelty, and Souvenir Shops (5947)
      48.   Luggage and Leather Goods Stores (5948)
      49.   Sewing, Needlework, and Piece Goods Stores (5949)
      50.   Florists (5992)
      51.   Tobacco Stores and Stands (5993)
      52.   News Dealers and Newsstands (5994)
      53.   Optical Goods Stores (5995)
      54.   Furrier Shops
      55.   Miscellaneous Retail Stores (5999), but not including auction
rooms, fireworks sales or sales barns
   Finance, Insurance, and Real Estate:
      61.   Depository and Nondepository Credit Institutions (60-61)
      62.   Security and Commodity Brokers, Dealers, Exchanges, and Services
(62)
      63.   Insurance Carriers, Agents, Brokers, and Services (63-64)
      64.   Real Estate Offices (65)
      65.   Holding and Other Investment Offices (67)
   Services:
      71.   Veterinary Services for Animal Specialties (0742)
      72.   Grooming Services for pets (0752)
      73.   Medical and miscellaneous equipment rental and leasing (7352/7359)
      74.   Laundry, Cleaning, and Garment Services (721), but not including
drycleaning plants (7216) or industrial launderers (7218)
      75.   Photographic Studios, Portrait (722)
      76.   Beauty Shops (723)
      77.   Barber Shops (724)
      78.   Shoe Repair Shops (725)
      79.   Tax Return Preparation Services (7291)
      80.   Advertising Services (731)
      81.   Mailing, Reproduction, Commercial Art and Photography, and
Stenographic Services
      82.   Services to Dwellings and Other Buildings (734)
      83.   Employment Agencies (7361)
      84.   Computer Programming, Data Processing, and Other Computer Related
Services (737)
      85.   Interior Decorating (7389)
      86.   Electrical Repair Shops (762), but not including refrigeration and
air-conditioning service and repair shops (7632)
      87.   Watch, Clock, and Jewelry Repair (763)
      88.   Reupholstery and Furniture Repair (764)
      89.   Video Tape Rental and Sales (784)
      90.   Offices and Clinics of Doctors of Medicine, Dentists, Osteopaths,
Chiropractors, Optometrists, Podiatrists, and Other Health Practitioners (801-
804)
      91.   Legal Services (81)
      92.   Engineering, Architectural, and Surveying Services (871)
      93.   Accounting, Auditing, and Bookkeeping Services (872)
      94.   Management and Public Relations Services (874)
      95.   Miscellaneous Services not elsewhere classified (89)
      96.   Dance Studios, Schools and Halls (7911)
      97.   Physical Fitness Facilities (7991)
      98.   Optical, Medical and Dental Laboratories (807)
      99.   Business Associations (861)
      100.   Labor Associations (863)
      101.   Civic, Social and Fraternal Associations (864)
      102.   Political Organizations (865)
      103.   Research, Development and Testing Services (873)
      104.   Business and Professional Offices not otherwise listed
      105.   Passenger car leasing and passenger car rental, provided that it
is located more than 300 feet from a traffic control signal.
      106.   Undertaking and Funeral Parlor
      107.   Hospitals (806)
   Transportation and Utility Services:
      111.   Travel Agencies (4724)
      112.   Tour Operators (4725)
      113.   Airline, Bus, and Railroad Ticket Offices (4729)
      114.   Offices of Communications and Utility Companies (48-49)
   Multiple Family Dwellings:
      121.   Residential occupancy but not on the first floor of any structure
and provided that each dwelling unit has a minimum of 1,000 square feet and
that the area of all dwelling units does not exceed the area of all commercial
uses in the structure.
   B.   Use Limitations. The following limitations apply to all uses in the "C"
Commercial District.
      1.   Noise. No use shall produce noise of such volume or pitch as to
cause a nuisance in any residential district at any time or within any
residential dwelling unit located in any district between the hours of 10:00
p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
      2.   Exterior Lighting. Exterior lighting fixtures shall be shaded so
that no direct light is cast upon any property located in any residential
district. No exterior light in or adjacent to any residential district shall be
operated to produce an intensity of light exceeding one-half foot candle at any
residential lot line.
      3.   Enclosed Structure. All business, service, storage, and display of
goods, other than off-street parking and loading and the sale of motor vehicles
fuels and related products when the same are allowed as a special use, shall be
conducted within a completely enclosed building.
      4.   Outdoor Storage. Outdoor storage shall not be allowed as an
accessory use.
      5.   Truck Parking. No parking of trucks shall be allowed between the
hours of 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. except for trucks based on the property and
used in conjunction with a permitted use thereon, and then such trucks may only
be parked to the side or rear of the main structure on the property.
   C.   Bulk, Yard and Space Requirements. The following requirements apply to
all uses in the "C" Commercial District.
      1.   Height. The maximum height of any structure is 3 stories or 34 feet
whichever is less, provided that hospitals shall not exceed 140 feet in height.
The maximum height of an accessory structure is 15 feet.
      2.   Front, Interior Side and Corner Side Yard Setbacks. No front,
interior side and corner side yard setback is required.
      3.   Rear Yard Setback. The rear yard setback shall be a minimum of 10
feet.
      4.   Lot Coverage. The maximum total lot coverage is 50%.
      5.   Floor Area Ratio. The maximum floor area ratio is 3.0.
(Ord. No. 16-2008, §§ 1-2, 6-16-08; Am. Ord. No. 5-2010, § 1, 4-5-10)
Sec. 25-55. "I" Cemetery District.
   A.   Permitted Uses. No land or building shall be used, erected or occupied
except for the following permitted uses:
      1.   Cemetery for the interment of human remains, including chapels,
administration buildings, maintenance buildings, and funeral homes, but
excluding crematoriums.
Sec. 25-58. "O" Open Space Recreation District.
   A.   Permitted Uses. No land or building shall be used, erected or occupied
except for the following permitted uses:
      1.   Public and private golf courses, including associated structures
such as club house, maintenance buildings and pro shop.
      2.   Golf driving range.
      3.   Riding clubs and stables.
      4.   Tennis clubs.
      5.   Raising of farm crops.
      6.   Soccer clubs, except professional and semi-professional.
      7.   Baseball clubs, except professional and semi-professional.
      8.   Football clubs, except professional and semi-professional.
      9.   Skiing, including lifts and lodge.
      10.   Tobogganing and sledding.
      11.   Botanical and zoological gardens.
      12.   Conservatories.
      13.   Miniature golf course.
      14.   Zoos.
      15.   Wildlife and game preserve.
      16.   Polo club.
   B.   Bulk, Yard and Space Requirements. The following requirements apply to
all uses in the "O" Open Space Recreation District:
      1.   Height. The maximum height of any structure, including accessory
structures, is 3 stories or 35 feet whichever is less.
      2.   Front, Interior Side and Corner Side Yard and Rear Yard Setbacks. No
building may be erected within 300 feet of any residentially used property or
within 50 feet of any public street.
      3.   Lot Coverage. The maximum total lot coverage is 1%.
      4.   Floor Area Ratio. The maximum floor area ratio is .02.
ARTICLE VI
SPECIAL USES, PLANNED DEVELOPMENTS
Sec. 25-60. Special Use Permits.
   A.   Special Uses. The following uses are special uses and may not be
developed without a special use permit. The list is not all inclusive and is
only an example of the types of uses which require a special use permit. In
interpreting the use designations, reference should be made to the Standard
Industrial Classification Manual. SIC codes are given in parentheses following
each use listing, when available.
      1.   Adult Book Store, Adult Entertainment Cabaret, Adult Mini Motion
Picture Theaters, and Adult Motion Picture Theater (but not within 500 feet of
a dwelling unit located within the Village)
      2.   Adult Day Care Services (832)
      3.   Agricultural, Food and Industrial Research & Development
Laboratories (7391)
      4.   Amusement and Recreation Services (7999)
      5.   Auto Supply and Parts Stores
      6.   Automotive Repair Shops (753)
      7.   Automotive Repair Shops not classified elsewhere (7539)
      8.   Billiard Parlor (7999)
      9.   Bingo Parlor (7999)
      10.   Boat Dealers (555)
      11.   Bowling Alley (7933)
      12.   Business Associations (861)
      13.   Car Washes (7542)
      14.   Child Day Care Services (835)
      15.   Commercial Testing and Laboratories (8734)
      16.   Correspondence, Business, Secretarial and Vocational Schools (824)
      17.   Drive-in Eating Places (5812)
      18.   Fuel Dealers (598)
      19.   Gasoline Service Stations, including food service (554)
      20.   Heavy Construction Equipment Rental and Leasing (7353)
      21.   Hotels and Motels (701)
      22.   Job Training and Vocational Rehabilitation Services (833)
         22.1   Laundromats, Including Self-Service Laundry and Drycleaning
(7215)
         22.2   Loan Institutions when the Predominant Business is Short-Term
Loans, Typically on Paychecks, Post-Dated Checks and Vehicle Titles (6141)
      23.   Lumber and Other Building Materials Dealers (521)
      24.   Lumber and Other Construction Materials (503)
      25.   Manufacturing (Division D)
      26.   Massage Parlors (7299)
      27.   Membership Sports and Recreation Clubs (7997)
      28.   Motion Picture Theaters (7832)
      29.   Nightclubs, Cabarets, Discotheques and Dance Clubs
      30.   Nursery and Pre-Kindergarten Schools (8351)
      31.   Nursing and Personal Care Facility (805)
      32.   Outdoor Automatic Teller Machines when not on the same property as
a financial institution
      33.   Outdoor Live Entertainment
      34.   Outdoor Seating Accessory To Permitted Eating Places
      35.   Outdoor Uncontained Bulk Storage
      36.   Pawn Shops (5932)
      37.   Physical Fitness Facilities (7991)
      38.   Planned Developments
         38.1   Public and Private Elementary and High Schools
      39.   Public Utility Yards and Facilities (49)
      40.   Public Warehousing and Storage (422)
      41.   Recycling Facility and any other use regulated by the Illinois
Environmental Protection Agency but which does not require siting approval
      42.   Research, Development and Testing Services (873)
      43.   Residential Care Facility (8351)
      44.   Scrap and Waste Materials (5093)
      45.   Teen Dances and parties open to the public for charge
      46.   Tire Retreading and Repair Shops (7534)
      47.   Top, Body and Upholstery Repair Shops and Paint Shops (7532)
      48.   Transitional Service Facility
      49.   Truck Rental and Leasing (7513)
      50.   Cannabis Dispensing Organizations, provided the facilities
otherwise comply with the provisions of Article X.
      51.   Any use not a permitted use in that zoning district
   B.   Purpose. Special uses are those uses having some special impact or
uniqueness that require a careful review of their location, design,
configuration, and special impact to determine, against fixed standards, the
desirability of permitting their establishment on any given site. They are uses
that may or may not be appropriate in a particular location depending on a
weighing, in each case, of the public need and benefit against the local impact
and effect.
   C.   Procedure.
      1.   Application. Applications for special use permits shall be filed
with the Zoning Board of Appeals.
      2.   Public Hearing. A public hearing shall be set, noticed, and
conducted by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
      3.   Action by Zoning Board of Appeals. Within 60 days after the
conclusion of the public hearing, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall transmit to
the Board of Trustees its recommendation either granting the application for a
special use permit; granting the application subject to conditions, or denying
the application. The failure of the Zoning Board of Appeals to act within such
60 days, or such further time to which the applicant may agree, shall be deemed
a recommendation for the denial of the proposed special use permit.
      4.   Action by Board of Trustees. Within 45 days after the receipt of the
recommendation of the Zoning Board of Appeals, or its failure to act as above
provided, the Board of Trustees shall either deny the application or, by
ordinance duly passed, shall grant the special use permit, with or without
modifications or conditions. The failure of the Board of Trustees to act within
such 45 days, or such further time to which the applicant may agree, shall be
deemed a decision denying the special use permit.
   D.   Standards for Special Use Permits.
      1.   General Standards. No special use permit shall be granted pursuant
to this Section unless the applicant shall establish that:
         (a)   Code and Plan Purposes. The proposed use and development will be
in harmony with the general and specific purposes for which this Code was
enacted and for which the regulations of the district in question were
established.
         (b)   No Undue Adverse Impact. The proposed use and development will
not have a substantial or undue adverse effect upon adjacent property, the
character of the area, or the public health, safety, and general welfare.
         (c)   No Interference with Surrounding Development. The proposed use
and development will be constructed, arranged, and operated so as not to
dominate the immediate vicinity or to interfere with the use and development of
neighboring property in accordance with the applicable district regulations.
         (d)   Adequate Public Facilities. The proposed use and development
will be served adequately by essential public facilities and services such as
streets, public utilities, drainage structures, police and fire protection,
refuse disposal, parks, libraries, and schools, or the applicant will provide
adequately for such services.
         (e)   No Traffic Congestion. The proposed use and development will not
cause undue traffic congestion nor draw significant amounts of traffic through
residential streets.
         (f)   No-Destruction of Significant Features. The proposed use and
development will not result in the destruction, loss, or damage of any natural,
scenic, or historic feature of significant importance.
         (g)   Compliance with Standards. The proposed use and development
complies with all standards imposed on that use and any district where it is a
permitted use.
      2.   Considerations. In determining whether the applicant's evidence
establishes that the foregoing standards have been met, the Zoning Board of
Appeals shall consider:
         (a)   Public Benefit. Whether and to what extent, the proposed use and
development at the particular location requested is necessary or desirable to
provide a service or a facility that is in the interest of the public
convenience or that will contribute to the general welfare of the neighborhood
or community.
         (b)   Alternative Locations. Whether and to what extent, such public
goals can be met by the location of the proposed use and development at some
other site or in some other area that may be more appropriate than the proposed
site.
         (c)   Mitigation of Adverse Impacts. Whether and to what extent, all
steps possible have been taken to minimize any adverse effects of the proposed
use and development on the immediate vicinity through building design, site
design, landscaping, and screening.
   E.   Conditions on Special Use Permits. The Zoning Board of Appeals may
recommend and the Board of Trustees may impose such conditions and limitations
concerning use, construction, character, location, landscaping, screening, and
other matters relating to the purposes and objectives of this Code upon the
premises benefited by a special use permit as may be necessary or appropriate
to prevent or minimize adverse effects upon other property and improvements in
the vicinity of the subject property or upon public facilities and services;
provided, however, that such conditions shall not be used as a device to grant
a permit for a special use that is intended to be temporary in nature. Such
conditions shall be expressly set forth in the ordinance granting the special
use. Violation of any such condition or limitation shall be a violation of this
Code and shall constitute grounds for revocation of the special use permit.
   F.   Affidavit of Compliance with Conditions; Fee. Whenever any special use
permit granted pursuant to this Section is made subject to conditions or
limitations to be met by the applicant, the applicant shall, upon meeting such
conditions, file an affidavit with the Building Commissioner so stating. Such
affidavit shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee, to be fixed in each case
by the Building Commissioner, to recover the Village's actual direct cost of an
inspection to verify that such conditions and limitations have been met.
   G.   Effect of Issuance of a Special Use Permit. The grant of a special use
permit shall not authorize the establishment or extension of any use nor the
development, construction, reconstruction, alteration, or moving of any
building or structure, but shall merely authorize the preparation, filing, and
processing of applications for any permits or approvals that may be required by
the codes and ordinances of the Village.
   H.   Limitations on Special Use Permits. Subject to an extension of time
granted by the Building Commissioner no special use permit shall be valid for a
period longer than one year unless a Building Permit is issued and construction
is actually begun within that period and is thereafter diligently pursued to
completion or unless a Certificate of Occupancy is issued and a use commenced
within that period.
   A special use permit shall be deemed to authorize only the particular use
for which it was issued, and such permit shall automatically expire and cease
to be of any force or effect if such use shall, for any reason, be discontinued
for a period of six consecutive months or more.
   Except when otherwise provided in the Ordinance granting a special use
permit, a special use permit shall be deemed to relate to, and be for the
benefit of, the use and property in question rather than the owner or operator
of such use or property
   I.   Amendments to Special Use Permits. A special use permit may be amended,
varied, or altered only pursuant to the procedures and subject to the standards
and limitations provided in this Section for its original approval.
(Am. Ord. No. 4-2014 § 2, 2-3-14; Am. Ord. No. 16-2021 § 2, 10-4-21)
Sec. 25-61. Planned Developments.
   A.   Purpose. Planned developments are included in this Code as a distinct
category of special use. As such, they are authorized in every zoning district.
In particular, however, the planned development technique is intended to allow
the relaxation of otherwise applicable substantive requirements based upon
procedural protections providing for detailed review of individual proposals
for significant developments. This special regulatory technique is included in
this Code in recognition of the fact that traditional use, bulk, space, and
yard regulations which may be useful in protecting the character of
substantially developed and stable areas may impose inappropriate pre-
regulations and rigidities upon the development or redevelopment of parcels or
areas that lend themselves to an individual, planned approach. Through the
flexibility of the planned development technique, the Village seeks to achieve
the following specific objectives:
      1.   Creation of a more desirable environment than would be possible
through strict application of other Village land use regulations.
      2.   Efficient use of land resulting in smaller networks of utilities and
streets while lowering development and housing costs.
      3.   Promotion of a creative approach to the use of land and related
physical facilities resulting in better design and development, including
aesthetic amenities.
      4.   Combination and coordination of architectural styles, building
forms, and building relationships.
      5.   Preservation and enhancement of desirable site characteristics such
as natural topography, vegetation, and geologic features, and the prevention of
soil erosion.
      6.   Provision for the preservation and beneficial use of open space.
      7.   An increase in the amount of open space over that which would result
from the application of conventional subdivision and zoning regulations.
      8.   Encouragement of land uses that promote the public health, safety
and general welfare.
   B.    Procedure.
      1.   Application. Applications for a planned development shall be filed
with the Zoning Board of Appeals and shall contain a Final Plan detailing:
         (a)   categories of uses to be permitted; and
         (b)   general location of residential and nonresidential land uses;
and
         (c)   overall maximum density of residential uses and intensity of
nonresidential uses; and
         (d)   the general architectural style of the proposed development; and
         (e)   general location and extent of public and private open space
including recreational amenities; and
         (f)   general location of vehicular and pedestrian circulation
systems; and
         (g)   staging of development; and
         (h)   nature, scope, and extent of public dedications, improvements,
or contributions to be provided by the applicant.
      2.   Public Hearing. A public hearing shall be set, noticed, and
conducted by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
      3.   Subdivision. When a subdivision of land is proposed in connection
with a planned development, review of the final plat of the proposed
subdivision shall be carried out simultaneously with review of the Final Plan.
      4.   Action by Zoning Board of Appeals. Within 60 days after the
conclusion of the public hearing, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall transmit to
the Board of Trustees its recommendation either granting the application for
planned development; granting the application subject to conditions, or denying
the application. The failure of the Zoning Board of Appeals to act within such
60 days, or such further time to which the applicant may agree, shall be deemed
a recommendation for the denial of the proposed planned development.
      5.   Action by Board of Trustees. Within 45 days after the receipt of the
recommendation of the Zoning Board of Appeals, or its failure to act as above
provided, the Board of Trustees shall either deny the application or, by
ordinance duly passed, shall approve the planned development, with or without
modifications or conditions. The failure of the Board of Trustees to act within
such 45 days, or such further time to which the applicant may agree, shall be
deemed a decision denying the planned development.
   C.   Standards for Planned Developments. No planned development shall be
granted pursuant to this section unless the application shall establish that:
      1.   Special Use Permit Standards. The proposed development will meet
each of the standards made applicable to special uses pursuant to Section 25-60
of this Code.
      2   Unified Ownership Required. The entire property proposed for planned
development treatment shall be in single ownership or under such unified
control as to ensure that the entire property will be developed as a unified
whole. All owners of the property shall be included as joint applicants on all
applications and all approvals shall bind all owners. The violation of any
owner as to any tract shall be deemed a violation as to all owners and all
tracts.
      3.   Minimum Area. The district regulations of this Code establishing
standards for particular types of planned developments specify the minimum area
required for some planned developments. In addition to meeting that specific
standard, or where no specific standard is set, the applicant shall have the
burden of establishing that the subject property is of sufficient size and
shape to be planned and developed as a unified whole capable of meeting the
objectives for which planned developments may be established pursuant to this
Section.
      4.   Covenants and Restrictions to be Enforceable by Village. All
covenants, deed restrictions, easements, and similar restrictions to be
recorded in connection with the planned development shall provide that they may
not be modified, removed, or released without the express consent of the Board
of Trustees and that they may be enforced by the Village as well as by future
landowners within the proposed development.
      5.   Public Open Space and Contributions. Whenever the development will
create a need for land for public purposes of the Village within the proposed
planned development, the Board of Trustees may require that such area be
designated and to the extent such need is specifically and uniquely
attributable to the proposed development, dedicated to the Village for such
use. In addition, the Board of Trustees may require evidence that all
requirements of Village ordinances pertaining to the dedication of land or the
contribution of cash in connection with subdivisions or developments of land
have been met as respects the proposed planned development, whether or not such
proposed development would be otherwise subject to such ordinances.
      6.   Common Open Space.
         (a)   Amount, Location, and Use. The failure of a planned development
to provide common open space shall be considered to be an indication that it
has not satisfied the objectives for which such developments may be approved
pursuant to this Code. When common open space is provided in a planned
development, the amount and location of such open space shall be consistent
with its intended function as set forth in the application and planned
development plans. No such open space shall be used for the construction of any
structure or improvement except such structures and improvements as may be
approved in the Final Plan as appropriate to the intended leisure and
recreational uses for which such open space is intended.
         (b)   Preservation. Adequate safeguards, including recorded covenants
or dedication of development rights, shall be provided to prevent the
subsequent use of common open space for any use, structure, improvement, or
development other than that shown on the approved Final Plan. The restrictions
must be permanent and not for a given period of years and must run with the
land.
         (c)   Ownership and Maintenance. The Final Plan shall include such
provisions for the ownership and maintenance of such open space and
improvements as are reasonably necessary to ensure their continuity, care,
conservation, maintenance, and operation in accordance with predetermined
standards and to ensure that remedial measures will be available to the Village
if such open space or improvements are permitted to deteriorate or are not
maintained in a condition consistent with the best interests of the planned
development or the Village.
         (d)   Property Owners' Association. When the requirements of the
preceding Subparagraph are to be satisfied by the ownership or maintenance of
such open space or improvements by a property owners' association, such
association shall meet each of the following standards:
            (1)   the by-laws and rules of the association and all
declarations, covenants, and restrictions to be recorded must be approved as
part of the Final Plan prior to becoming effective. Each such document shall
provide that it shall not be amended in any manner that would result in it
being a violation of the requirements of this subparagraph; and
            (2)   the association must be established and all covenants and
restrictions must be recorded prior to the sale of any property within the area
of the planned development designated to have the exclusive use of the proposed
open space or improvements; and
            (3)   the association must be responsible for casualty and
liability insurance, taxes, and the maintenance of the open space and
improvements to be deeded to it; and
            (4)   membership in the association must be mandatory for each
property owner and any successive owner having a right to the use or enjoyment
of such open space or improvements; and
            (5)   every property owner having a right to the use or enjoyment
of such open space or improvements must pay its pro rata share of the cost of
the association by means of an assessment to be levied by the association that
meets the requirements for becoming a lien on the property in accordance with
statutes of the State of Illinois; and
            (6)   the association must have the right to adjust the assessment
to meet changed needs. The membership vote required to authorize such
adjustment shall not be fixed at more than two-thirds of the members voting on
the issue; and
            (7)   the Village must be given the right to enforce the covenants;
and
            (8)   the Village must be given the right, after 10 days' written
notice to the association, to perform any maintenance or repair work that the
association has neglected to perform, to assess the membership for such work
and to have a lien against the property for any member failing to pay such
assessment. For this purpose alone, the Village shall have all the rights and
powers of the association and its governing body under the agreements and
declarations creating the association.
      7.   Landscaping and Perimeter Treatment. Any area of a planned
development not used for structures or circulation elements shall be landscaped
or otherwise improved. The perimeter of the planned development shall be
treated so as to ensure compatibility with surrounding uses by means such as
provision of compatible uses and structures, setbacks, screening, or natural or
man-made buffers. Every planned development having 20 or more acres shall
provide a perimeter landscaped open space along each of its boundaries; each
such open space shall have a minimum depth equal to the minimum front yard
required in the district in which it is located or which it abuts, whichever is
greater.
      8.   Private Streets. Private streets are prohibited unless expressly
approved by the Board of Trustees. If so approved, they shall meet all
construction standards applicable to public streets. No such streets shall be
approved except upon the condition that they shall be owned and maintained by a
property owners' association.
      9.   Sidewalks. A sidewalk shall be provided along at least one side of
every street in or abutting a planned development; provided, however, that such
sidewalk may be constructed in a street right-of-way or as a specific element
of the design of the planned development.
      10.   Utilities. All utility lines shall be installed underground.
   D.   Conditions on Planned Developments. The Zoning Board of Appeals may
recommend and the Board of Trustees may impose such conditions and limitations
concerning use, construction, character, location, landscaping, screening, and
other matters relating to the purposes and objectives of this Code upon the
premises benefited by a planned development as may be necessary or appropriate
to prevent or minimize adverse effects upon other property and improvements in
the vicinity of the subject property or upon public facilities and services;
provided, however, that such conditions shall not be used as a device to
approve a planned development that is intended to be temporary in nature. Such
conditions shall be expressly set forth in the ordinance granting the planned
development. Violation of any such condition or limitation shall be a violation
of this Code and shall constitute grounds for revocation of the planned
development approval.
   E.   Affidavit of Compliance with Conditions; Fee. Whenever any planned
development granted pursuant to this Section is made subject to conditions or
limitations to be met by the applicant, the applicant shall, upon meeting such
conditions, file an affidavit with the Building Commissioner so stating. Such
affidavit shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee, to be fixed in each case
by the Building Commissioner, to recover the Village's actual direct cost of an
inspection to verify that such conditions and limitations have been met.
   F.   Effect of Approval of a Planned Development. The approval of a planned
development shall not authorize the establishment or extension of any use nor
the development, construction, reconstruction, alteration, or moving of any
building or structure, but shall merely authorize the preparation, filing, and
processing of applications for any permits or approvals that may be required by
the codes and ordinances of the Village.
   G.   Limitations on Planned Development Permits. Subject to an extension of
time granted by the Building Commissioner no permit for a planned development
shall be valid for a period longer than one year unless a Building Permit is
issued and construction is actually begun within that period and is thereafter
diligently pursued to completion or unless a Certificate of Occupancy is issued
and a use commenced within that period.
   A planned development permit shall be deemed to authorize only the
particular use for which it was issued, and such permit shall automatically
expire and cease to be of any force or effect if such use shall, for any
reason, be discontinued for a period of six consecutive months or more.
   Except when otherwise provided in the Ordinance approving a planned
development, a planned development permit shall be deemed to relate to, and be
for the benefit of, the use and property in question rather than the owner or
operator of such use or property
   H.   Amendments to Planned Development Permits. A planned development permit
may be amended, varied, or altered only pursuant to the procedures and subject
to the standards and limitations provided in this Section for its original
approval.
ARTICLE VII
COMMUNITY RESIDENCES
Sec. 25-70. Responsibility.
The primary responsibility for enforcement of all regulations in this Code
pertaining to community residences, certifications and the issuance of
administrative permits, shall be in the zoning and development committee of the
board of trustees. The primary responsibility for the issuance of a building
permit, construction and compliance with all building regulations including
issuance of an occupancy permit that construction complies with the building
Code shall remain with the building commissioner.
Sec. 25-71. Application for Community Residence Permits.
In every application for a community residence permit or certification, the
applicant shall demonstrate that it has either obtained or is eligible for
state or local licensing or certification to operate the proposed community
residence, or that the proposed community residence is licensed or certified or
eligible for licensing or certification. Applicants to operate community
residences for which the state does not require licensing or certification
shall obtain a special use permit prior to obtaining an occupancy certificate.
The zoning and development committee of the board of trustees shall issue such
permits or certifications administratively. The board may revoke a certificate
of occupancy for a community residence if its license or certification, or the
operator's license or certification to operate community residences, is
revoked. A certificate of occupancy is not transferable to another operator or
to another location.
Sec. 25-72. Community Residence Permits.
No building permit or occupancy permit, administrative or otherwise, shall be
issued unless it is found that such application conforms with the following
standards:
   A.   That it complies with zoning requirements.
   B.   That it meets all the qualifications for a group home set forth in law.
   C.   That it complies with the current building Code, fire prevention Code
and property maintenance Code.
   D.   That it complies with all state and federal building and occupancy
requirements.
   E.   That it is duly licensed and certified by the state.
   F.   That it would not create an institutional setting.
   G.   That adequate off-street parking is provided.
   H.   That parking on streets will not interfere with other resident street
parking.
   I.   That the building is so designed that it will fit in with the character
of the neighborhood in which it is being located; that is, provide a home-like
atmosphere.
ARTICLE VIII
PARKING
Sec. 25-80. Minimum Parking Requirements.
For the following uses, the following minimum number of off-street parking
spaces or stacking spaces shall be provided:
   A.   Residential.
      1.    Multiple Family Dwellings   2 for each dwelling unit
      2.   Single Family Dwellings   2 for each dwelling unit
      3.   Transitional Service Facilities and Community Residences   1 for
each 3 residents plus 1 for each employee on the major shift
   B.   Retail Trade.
      1.   All Retail Trade Uses not otherwise listed   1 for each 250 square
feet of net floor area
      2.   Gasoline Service Stations, not including mini-marts   2 for each
service bay plus 1 for each employee
      3.   Car Washes   4 for each manual washing rack or bay plus 1 for each
employee plus 5 stacking spaces for each automated washing rack or bay
      4.   Eating and Drinking Places   1 for each 65 square feet of gross
floor area but in no event less than 12 parking spaces
      5.    Drive-In Facilities   8 stacking spaces for the first drive-in
window plus 2 stacking spaces for each additional drive-in window
   C.    Finance, Insurance, and Real Estate.   1 for each 250 square feet of
net floor area
   D.   Business and Professional Offices.    1 for each 350 square feet of net
floor area
    E.    Services.
      1.   All Services not otherwise listed    1 for each 250 square feet of
net floor area
      2.   Motion Picture Theatres    1 for each 2 persons of design capacity
plus 1 for each 2 employees
      3.   Research and Development Laboratories and Commercial Testing    1
for each 1.5 employees on the major shift plus 1 for each company vehicle
      4.    Physical Fitness Facilities   1 for each 200 square feet of gross
floor area
      5.   Membership Sports and Recreation Clubs    1 for each 200 square feet
of gross floor area
      6.    Health Service Offices    6 for each licensed practitioner, not
including nurses and assistants, plus 1 for each employee
      7.    Nursing and Personal Care Facilities    1 for each 3 beds plus 1
for each employee and full-time volunte   er
      8.    Hospitals   1 for each 2 beds plus 1.5 for each emergency room bed
plus 1 for each employee and full-time volunteer
      9.    Elementary Schools   1 for each employee plus 4 for visitors and
guests
      10.   Secondary Schools   1 for each 8 students plus 1 for each employee
      11.    Libraries and Information Centers   1 for each 750 square feet of
gross floor area
      12.   Vocational Schools, except Correspondence Schools   1 for each
student of design capacity plus 2 for each 3 employees
      13.   Child and Adult Day Care Services and Nursery Schools   1 for each
employee plus 1 for each 5 children or adults
      14.   Museums and Art Galleries   1 for each 400 square feet of gross
floor area
      15.   Undertaking and Funeral Establishments   1 for each seat in each
chapel or parlor plus 1 for each employee plus 1 for each company vehicle
      16.    Golf Courses, including all related facilities   60 for each nine
holes plus 1 for each 2 employees
      17.   Religious Organizations   1 for each 4 persons of design capacity
      18.    Other Membership Organizations   1 for each 3 persons of design
capacity
      19.   Bowling Alleys   5 per lane plus 1 for each employee, plus 50% of
the space otherwise required for accessory use
      20.   Billiard Parlors or Tables   2 per table plus 1 for each employee
      21.   Hotels/Motels   1 per guest room plus 1 for each employee plus
specified requirements for restaurants, bars, meeting rooms, and related
facilities
      22.   Beauty Shops and Barber Shops   3 parking spaces for each chair or
position where customers are serviced
      23.   Laundromats   1 parking space for every 4 machines
   F.   Public Administration.   1 for each 250 square feet of gross floor
space
   G.   Uses Conducted Outside Structures.   1 for each 1,500 square feet of
outdoor area devoted to such use plus spaces as otherwise required for any
aspect of the use conducted within a structure
   H.   Construction, Manufacturing, Transportation, and Public Utilities.
      1.   Production and Assembly    1 for each 1.5 employees plus 1 for each
company vehicle
      2.   Warehouse and Storage    1 for each 2,000 square feet of gross floor
area
      3.   Office and other activities   1 for each 350 square feet of gross
floor area
Sec. 25-81. Computation.
   A.   Unspecified Uses. When the ultimate use of a structure is not known,
the maximum number of spaces that might be required for any use to which the
structure might be reasonably and permissibly be devoted shall be required.
   B.   Fractional Spaces. When determination of the number of required parking
spaces results in the requirement of a fractional space, any fraction shall
require one additional parking space.
   C.   Capacity Calculations. When parking spaces are required on the basis of
capacity, capacity shall be determined based on the occupancy standards
established by the Building Code.
   D.   Bench Seating. In stadia, auditoria, houses of worship, and other
places of assembly in which patrons or spectators occupy benches, pews, or
other similar seating facilities, each 22 inches of seating facility shall be
counted as one seat for the purpose of determining the requirement for off-
street parking facilities under this Code.
   E.   Population Calculations. When parking spaces are required on the basis
of the number of employees, customers, students, or similar measure, the
maximum number for which the structure is designed shall govern, except that
when the structure has no design capacity the maximum number present at any one
time shall govern.
Sec. 25-82. Parking Design and Maintenance.
All parking facilities shall meet the following requirements of design,
construction and maintenance:
   A.   Access to Street. No curb cut across public property shall exceed 30
feet without the written approval of the Building Commissioner. All parking
lots shall be so located and designed as to provide access to adjacent streets
with the least interference with through traffic movements. No access shall be
provided through a zoning district other than the district in which the parking
lot is located. No access shall be provided through a zoning lot other than the
zoning lot served by such access except across a permanent recorded access
easement.
   B.   Turn-Around Area. All parking lots and garages, other than a parking
lot to a single family or 2 family dwelling, shall be provided with a turn-
around area or other means to permit cars to exit the parking lot or garage
without backing onto any street or sidewalk.
   C.   Surfacing. All new and existing parking areas shall be improved with
paved brick, asphalt or concrete surface over a proper base. All construction
shall meet the minimum standards for structural materials derived from The
Illinois Department of Transportation Design Manual, current edition.
Individual stalls shall be clearly identified by painted markings 4" to 6" in
width.
   D.   Drainage. All parking areas shall provide adequate drainage of water to
the storm sewer system. Storm water run-off shall be detained on site in
accordance with applicable Village standards and ordinances of the Metropolitan
Water Reclamation District of Greater Chicago.
   E.   Screening and landscaping. All parking areas shall be screened on each
side abutting any property situated in a residential district or improved with
a residence by a wall, fence or densely planted hedge not less than 5 feet nor
more than 6 feet in height. Where a public alley exists between the parking
area and the residential district, and is used for ingress and egress to the
parking area, screening and landscaping shall be used only where in the opinion
of the building commissioner it is safe to do so.
   F.   Lighting. Fixed lighting shall be provided for all parking lots and
garages accommodating more than 10 vehicles. Any lighting used to illuminate
any parking area shall be directed away from adjoining properties. In no case
shall lighting exceed 3 foot candles measured at any lot line.
   G.   Use. No off-street parking lot or garage shall be used for any purpose
other than the temporary storage of motor vehicles related to the premises on
the zoning lot. The storage of merchandise and the sale or commercial repair of
vehicles are prohibited.
   H.   Maximum number of spaces. The total number of parking spaces provided
for a single family or multifamily dwelling shall not exceed that required by
more than 50 percent or 4 spaces, whichever number is greater.
   I.   Car stops. Concrete bumpers shall be installed not less than 24 inches
from any public sidewalk, building, or landscaping where determined necessary
by the Building Commissioner.
   J.   Sidewalks. Public sidewalks of concrete must be installed on all
rights-of-way adjacent to parking areas.
   K.   Maintenance. All parking lots shall be properly maintained at all times
so as to be free of pot holes, broken curbs, and other damaged or neglected
features.
   L.   Area and Access. Every parking stall shall be at least 9 feet in width.
All parking stalls and aisles shall conform to the following specifications:
 
Angle of Parking  Stall Width Parallel Stall Depth
(degrees)         to Aisle             Perpendicular to Aisle Width (One Way)
                                       Aisle
0                 20.0'                9.0'             13.0'
45                12.7'                16.5'            13.0'
60                10.4'                18.0'            16.0'
75                9.3'                 18.5'            22.0'
90                9.0'                 17.5'            26.0'
 
   All parking stalls shall access directly upon a aisle or driveway of such
design as to provide safe and efficient means of vehicular access. All two-way
parking aisles must be at least 26 feet in width. Dead end parking aisles of
less than 26 feet in width and parking stalls where vehicles must back onto a
public street for access are prohibited. No driveway across public property at
the right-of-way line of a street shall exceed a width of 30 feet. No loading
area shall be counted as a parking stall. Storm water retention or detention is
prohibited in a parking lot if the water level for a 100-year rainfall
intensity will exceed 6 inches in any part thereof.
   M.   Handicapped Parking. Handicapped parking shall be provided in
conformance with the following table:
Total Parking Stalls in Lot Required Minimum Handicapped Stalls
1 to 25                     1
26 to 50                    2
51 to 75                    3
76 to 100                   4
101 to 150                  5
151 to 200                  6
201 to 300                  7
301 to 400                  8
401 to 500                  9
501 and over                2%
 
The minimum width of handicapped stalls shall comply with State and Federal
law. Handicapped stalls shall be located closest to the nearest accessibility
entrance on an accessible route. Handicapped stalls may share a common access
aisle in order to meet minimum width requirements. Parking signs shall be
installed and maintained to identify handicapped parking stalls.
   N.   Change In Use. Whenever the use of any property, or any structure, or
part thereof, is changed to another use which requires a greater minimum number
of off-street parking spaces, such change in use is prohibited unless
additional off-street parking is provided to conform to the minimum
requirements.
   O.   Location. Required parking spaces shall be located on the same zoning
lot as the use which they serve or within 300 feet of such use provided such
off-lot parking spaces are located in the same or a less restrictive zoning
district and are located on property which is under the same ownership as the
use served or under a lease with a term of not less than 20 years. In the event
that such spaces cease to be under such control or cease to be used, then the
use on the zoning lot shall be terminated or reduced in conformity with the
number of required parking spaces available.
ARTICLE IX NONCONFORMITIES
Sec. 25-90. General Provisions.
   A.   Purposes. This Article regulates and limits the continued existence of
uses, structures and lots established prior to the effective date of this Code
that do not conform to the regulations of this Code applicable in the zoning
districts in which such uses, structures and lots are located.
The zoning districts established by this Code are designed to guide the future
use of land within the Village by encouraging the development or maintenance of
areas with appropriate groupings of compatible and related uses and thus to
promote and protect the public health, safety, and general welfare. The
continued existence of nonconformities is frequently inconsistent with the
purposes for which such districts are established and thus the gradual
elimination of such nonconformities is generally desirable.
   B.   General Scope and Scheme of Regulation. Separate restrictions are
established for nonconforming uses of land and nonconforming uses of structures
designed for a permitted use, nonconforming uses of structures not designed for
a permitted use, nonconforming structures, nonconforming lots of record. The
degree of restriction made applicable to each category of nonconformity is
generally related to the degree of incompatibility with permitted uses and the
amount of investment typically associated with nonconformities of that type.
   While the regulations of this Article related to nonconformities allow such
nonconformities to continue without specific limitation of time, the
regulations restrict further investments that would make the nonconformity more
permanent, and the eventual elimination of the nonconformity is intended.
   C.   Exception for Repairs Pursuant to Public Order. Nothing in this Article
shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or restoration to a safe condition
of a structure in accordance with an order of a public official who is charged
with protecting the public safety and who declares such structure to be unsafe
and orders its restoration to a safe condition, provided such restoration is
not otherwise in violation of the various provisions of this Article
prohibiting the repair or restoration of partially damaged or destroyed
structures.
   D.   Nonconforming Accessory Uses and Structures. No use or structure that
is accessory to a principal nonconforming use or structure shall continue after
such principle use or structure shall have been terminated, unless it shall
thereafter conform to all the regulations of the zoning district in which it is
located.
   E.   Burden of Owner to Establish Legality of Nonconformity. The burden of
establishing that any nonconformity is lawfully existing under the provisions
of this Article XII shall, in all cases, be upon the owner of such
nonconformity and not upon the Village.
Sec. 25-91. Nonconforming Uses of Land and Nonconforming Uses in Structures
Designed for a Permitted Use.
   A.   Authority to Continue. Except as provided in Subsection I of this
Section, any lawfully existing nonconforming use not involving the use of a
structure, or involving only a structure that is accessory to a nonconforming
use of land, or located in a structure designed for a use permitted in the
district in which it is located may be continued so long as it remains
otherwise lawful, subject to the regulations contained in Subsections B through
H of this Section and in Subsections D and E of Section 25-90 of this Code.
For purposes of this Section, any structure that is used in connection with a
nonconforming use of land and that has an assessed value of less than $5,000 on
the effective date of this Code or any amendment hereto creating such
nonconformity shall be considered to be a structure accessory to a
nonconforming use of land.
   B.   Ordinary Repair and Maintenance. Normal maintenance and incidental
repair or replacement, and installation or relocation of nonbearing walls,
nonbearing partitions, fixtures, wiring, or plumbing, may be performed on any
structure that is accessory to a nonconforming use of land or that is designed
for a permitted use but devoted in whole or in part to a nonconforming use;
provided, however, that this Subsection shall not be deemed to authorize any
violation of Subsections C through I of this Section.
   C.   Structural Alteration. No structure that is accessory to a
nonconforming use of land or that is designed for a permitted use and devoted
in whole or in part to a nonconforming use shall be structurally altered unless
the use thereof shall thereafter conform to the use regulations of the zoning
district in which it is located. No such alteration shall create a new parking,
loading, bulk, yard, or space nonconformity or increase the degree of any
existing parking, loading, bulk, yard, or space nonconformity of such
structure. For the purposes of this Subsection, the vertical or horizontal
extension of a structure shall be considered to increase the degree of an
existing nonconformity related to a required yard or setback.
   D.   Enlargement of Structure. No structure that is accessory to a
nonconforming use of land or that is designed for a permitted use and devoted
in whole or in part to a nonconforming use shall be enlarged or added to in any
manner, including the interior addition of floor area, unless the use of such
structure shall thereafter conform to the use regulations of the district in
which it is located. No such enlargement shall create any new parking, loading,
bulk, yard, or space nonconformity or increase the degree of any existing
parking, loading, bulk, yard, or space nonconformity of such structure. For the
purposes of this Subsection, the vertical or horizontal extension of a
structure shall be considered to increase the degree of an existing
nonconformity related to a required yard or setback.
   E.   Extension of Use. A nonconforming use of land or of a structure that is
accessory to a nonconforming use of land or a nonconforming use in a structure
designed for a permitted use shall not be extended, expanded, enlarged, or
increased in intensity. Such prohibited activity shall include, without being
limited to:
      1.   An extension of such use, including its accessory uses, to any
structure or land area other than that occupied by such nonconforming use on
the effective date of this Code or any amendment hereto that causes such use to
become nonconforming, and
      2.   An extension of such use, including its accessory uses, within a
building or other structure to any portion of the floor area that was not
occupied by such nonconforming use on the effective date of this Code or any
amendment hereto that causes such use to become nonconforming, and
      3.   An extension of the hours of operation of such use beyond the normal
hours of operation on the effective date of this Code or any amendment hereto
that causes such use to become nonconforming.
   F.    Moving. No structure that is accessory to a nonconforming use of land
or that is designed for a permitted use and devoted in whole or in part to a
nonconforming use shall be moved in whole or in part, for any distance
whatsoever, to any other location on the same or any other lot, unless the
entire structure and the use thereof shall thereafter conform to all
regulations of the zoning district in which it is located after being so moved.
No nonconforming use of land shall be moved in whole or in part, for any
distance whatsoever, to any other location on the same or any other lot, unless
such use shall thereafter conform to all regulations of the zoning district in
which it is located after being so moved.
   G.   Change in Use. A nonconforming use of land not involving a structure or
involving only a structure that is accessory to the nonconforming use of land
or a nonconforming use in a structure designed for a use permitted in the
district in which it is located shall not be changed to any use other than a
use permitted in the zoning district in which the use or structure is located.
When such a nonconforming use has been changed to a permitted use, it shall not
thereafter be changed back to any nonpermitted use. For purposes of this
Subsection G, a use shall be deemed to have been so changed when an existing
nonconforming use shall have been terminated and a permitted use shall have
commenced and continued for a period of five days. Any change of use in
violation of this Subsection shall be deemed to be an abandonment of the
lawfully existing nonconforming use.
   H.   Damage or Destruction. Any structure that is accessory to a
nonconforming use of land or that is designed for a permitted use and devoted
in whole or in part to a nonconforming use and that is damaged or destroyed, by
any means, to the extent of more than 50 percent of the cost of replacement of
such structure new shall not be restored unless the use of such structure shall
thereafter conform to the use regulations of the zoning district in which it is
located and unless such restoration is accomplished without creating any new
parking, loading, bulk, yard, or space nonconformity or increasing the degree
of any parking, loading, bulk, yard, or space nonconformity existing prior to
such damage or destruction.
When any such structure is damaged or destroyed by any means not within the
control of the owner thereof to the extent of 50 percent or less of the cost of
replacement of the structure new, repair or restoration of such structure may
be made; provided, however, that no repairs or restorations shall be made that
would create any new parking, loading, bulk, yard, or space nonconformity or
increase the degree of any parking, loading, bulk, yard, or space nonconformity
existing prior to such damage or destruction, nor shall any repairs or
restoration except in conformity with the applicable zoning district
regulations be made unless a Certificate of Zoning Compliance is obtained and
restoration is actually begun within one year after the date of such partial
damage or destruction and is diligently pursued to completion.
In no event shall any damage or destruction to such a structure by means within
the control of the owner be repaired or restored except in accordance with
Subsections B, C, and D of this Section.
   I.   Termination by Discontinuance or Abandonment. When a nonconforming use
of land not involving a structure or involving only a structure that is
accessory to the nonconforming use of land or when a nonconforming use of a
part or all of a structure that was designed for a use that is permitted in the
zoning district in which such structure is located is discontinued or abandoned
for a period of 12 consecutive months, regardless of any intent to resume or
not to abandon such use, such use shall not thereafter be reestablished or
resumed. Any subsequent use or occupancy of such land or structure shall comply
with the use regulations of the zoning district in which such land or structure
is located.
Any period of such discontinuance caused by government action, strikes,
material shortages, or acts of God, and without any contributing fault by the
nonconforming user, shall not be considered in calculating the length of
discontinuance for purposes of this Subsection.
Sec. 25-92. Nonconforming Uses in Structures Not Designed for a Permitted Use.
   A.   Authority to Continue. Except as provided in Subsection I of this
Section, any lawfully existing nonconforming use located in a structure not
designed or intended for any use permitted in the district in which it is
located may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the
regulations contained in Subsections B through H of this Section and in
Subsections D and E of Section 25-90 of this Code.
   B.   Ordinary Repair and Maintenance. Normal maintenance and incidental
repair or replacement, and installation or relocation of nonbearing walls,
nonbearing partitions, fixtures, wiring, or plumbing, may be performed on any
structure devoted in whole or in part to a nonconforming use and not designed
or intended for any use permitted in the district in which such structure is
located; provided, however, that this Subsection shall not be deemed to
authorize any violation of Subsections C through I of this Section.
   C.   Structural Alteration. No structure devoted in whole or in part to a
nonconforming use and not designed or intended for any use permitted in the
district in which such structure is located shall be structurally altered
unless the entire structure and the use thereof shall thereafter conform to all
regulations of the zoning district in which it is located. No such alteration
shall create a new parking, loading, bulk, yard, or space nonconformity or
increase the degree of any existing parking, loading, bulk, yard, or space
nonconformity of such structure. For the purposes of this Subsection, the
vertical or horizontal extension of a structure shall be considered to increase
the degree of an existing nonconformity related to a required yard or setback.
   D.   Enlargement of Structure. No structure devoted in whole or in part to a
nonconforming use and not designed or intended for any use permitted in the
district in which such structure is located shall be enlarged or added to in
any manner, including the interior addition of floor area, unless the entire
structure and the use thereof shall thereafter conform to all the regulations
of the district in which it is located. No such alteration shall create a new
parking, loading, bulk, yard, or space nonconformity or increase the degree of
any existing parking, loading, bulk, yard, or space nonconformity of such
structure. For the purposes of this Subsection, the vertical or horizontal
extension of a structure shall be considered to increase the degree of an
existing nonconformity related to a required yard or setback.
   E.   Extension of Use.
      1.   Prohibited Extensions. A nonconforming use in a structure not
designed or intended for any use permitted in the district in which such
structure is located shall not be extended, expanded, enlarged, or increased in
intensity by:
         (a)   An extension of such use to any structure or land area other
than that occupied by such nonconforming use on the effective date of this Code
or any amendment to it that causes such use to become nonconforming; or
         (b)   An extension of the hours of operation of such use beyond the
normal hours of operation on the effective date of this Code or any amendment
to it that causes such use to become nonconforming.
      2.   Permitted Extensions. A nonconforming use in a structure not
designed or intended for any use permitted in the district in which such
structure is located may be extended throughout any part of such structure
lawfully existing on the effective date of this Code or any amendment to it
that causes such use to become nonconforming, provided, however, that such
extension shall not be allowed unless off-street parking and loading spaces
required for such extension can be, and are, provided in accordance with the
requirements and restrictions of this Code. No such extension shall be deemed
to affect the duty to terminate such use pursuant to Subsection I of this
Section.
   F.   Moving. No structure devoted in whole or in part to a nonconforming use
and not designed or intended for any use permitted in the district in which
such structure is located shall be moved, in whole or in part, for any distance
whatsoever, to any other location on the same or any other lot unless the
entire structure and the use thereof shall thereafter conform to all
regulations of the zoning district in which it is located after being so moved.
   G.   Change in Use. A nonconforming use in a structure not designed or
intended for a use permitted in the district in which such structure is located
shall not be changed to any use other than a nonconforming use of a more
restricted classification or a use permitted in the zoning district in which
the structure is located. When a nonconforming use has been changed to a more
restricted nonconforming use or to a permitted use, it shall not thereafter be
changed back to a less restricted nonconforming use. For purposes of this
Subsection G, a use shall be deemed to have been so changed when an existing
nonconforming use shall have been terminated and a more restricted
nonconforming use or a permitted use shall have commenced and continued for a
period of five days. Any change of use in violation of this Subsection shall be
deemed to be an abandonment of the lawfully existing nonconforming use.
   H.   Damage or Destruction. Any structure devoted in whole or in part to a
nonconforming use and not designed or intended for any use permitted in the
district in which such structure is located that is damaged or destroyed, by
any means, to the extent of more than 50 percent of the cost of replacement of
such structure new shall not be restored unless such structure and the use
thereof shall thereafter conform to all regulations of the zoning district in
which it is located and unless such restoration is accomplished without
creating a new parking, loading, bulk, yard, or space nonconformity or
increasing the degree of any existing parking, loading, bulk, yard, or space
nonconformity of such structure existing prior to such damage or destruction.
When any such structure is damaged or destroyed by any means not within the
control of the owner thereof to the extent of 50 percent or less of the cost of
replacement of the structure new, repair or restoration of such structure may
be made; provided, however, that no repairs or restorations shall be made that
would create any new parking, loading, bulk, yard, or space nonconformity or
increase the degree of any parking, loading, bulk, yard, or space nonconformity
of such structure existing prior to such damage or destruction nor shall any
repairs or restoration except in conformity with the applicable zoning district
regulations be made unless a Certificate of Zoning Compliance is obtained and
restoration is actually begun within one year after the date of such partial
damage or destruction and is diligently pursued to completion.
In no event shall any damage or destruction to such a structure by means within
the control of the owner be repaired or restored except in accordance with
Subsections B, C, and D of this Section.
   I.   Termination by Discontinuance or Abandonment. When a nonconforming use
of a part or all of a structure that was not designed or intended for any use
permitted in the zoning district in which such structure is located is
discontinued or abandoned for a period of 12 consecutive months, regardless of
any intent to resume or not to abandon such use, such use shall not thereafter
be re-established or resumed. Any subsequent use or occupancy of such structure
shall comply with the use regulations of the district in which such structure
is located.
Any period of such discontinuance caused by government actions, strikes,
material shortages, or acts of God, and without any contributing fault by the
nonconforming user, shall not be considered in calculating the length of
discontinuance for purposes of this Subsection.
Sec. 25-93. Nonconforming Structures.
   A.   Authority to Continue. Any nonconforming structure that is devoted to a
use that is permitted in the zoning district in which it is located may be
continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the restrictions
in this Section and Section 25-90.
   B.   Repair, Maintenance, Alterations, and Enlargement. Any nonconforming
structure may be repaired, maintained, altered, or enlarged; provided, however,
that no such repair, maintenance, alteration, or enlargement shall either
create any new nonconformity or increase the degree of the existing
nonconformity of all or any part of such structure. For the purposes of this
Subsection, the vertical or horizontal extension of a structure shall be
considered to increase the degree of an existing nonconformity related to a
required yard or setback.
   C.   Moving. No nonconforming structure shall be moved in whole or in part,
for any distance whatsoever, to any other location on the same or any other lot
unless the entire structure shall thereafter conform to the regulations of the
zoning district in which it is located after being moved.
   D.   Damage or Destruction. Any nonconforming structure that is damaged or
destroyed, by any means not within the control of the owner thereof, to any
extent, may be repaired or restored; provided, however, that no repair or
restoration shall be made that would create any new nonconformity not existing
prior to such damage or destruction nor shall any repair or restoration except
in conformity with the applicable district regulations be made unless a
Certificate of Zoning Compliance is obtained and restoration is actually begun
within one year after the date of such damage or destruction and is diligently
pursued to completion.
In no event shall any damage or destruction to such a structure by means within
the control of the owner be repaired or restored except in accordance with
Subsection B of this Section.
Sec. 25-94. Nonconforming Lots of Record. 
   A.    Authority to Utilize for Dwellings. In any district in which dwellings
are a permitted use, notwithstanding the regulations imposed by any other
provisions of this Code, a dwelling of the type permitted in the district in
which the lot is located and that complies with the restrictions of Subsection
B of this Section may be erected on a legal nonconforming lot of record that
has a total lot area equal to at least 70 percent of the total lot area
required in the district in which such lot is located.
   B.   Regulations for Single Family Use of Nonconforming Lots. A legal
nonconforming lot of record authorized to be used pursuant to Subsection A of
this Section may be used for a dwelling of the type permitted in the district
in which the lot is located and permitted accessory structures, but for no
other structure. Construction of such dwelling and accessory structures shall
comply with all the regulations applicable to dwellings and accessory
structures in the zoning district in which the lot in question is located,
except that the following lot area requirements shall apply in place of the lot
area requirements otherwise applicable:
      1.   Total lot area shall equal at least 70 percent of the district
requirement for the type of dwelling, and
      2.   Lot area per unit shall equal or exceed the district requirement,
except that one detached single family dwelling may be constructed with only 70
percent of the required lot area per unit.
    C.   Other Uses of Nonconforming Lots. In any zoning district in which
dwellings are not permitted, a legal nonconforming lot of record may be used
for any use permitted in the district in which it is located, if, but only if,
the development of such lot meets all requirements of the district in which it
is located, including floor area ratio and yard requirements, except lot area,
width, and depth requirements.
Sec. 25-95. Nursing and Personal Care Facility.
Any nursing and personal care facility which lawfully existed on the date of
the passage of this ordinance shall be a legal non-conforming use subject to
the provisions of Article IX, Nonconformities. In order to be lawfully
existing, the nursing and personal care facility must have a current valid
license from the State of Illinois issued under the Nursing Home Care Act.
Because of the effect that such facilities have shown upon neighboring
residential areas, the continuation of any legal non-conforming use is subject
to the following limitations:
   A.   There shall be no increase in the number of beds for which the facility
is permitted by the Illinois Department of Public Health.
   B.   There shall be no increase in the number of beds in any category (such
as skilled beds, intermediate beds, etc.) for which the facility is permitted
by the Illinois Department of Public Health.
   C.   No new patients shall be admitted under the categories of Aggressive/
Anti-Social and Drug Addiction. Any existing patients in such categories may
remain, but upon their removal from the facility, no new patient may replace
the same if admitted under the above categories.
   D.   On-site parking requirements shall be not less than one parking place
for each three beds for which the facility is permitted by the Illinois
Department of Public Health plus one parking space for each member of the staff
as determined by taking the most recent total staff (including full-time and
part-time) as reported by the Illinois Department of Public Aid and divided by
three. To the extent that a facility does not meet this on-site parking
requirement, no new patients shall be admitted, even if replacing existing
patients who are removed from the facility.
ARTICLE X. CANNABIS CULTIVATION AND DISPENSARIES
Sec. 25-100. Purpose and Applicability.
   It is the intent and purpose of this Article to provide regulations
regarding the siting and operation of cannabis organizations within the
corporate limits of the Village of Evergreen Park. Such organizations shall
comply with all provisions contained in the Compassionate Use of Medical
Cannabis Program Act and the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, as may be amended
from time to time (the "Acts"), regulations enacted pursuant to authority
granted through the Acts, and the regulations provided herein. In the event
that any provision of the Acts or regulations are in conflict with Village
provisions, then the more restrictive shall be applicable.
(Ord. No. 4-2014 § 3, 2-3-14; Am. Ord. No. 16-2021 § 3, 10-4-21)
Sec. 25-101. Procedure.
   Cannabis dispensing organizations shall be a special use in the "C"
Commercial District and processed in accordance with the provisions of the
Evergreen Park Zoning Code and this Article. No Cannabis dispensing
organization shall be sited, opened or operated unless specifically authorized
under and pursuant to the Acts and the Evergreen Park Zoning Code.
(Ord. No. 4-2014 § 3, 2-3-14; Am. Ord. No. 16-2021 § 3, 10-4-21)
Sec. 25-102. Cannabis Dispensing Organization Components.
   In determining compliance with Article VI of the Evergreen Park Zoning Code,
the following components of the cannabis dispensing organization shall be
evaluated based on the entirety of the circumstances affecting the particular
property in the context of the existing and intended future use of other
properties in the vicinity:
   A.   Impact of the proposed facility on existing or planned uses located
within the vicinity of the subject property.
   B.   Proposed structure in which the facility will be located, total square
footage, security installations, security plan, and Building Code compliance.
   C.   Hours of operation and anticipated number of employees at maximum
operations.
   D.   Anticipated parking demand.
   E.   Traffic generation and adjacent roadway capacity.
   F.   Site design, including access points, internal site circulation and
commercial vehicle loading, unloading and parking.
   G.   Proposed signage plan.
   H.   Proximity to a public or private nursery school, preschool, primary or
secondary school, day care center, day care home, residential care home, a
public park, or any property lawfully used in a residential manner or any
residential zoning district.
   I.   Compliance with all requirements provided in Section
25-104 (Cannabis Dispensing Organizations).
(Ord. No. 4-2014 § 3, 2-3-14; Am. Ord. No. 16-2021 § 3, 10-4-21)
Sec. 25-103. General Zoning Restrictions.
   Cannabis dispensing organizations must comply with the following locational
restrictions:
   (A)   Be located in the "C" Commercial District south of 91st Street, north
of 99th Street, west of Western Avenue and east of the B&O Railroad Tracks;
provided, however that only one cannabis dispensing organization may be located
south of 95th Street and only one cannabis dispensing organization may be
located north of 95th Street.
   (B)   Be located not less than 300 feet from any pre-existing public or
private nursery school, preschool, grade school, middle school, high school,
church, mosque, temple, or public park when measured lot line to lot line.
(Ord. No. 4-2014 § 3, 2-3-14; Am. Ord. No. 16-2021 § 3, 10-4-21)
Sec. 25-104. Cannabis Dispensing Organization.
   Cannabis dispensing organizations must comply with the following:
   A.   May not be located in a house, apartment, condominium or a building
devoted in whole or in part to a residential use.
   B.   May not have a drive-thru service.
   C.   May not permit or allow the on-site consumption of cannabis or
cannabis-infused products.
   D.   May not permit or allow the sale or on-site consumption of alcoholic
liquor.
   E.   May not permit or allow any form of gambling, including that regulated
by the Illinois Gaming Board.
   F.   Must have not less than 90% of their floor area dedicated to the sale
of cannabis and cannabis-infused products.
   G.   Customers shall not be allowed to line up or wait outside of any
building permitted as a cannabis dispensing location.
   H.   Hours of operation are limited to 8:00 a.m. through 10:00 p.m. daily,
except that on Sunday, the opening hour shall be no earlier than 11:00 a.m.
   I.   For purposes of determining required parking, said facilities shall be
classified as a "Health Service Office" per Section
25-80 of the Evergreen Park Zoning Code except that the number shall be
calculated based on Cannabis Dispensing Organization Agents working on the
property; provided, however, that not less than 20 on-site parking spaces shall
be provided.
(Ord. No. 4-2014 § 3, 2-3-14; Am. Ord. No. 16-2021 § 3, 10-4-21)
Sec. 25-105. Additional Requirements.
   Petitioner shall install security cameras, lighting, and other improvements
as required by the Village to ensure the safety of employees and customers of
the cannabis dispensing organization.
(Ord. No. 4-2014 § 3, 2-3-14; Am. Ord. No. 16-2021 § 3, 10-4-21)
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE
1965 CODE
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1965
Code, as updated through November 21, 1988, which are included herein. Sections
of the 1965 Code, as supplemented, not listed herein have been omitted as
repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For
the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table
immediately following this table.
1965 Code Section Section this Code
1965 Code Section          Section this Code
1-1, 1-2                   1-1, 1-2
1-3                        1-4
1-4                        1-6
1-5                        1-8
1-6                        1-5
1-7                        1-9
1-9                        1-11
2-1                        2-1
2-2                        2-321
2-4                        2-152
2-5                        2-156
2-6                        2-151
2-7                        2-155
2-8-2-10                   2-157
2-12                       2-160
2-13                       2-159
2-14-2-17                  2-322-2-325
2-27                       2-26
2-28, 2-29                 2-74, 2-75
2-30                       2-79
2-31                       2-53
2-32                       2-127
2-33                       2-27
2-34                       2-48
2-36                       2-28
2-41, 2-42                 2-46, 2-47
2-44                       2-49
2-46-2-48                  2-50-2-52
2-54                       2-71
                           2-128
2-54(rule 1)               2-28
                           2-74
2-54(rule 2)               2-75
                           2-48
2-54(rule 3)               2-78
                           2-80
2-54(rule 6)               2-79
                           2-81
2-54(rule 7)-
2-54(rule 14)              2-82-2-89
2-54(rule 15)              2-103
2-54(rule 16),
2-54(rule 17)              2-126, 2-127
2-54(rule 18)-
2-54(rule 23)              2-104-2-109
2-54(rule 24)-
2-54(rule 27)              2-90-2-94
2-54(rule 28)              2-94
                           2-96
2-54(rule 29)              2-95
2-54(rule 30)-
2-54(rule 35)              2-97-2-102
2-54(rule 43)              2-129
2-54(rule 44)              2-73
2-88, 2-89                 2-181, 2-182
2-91                       2-161
2-101                      2-201, 2-202
2-114                      2-217
2-115                      2-130
2-116                      2-218
2-119, 2-120               2-219, 2-220
2-121                      2-216
2-136, 2-137               2-242
2-139, 2-140               2-243, 2-244
2-141                      2-241
2-153-2-156                2-264-2-267
2-158                      2-261-2-263
2-168, 2-169               2-382, 2-383
2-170                      2-386
2-174                      2-384
2-175                      2-388
2-176                      2-385
2-177                      2-387
2-178                      2-381
2-182                      2-361
                           2-364
2-182(a), 2-182(b)         2-362, 2-363
2-182(d)                   2-365
2-183                      2-366
2-200-2-203                13-91-13-94
2-204-2-206                13-96-13-98
2-207                      13-95
2-256, 2-257               2-286, 2-287
2-266, 2-267               2-301, 2-302
3-1                        3-31
3-2-3-8                    3-52 - 3-54, 3-56, 3-58 - 3-60
3-9                        3-36
3-10                       3-55
3-11(a)-3-11(i)            3-38 - 3-46
3-11(j)-3-11(1)            3-33-3-35
3-12                       3-37
3-13                       3-3
3-14(a)-(e)                3-4
3-14(f), (g)               3-2
3-15                       3-32
3-16                       3-61
3-17                       3-1
3-18                       3-47
4-1                        11-156
4-2                        11-160
4-5, 4-6                   11-161, 11-162
4-8, 4-9                   11-163, 11-164
4-21-4-23                  11-181-11-183
7-108(a)-(c)               21-17
7-150-7-154                17-26-17-30
91/4-1, 91/4-2             10-46, 10-47
91/4-3, 91/4-4             10-50, 10-51
91/4-11                    10-27
91/4-11(a)                 10-26
91/4-12                    10-28
91/4-20-91/4-23            11-301-11-304
10-1                       6-1
13-19                      11-99
14-1, 14-2                 20-1, 20-2
14-3, 14-4                 20-2, 20-3
14-5                       20-7
14-7, 14-8                 20-8, 20-9
14-9                       20-6
14-11                      20-5
14-25                      20-31
14-26, 14-27               20-34, 20-35
14-28-14-30                20-51-20-53
14-31, 14-32               20-36, 20-37
14-33, 14-34               20-32, 20-33
14-35                      20-4
15-62                      19-211
16-8                       9-2
16-11                      9-1
16-20                      8-14
18-1                       11-99
18-3-18.5                  11-102-11-104
18-6, 18-7                 11-109, 11-110
18-8                       11-106
18-9                       11-105
18-10, 18-11               11-107, 11-108
18-12                      11-8
18-13(a)-18-13(c)          11-1-11-3
18-14                      11-6
18-14(a),18-14(b)          11-4, 11-5
18-15                      11-7
18-16, 18-17               11-111, 11-112
18-22                      11-101
18-31                      11-131
18-32(a)(6)                11-131
18-32(a)(7)                11-97
18-32(a)(8)                11-96
18-32(b)                   11-96
18-32(b)(10)               11-100
18-33, 18-34               11-133, 11-134
18-35                      11-132
18-39                      11-36
18-39.1-18-39.3            11-37-11-39
18-40(a)                   11-227
18-40(b), (c)              11-226
18-40(d),18-40(e)          11-228, 11-229
18-40(f)                   11-228
18-40(g),18-40(h)          11-230, 11-231
18-50                      11-62
18-51                      11-61
18-52-18-60                11-63-11-71
18-63                      11-72
18.70-18-73                21-211-21-214
18-74                      21-191
18-80                      11-257
                           11-281
18-81                      11-256
18-82-18-85                11-281-11-284
18-86-18-89                11-258-11-261
18-90                      11-285
19-1                       12-74
19-2(a), 19-2(b)           9-3, 9-4
19-2(c)                    9-3
19-2(d)                    12-178
19-4                       11-157
19-6                       12-26
19-7                       12-180, 12-181
19-10                      12-27
19-12                      12-51
19-13                      12-304
19-14                      12-171
19-15, 19-16               12-302, 12-303
19-17                      12-97
19-17.1(a)                 12-97
19-18(1), 19-18(2)         12-173, 12-174
19-18(3)                   12-180
19-18(5)                   12-186
19-18(6)                   12-175
19-18(7), (8)              12-77
19-18(9)                   12-234
19-18(11)                  12-154
19-18(13)                  12-328
19-18(14)                  12-177
19-18(15)                  12-173
19-18(16)                  12-176
19-18(18)                  12-173
19-18(19)                  12-327
19-18(20)                  12-180
19-18(21)                  12-183
19-18(22)                  12-153
19-18(23), (24)            12-185
19-18(25)                  12-182
19-18(26)                  12-131
19-19, 19-20               12-172
19-21(a)                   12-211
19-21(e), 19-21(f)         12-211
19-22                      20-10
19-23                      21-16
19-24                      12-191
19-25                      12-126
19-26                      12-73
19-27                      12-351
19-30, 19-31               12-233
19-32, 19-33               12-231, 12-232
19-34                      12-235
19-35(a)                   11-201
19-35(b), 19-35(c)         11-203, 11-204
19-35(d)                   11-203
19-35(e)                   11-207
19-35(f)                   11-205
19-35(g)                   11-203
19-35(h)                   11-206
19-35(i)                   11-202
19-36                      12-1
19-36.1                    11-9
19-37                      12-355
19-38                      17-2
19-41                      12-97
                           12-100
19-42                      12-305
19-43                      14-9
19-44, 19-45               12-98, 12-99
19-46                      12-72
19-47                      12-179
19-48                      20-10
19-49, 19-50               12-187, 12-188
19-51                      12-352
19-52                      12-189
19-53, 19-54               14-2, 14-3
19-55                      14-1
19-56(a)                   14-4
19-57-19-60                14-5-14-8
19-61(b)                   12-213, 12-214
19-62(a)-19-62(f)          12-251-12-256
19-62(g)–(i)             12-257
19-62(j)-19-62(1)          12-258-12-260
19-63                      12-133
19-64                      1-7
19-65                      12-127
19-66                      21-18
19-67                      12-301
19-68(a)-19-68(i)          15-53-15-61
19-68(j)                   15-52
19-69                      12-184
19-70                      12-172
19-71                      11-158
19-74                      12-329
19-75, 19-76               12-100, 12-101
19-77-19-83                12-276-12-282
19-84                      12-212
19-85                      12-356
19-86                      12-128
19-87                      12-326
19-88                      12-354
19-89                      9-5
19-90                      12-353
19-91                      12-76
19-92                      12-75
19-93                      12-71
19-94                      12-129, 12-130
19-96                      12-96
19-98                      12-97
19-99(a)                   12-152
19-99(b)                   12-153
                           12-330
19-99(d)                   12-155
19-100-19-103              12-153
19-104                     14-10
19-105                     20-11
19-106                     12-132
20-1                       13-1
20-2(a)                    13-2
                           13-326
20-2(b)                    13-3, 13-4
20-2(c), (d)               13-4
20-4                       13-36
20-5                       13-57
20-6                       13-352
20-8                       13-354
20-9                       13-160
20-11                      13-161
20-12-20-14                13-156-13-158
20-16                      13-356
20-16(a)                   13-355
20-16(c)                   13-355
20-17                      13-58
20-18                      13-159
20-19                      13-353
20-21                      13-181
20-22(a)–(c)             13-182
20-22(d)                   13-183
20-52                      13-206
20-53(a)(15), 20-53(a)(16) 13-215, 13-216
20-53(a)(18)               13-214
20-53(a)(20)               13-210
20-53(a)(21)               13-212
20-53(a)(23)               13-219
20-53(a)(24)               13-218
20-53(a)(25)               13-217
20-53(a)(26)               13-215
20-53(a)(27)               13-204
20-53(a)(29)               13-223
20-53(a)(30)               13-222
20-53(a)(31)               13-213
20-53(a)(32),              13-220, 13-221
20-53(a)(33)
20-53(b)                   13-205
20-54                      13-224
20-56, 20-57               13-225, 13-226
20-57.1                    13-226
20-58                      13-226
20-59.1                    13-226
20-60                      13-226
20-61(a)–(d)             13-211
20-61(e)–(g)             13-208
20-62-20-64                13-201-13-203
20-65                      13-207
20-70                      13-209
20-80, 20-81               13-351
20-90, 20-91               13-7, 13-8
20-100                     13-246
                           13-250
20-101                     13-5
20-102, 20-103             13-251, 13-252
20-104                     13-248
20-105                     13-247
20-105(b)                  13-249
20-106                     13-6
20-111(1) - 20-111(6)      13-327-13-332
20-113                     13-333
20-114(1)                  13-334
20-114(3)                  13-334
20-140, 20-14"5-2008       13-76, 13-77
1
21-1---21-5                15-26-15-30
21-6                       15-32
21-7                       15-31
22-9                       24-234
22-9(b)                    24-234
22-20, 22-21               24-156, 24-157
22-22(a)                   24-176
22-22(b)                   24-231
22-22(c)                   24-176
22-22(e)-22-22(j)          24-177-24-182
22-22(k), (1)              24-183
22-22(m)                   24-184
22-23(a)                   24-234
22-23(c), (d)              24-235
22-23(e)-
22-23(h)                   24-236-24-239
22-23(i), (j)              24-240
22-23(k)                   24-241
22-24                      24-159
22-25                      24-158
22-26(c), 22-26(d)         24-202, 24-203
22-27(a), 22-27(b)         24-201
22-27(e)                   24-201
22-27(0-22-27(i)           24-204-24-207
22-27(j), (k)              24-208
22-27(1)-22-27(n)          24-209-24-211
23-1                       18-26
23-2                       18-28
23-2.1                     18-31
23-2.2                     2-364
23-3                       18-32
23-5                       18-34
23-12                      18-35
23-18                      12-331
23-20                      18-36
23-22(a)                   18-27
23-22(b)                   2-362
                           18-30
23-22(c), (d)              18-30
23-23                      18-29
23-32-23-35                18-101-18-104
23-36                      18-33
23-39-23-43                18-76-18-80
25-1                       19-1
25-3, 25-4                 19-2, 19-3
25-5                       19-8
25-6                       19-4
25-7                       19-7
25-8, 25-9                 19-5, 19-6
25-15-25-22                19-36-19-43
25-25-25-33                19-71-19-79
25-37-25-39                19-117
25-40-25-44                19-118-19-122
25-45-25-49                19-80-19-84
25-52                      19-86
25-53                      19-151
25-54                      19-152
25-55                      19-153
25-57-25-59                19-181-19-183
25-61                      19-85
25-63-25-67                19-212-19-216
25-69-25-73                19-246-19-250
25-74-25-77                19-278-19-281
25-78                      19-277
26-1                       16-26
26-2                       16-28
26-3-26-7                  16-46-16-50
26-9-26-12                 16-51-16-54
26-13-26-15                16-29-16-31
26-16                      16-27
26-17                      16-55
26-20-26-24                16-116-16-120
26-25                      16-122
26-26, 26-27               16-102, 16-103
26-28-26-30                16-123-16-125
26-31(a)                   16-101
26-32                      16-126
26-33                      16-121
26-35(a)                   16-171
26-35(b)                   16-152
26-36-26-38                16-172-16-174
26-40, 26-41               16-175, 16-176
26-43                      16-151
26-50-26-55                16-76-16-81
27-1                       21-1
27-3, 27-4                 21-7, 21-8
27-5-27-8                  21-2-21-5
27-11                      17-1
27-12                      21-6
27-14, 27-15               21-9, 21-10
27-17                      21-15
27-19, 27-20               21-16
27-21-27-23                21-11-21-13
27-25                      12-190
27-36, 27-37               21-46
27-38-27-41                21-47-21-50
27-52(a)                   21-71
27-52(c)                   21-73
27-54                      21-74
                           21-76
27-54(b)                   21-72
27-55                      21-75
27-66                      21-96
27-67(a)                   21-97
27-67(c)                   21-97
27-69-27-71                21-98-21-100
27-82-27-84                21-126-21-128
27-85                      12-100
27-86-27-89                21-129-21-132
27-100-27-107              21-156-21-163
28-1                       22-1
28-2-28-5                  22-96-22-99
28-6, 28-7                 22-51, 22-52
28-8-28-10                 22-66-22-68
28-11, 28-12               22-2, 22-3
28-20(a)                   17-52
28-20(b)                   17-51
28-20(c)-28-20(g)          17-53-17-57
31-1                       24-1, 24-2
31-2-31-8                  24-3-24-9
31-11-31-13                24-72-24-74
31-15, 31-16               24-42, 24-43
31-18                      24-47
31-19                      24-50
31-20                      24-48
31-27                      24-41
31-28                      24-51
31-29, 31-30               24-11, 24-12
31-31                      24-10
31-32-31-34                24-79-24-81
31-35                      24-84
31-36                      24-83
31-37                      24-82
31-39                      24-49
31-40                      24-13
31-42                      24-14
31-52, 31-53               24-127, 24-128
31-54                      24-126
31-55-31-58                24-129-24-132
31-59                      24-75
31-61(d)                   24-176
31-62                      24-233
31-63                      24-232
31-72                      24-77
31-76                      24-71
31-77                      24-76
31-79                      24-78
31-80, 31-81               24-44, 24-45
31-87-31-92                24-101-24-106
31-93                      24-46
32-11                      12-151
32-26                      12-151
34-1                       25-1
34-2                       25-2
                           25-91
34-3-34-9                  25-126-25-132
34-10(a), 34-10(b)         25-46
34-10(b)(1) - 34-10(b)(8)  25-47-25-54
34-11                      25-4
34-12                      25-166
34-12.1                    25-167
34-23, 34-24               25-71, 25-72
34-25                      25-33
                           25-73
34-26                      25-74, 25-75
34-27(a)                   25-32
34-27(b)                   25-32
                           25-73
34-27(c)–(e)             25-75
                           25-132
34-38                      25-27
                           25-30
34-40                      25-3
                           25-26
34-41                      25-92
34-43                      25-33
54-10                      11-159
 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE ORDINANCES
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted
since the 1965 Code, as updated through November 21, 1988, which are included
herein. Ordinances adopted prior to such date were incorporated into the 1965
Code, as supplemented. Ordinances not listed herein have been omitted as
repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature.
Ordinance Number Date Section Section this Code
Ordinance Number  Date      Section           Section this Code
20-1988           12- 5-88  1                 13-351
3-1989            2- 6-89   1                 11-101
                                              11-106
5-1989            3- 6-89   1                 11-159
6-1989            5-15-89   1                 24-127
7-1989            5-15-89   1                 24-203
8-1989            6- 5-89   1                 20-4
9-1989            6-19-89   1                 24-14
5-1990            4- 2-90   1                 20-1
                                              20-12
13-1990           6- 4-90   1                 11-134
14-1990           6- 4-90   1                 12-236
16-1990           6-18-90   1                 19-5
19-1990           11- 5-90  1(34-1)           25-1
                            1(34-3), 1(34-4)  25-126, 25-127
                            1(34-9)           25-132
                            1(34-12)          25-166
                            1(34-38A)         25-28
                            1(34-38B)         25-29
                            1(34-39A)         25-31
                            2(34-40)          25-3
22-1990           11- 5-90  1                 20-13
26-1990           12-17-90  1(12-1)-1(12-5)   7-1-7-5
                            1(12-31)-1(12-36) 7-31-7-36
                            1(12-56)          7-56
                            1(12-76)-1(12-95) 7-76-7-95
                            1(12-101)-        7-121-7-130
                            1(12-110)
                            1(12-121)-        7-157-7-161
                            1(12-125)
27-1990           12-17-90  1                 11-134
25-1990           1- 7-91   1(7-1)-1(7-7)     5-1-5-7
                            1(7-8), 1(7-9)    5-9, 5-10
                            1(7-10)-1(7-13)   5-41-5-44
                            1(7-20)-1(7-27)   5-71-5-78
                            1(7-40)-1(7-43)   5-106-5-109
                            1(7-50)-1(7-56)   5-136-5-142
                            1(7-70)--1(7-74)  5-171-5-175
                            1(7-80)-1(7-85)   5-201-5-206
                            1(7-90)-1(7-94)   5-236-5-240
                            1(7-100)          5-8
                            1(7-101)          5.266
4-1991            2- 4-91   1                 25-32
13-1991           5- 6-91                     2-367
14-1991           6- 3-91   1                 20-4
18-1991           7- 1-91   1                 2-362
                                              18-27
                                              18-30
                            1(18-123)         11-50
19-1991           7- 1-91   1(18-120)         11-46, 11-47
                            1(18-121),        11-48, 11-49
                            1(18-122)
                            1(18-124)-        11-51-11-57
                            1(18-130)
                            2                 11-58
17-1991           8-19-91                     5-108
5-1992            2- 3-92   1                 18-27
6-1992            2-18-92   1                 24-127
7-1992            2-18-92   1                 24-203
9-1992            3- 2-92   1                 1-10
12-1992           4- 6-92   1(16-21)          8-14
15-1992           5- 4-92   1(19-108)         12-357
22-1992           8-17-92   1                 13-217
27-1992           11-16-92  2-280(a)-2-280(e) 2-401-2-405
4-2005            3-21-05   1                 20-4
5-2005            3-7-05    1                 19-12
                            2                 19-16
6-2005            2-21-05   1                 5-108
                            2                 5-110
10-2005           4-4-05    1                 5-266
13-2005           4-13-05   1                 9-17
                            2                 9-16
                            3                 9-15
16-2005           6-6-05    1                 15-63 - 15-66
21-2005           7-18-05   1                 3-36
                            2                 3-56
                            3                 3-58
25-2005           9-6-05    1                 20-52
30-2005           11-21-05  1                 7-156 - 7-159
32-2005           12-19-05  1                 8-42
3-2006            1-3-06    1                 13-405 - 13-412
4-2006            1-16-06   1                 3-36
                            2                 3-46
5-2006            1-17-06   1                 24-127
6-2006            1-17-06   1                 24-203
7-2006            2-6-06    1                 24-76 - 24-78
11-2006           2-20-06   1                 10-46 - 10-48
18-2006           4-17-06   1                 2-154
19-2006           5--06     1                 13-410
23-2006           5-15-06   1                 13-410
27-2006           7-17-06   1                 5-8
36-2006           11-20-06  1                 18-76, 18-78 - 18-80, 18-101
39-2006           12-18-06  1                 13-407, 13-409, 13-410, 13-412
1-2007            1-2-07    1                 7-180 - 7-183
2-2007            1-2-07    1                 19-16
4-2007            1-16-07   1                 5-1
                            2                 5-2
                            3                 5-3
                            4                 5-4
                            5                 5-5
                            6                 5-6
                            7                 7-79
5-2007            2-5-07    1                 5-350
6-2007            2-5-07    1                 12-370 - 12-378
7-2007            2-19-07   1                 13-380 - 13-392
9-2007            2-19-07   1                 17-70 - 17-73
10-2007           3-5-07    1                 9-6
11-2007           2-19-07   1                 3-1, 3-4
13-2007           2-19-07   1                 7-3
                            2                 7-131
14-2007           2-19-07   1                 11-329
15-2007           2-19-07   1                 12-102
16-2007           2-19-07   1                 12-193
17-2007           2-19-07   1                 12-212
18-2007           2-19-07   1                 5-1
                            2                 5-8
19-2007           2-19-07   1                 7-79
20-2007           3-19-07   1                 5-1
                            2                 8-15, 8-47
                            3                 9-7
21-2007           3-19-07   1                 3-1, 3-4
                            2                 12-378
23-2007           4-2-07    1                 13-500 - 13-504, 13-506 - 13-513
29-2007           6-18-07   1                 13-505
30-2007           7-16-07   1                 7-3
31-2007           8-6-07    1                 31-2007
32-2007           8-6-07    1                 5-72
36-2007           10-15-07  1                 3-71
38-2007           11-5-07   2                 11-430 - 11-432
39-2007           11-5-07   2                 11-450 - 11-456
40-2007           11-5-07   2                 21-221
43-2007           12-17-07  1                 24.127
44-2007           12-17-07  1                 24.203
2-2008            1-7-08    1                 9-6
4-2008            2-4-08    1                 7-96
5-2008            2-18-08   1                 5-42
                            2                 5-108
                            3                 5-109
                            4                 5-110
                            5                 5-112
                            6                 5-114
13-2008           4-21-08   1                 3-1 - 3-4, 3-31 - 3-61
15-2008           4-21-08   1                 5-12
16-2008           6-16-08   1                 25-54
                            2                 25-54
18-2008           6-16-08   1                 24-75
                            2                 24-128
19-2008           6-16-08   1                 18-27
23-2008           8-18-08   1                 21-250 - 21-253
24-2008           9-2-08    1                 21-19
29-2008           12-15-08  1                 16-101
30-2008           12-15-08  1                 24-176
31-2008           12-15-08  1                 18-27
                            2                 18-30
1-2009            1-20-09   1                 24-203
2-2009            1-20-09   1                 24-127
4-2009            1-20-09   1                 24-133
6-2009            2-2-09    1                 7-158
7-2009            2-3-09    1                 20-4
8-2009            2-16-09   1                 12-306
11-2009           3-16-09   1                 13-405 - 13-407, 13-409, 13-410
15-2009           5-4-09    1                 12-216
17-2009           7-20-09   1                 5-13
19-2009           9-8-09    1                 18-27
20-2009           9-21-09   1                 25-52
26-2009           11-16-09  1                 11-48
                            2                 11-52
27-2009           12-7-09   1                 13-407 - 13-410, 13-412
30-2009           12-7-09   1                 12-216
31-2009           12-7-09   1                 13-388
32-2009           12-7-09   1                 1-9
34-2009           12-21-09  1                 24-127
35-2009           12-21-09  1                 24-203
4-2010            2-15-10   1                 5-8
5-2010            4-5-10    1                 25-54
7-2010            4-19-10   1                 3-58
9-2010            5-3-10    1                 5-1
                            2                 5-2
                            3                 5-3
                            4                 5-4
                            5                 Repeals 5-6
                            6                 7-79
10-2010           5-17-10   1                 3-58
11-2010           8-16-10   1                 18-27
                            2                 18-30
13-2010           11-1-10   1                 11-113
14-2010           11-15-10  1                 3-58
17-2009 (revised) 1-3-11    1                 5-13
3-2011            4-4-11    1                 2-324
                            2                 2-325
6-2011            5-16-11   1                 5-115
11-2011           7-5-11    1                 13-220
15-2011           10-17-11  1                 3-58
19-2011           12-19-11  1                 24-127
20-2011           12-19-11  1                 24-203
1-2012            1-3-12    2                 12-400 - 12-404
6-2012            3-5-12    1                 3-36
                            2                 3-56
                            3                 3-58
7-2012            3-19-12   1                 3-58
9-2012            4-16-12   1                 3-36
                            2                 3-58
11-2012           5-7-12    2                 24-250
13-2012           6-4-12    1                 3-5
15-2012           6-4-12    1                 18-120
19-2012           8-7-12    1                 5-8
23-2012           9-4-12    1                 11-111
                            2                 Repeals 11-112
25-2012           9-4-12    1                 2-27
                            2                 2-47
                            3                 2-216
2-2013            1-22-13   1                 5-1
                            2                 5-2
                            3                 5-3
                            4                 5-4
                            5                 7-79
3-2013            1-22-13   1                 24-127
4-2013            1-22-13   1                 24-203
5-2013            1-22-13   1                 20-4
9-2013            6-3-13    1                 5-110
10-2013           5-20-13   1                 21-18
11-2013           6-3-13    1                 20-52
13-2013           6-17-13   1                 11-61
14-2013           8-19-13   1                 5-353
                            2                 5-362
                            3                 5-370
                            4                 5-384
15-2013           7-1-13    1                 3-58
26-2013           11-18-13  1                 3-36
31-2013           12-16-13  1                 3-56
32-2013           12-16-13  1                 24-127
4-2014            2-3-14    1                 25-21
                            2                 25-60
                            3                 25-100 - 25-105
5-2014            3-3-14    1                 5-400 - 5-406
6-2014            3-3-14    2                 13-601 - 13-605
7-2014            3-3-14    1                 5-407 - 5-413
8-2014            4-7-14    1                 5-353
                            2                 5-110
                            3                 5-112
10-2014           4-7-14    1                 18-27
19-2014           9-2-14    1                 3-58
21-2014           9-15-14   1                 3-56
                            2                 3-58
                            3                 3-36
22-2014           10-6-14   1                 3-58
26-2014           12-15-14  1                 24-203
27-2014           12-15-14  1                 24-127
28-2014           12-15-14  1                 3-56
                            2                 3-58
                            3                 3-36
4-2015            2-16-15   1                 12-355
6-2015            5-4-15    1                 13-4
8-2015            5-4-15    1                 5-108
                          2                 5-109
18-2015           8-17-15   1                 2-460 - 2-463
21-2015           9-8-15    1                 5-171
                          2                 24-14
22-2015           9-8-15    1                 3-56
                          2                 3-58
                          3                 3-36
6-2016            3-7-16    1                 13-500 - 13-512
12-2016           4-18-16   1                 5-8
14-2016           4-18-16   1                 21-222
15-2016           5-2-16    1                 3-56
                          2                 3-58
                          3                 3-36
16-2016           6-6-16    1                 3-56
                          2                 3-36
18-2016           6-6-16    1                 5-1
                          2                 5-2
                          3                 5-3
                          4                 5-4
                          5                 7-79
                          6                 5-5
                          7                 5-6
21-2016           7-18-16   1                 5-113
22-2016           8-15-16   1                 12-216
1-2017            1-3-17    1                 3-58
3-2017            1-17-17   1                 5-1
10-2017           4-17-17   1                 11-500 - 11-509
11-2017           4-17-17   2                 11-520, 11-521
13-2017           6-5-17    1                 3-58
14-2017           6-19-17   1                 3-58
18-2017           11-6-17   1                 13-504
                          2                 13-505
1-2018            1-2-18    1                 7-158
5-2018            2-5-18    1                 Repeals 11-39
6-2018            2-5-18    1                 13-1
10-2018           4-2-18    1                 3-58
14-2018           5-21-18   1                 11-261
15-2018           6-18-18   1                 Repeals 12-215
16-2018           7-16-18   1                 5-8
18-2018           7-16-18   1                 16-121
19-2018           8-20-18   1                 3-32
20-2018           8-20-18   1                 8-2
22-2018           8-20-18   1 - 7             5-1, 5-2, 5-3, 5-4, 5-5, 5-6, 7-
                                              79
23-2018           8-20-18   1                 21-221 - 21-246
24-2018           9-4-18  1�                11-550 - 11-557
26-2018           10-15-18  1                 3-58
29-2018           11-5-18   1                 1-9
30-2018           11-5-18   1                 13-388
32-2018           12-3-18   1                 5-80
35-2018           12-17-18  1                 24-203
4-2019            2-4-19    1                 12-216
6-2019            3-18-19   1                 3-58
16-2019           7-15-19   1                 11-320 - 11-325
19-2019           8-19-19   1                 5-81
20-2019           8-19-19   1 - 3             12-211, 12-216, 13-406
25-2019           10-7-19   1                 3-58
26-2019           11-4-19   1                 3-58
6-2020            6-15-20   1                 11-410, 11-411
9-2020            9-21-20   1                 11-78, 11-79
10-2020           10-19-20  1                 12-233
11-2020           10-19-20  1                 11-600 - 11-614
13-2020           12-21-20  1                 24-203
5-2021            6-21-21   1                 12-237
7-2021            7-19-21   1                 5-8
8-2021            7-19-21   1                 11-608
9-2021            7-19-21   1                 3-58
                          2                 3-60
                          3                 3-56
14-2021           8-16-21   1                 11-611.1, 11-611.2
16-2021           10-4-21   1                 25-21
                          2                 25-60
                          3                 25-100 - 25-105
17-2021           10-4-21   1                 11-620 - 11-622
18-2021           10-18-21  1                 11-134
                          2                 11-326
24-2021           12-6-21   1                 24-203
2-2022            1-18-22   1                 2-28
3-2022            2-7-22    1                 3-58
4-2022            3-7-22    1                 3-58
6-2022            4-18-22   1                 20-4
                          2                 24-135
                          3                 24-208
7-2022            4-18-22   1                 3-58
12-2022           6-6-22    1                 7-158
15-2022           8-15-22   1                 24-250
16-2022           8-15-22   1                 2-362
17-2022           8-15-22   1                 5-1
                          2                 5-2
                          3                 5-3
                          4                 5-4
                          5                 7-79
                          6                 5-5
                          7                 5-6
22-2022           9-6-22    1                 13-388
25-2022           12-5-22   1                 17-70
2-2023            2-6-23    1                 11-101
3-2023            2-6-23    1                 24-203
6-2023            3-6-23    1                 3-56
                          2                 3-36
                          3                 3-58
7-2023            6-19-23   1                 4-1 - 4-11, 4-20 - 4- 40
8-2023            6-21-23   1                 5-420 - 5-426
17-2023           9-5-23    1                 3-58
23-2023           11-6-23   1                 11-630 - 11-632
27-2023           11-20-23  1                 13-276 - 13-286
30-2023           12-18-23  1                 24-127
31-2023           12-18-23  1                 24-203
2-2024            1-16-24   2                 13-601 - 13-605
3-2024            1-16-24   1                 13-388
6-2024            1-16-24   2                 11-520, 11-521
7-2024            2-5-24    1                 Repeals 13-126 - 13-135
8-2024            2-5-24    1                 2-216
16-2024           5-6-24    1                 11-98
17-2024           5-6-24    1                 5-306
20-2024           7-15-24   1                 5-380
                          2                 5-384
23-2024           8-19-24   1                 19-3
                          2                 19-12
26-2024           10-21-24  1                 3-56
                          2                 3-36
                          3                 3-58
4-2025            3-3-25    1                 13-220
06-2025           4-7-25    1                 12-420 - 12-423
07-2025           4-21-25   1                 21-126 - 21-148
08-2025           4-7-25    1                 13-227
09-2025           10-6-25   1                 11-640 - 11-644
13-2025           4-21-25   1                 3-58
15-2025           6-16-25   1                 1-9
16-2025           6-16-25   1                 3-58
17-2025           7-21-25   1                 3-58
19-2025           8-18-25   1                 13-358
21-2025           9-2-25    1                 24-130
                                            
 
 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE
This table shows the location within this Code, either in the text or notes
following the text, of references to the Illinois Compiled Statutes.
ILCS Chapter Section Section this Code
ILCS Chapter Section                  Section this Code
            5/3                      12-233
            5/12-12                  12-276
5            120/1 et seq.            2-4
                                    2-403
            120/2.02, 120/2.03       2-74
            120/2.03                 2-75
            140/1 et seq.            2-5
10           5/1-1 et seq.            2-2
                                    Ch. 6
20           1605/1 et seq.           11-256
30           235/6                    2-244
            405/1 et seq.            24-156
            155/2, 155/3             11-36
35           505/1 et seq.            11-47
            636/5-1 et seq.          11-410
40           5/4-101 et seq.          7-56
50           705/1 et seq.            Ch. 18, Art. II
                                    18-31
            750/0.01 et seq.         2-401
                                    2-405
            750/15.4                 Ch. 2, Art. V, Div. 4
65           5/1-1-1                  Ch. 2
            5/1-1-2(2), 5/1-1-2.1    1-2
            5/1-2-1                  Ch. 2, Art. II, Div. 4
            5/1-2-4                  2-128-2-130
            5/1-2.1-6                13-383
            5/3-2-1 et seq.          Ch. 6
            5/3-2-2                  2-3
            5/3-5-1                  2-26
            5/3-5-1 et seq.          6-1
            5/3-5-9                  6-1
            5/3-7-3                  Ch. 2, Art. III, Div. 2
            5/3-8-1                  2-151
            5/3-8-3                  2-261
            5/3-9-4                  18-28
            5/3-10-1                 2-242
            5/3-10-1 et seq.         Ch. 2, Art. III, Div. 5
            5/3-10-2                 2-242
            5/3-10-3                 2-244
            5/3-10-7                 2-1
                                    2-217
            5/3-11-1 et seq.         2-49
            5/3-11-2                 2-52
            5/3-11-3                 2-160
            5/3-11-7                 2-48
            5/3-11-12                2-79
            5/3-11-13                2-75
            5/3-11-14                2-80 2-126
            5/3-11-15                2-48
            5/3-11-17, 5/3-11-18     2-126, 2-127
            5/3-11-19                2-127
            5/3-11-20                2-102
            5/3-11-25                Ch. 2, Art. III, Div. 6
            5/3-12-2                 2-49
                                    2-52
                                    2-80
                                    2-127
                                    2-160
            5/3-12-2 et seq.         2-48
            5/3-12-5                 1-2
            5/3-13-1 et seq.         2-216
            5/3-13-6                 2-47
            5/3-13-7                 2-27
            5/3-14-1                 2-152
            5/3-14-2                 2-159
            5/3-14-3                 Ch. 2, Art. III, Div. 5 2-46
                                    2-156, 2-157
            5/3-14-4                 2-103
            5/8-1-1 et seq.          Ch. 2, Art. IV 2-322
            5/8-1-8, 5/8-1-9         2-323
            5/8-1-11                 2-323
            5/8-1-12                 2-323
            5/8-1-14                 2-323
            5/8-11-1                 11-78
            5/8-11-5                 11-78
            5/8-11-4                 Ch. 13, Art. III
            5/8-11-7-5/8-11-9        11-36-11-38
            5/8-11-24                11-640, 11-641, 11-643
            5/9-1-1 et seq.          2-382
            5/9-2-1                  2-383
            5/9-2-1 et seq.          2-381, 2-382
            5/9-2-7                  2-385
            5/9-2-9 et seq.          2-388
            5/10-2.1-1 et seq.       2-361
                                    Ch. 18, Art. II
            5/11-11.1-1              10-47
            5/11-12-4 et seq.        Ch. 17
            5/11-13-1 et seq.        Ch. 25
            5/11-13-1.1              25-132
            5/11-13-5 et seq.        25-75
            5/11-13-12, 5/11-13-13   25-73
            5/11-13-14               25-33
            5/11-13-15               25-3
            5/11-20-7                14-10
            5/11-20-11               21-135
            5/11-20-12               21-135
            5/11-54.1-1 et seq.      11-164
            120/2.02                 2-387
70           3615/1.01 et seq.        11-57
210          45-1 et seq.             9-16
220          5/21-201(v)              21-221
            5/21-401, et seq.        21-222
            5/70-501 et seq.         11-430
            5/70-501(s)              11-432
            50/1 et seq.             21-236
            65/4                     21-225
225          10/2.09                  5-72
            320/0.01 et seq.         5-172
            445/1 et seq.            Ch. 18
            455/1 et seq.            11-301
            465/1 et seq.            Ch. 16
            46010.01 et seq.         16-152
230          15/1                     11-256
            15/1 et seq.             Ch. 11, Art. VII
            15/2                     11-256
            15/2(a)                  Ch. 11, Art. VII, Div. 2
            15/3                     11-282
                                    11-284
            15/3(1)                  11-281
            15/4(a)                  11-258
            15/5, 15/6               11-259, 11-260
            25/1 et seq.             11-256
            30/1 et seq.             11-9
            40/1 et seq.             3-5, 11-600, 11-601
235          5/1-1 et seq.            Ch. 3
                                    3-67
            5/4-1                    3-67
            5/4-1 et seq.            3-31
            5/4-4                    3-74
            5/6-2                    3-67
            5/6-11, 5/6-12           3-67
            5/6-16                   3-4
            5/6-20                   3-4
            5/6-25                   3-67
            5/7-5 et seq.            3-74
410                                  Ch. 9
            130/1 et seq.            12-401
            535/9, 535/10            9-1
            535/25                   9-1
            615/1 et seq.            Ch. 8
            620/1 et seq.            8-4
            705/1-1 et seq.          12-401, 25-21
            4155/8 et seq.           9-3
            5/9(c)                   7-3
            5/20 et seq.             Ch. 20
            5/23 et seq.             12-178
            20/1 et seq.             Ch. 20
            105/1 et seq.            Ch. 20
                                    20-10
420          20/1 et seq.             Ch. 20
425                                  Ch. 7
            30/1 et seq.             Ch. 7, Art. IV
430          35/1 et seq.             Ch. 20
            65/1 et seq.             12-152
505          100/2(5)                 14-10
605          5/1-101 et seq.          Ch. 21
            5/7-101                  21-6
625          5/1-59.1                 13-211
            5/1-100 et seq.          Ch. 13
                                    13-1
                                    13-224
                                    13-500
            5/1-157                  11-38
            5/1-159.1                13-211
            5/2-121                  Ch. 13, Art. III
            5/3-101 et seq.          13-6
            5/3-609                  13-211
            5/3-616                  13-211
            5/4-203                  13-277
            5/6-101                  13-277, 13-405
            5/6-303                  13-405
            5/11-100 et seq.         Ch. 13
            5/11-203                 13-36
            5/11-204                 13-405
            5/11-205(a), (f)         13-3
            5/11-205(b)              7-86
            5/11-205(b)—(e)        13-4
            5/11-206                 13-2
            5/11-207                 Ch. 13 13-57
            5/11-208                 Ch. 13
            5/11-208(a)(1)           Ch. 13, Art. V
            5/11-208(a)(2)           13-36
            5/11-208(a)(4)           13-58
            5/11-208(a)(8)           Ch. 13, Art. VIII
            5/11-208(a)(11)          13-159
            5/11-208(b)              13-57
            5/11-208.2               Ch. 13
            5/11-209                 13-8
            5/11-301                 13-57
                                    13-211
            5/11-301 et seq.         Ch. 13, Art. II, Div. 2
                                    13-57
            5/11-306                 13-500
            5/11-310                 19-72
            5/11-501                 13-405
            5/11-502                 13-405
            5/11-503                 13-156
            5/11-601 et seq.         Ch. 13, Art. IV, Div. 2
            5/11-708                 13-58
            5/11-1141                7-87
            5/11-1301 et seq.        Ch. 13, Art. V
            5/11-1301.1              13-208
            5/11-1301.2, 5/11-1301.3 13-211
            5/11-1302                13-201
            5/11-1303(b)             13-205
            5/11-1305                Ch. 13, Art. V 13.77
            5/11-1305 et seq.        13-203
            5/11-1306                Ch. 13, Art. V 13-77
            5/11-1411                7-84
            5/11-1412.1              13-158
            5/11-1501 et seq.        Ch. 13, Art. VIII
            5/11-1502                13-326
            5/11-1504                13-352
            5/11-1506                13-330
            5/11-1512                13-327
            5/11-1513                13-334
            5/12-100 et seq.         13-161
            5/12-203                 13-204
            5/15-111 et seq.         13-160
            5/18c-7402               13-351
            5/20-204                 13-1
705          35/1                     1-2
            405-1/1 et seq.          12-301
720          5/1-1 et seq.            11-301
                                    Ch. 12
            5/9-1 et seq.            Ch. 12, Art. II
            5/10-6                   12-303
            5/11-9   2            12-21
            5/11-14                  12-276
            5/11-14 et seq.          Ch. 12, Art. VI, Div. 4
            5/11-15, 5/11-16         12-277, 12-278
            5/11-17                  12-281
            5/11-18                  12-282
            5/11-19                  12-280
            5/11-20 et seq.          Ch. 12, Art. VI, Div. 3
            5/12-1, 5/12-2           12-26
            5/12-3 et seq.           12-27
            5/12-7.1                 12-182
            5/12-12                  12-282
            5/15-1 et seq.           Ch. 12, Art. III
            5/16-1                   12-71
            5/16-1 et seq.           Ch. 12, Art. III, Div. 2
            5/16-3                   12-74
            5/16B-2                  12-72
            5/16B-2.1                12-98
            5/17-1                   12-77
            5/19-2                   12-51
            5/21-1                   12-99
            5/21-1 et seq.           Ch. 12, Art. III, Div. 3
            5/21-1-5/21-1.2          12-97
            5/21-1.1                 7-2
            5/21-2 et seq.           12-96
            5/21.1-1 et seq.         12-184
            5/21.4                   12-97
            5/24-1                   12-153, 13-405
            5/24-1 et seq.           Ch. 12, Art. IV, Div. 2
            5/25-1                   12-180
            5/26(1)(a)(1)—(a)(3)   7-4
            5/26-1                   12-172
            5/26-1 et seq.           Ch. 12, Art. V
            5/26-1(a)(1)—(a)(3)    12-126
            5/28-1                   12-233, 12-234
            5/28-1 et seq.           Ch. 12, Art. VI, Div. 2
            5/28-1(b)                12-233
            5/28-2                   12-231
            5/28-3                   12-235
            5/28-5                   12-232
            5/30-1 et seq.           Ch. 12, Art. VIII
            5/31-1                   12-326
            5/31-6, 5/31-7           12-331
            5/31-8                   12-329
            5/31A-1.1                12-330
            365/1                    12-75
            370/1 et seq.            12-75
            505/1                    12-128
            535/1 et seq.            Ch. 12, Art. N, Div. 2 12-153
            555/1 et seq.            12-302
            550/3                    13-405
            570/101 et seq.          13-405
            600/2                    13-405
            605/1                    12-127
            635/0.01 et seq.         12-211
            675/1 et seq.            12-304
                                    Ch. 12, Art. IV, Div. 2
730          5/1-1-1 et seq.          12-301
            150/1 et seq.            9-17
735          5/3-101 et seq.          13-284
740          55/221 et seq.           Ch. 14
            115/1 et seq.            12-301
745          10/1-101                 2-161
765          205/0.01 et seq.         Ch. 22
            605/1 et seq.         Ch. 17, Art. III
                                    17-51
                                    17-55
                                    17-57
775          5/1-101 et seq.          Ch. 10
            5/3-102                  10-47
            5/3-103                  10-50
            5/3-104.1                10-49
            5/3-106                  10-47
            5/5-102, 5/5-103         10-51
                                     
 
