VILLAGE CODE
of
FOREST VIEW, ILLINOIS
1971
Code current through:
Ord. 25-28, passed December 9, 2025
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street * Suite 310 * Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-833-226-3439 * www.amlegal.com
PREFACE
   This code of the Village of Forest View, as supplemented, contains
ordinances up to and including ordinance 25-28, passed December 9, 2025.
Ordinances of the Village adopted after said ordinance supersede the provisions
of this code to the extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent therewith.
Consult the Village office in order to ascertain whether any particular
provision of the code has been amended, superseded or repealed.
      American Legal Publishing
      Cincinnati, Ohio
ORDINANCES PENDING REVIEW FOR CODIFICATION
Listed ordinances have been passed, but they are pending review by the
publisher, and they may not amend the code of ordinances. Additionally,
ordinances listed in this section may not show the original ordinances in their
entirety. Please contact the office of the clerk if there are any questions
concerning any listed ordinances.
 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE #71-268
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING THE VILLAGE CODE OF FOREST VIEW, ILLINOIS
   1971
   BE IT ORDAINED BY THE PRESIDENT AND BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF THE VILLAGE OF
FOREST VIEW, COOK COUNTY, ILLINOIS:
   SECTION ONE: That the Village Code of Forest View, Illinois, 1971, be and
the same is hereby adopted.
   Said Village Code is to read as follows:
   SECTION TWO: All general ordinances or parts of general ordinances in
conflict with the provisions of said Village Code of Forest View, Illinois,
1971, except as specifically saved from repeal or otherwise excepted by the
terms of said Village Code, be and the same are hereby repealed.
   SECTION THREE: This ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and
after its passage, approval and publication in pamphlet form in the manner
provided by law.
   AYES: Coates, Gilbertsen, Klich, Good, Najfus
   NAYS: none
   PASSED & APPROVED this 14th day of December, 1971.
[image]
TITLE 1
ADMINISTRATIVE
CHAPTER 1
OFFICIAL CODE
SECTION:
1-1-1: Title
1-1-2: Acceptance
1-1-3: Amendments
1-1-4: Interpretations
1-1-5: Code Alteration
1-1-1: TITLE:
Upon adoption by the Board of Trustees this Village Code is hereby declared to
be and shall hereafter constitute the official Village Code of the Village of
Forest View. This Village Code of Ordinances shall be known and cited as the
Forest View Municipal Code, and it is hereby published by authority of the
Board of Trustees and shall be kept up to date as provided in Section
1-1-3 of this Chapter under the direction of the Village Attorney, acting for
said Village Board of Trustees. Any reference to the number of any Section
contained herein shall be understood to refer to the position of the same
number, its appropriate Chapter and Title heading, and to the general penalty
clause relating thereto, as well as to the Section itself, when reference is
made to this Village Code by title in any legal document. (1971 Code)
1-1-2: ACCEPTANCE:
This Village Code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be
received without further proof in all courts and in all administrative
tribunals of this State as the ordinances of the Village of general and
permanent effect, except the excluded ordinances enumerated in Section
1-2-1 of this Title 1 . (1971 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/1-2-6.
1-1-3: AMENDMENTS:
Any ordinance amending this Village Code shall set forth the title, chapter and
section number of the section or sections to be amended, and this shall
constitute a sufficient compliance with any statutory requirement pertaining to
the amendment or revision by ordinance of any part of this Village Code. All
such amendments or revisions by ordinance shall be immediately forwarded to the
codifiers and the said ordinance material shall be prepared for insertion in
its proper place in each copy of this Village Code. Each such replacement page
shall be properly identified and shall be inserted in each individual copy of
the Village Code within thirty (30) days from the date of its final passage.
(1971 Code)
1-1-4: INTERPRETATIONS:
In the determination of the provisions of each section of this Code the
following rules shall be observed:
   (A)   Intent To Defraud: Whenever an intent to defraud is required in order
to constitute an offense, it shall be sufficient if an intent appears to
defraud any person.
   (B)   Liability Of Employers And Agents: When the provisions of any section
of this Village Code prohibits the commission of an act, not only the person
actually doing the prohibited act or omitting the directed act, but also the
employer and all other persons concerned with or in aiding or abetting the said
person shall be guilty of the offense described and liable to the penalty set
forth. (1971 Code)
1-1-5: CODE ALTERATION:
It shall be deemed unlawful for any person to alter, change, replace or deface
in any way any section or any page of this Village Code in such a manner that
the meaning of any phrase or order may be changed or omitted. Replacement pages
may be inserted according to the official instructions when so authorized by
the Village Board. The Clerk shall see that the replacement pages are properly
inserted in the official copies maintained in the office of the Clerk.
Any person having in his custody an official copy of this Village Code shall
make every effort to maintain said Code in an up to date and efficient manner.
He shall see to the immediate insertion of new or replacement pages when such
are delivered to him or made available to him through the office of the Village
Clerk. Said Code Books, while in actual possession of officials and other
interested persons, shall be and remain the property of the Village and shall
be returned to the office of the Clerk when directed so to do by order of the
Village Board. (1971 Code)
CHAPTER 2
SAVINGS CLAUSE
SECTION:
1-2-1: Repeal Of General Ordinances
1-2-2: Public Utility Ordinances
1-2-3: Court Proceedings
1-2-1: REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES:
All general ordinances of the Village passed prior to the adoption of this
Village Code are hereby repealed, except such as are referred to herein as
being still in force or are by necessary implication herein reserved from
repeal (subject to the saving clauses contained in the following Section), from
which are excluded the following ordinances which are not hereby repealed: tax
levy ordinances; appropriation ordinances; ordinances relating to boundaries
and annexations; franchise ordinances and other ordinances granting special
rights to persons or corporations; contract ordinances and ordinances
authorizing the execution of a contract or the issuance of warrants; salary
ordinances; ordinances establishing, naming or vacating streets, alleys or
other public places; improvement ordinances; bond ordinances; ordinances
relating to elections; ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of
real estate by or from the Village; and all special ordinances. (1971 Code)
1-2-2: PUBLIC UTILITY ORDINANCES:
No ordinance relating to railroads or railroad crossings with streets and other
public ways, or relating to the conduct, duties, service or rates of public
utilities shall be repealed by virtue of the adoption of this Village Code or
by virtue of the preceding section, excepting as this Village Code may contain
provisions for such matters, in which case this Village Code shall be
considered as amending such ordinance or ordinances in respect to such
provisions only. (1971 Code)
1-2-3: COURT PROCEEDINGS:
   (A)   No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a former
ordinance, whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not, as to
any offense committed against such former ordinance or as to any act done, any
penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued or claim
arising under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any such
offense or act so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture or
punishment so incurred or any right accrued or claim arising before the new
ordinance takes effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter shall conform
to the ordinance in force at the time of such proceeding, so far as
practicable. If any penalty, forfeiture or punishment be mitigated by any
provision of a new ordinance, such provision may be, by the consent of the part
affected, applied to any judgment announced after the new ordinance takes
effect.
   (B)   This Section shall extend to all repeals, either by express words or
implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making any new provisions
upon the same subject or in any other ordinance.
   (C)   Nothing contained in this Chapter shall be construed as abating any
action now pending under or by virtue of any general ordinance of the Village
herein repealed and the provisions of all general ordinances contained in this
Code shall be deemed to be continuing provisions and not a new enactment of the
same provision; nor shall this Chapter be deemed as discontinuing, abating,
modifying or altering any penalty accrued or to accrue, or as affecting the
liability of any person, firm or corporation, or as waiving any right of the
Village under any ordinance or provision thereof in force at the time of the
adoption of this Village Code. (1971 Code)
CHAPTER 3
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
1-3-1: Construction Of Words
1-3-2: Definitions
1-3-1: CONSTRUCTION OF WORDS:
Whenever any word in any section of this Village Code importing the plural
number is used in describing or referring to any matters, parties, or persons,
any single matter, party, or person shall be deemed to be included, although
distributive words may not have been used.
When any subject matter, party or person is referred to in this Village Code by
words importing the singular number only, or the masculine gender, several
matters, parties, or persons and females as well as males and bodies corporate
shall be deemed to be included; provided, that these rules of construction
shall not be applied to any section of this Village Code which contains any
express provision excluding such construction or where the subject matter or
content may be repugnant thereto. (1971 Code)
1-3-2: DEFINITIONS:
Whenever the following words or terms are used in this Code they shall have the
meanings herein ascribed to them, unless the context makes such meaning
repugnant thereto:
AGENT: A person acting on behalf of another.
BOARD: Unless otherwise indicated, the Board of Trustees of the Village.
CODE: The Municipal Code of Forest View and amendments thereto.
COUNTY: County of Cook.
EMPLOYEES: Whenever reference is made in this Code to a Village employee by
title only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words "of the
Village of Forest View".
FEE: A sum of money charged by the Village for the carrying on of a business,
profession or occupation.
KNOWINGLY: The word "knowingly" imports only a knowledge that the facts exist
which brings the act or omission within the provisions of this Code. It does
not require any knowledge of the unlawfulness of such act or omission.
LICENSE: The permission granted for the carrying on of a business, profession
or occupation.
MISDEMEANOR: Any offense deemed a violation of the provisions of this Code
which is a lesser offense than a felony as defined by State law.
NEGLIGENT: The word "negligent", as well as "neglect", "negligence" and
"negligently" imports a want of such attention to the nature of probable
consequences of the act or omission as a prudent man ordinarily bestows in
acting in his own concern.
NUISANCE: Anything offensive or obnoxious to the health and welfare of the
inhabitants of the Village; or any act or thing repugnant to, or creating a
hazard to, or having a detrimental effect on the property of another person or
to the community.
OCCUPANT: The word "occupant" applied to a building or land shall include any
person who occupies the whole or any part of such building or land whether
alone or with others.
OFFENSE: Any act forbidden by any provision of this Code or the omission of any
act required by the provisions of this Code.
OFFICERS: Whenever reference is made in this Code to a Village officer by title
only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words "of the Village
of Forest View".
OPERATOR: The person who is in charge of any operation, business or profession.
OWNER: The word "owner" applied to a building or land shall include any part
owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or lessee of the whole or of
a part of such building or land.
PERSON: Any natural individual, firm, trust, partnership, association, or
corporation in his or its own capacity or as administrator, conservator,
executor, trustee, receiver or other representative appointed by the court.
Whenever the word "person" is used in any section of this Code prescribing a
penalty or fine as applied to partnerships or associations, the word shall
include the partners or members thereof, and such word as applied to
corporations shall include the officers, agents, or employees thereof who are
responsible for any violation of said section.
PERSONAL PROPERTY: Every description of money, goods, chattels, effects,
evidence of rights in action and all written instruments by which any pecuniary
obligation, right or title to property is created, acknowledged, transferred,
increased, defeated, discharged or diminished and every right or interest
therein.
RETAILER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate
to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things in small quantities
direct to the consumer.
STATE: The State of Illinois.
STREET: Alleys, lanes, courts, boulevards, public squares, public places and
sidewalks.
TENANT: The word "tenant" when applied to a building or land shall include any
person who occupies the whole or any part of such building or land whether
alone or with others.
VILLAGE: The Village of Forest View, County of Cook, State of Illinois.
WHOLESALER, WHOLESALE DEALER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be
understood to relate to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things in
quantity to persons who purchase for the purpose of resale.
WILFULLY: When applied to the intent with which an act is done or omitted,
implies simply a purpose or willingness to commit the act or make the omission
referred to. It does not require any intent to violate law, or to injure
another, or to acquire an advantage.
WRITTEN, IN WRITING: May include printing and any other mode of representing
words and letters, but when the written signature of any person is required by
law to any official or public writing or bond required by law, it shall be in
the proper handwriting of such person, or in case he is unable to write, by his
proper mark. (1940 Code Sec. 1-3; 1971 Code)
CHAPTER 4
PENALTY
SECTION:
1-4-1: Penalty
1-4-2: Default; Labor
1-4-3: License
1-4-4: Application
1-4-5: Liability Of Officers
1-4-6: Nonsufficient Funds (NSF) Checks
1-4-1: PENALTY:
   (A)   Whenever in any ordinance or provision of this Code any act is
prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or whenever in
such ordinance or provision the doing of any act is required or the failure to
do any act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is provided
therefor, the violation of any such provision or ordinance shall be punishable
by a fine not exceeding of not less than two hundred and fifty dollars
($250.00) or more than unless provided elsewhere by separate offense.
   (B)   A subsequent violation of an ordinance occurring within a twelve (12)-
month period shall be punishable by a fine of not less than five hundred
dollars ($500.00) or more than one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00).
   (C)    A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day a violation
occurs or continues 1 . (Ord. 64-89, 2-25-1964; amd. Ord. 95-23, 10-10-1995;
Ord. 24-17, 12-10-2024)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/1-2-1.
1-4-2: DEFAULT; LABOR:
Any person in default of payment of any fine or costs imposed may be committed
to the County jail until the fine, penalty and costs are fully paid. Any person
imprisoned under the provisions of this Chapter may put to work for the benefit
of the Village for the term of his imprisonment. The committed person shall be
allowed, exclusive of board, a credit as provided by statute for each day's
work 1 . (1971 Code)
 
Notes
1 2. 65 ILCS 5/1-2-9.
1-4-3: LICENSE:
When a person is convicted of a violation of any section of this Code any
license previously issued to him by the Village may be revoked by the court or
by the Board of Trustees. (1971 Code)
1-4-4: APPLICATION:
The penalty provided in this Chapter shall be applicable to every section of
this Code the same as though it were a part of each and every separate section.
Any person convicted of a violation of any section of this Code where any duty
is prescribed or obligation imposed, or where any act which is of a continuing
nature is forbidden or declared to be unlawful, shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day such
duty or obligation remains unperformed or such act continues, unless otherwise
specifically provided in this Code.
In all cases where the same offense is made punishable or is created by
different clauses or sections of this Code the prosecuting officer may elect
under which to proceed; but not more than one recovery shall be had against the
same person for the same offense; provided, that the revocation of a license or
permit shall not be considered a recovery or penalty so as to bar any other
penalty being enforced.
Whenever the doing of any act or the omission to do any act constitutes a
breach of any section or provision of this Code and there shall be no fine or
penalty specifically declared for such breach, the provisions of this Chapter
shall apply and a separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day
during or on which a breach or violation occurs or continues. (1971 Code)
1-4-5: LIABILITY OF OFFICERS:
No provision of this Code designating the duties of any officer or employee
shall be so construed as to make such officer or employee liable for any fine
or penalty provided for a failure to perform such duty, unless the intention of
the Board of Trustees to impose such fine or penalty on such officer or
employee is specifically and clearly expressed in the section creating the
duty. (1971 Code)
1-4-6: NONSUFFICIENT FUNDS (NSF) CHECKS:
   (A)   Any check made payable to the Village, or any of its departments, and
deposited in the bank, or other financial institution, which results in
inability to pay the item, for any reason, shall be deemed nonsufficient funds
(NSF). The maker of the check shall be charged a fee of ten dollars ($10.00),
or rate as set by the Board from time to time, plus the face value of the
instrument returned, for any reason, to the Village by a bank or other
financial institution.
   (B)   The maker of the dishonored check shall make restitution to the
Village for the face value of the check plus a collection fee of ten dollars
($10.00), or fee set by the Board from time to time, per returned check. (Ord.
95-24, 10-10-1995)
CHAPTER 5
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
SECTION:
1-5-1: Officers Of The Village
1-5-2: Oath And Bond
1-5-3: Take Office; Vacancy
1-5-4: Delivery Of Records To Successor
1-5-5: Salaries
1-5-6: Longevity Salary Increments (Rep. by Ord. 78-6, 4-4-1978)
1-5-7: Sick Leave; Bereavement Leave
1-5-8: Salaries And Benefits; Full-Time And Part-Time Personnel
1-5-9: Illinois Municipal Retirement Fund
1-5-10: Full Time Employee Of The Public Works Department
1-5-11: Overtime/Compensatory Time Policy For All Eligible Village Employees
1-5-12: Residency Requirement For Police And Fire Department Members
1-5-13: Outside Employment
1-5-1: OFFICERS OF THE VILLAGE:
There shall be elected, as provided by law, a President and six (6) Trustees to
the Village Board. The President, with the advice and consent of the Board of
Trustees, may appoint a Treasurer, Attorney, Chief of Police, Chief of the Fire
Department and such other officers as may be necessary to carry on the good
government of the Village. (Ord. 78-5, 4-4-1978)
All newly elected officers shall take office at the conclusion of the business
portion of the Village's last regular meeting in the month of April, following
the election. If official election results are not received from the County
Clerk before the Village's last regular meeting in the month of April, the
terms of elected Municipal officers shall commence at the first regular or
special meeting of Corporate Authorities after receipt of official election
results from the County Clerk. Newly elected officers shall take office
immediately following the Village Board's adjournment sine die. (Ord. 09-02, 2-
10-2009)
1-5-2: OATH AND BOND:
Election of officers herein named shall be in accordance with the laws of the
State and the officers elected shall take oath and give bond in accordance with
the State law. Officers and committee men holding appointive positions shall,
when the State law so directs, take oath and give bond in like manner. (1940
Code Sec. 2-15)
1-5-3: TAKE OFFICE; VACANCY:
Appropriate officers shall be appointed and qualified at the first meeting of
the fiscal year. If their office becomes vacant, a successor shall be appointed
for the duration of the term of office. (1940 Code Sec. 2-15)
1-5-4: DELIVERY OF RECORDS TO SUCCESSOR:
   (A)   Every person retiring from office after having been an officer of the
Village shall, within five (5) days after notification and request, deliver to
his successor in office all property, books and effects of every description in
his possession belonging to the Village or appertaining to his office.
   (B)   All employees of the Village, including policemen and firemen, upon
termination of their employment, shall return to their department heads all
property, books and effects of every description in their possession belonging
to the Village.
Notice of the above and type of Village equipment or property concerned shall
be posted by all department heads. (Ord. 63-85, 9-10-1963)
1-5-5: SALARIES:
   (A)   Generally: The compensation paid the elected and appointed officials
of the Village and of the various employees thereof shall be set from time to
time by the President and Board of Trustees. (1971 Code)
   (B)   Elected Officials:
      1.   Village President: Any individual elected President of the Board of
Trustees of the Village at the April 1989 election, and any individual elected
or appointed President thereafter, shall receive a compensation of five
thousand dollars ($5,000.00) per year. Any individual elected President of the
Board of Trustees at the April 2025 Election, and any individual elected or
appointed President thereafter shall receive a compensation of $10,000.
      2.   Board Of Trustees: Any individual elected trustee of the village at
the April 1989 election, and any individual elected or appointed trustee
thereafter, shall receive a compensation of two thousand five hundred dollars
($2,500.00) per year. Any individual elected Trustee of the Village at the
April 2023 Election, and any individual elected or appointed Trustee thereafter
shall receive a compensation of $5,000.
   (C)   Reimbursement For Expenses Incurred: Elected officials shall be
advanced or reimbursed for the actual and reasonable expenses incurred by
individual elected officials in attending state, local, regional or national
conferences, seminars and similar events as approved by the board of trustees.
“Actual and reasonable expenses” for conferences in excess of seventy five (75)
miles radius of the village are those reasonably anticipated for travel,
lodging and per diem expenses as established by the board from time to time.
Expenditures for travel, lodging, meals and parking shall not be considered
reimbursable expenses for conferences within seventy five (75) miles radius of
the village. Conference registration shall be an advanced or reimbursable
expense regardless of the distance traveled.
      1.   After a meeting for which money was advanced to an elected official,
such official shall submit itemized expense vouchers showing the amount of his
actual expenses. Receipts shall be attached where possible. Officials seeking
reimbursement shall submit similar evidence of expenses actually incurred.
      2.   If the actual and reasonable expenses exceed the amount advanced,
the official shall be reimbursed for the amount not advanced. If the actual and
reasonable expenses are less than the amount advanced, the official shall
refund the excess amount.
      3.   No money for expenses shall be advanced nor shall any official be
reimbursed for any expenses incurred on behalf of any person other than the
official. (Ord. 87-12, 9-1-1987; amd. Ord. 97-19, 10-28-1997; Ord. 22-16, 7-26-
2022)
1-5-6: LONGEVITY SALARY INCREMENTS:
(Rep. by Ord. 78-6, 4-4-1978)
1-5-7: SICK LEAVE; BEREAVEMENT LEAVE:
   (A)   For purposes of this section, the term "sick leave" shall mean an
employee's personal illness requiring confinement at home or in the hospital.
The term "employee" means any person drawing a full time salary from the
village and does not include an elected official of the village. (Ord. 91-13,
8-27-1991)
   (B)   All employees other than firefighters shall be entitled to ninety six
(96) hours of sick leave for each calendar year (the equivalent of twelve 8-
hour days). After January 1, 2000, those employees will be allotted eighty (80)
hours of sick leave days for each calendar year (the equivalent of ten 8-hour
days). Firefighters shall be entitled to one hundred forty four (144) hours of
sick leave for each calendar year (the equivalent of eighteen 8-hour days).
After January 1, 2000, firefighters shall be allotted one hundred twenty (120)
hours of sick leave for each calendar year (the equivalent of fifteen 8-hour
days). Corporate authorities or department heads may require a physician's
certificate as a basis for pay during leave after an absence of three (3)
consecutive days in the case of employees except firefighters, or two (2)
consecutive shift days in the case of firefighters. The accumulation rate shall
be prorated at eight (8) hours per month (the equivalent of one 8-hour day) for
all employees other than firefighters. After January 1, 2000, for those
employees (other than firefighters), the accumulation rate shall be one 8-hour
sick day for each of the first ten (10) months of the calendar year and none
for the remaining two (2) months. Firefighters shall accumulate sick leave at
twelve (12) hours per month (the equivalent of 1.5 8-hour days). After January
1, 2000, firefighters shall accumulate sick leave at ten (10) hours per month
throughout the calendar year. (Ord. 98-14, 11-10-1998)
   (C)   Sick time may be used in increments of at least one-half (1/2) day for
all employees except firefighters, and eight (8) hours in the case of
firefighters. (Ord. 91-2, 2-12-1991, eff. retroactive to 1-1-1991; amd. Ord.
96-1, 1-9-1996)
   (D)   Employees (other than firefighters) may accumulate up to a maximum of
four hundred eighty (480) hours of unused sick leave (the equivalent of sixty
8-hour days). After January 1, 2000, employees (other than firefighters), may
accumulate up to a maximum of eight hundred (800) hours of sick leave (the
equivalent of one hundred 8-hour days). Firefighters may accumulate up to a
maximum of six hundred seventy two (672) hours of unused sick leave (the
equivalent of eighty four 8-hour days). After January 1, 2000, firefighters may
accumulate up to a maximum of one thousand one hundred twenty (1,120) hours of
unused sick leave (the equivalent of one hundred forty 8-hour days). (Ord. 98-
14, 11-10-1998)
   (E)   At retirement, any employee who qualifies for a Village retirement
plan shall be entitled to "cash in" one-third (1/3) of any accumulated sick
days for their current cash value, or may utilize two-thirds (2/3) of those
days as service credit toward retirement. (Ord. 97-3, 1-28-1997)
   In the event of termination, resignation or any other discontinuation of
employment, unused sick leave is lost without any form of compensation. (Ord.
91-2, 2-12-1991, eff. retroactive to 1-1-1991; amd. Ord. 96-1, 1-9-1996)
   (F)   In addition to the sick leave, vacation and compensatory time
authorized in this chapter, the Village Board may, in its discretion, authorize
an employee, other than a firefighter, with a verified, extended illness who
has expended all of his or her accumulated sick leave, vacation and
compensatory time to utilize up to ninety six (96) hours of the employee's sick
leave for the following year. The Village Board may, in its discretion,
authorize a firefighter with a verified, extended illness who has expended all
of his or her accumulated sick leave, vacation and compensatory time to utilize
up to one hundred forty four (144) hours of the firefighter's sick leave for
the following year. (Ord. 93-30, 11-9-1993)
   (G)   Full time employees shall be entitled to up to three (3) days of
bereavement leave (one 24-hour shift in the case of firefighters) when the
employee experiences a death in the immediate family. The Village may require
proof of death. For purposes of this section "immediate family" shall include
parents, spouse, brothers, sisters, children, stepchildren, grandparents,
grandchildren, parents-in-law, brothers-in-law, sisters-in-law and legal
guardians. (Ord. 91-13, 8-27-1991)
1-5-8: SALARIES AND BENEFITS; FULL-TIME AND PART-TIME PERSONNEL:
   (A)   Police Department: The full-time non-union members and employees of
the Police Department of the Village shall receive annual salaries and benefits
as follows:
                        Annual Salary
      1.   Chief of Police          $120,681
      2.   Part-Time Personnel: Non-certified part-time police personnel shall
be compensated at the rate of twenty-one dollars and thirty four cents ($21.34)
per hour. Upon certification as required by P.A. 89-170 (Part Time
Authorization and Training), part-time police personnel shall be compensated at
twenty-six dollars and thirty-four cents ($26.34) per hour. Non-certified part-
time police personnel shall be compensated at twenty-seven and sixty two cents
($27.62) per hour for training required toward certification under P.A. 89-170
(Part Time Police Authorization and Training).
      3.   Chief of Police Clothing Allowance: The clothing allowance shall be
one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) covering the twelve-month period of July 1st
thru June 30th of each salary ordinance year. A lump sum check shall be issued
to eligible employees, or given on a pro-rated basis. The Chief of Police shall
have the discretion to purchase clothing for Part-Time Personnel and Records
Clerks in an amount not to exceed five hundred fifty dollars ($550.00) per
employee.
                        Annual Salary
      4.   Records Clerk         $41,400
      5.   The records clerk shall be subject to emergency callback by the
Chief of Police. All such callback time shall be paid according to federal law.
   (B)   Fire Department: The full-time and part-time non-union members and
employees of the Fire Department of the Village shall receive annual salaries
and benefits as follows:
                        Annual Salary
      1.   Fire Chief             $109,710
      The Part-Time members of the Fire Department of the Village shall be paid
the hourly rates as follows:
      2.   Deputy Fire Chief (Effective on or after February 12, 2019): Thirty-
one dollars and twenty-one cents ($31.21) per hour.
      3.   Firefighter Tier I (Hired Prior to April 28, 2015):
      Part-Time firefighter personnel who obtain both a current EMT license and
Firefighter II certification shall be compensated at twenty-six dollars and
forty-eight cents ($26.48) per hour.
      4.   Firefighter Tier II (Hired on or after April 28, 2015):
      OFSM Firefighter II/Basic and IDPH EMT-Basic - Eighteen dollars and ten
cents ($18.10) per hour.
      Part-Time Firefighters/paramedics may not be scheduled more than 29 hours
a week. Incentive adjustments will be calculated on May 1st of each year, and
increased to coincide with annual Section 1-5-8 amendments. No mid-year
adjustments will be made.
      5.   Fire Inspector: Twenty-five dollars and eighty-three cents ($25.83)
per hour.
      Per Hour Incentives:
         (a)   Lieutenant - thirty-six cents ($0.36) per hour.
         (b)   OSFM Vehicle and Machinery Operations and OSFM Fire Service
Vehicle Operator - thirty-six cents ($0.36) per hour.
         (c)   MABAS Specialty Team (good standing with Haz-Mat, TRT, Dive,
Origin, Training) - thirty-six cents ($0.36) per hour.
         (d)   OSFM Firefighter III/Advanced - thirty-six cents ($0.36) per
hour.
         (e)   Per year of service - seventeen cents ($0.17) per hour.
         (f)   OSFM Fire Apparatus Engineer and OSFM Fire Service Vehicle
Operator - One dollar and twenty-three cents ($1.23) per hour.
         (g)   OSFM Fire Officer I - One dollar and twenty-seven cents ($1.27)
per hour.
         (h)   IDPH Paramedic - Two dollars and sixty cents ($2.60) per hour.
      6.   Clothing Allowance: The clothing allowance for the Fire Chief shall
be one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) covering the twelve-month period of July
1st thru June 30th of each salary ordinance year. A lump sum check shall be
issued to eligible employees, or given on a pro-rated basis.
   (C)   Public Works Department: The full-time non-union members and employees
of the Public Works Department of the Village shall receive annual salaries and
benefits as follows:
 Annual Salary Hourly Rate
                                                Annual Salary Hourly Rate
1.   Superintendent Of Public Works And Water$91,080
2.   Assistant Superintendent Of Public Works$75,348
3.   Class “C” Water Operator I:                       $34.16
4.   Full-Time Public Works Maintenance Worker:
(a)   Public Works Maintenance Worker I                    $25.89
(b)   Public Works Maintenance Worker II                   $27.96
(c)   Public Works Maintenance Worker III                  $31.00
 
      5.   Part-Time Public Works Maintenance Worker: The Part-Time Public
Works Maintenance Worker, including janitorial employees, shall be compensated
at twenty-one dollars and thirty-four cents ($21.34) per hour for regular hours
worked. Compensation for work performed during weekend events and holidays
shall be at a rate of thirty-two dollars and one cent ($32.01) per hour, which
represents time-and-a-half compensation.
      6.   Seasonal Part-Time Public Works Maintenance Worker: Seasonal Part-
Time Public Works Maintenance Workers shall be compensated at twenty dollars
and two cents ($20.02) per hour.
      7.   Clothing Allowance: The clothing allowance for the Full-Time
employees (i.e. Superintendent, Assistant Superintendent, Class “C” Operator
and Full-Time Public Works Employee) of the Public Works Department shall be
four hundred dollars ($400.00) covering the twelve-month period of July 1st
thru June 30th of each salary ordinance year. A lump sum check shall be issued
to eligible employees, or given on a pro-rated basis. The Superintendent of
Water and Public Works shall have the discretion to purchase clothing for Part-
Time Maintenance Workers in an amount not to exceed four hundred dollars
($400.00) per employee.
      8.   Public Works employees shall be subject to emergency callback by the
Superintendent of Water and Public Works. All such callback time shall be paid
according to federal law.
   (D)   Village Office:
 
                                                        Annual Salary
1.   Finance Manager (also known as Village Accountant$92,840
2.   Office Manager:                                  $74,313
3.   Part-Time Office Assistant:                      $21.74 per hour
 
   (E)   Callback Policy:
      1.   The following employees shall not be compensated for overtime on
callback time: Chief of Police, Fire Chief, Superintendent of Public Works and
Water, and Assistant Superintendent of Public Works and Water.
   (F)   Tuition Reimbursement Program: Any tuition reimbursement request from
Non-FOP Full-Time employees to obtain an associate’s degree shall be approved
by the Village President and Board of Trustees on a case-by-case basis.
   (G)   Paid Vacation and Personal Days:
      1.   Vacation Days Tier I (Hired on or before May 31, 2021): All Full-
Time employees shall be entitled to annual vacation periods without loss of
compensation, on the following basis:
         Ten (10) days after one full year of service.
         Fifteen (15) days after three (3) full years of service.
         Twenty (20) days after ten (10) full years of service.
         Twenty-one (21) days after twenty-one (21) full years of service.
         Twenty-two (22) days after twenty-two (22) full years of service.
         Twenty-three (23) days after twenty-three (23) full years of service.
      2.   Vacation Days Tier II (Hired on or after June 1, 2021): All full-
time employees shall be entitled to annual vacation periods without loss of
compensation, on the following basis. Vacation days are earned at the beginning
of the calendar year. Should employees be hired during the calendar year,
vacation days will be prorated based on when they were hired.
         Ten (10) days from date of hire, to five (5) years of service
         Fifteen (15) days from six (6) years of service, to nine (9) years of
service.
         Seventeen (17) days from ten (10) years of service, to fourteen (14)
years of service.
         Twenty (20) days from fifteen (15) years of service, to nineteen (19)
years of service.
         Twenty-two (22) days from twenty (20) years of service, to twenty-five
(25) years of service.
         Twenty-five (25) days for twenty-six (26) years of service and above.
         The Village Administrator, Chief of Police, Fire Chief, and
Superintendent of Public Works and Water shall be awarded 6 extra vacation days
above and beyond the amount earned for years of service.
         Vacation days may be carried over into the following calendar year,
not to exceed five (5) extra days total. Therefore, the maximum amount of
vacation days an employee can have will be based on the number of days they
earn for their years of service in their respective tier, plus five (5) days.
Should a situation arise where an employee has not used all of their vacation
time in the current year, or has run out of vacation time and would like to
take extra vacation days, permission to roll over the days or take more than
the allotted vacation time will be addressed on a case by case basis by the
Village Administrator and Village President. See the appendices at the end of
the ordinance.
      3.   Paid Sick Time:
         The number of paid sick days shall be twelve (12) per year. The
Village Administrator may require a physician’s certificate as a basis for pay
during a leave of absence for sick leave of three of more consecutive days.
Sick leave must be used in increments of at least one-half days. Employees may
accumulate up to one hundred (100) days of sick leave.
         Sick days are earned at the beginning of the calendar year. Should
employees be hired during the calendar year, sick days will be prorated based
on when they were hired.
      4.   Personal Days:
         Full-time employees will receive five (5) personal days off with pay
each year. Employees must make every effort to use the Personal Days during the
calendar year and may not carry over the Personal Days to the following
calendar year unless written permission is granted by the Village
Administrator.
         Personal days shall be initially selected on a seniority basis in
conjunction with the selection of vacation days. Thereafter, personal days
shall be selected on a first come-first served basis.
         No more than one (1) employee per department may be off on a personal
day leave at any one time. Employees must give the Employer at least forty-
eight (48) hours' notice of a personal day leave request. Such request will not
be unreasonably denied.
         Personal days are earned at the beginning of the calendar year. Should
employees be hired during the calendar year, personal days will be prorated
based on when they were hired.
   (H)   Hospitalization and Other Insurance:
      The Full-Time employees of the Village and their dependents shall be
eligible for participation in the medical and hospitalization insurance plan
provided by the Village, after eighty-nine (89) days’ service of their
employment. In addition, all Full-Time employees shall be eligible for
participation in the Village life insurance plan. All Full-Time employees of
the Village and their dependents shall be eligible for participation, after
eighty-nine (89) days’ service, in the group prescription drug and vision
service programs.
      1.    Health Insurance: Full-Time employees of the Village and their
dependents shall be eligible to participate in the current Village sponsored
health plan. Full-Time employee contribution toward that Plan shall be 15% of
the actual premium cost of their respective market category premium, or as
determined by the Village President and Board of Trustees from time to time,
irrespective if the Full-Time employee’s enrollment in any of the villages’s
health plan options.
      2.    Dental and Vision Insurance: Full-Time employees of the Village and
their dependents shall be eligible to participate in the dental and vision
insurance plan. Full-Time employees shall contribute 15% of the actual premium
cost of their respective market category premium, or as determined by the
Village President and Board of Trustees from time to time. The Village has
determined that these plans are “bundled” and as such all types of coverage
cannot be split.
   (I)   Part-Time Employees: Unless otherwise specified, all other persons
employed by the Village shall be deemed Part-Time employees and shall be
compensated at the rate of twenty-one dollars and thirty-four cents ($21.34)
per hour. Part-Time employees shall not be eligible to participate in the
hospitalization insurance plan provided by the Village unless required by
stipulations of the Affordable Care Act. Elected Officials and appointed
officers of the Village shall not be considered as Part-Time employees. The
Village shall observe the Paid Leave For All Workers Act requirements for part-
time employees by granting part-time employees one (1) hour of paid leave for
every forty (40) hours worked.
   (J)   Executive and Legislative:
 
                             Annual Salary
Village Administrator         $115,000
Village Clerk / Treasurer     $61,375
Village Building Commissioner $12,420
 
   (K)   Holiday Compensation:
      1.   Full-Time Employees: All Full-Time non-FOP employees shall be
granted paid time off on New Year’s Day (January 1), President’s Day (third
Monday in February), Memorial Day (last Monday in May), Independence Day (July
4), Labor Day (first Monday in September), Thanksgiving (fourth Thursday in
November), Day after Thanksgiving, Christmas Eve (December 24), Christmas Day
(December 25), and New Year’s Eve (December 31). Holidays that fall on a
Saturday will be observed on the preceding Friday, and holidays that fall on a
Sunday will be observed on the following Monday.
         All Full-Time non-FOP employees who are scheduled to work and do work
at least seven (7) hours on a “holiday”, (as defined above), shall receive an
additional sixteen (16) hours straight-time pay.
         Any Full-Time or Part-Time Public Works employee who is ordered to
work on a holiday shall be paid an additional two hours of straight time pay
for each hour worked, regardless of how many hours the employee works.
      2.   Part-Time Firefighters/paramedics and Part-Time Police Officers: Any
Part-Time Firefighters/paramedics or Part-Time Police Officers or Part-Time
Radio Operators who are scheduled to work on a “holiday” (as defined below)
shall receive an additional one (1) hour of straight time pay for each hour
worked up to twenty-four (24) hours.
         For purposes of Part-Time Firefighters/paramedics and Part-Time Police
Officers a “holiday” refers to:
         New Year’s Eve starting at the beginning of the first shift at 7:00
a.m. until 11:00 p.m. on New Year’s Day, and extending for twenty-four (24)
hours;
         President’s Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day,
Thanksgiving, starting at 7:00 a.m. and extending for 24 hours;
         Christmas Eve starting at the beginning of the first shift at 7:00
a.m. until 11:00 p.m. on Christmas Day and extending for twenty-four (24)
hours.
         Any Part-Time Firefighters/paramedics who are ordered to work on a
“holiday”, (as defined above), shall be paid an additional two hours of
straight time pay for each hour worked, regardless of how many hours the
employee works.
   (L)   The Village President shall have the authority to adjust starting
salaries by a plus or minus ten percent (+ or - 10%) depending on the
qualifications of new hires. The remainder of the salary grid shall be
proportionally adjusted based on the starting salary.
       Salary provisions of the above section shall be effective July 1, 2024.
(Ord. 17-13, 8-8-2017; amd. Ord. 20-07, 8-25-2020; Ord. 2021-14, 12-14-2021;
Ord. 2022-04, 1-11-2022; Ord. 22-06, 3-8-2022; Ord. 22-17, 7-26-2022; Ord. 23-
09, 8-1-2023; Ord. 23-17, 12-12-2023; Ord. 24-09, 6-25-2024; Ord. 25-10, 6-24-
2025; Ord. 25-15, 8-12-2025)
1-5-9: ILLINOIS MUNICIPAL RETIREMENT FUND:
The Village does hereby elect to participate in the Illinois Municipal
Retirement Fund effective January 1, 1965, pursuant to the provisions set forth
in 40 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/7-101 et seq. (Ord. 64-92, 4-14-1964)
1-5-10: FULL TIME EMPLOYEE OF THE PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT:
   (A)   Position Created: The position of full time employee of the Public
Works Department of the Village be and the same is hereby created. The person
filling said position shall have the following duties and responsibilities:
      1.   To report to the Superintendent of Public Works and his assistants;
      2.   To perform any and all tasks assigned by the department head or his
assistants;
      3.   To carry out any and all assignments and responsibilities assigned
to said employee by the department head; and
      4.   To work a full forty (40) hour week, excluding lunch period.
   (B)   Public Service Employees: From time to time, pursuant to authorization
from the Board of Trustees, the Village Administrator may authorize the hiring
of part time public service employees. Such employees shall be assigned to the
Public Works Department and shall be considered public works employees for
purposes of any pension entitlements. Public service employees shall also be
available to assist as assigned in the Fire Department or to perform other
Village functions as assigned. Such employees shall be entitled to no vacation
or health insurance benefits. The Village Administrator is authorized to
prepare, subject to approval by the Board of Trustees, job descriptions and
workplace regulations governing the employment of public service employees.
(Ord. 94-20, 12-13-1994)
1-5-11: OVERTIME/COMPENSATORY TIME POLICY FOR ALL ELIGIBLE VILLAGE EMPLOYEES:
In accordance with the Fair Labor Standards Amendment of 1985, all eligible
employees entitled to receive overtime compensation shall receive in lieu
thereof compensatory time off at a rate of one and one-half (11/2) hours for
each hour of employment for which overtime compensation would be required by
law. No monetary overtime compensation shall be paid any employee unless the
employee receives the consent of the appropriate department head prior to the
performance of any work. (Ord. 86-1, 1-28-1986)
1-5-12: RESIDENCY REQUIREMENT FOR POLICE AND FIRE DEPARTMENT MEMBERS:
All full time members of the Village's Police and Fire Departments employed
after January 27, 1987, shall reside within a five (5) mile radius of the
Village limits within six (6) months of the date of being hired. The President
and Board of Trustees may extend this time limit for up to an additional twelve
(12) months in individual cases upon a showing of exceptional need by the
employee. (Ord. 97-4, 2-11-1997)
1-5-13: OUTSIDE EMPLOYMENT:
All full time employees of the Village who accept a second job or any outside
employment, who own or operate any business, or who perform any other work or
provide any other service for which they receive compensation, shall, upon the
commencement of such employment or work, notify the Village Administrator and
respective department head, in writing, on such forms as may be provided by the
Village Administrator. (Ord. 92-14, 10-13-1992)
CHAPTER 6
PRESIDENT
SECTION:
1-6-1: Election; Qualifications; Term
1-6-2: Duties; Powers
1-6-1: ELECTION; QUALIFICATIONS; TERM:
The President shall be a qualified elector and reside within the Village limits
for at least one year prior to his election. He shall hold office for four (4)
years and until his successor is elected and duly qualified. Where a vacancy
exists in the office of President and the unexpired term is less than one year
it shall be filled by an election which shall be had for such purpose within
six (6) months after such vacancy occurs and pending said election and until a
successor is duly elected and qualified, the Board shall elect one of its
number to act as President Pro Tempore. Where said vacancy is for less than one
year the Board shall elect one of its number to act as President until the next
annual election and until the President's successor is duly elected and
qualified. (1940 Code Sec. 2-2)
1-6-2: DUTIES; POWERS:
   (A)   The President shall preside at all meetings of the Board of Trustees
but shall not vote except in case of a tie vote of the members of the Board of
Trustees, and except concerning matters which, by statute, require the vote of
the corporate authorities.
   (B)   He shall appoint all officers, full-time employees, and part-time
employees with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees with the
exception of those taking office by election. He shall have power to remove any
officer appointed by him as provided by law.
   (C)   He may exercise within the Village limits, the powers conferred upon
sheriffs to suppress disorder and keep the peace; he may release persons
imprisoned for violation of any Village ordinance, reporting such release and
the cause therefor at the next Board meeting.
   (D)   He may annually and from time to time, give the Board information
relative to the Village affairs and recommend measures he deems expedient for
their consideration.
   (E)   He shall have the power to suppress riot and other disorderly conduct
and to enforce Village ordinances by calling on all inhabitants of the Village
eighteen (18) years of age or more for assistance.
   (F)   He shall have power at all times to examine the books, records and
papers of any agent, officer or employee of the Village. (Ord. 78-7, 4-4-1978;
amd. Ord. 23-04, 4-25-2023)
CHAPTER 7
BOARD OF TRUSTEES
SECTION:
1-7-1: Election; Qualifications; Term
1-7-2: Powers
1-7-3: Quorum; Attendance Required
1-7-4: President Pro Tem
1-7-5: Meetings
1-7-6: Order Of Business
1-7-7: Committees
1-7-8: Remote Participation At Village Board Meetings
1-7-1: ELECTION; QUALIFICATIONS; TERM:
The board of trustees shall consist of six (6) members, each of whom shall be
qualified electors and shall reside and have resided within the village limits
at least one year prior to his election. They shall each hold the office for a
period of four (4) years and until their respective successors are elected and
duly qualified. Where a vacancy exists in the office of trustee, the president
may appoint a trustee until the next election or special election. (1940 Code
Sec. 2-3)
1-7-2: POWERS:
The board and the president shall exercise such powers as are accorded to it by
state statutes. (1940 Code Sec. 2-3)
1-7-3: QUORUM; ATTENDANCE REQUIRED:
A majority of the corporate authorities elected shall constitute a quorum to do
business but a smaller number may adjourn from time to time.
The board shall be the judge of the election and qualification of its own
members and may punish its members for disorderly conduct in accordance with
statutes made and provided. It may elect a temporary chairman in the absence of
the president because of temporary illness or otherwise who shall act as
presiding officer. (Ord. 75-340, 5-13-1975)
1-7-4: PRESIDENT PRO TEM:
Where the president's absence is occasioned by absence from the village,
serious and continued illness or other disability, the board shall elect one of
its number as president pro tem who shall for the duration of said absence
exercise all of the powers of president. (1940 Code Sec. 2-3)
1-7-5: MEETINGS:
   (A)   Regular meetings of the board shall be held on the second and fourth
Tuesdays of each month at seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. in the village hall, 7000
West 46th Street, and special meetings may be held at any time on call of the
president or three (3) trustees and in compliance with the requirements of the
Illinois open meetings act. (Ord. 89-6, 5-23-1989)
   (B)   A call for a special meeting shall be signed by the officers calling
it, shall specify the purposes for which it is called and be filed with the
village clerk before becoming effective, the village clerk shall cause a
written notice of the meeting to be served upon all of the trustees and the
president not later than the calendar day next preceding the day of the meeting
except in case of grave emergency when it may be served on the day of the
meeting. The vote of the board at a prior meeting shall not be reconsidered or
rescinded at a special meeting unless a large number of trustees be present as
were present when such vote was taken.
All meetings shall be open to the general public and shall be held at the
village hall. (1940 Code Sec. 2-4)
1-7-6: ORDER OF BUSINESS:
The order of business at meetings shall be in accordance with such rules as the
board may from time to time prescribe. (1940 Code Sec. 2-4)
1-7-7: COMMITTEES:
From the membership of the board, the president shall annually appoint the
following committees who shall serve without remuneration therefor and have
such special duties on behalf of the board as may be delegated to them by this
code:
Building committee
Committee on public improvements
Health committee
Their commission shall be concurrent with their term of office. In the
discretion of the president he may appoint such standing and special committees
as he may deem appropriate. (1940 Code Sec. 2-14)
1-7-8: REMOTE PARTICIPATION AT VILLAGE BOARD MEETINGS:
Members of the board of trustees may participate in a regular meeting, special
meeting or administrative meeting of the board of trustees under the following
circumstances:
   (A)   Permissible Reasons: A board member may participate in a meeting by
video or audio conference if that board member's absence is necessitated by one
of the following:
      1.   Personal illness or disability of the board member.
      2.   Employment purposes of the board member.
      3.   The board member's participation in a matter relating to the
business of the village.
      4.   Family or other emergency involving the board member.
   (B)   Quorum Requirement: No meeting shall take place unless a quorum of the
board members is physically present at the meeting.
   (C)   Prior Notice: A board member desiring to participate at a meeting by
video or audio conferencing must advise the village administrator as soon as is
reasonably possible in order to facilitate the audio or video conferencing.
(Ord. 06-19, 11-28-2006)
CHAPTER 8
CLERK
SECTION:
1-8-1: Appointment; Qualifications; Term
1-8-2: Duties
1-8-3: Compensation
1-8-4: Village Board Meeting Clerk
1-8-5: Bond
1-8-1: APPOINTMENT; QUALIFICATIONS; TERM:
The clerk shall be appointed by the village president, subject to the
concurrence of the board of trustees. Such appointment shall be for a term of
one year. (Ord. 15-01, 3-24-2015)
1-8-2: DUTIES:
   (A)   The appointed village clerk shall:
      1.   Attend all meetings and executive sessions.
      2.   Verify and authenticate the final typed copy of such meeting minutes
by affixing his/her signature.
The appointed village clerk shall have the authority to delegate duties to
office staff whenever he/she deems necessary.
   (B)   The clerk shall keep the corporate seal to be provided by the
corporate authorities and all papers belonging to the village, the custody and
control of which are not given to other officers. He/she shall conduct
correspondence on behalf of the village and is hereby empowered to administer
oaths and affirmations upon lawful occasions. Copies of all papers duly filed
in the clerk's office and transcripts from the journals and other records and
files of the clerk's office, certified by the clerk under the corporate seal,
shall be evidence in all courts in like manner as if the originals were
produced. The clerk shall have other duties prescribed by the president and
board of trustees from time to time.
   (C)   Upon the request of any person and payment of a fee per page, as
established by the board of trustees from time to time, the clerk shall furnish
a reproduction or photocopy of any public record of the village. In the event a
certified copy of such record or document is requested, an additional charge of
five dollars ($5.00) shall be payable.
   (D)   The clerk shall serve as the local election official as provided in
the general election law. He/she shall serve as deputy registrar who may accept
the registration of all qualified residents of the village, certify the offices
to be filled, receive nominating petitions or certificates of candidacy,
conduct in person absentee voting and transmit all precinct tally sheets and
printouts to the canvassing board, and other statutory election provisions.
   (E)   By statute, the clerk shall serve as a member of the firemen's pension
fund board. (Ord. 97-6, 5-13-1997)
   (F)   The position of village clerk will serve as the official freedom of
information act officer for the village of Forest View. The village clerk will
hereafter be required to meet all required training stipulations as provided by
statute. (Ord. 16-03, 4-26-2016)
1-8-3: COMPENSATION:
The appointed village clerk shall receive compensation as the village board
shall fix from time to time. (Ord. 15-01, 3-24-2015)
1-8-4: VILLAGE BOARD MEETING CLERK:
   (A)   Appointment: The office assistant or village accountant shall serve as
the board meeting clerk.
   (B)   Duties: The village board meeting clerk shall:
      1.   Attend all twenty four (24) regular village board meetings.
      2.   Verify and authenticate the final typed copy of such meeting minutes
by affixing his/her signature.
   (C)   Compensation: The village board meeting clerk shall be compensated at
a rate of fifty dollars ($50.00) per meeting, regardless of the length of the
meeting. The fifty dollar ($50.00) compensation shall be in lieu of any
overtime compensation. (Ord. 97-6, 5-13-1997)
1-8-5: BOND:
The appointed village clerk shall furnish a bond in such amount as may be
required and with such surety as may be approved by the village board, said
bond shall be conditioned on the faithful performance of duties and shall be
conditioned to indemnify the village for any loss by reason of any neglect of
duty or any act of the appointed village clerk. The premium on the bond shall
be paid by the village. (Ord. 97-6, 5-13-1997)
CHAPTER 9
VILLAGE ACCOUNTANT
SECTION:
1-9-1: Creation; Appointment
1-9-2: Powers And Duties
1-9-3: Compensation
1-9-4: Bond
1-9-1: CREATION; APPOINTMENT:
There is hereby created in the Village the position of Village Accountant. The
Village Accountant shall be appointed by the President subject to confirmation
by the Board of Trustees and shall serve at the discretion of the President and
Board of Trustees as provided by law. (Ord. 97-8, 5-13-1997)
1-9-2: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The Village Accountant shall be the principal accounting employee of the
Village. The Village Accountant shall be responsible for, but not limited to,
the following: maintaining a complete set of books and records relative to the
Village's business transactions, general and subsidiary ledgers, revenue and
expenditure reports, payroll, and bank reconciliation; preparing information
and assisting in Village audits; working closely with the Village Treasurer in
managing investments and financial liquidity; undertaking significant
responsibility in the overall operation of the Village computer system
including software utilization and data entry; preparing a summary statement of
current accounts payable, payroll and revenues received to be included in the
Village Board Meeting Clerk's Board meeting information; assisting in
maintaining Village Code books; the Village Accountant shall also serve as the
benefits coordinator for the Village; administer the employee assistance,
health, dental and life insurance plans; perform the duties of the Village
Board Meeting Clerk; assist the Village Clerk in his/her role as the local
election official by serving as a deputy registrar, conducting in-house
absentee voting and other duties delegated in accordance with the general
election law; serve as notary public; prepare quarterly newsletter; perform
secretarial and clerical office duties on word processing equipment and perform
other duties as may be assigned from time to time by the Village Administrator.
The position shall report directly to the Village Administrator in the chain of
command. (Ord. 97-11, 6-24-1997)
1-9-3: COMPENSATION:
The Village Accountant shall receive such compensation as the Village Board
shall fix from time to time. The Village Accountant shall be considered a full-
time employee of the Village for insurance purposes. (Ord. 97-8, 5-13-1997)
1-9-4: BOND:
The Village Accountant shall furnish a bond in such amount as may be required
and with such surety as may be approved by the Village Board. Said bond shall
be conditioned on the faithful performance of duties and shall be conditioned
to indemnify the Village for any loss by reason of any neglect of duty or any
act of the Village Accountant. The premium on the bond shall be paid by the
Village. (Ord. 97-8, 5-13-1997)
CHAPTER 9A
OFFICE ASSISTANT
SECTION:
1-9A-1: Creation; Appointment
1-9A-2: Powers And Duties
1-9A-3: Compensation
1-9A-4: Bond
1-9A-1: CREATION; APPOINTMENT:
There is hereby created in the Village the position of Office Assistant. The
Office Assistant shall be appointed by the President subject to confirmation by
the Board of Trustees and shall serve at the discretion of the President and
Board of Trustees as provided by law. (Ord. 93-17, 8-24-1993)
1-9A-2: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The Office Assistant shall be responsible for, but not limited to, the
following: function as the Water Clerk performing billing, collections, late
payment penalties and record keeping utilizing the Village computer system;
issue, monitor and collect various licenses, permits and applicable fees;
perform the duties of the Village Board Meeting Clerk, preparing the final copy
of Village Board meeting minutes from the written draft submitted by the
Village Board Meeting Clerk; record the original copy of minutes of the Board
in a well bound journal; forward the codifier copies of all applicable
ordinance and maintain up-to-date Code books and distribute as needed; develop
and maintain personnel records on all employees including, but not limited to,
W-4 and I-9 forms and sick leave records; assist the Chief of Police with
maintenance of "P" tickets; maintain vehicle sticker count annually to assist
Village Accountant with yearly audit; notify applicable officials of ethics
statements regulations; obtain and maintain officials bonds as required;
prepare petty cash funds to maintain sufficient ready cash; assist department
heads with property damage claims; maintain Illinois Risk Management property
control ledgers; assist the Village Clerk in his/her role as the local election
official by serving as a deputy registrar, conducting in-house absentee voting
and other duties as delegated in accordance with the General Election Law;
perform secretarial and clerical office duties as needed on word processing
equipment; maintain Village historical records; and perform other duties as may
be assigned from time to time by the Village Administrator. The position shall
report directly to the Village Administrator in the chain of command. (Ord. 97-
12, 6-24-1997; amd. Ord. 17-07, 4-11-2017)
1-9A-3: COMPENSATION:
The Office Assistant shall receive such compensation as the Village Board shall
fix from time to time. The Office Assistant shall be considered a part-time
position compensated at an hourly rate. (Ord. 93-17, 8-24-1993)
1-9A-4: BOND:
The Office Assistant shall furnish a bond in such amount as may be required and
with such surety as may be approved by the Village Board, said bond shall be
conditioned on the faithful performance of duties and shall be conditioned to
indemnify the Village for any loss by reason of any neglect of duty or any act
of the Office Assistant. The premium on the bond shall be paid by the Village.
(Ord. 93-17, 8-24-1993)
CHAPTER 9B
OFFICE ADMINISTRATIVE ASSISTANT
SECTION:
1-9B-1: Creation; Appointment
1-9B-2: Powers And Duties
1-9B-3: Compensation
1-9B-4: Bond
1-9B-1: CREATION; APPOINTMENT:
There is hereby created in the village the position of village office
administrative assistant. The village office administrative assistant shall be
appointed by the president, subject to confirmation by the board of trustees
and shall serve at the discretion of the president and board of trustees as
provided by law. (Ord. 16-04, 4-26-2016)
1-9B-2: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The village office administrative assistant shall be responsible for, but not
limited to, the following: function as the water clerk performing billing,
collections, late payment penalties and recordkeeping utilizing the village
computer system; issue, monitor, and collect business and other various
licenses, permits and fees; assist the village administrator and village
accountant in day to day work activities; perform the duties of the village
board meeting clerk; preparing the final copy of the village board meeting
minutes; record the original copy of minutes of the board in a well bound
journal; forward the codifier copies of all applicable ordinances for
codification, as well as maintain up to date code books and distribute as
needed; develop and maintain personnel records on all employees including, but
not limited to, W-4 and I-9 forms and sick leave records; assist the chief of
police with the collection of fines and maintenance of "P" tickets; notify
applicable officials of ethics statements regulations; prepare petty cash funds
to maintain sufficient ready cash; assist department heads with property damage
claims; assist the village clerk in his/her role as the local election official
by serving as a deputy registrar as delegated in accordance with the general
election law; assist freedom of information officer with duties; perform
secretarial and clerical office duties as needed, maintain village historical
records; creation of the quarterly newsletter, as well as other notices as
required; coordinate building permits and inspections with the building
commissioner; provide secretarial support to the public works superintendent;
and perform other duties as may be assigned from time to time by the president
or village administrator. The village office administrative assistant shall
also be cross trained to perform the duties of the village accountant,
including accounts payable and payroll; bank reconciliations; as well as making
weekly bank deposits, with receipts being provided to the village accountant.
The position shall report directly to the village administrator in the chain of
command. (Ord. 16-04, 4-26-2016)
1-9B-3: COMPENSATION:
The village office administrative assistant shall receive such compensation as
the village board shall fix from time to time. The village office
administrative assistant shall be considered a full time position for benefit
purposes. (Ord. 16-04, 4-26-2016)
1-9B-4: BOND:
The village office administrative assistant shall furnish a bond in such amount
as may be required and with such surety as may be approved by the village
board, said bond shall be conditioned on the faithful performance of duties and
shall be conditioned to indemnify the village for any loss by reason of any
neglect of duty or any act of the village office administrative assistant. The
premium of the bond shall be paid by the village. (Ord. 16-04, 4-26-2016)
CHAPTER 10
TREASURER
SECTION:
1-10-1: Appointment; Qualifications; Term
1-10-2: Duties
1-10-3: Salary
1-10-1: APPOINTMENT; QUALIFICATIONS; TERM:
The Treasurer shall be a qualified elector and reside and have resided in the
Village limits for at least one year prior to his appointment. He shall hold
office for four (4) years and until his successor is appointed and duly
qualified. (1940 Code Sec. 2-6)
1-10-2: DUTIES:
   (A)   He shall receive all monies belonging to the Village other than
special assessment funds.
   (B)   He shall issue permits and licenses upon proper authority, and shall
at all regular meetings present a report of the balance in the general Village
funds at the time of the previous meeting and an itemized account of receipts
and disbursements together with one of all accounts paid in the period.
   (C)   He shall keep his books and accounts in form satisfactory to the Board
and said accounts shall always be subject to inspection by the President or a
member of the Board.
   (D)   Annually between the first and tenth of April he shall make out and
file with the Clerk a full and detailed account of all receipts and
expenditures and transactions during the preceding fiscal year. The Clerk shall
publish the same by posting and reporting thereon to the Board at its next
meeting. All warrants paid by the Treasurer shall be marked paid and filed with
his monthly account. A register of all warrants redeemed and paid shall be kept
by him showing the date, amount, number, the fund from which paid, the name of
the person to whom and when paid. (1940 Code Sec. 2-6)
1-10-3: SALARY:
The compensation of the Treasurer of the Village shall be one hundred twenty
five dollars ($125.00) per month. (Ord. 83-7, 6-28-1983, eff. 5-1-1983)
CHAPTER 11
VILLAGE ATTORNEY
SECTION:
1-11-1: Creation Of Office; Appointment; Compensation
1-11-2: Suits And Actions
1-11-3: Judgments
1-11-4: Advice
1-11-5: Special Assessments
1-11-6: Ordinances And Documents
1-11-7: Bond Issues
1-11-8: Additional Legal Counsel
1-11-1: CREATION OF OFFICE; APPOINTMENT; COMPENSATION:
There is hereby created the office of Village Attorney, an executive office of
the Village. The Attorney shall be appointed by the President with the advice
and consent of the Board of Trustees and shall serve for a term of one year. A
law firm may be retained to act as Village Attorney, in which instance, the
President is authorized to appoint one or more members of said firm to act in
the capacity of Village Attorney. The Village Attorney shall receive such
compensation as may, from time to time, be provided by contract, motion or
ordinance. (Ord. 78-9, 4-4-1978)
1-11-2: SUITS AND ACTIONS:
The Village Attorney, upon such financial arrangements as shall prevail, shall
prosecute or defend any and all lawsuits to which the Village may be a party,
or in which it may be interested, or which may be brought against it, or which
may be brought by any officer on behalf of the Village, or which may be brought
in the capacity of such person as an officer of the Village. When so directed
by the Board of Trustees, the Attorney shall defend any and all lawsuits
brought against officials, employees and agents of the Village arising out of
the performance of duties on behalf of the Village. (Ord. 78-9, 4-4-1978)
1-11-3: JUDGMENTS:
It shall be the duty of the Village Attorney to see to the full enforcement of
all judgments or decrees rendered or entered in favor of the Village and of all
similar orders. (Ord. 78-9, 4-4-1978)
1-11-4: ADVICE:
The Attorney shall be the legal adviser of the Village and upon such financial
arrangement as shall prevail, shall render advice on all legal questions
affecting the Village whenever requested to do so by any elected officer of the
Village or department head. The Attorney shall attend all regular and special
meetings of the Board and such other Municipal meetings at which his attendance
is required. (Ord. 78-9, 4-4-1978)
1-11-5: SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS:
Upon such financial arrangements as shall prevail, it shall be the duty of the
Attorney to see to the completion of all special assessment proceedings and
condemnation proceedings. (Ord. 78-9, 4-4-1978)
1-11-6: ORDINANCES AND DOCUMENTS:
When requested by the President or Board of Trustees, and upon such financial
arrangements as shall prevail, the Village Attorney shall prepare all
ordinances and resolutions, contracts, leases and other documents or
instruments to which the Village may be a party. (Ord. 78-9, 4-4-1978)
1-11-7: BOND ISSUES:
Upon such financial arrangements as shall prevail, and at the request of the
Board of Trustees, the Attorney shall prepare all documents necessary to the
issuance of any bonds. (Ord. 78-9, 4-4-1978)
1-11-8: ADDITIONAL LEGAL COUNSEL:
The corporate authorities may, from time to time, employ additional lawyers to
perform specialized, consultant or advisory services to the Village Attorney or
the Village. (Ord. 78-9, 4-4-1978)
CHAPTER 12
ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR
SECTION:
1-12-1: Office Created
1-12-2: Duties
1-12-3: Administration Of Electrical Regulations
1-12-4: Penalty
1-12-1: OFFICE CREATED:
There is hereby created the office of Electrical Inspector. Such office shall
be filled by appointment by the President and Board of Trustees. His term of
office shall be one year and until his successor shall have been appointed and
shall have qualified. He shall furnish a bond with good and sufficient
security, for the faithful performance of his duty, in form and effect and
amount as other officials of the Village. His salary shall be fixed from time
to time by the President and Board. He may be assisted in his work by such
assistant electrical inspectors as from time to time may be necessary for the
proper performance of his duties, which appointments shall be made in the same
manner and for the same term of office as the appointment of the Chief
Electrical Inspector.
In the absence of the Electrical Inspector, or in the case of a vacancy of his
office, the Building Commissioner shall perform all the duties of the office of
the Electrical Inspector. (Ord. 71-259, 7-13-1971)
1-12-2: DUTIES:
Such Electrical Inspector and his assistants shall have the following specific
powers, authority and duties:
   (A)   Power To Enter Building: The Electrical Inspector or assistant
electrical inspectors shall have the power to enter any building or premises at
any reasonable hour in the discharge of their duties, and it shall be competent
for them, when necessary to remove any existing obstructions such as laths,
plastering, boarding or partitions which may prevent a perfect inspection of
the electrical equipment; they shall also have the power to enter any building
used in whole or in part for the purpose of public assemblage at any time when
occupied by the public, in order to examine electrical equipment in such
building, and it shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with them in the
performance of their duties.
   (B)   Aid Of Police Department: Whenever, in the opinion of the Electrical
Inspector, it shall be necessary to call upon the Police Department for aid and
assistance in carrying out or enforcing any of the provisions in this Ordinance
governing the inspection of electrical equipment, he shall have the authority
to do so, and it shall be the duty of any member of the Police Department when
called upon by said Electrical Inspector to act according to the instructions
of and to perform such duties as may be required by such Electrical Inspector
in order to enforce or put into effect the regulations of the Village relating
to the inspection of electrical equipment.
   (C)   Police Power: The Electrical Inspector and assistant electrical
inspectors who may be designated, and who are under the direction of the
Electrical Inspector, shall have full police power and shall have the right to
arrest any person who violates any of the electrical regulations of the
Village.
   (D)   Attach Official Notices And Seals: The Electrical Inspector or the
assistant electrical inspectors are hereby empowered to attach to electrical
cabinets and equipment, an official notice or seal to prevent use of
electricity, and it shall be unlawful for any other person to put or attach
such seal or to break, change, destroy, tear, mutilate, cover or otherwise to
deface or injure any such official notice or seal posted by the Inspector.
   (E)   Permits: The Electrical Inspector shall issue permits for such
installation and alteration of electrical equipment in all cases where
application for such permit shall be made in accordance with the rules and
regulations applicable thereto.
   (F)   Inspection And Certificates Of Inspection:
      1.   The Electrical Inspector or the assistant electrical inspectors of
the Village shall inspect all electrical equipment installed or altered, except
such electrical equipment as may be lawfully exempt, and shall require that it
conform to the electrical regulations of this Village.
      2.   Upon completion of such installation or alteration in compliance
with the electrical regulations of the Village, the Electrical Inspector shall,
on request made by a registered electrical contractor, issue a certificate of
inspection covering such installation or alteration; provided, however, that no
such certificate shall be issued until all inspection fees for such
installation have been paid.
   (G)   Reinspection: The Electrical Inspector or the assistant electrical
inspectors are hereby empowered to reinspect any electrical equipment within
the scope of the electrical regulations of the Village, and when said equipment
is found to be unsafe to life or property, shall notify in writing the person
owning, using or operating the same to place such electrical equipment in a
safe and secure condition in compliance with the electrical regulations of this
Village within such time as the Electrical Inspector shall consider just and
reasonable. Refusal or failure to comply with the requirements of such
notification shall subject the person owning, using or operating such
electrical equipment to the penalties provided for in this Ordinance and in
addition thereto the Electrical Inspector or the assistant electrical
inspectors of the Village are hereby empowered to cut off and stop current to
any such electrical equipment found unsafe to life or property.
   (H)   To Keep Records: The Electrical Inspector shall keep complete records
of all permits issued and inspections made and other official work performed
under the electrical regulations of the Village.
   (I)   Temporary Current Permits: Whenever any electrical equipment has been
installed or altered, no electrical current shall be used on such equipment,
except as hereinafter provided, previous to the inspection of such equipment by
the Electrical Inspector or by an assistant electrical inspector under his
jurisdiction and the issuance of a temporary current permit covering designated
portions or the entirety of such installation or alteration; provided, however,
that in case of any installation or alteration, covered by permit authorizing
such installation or alteration, the portion of such equipment comprising the
service entrance equipment and wiring, the meter and meter connection cabinet
and the meter wiring up to but not beyond the customer's disconnecting switch
or other disconnecting device may be made electrically alive, prior to
inspection and the issuance of a temporary current permit; and provided
further, that in such case, the Electrical Inspector shall be notified of the
intention to make such portion of the equipment electrically alive and that the
customer's disconnecting switch or other disconnecting device shall be sealed
in the "off" position and tagged with a warning notice reading as follows:
It shall be unlawful for any person to place this switch in the "on" position
or to use electricity on any wiring beyond this switch previous to the
issuance, by the Electrical Inspector, of a temporary current permit or a
certificate of inspection authorizing the use of current on this installation.
   (K)   Suspend Work Of Electrical Contractor And To Revoke Permits: The
Electrical Inspector is hereby empowered to suspend the permit privileges of
any registered electrical contractor who shall fail to pay any just
indebtedness to the Village for inspection fees for electrical wires and
apparatus as fixed by the Village, until such registered electrical contractor
shall discharge and pay to the Village all just indebtedness then due and owing
from such registered electrician.
The Electrical Inspector is authorized to revoke any permit or certificate
obtained by fraud, misrepresentation, or in any way contrary to the provisions
of the electrical regulations of this Ordinance, for the installation,
alteration, repair and use of any electrical equipment.
   (K)   Personal Liability: In all cases where any action is taken by the
Electrical Inspector to enforce the electrical regulations of the Village, such
acts shall be done in the name of and on behalf of the Village and the said
Electrical Inspector in so acting for the Village shall not render himself
liable for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result of any
such act committed in good faith in the discharge of his duties, and any suit
brought against said Electrical Inspector by reason thereof shall be defended
by the Village, at its costs, until final termination of the proceedings
contained therein. (Ord. 71-259, 7-13-1971)
1-12-3: ADMINISTRATION OF ELECTRICAL REGULATIONS:
The Electrical Inspector shall administer the electrical regulations adopted by
the Village. (Ord. 71-259, 7-13-1971)
1-12-4: PENALTY:
Any person violating the provisions of this Ordinance shall be fined as
provided in Section
1-4-1 of this Code for each such offense. (Ord. 71-259, 7-13-1971; amd. Ord.
95-23, 10-10-1995)
CHAPTER 13
HEALTH OFFICER
(Rep. by Ord. 75-343, 6-17-1975)
CHAPTER 14
SUPERINTENDENT OF PUBLIC WORKS
SECTION:
1-14-1: Appointment; Duties
1-14-2: Assistant Superintendent Of Public Works
1-14-1: APPOINTMENT; DUTIES:
The Superintendent of Public Works shall be appointed annually by the President
with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees, and shall hold office
until his successor is appointed and duly qualified. He shall have charge of
the maintenance of the sewer and water system of the Village, and shall receive
as compensation, such sums as the Board of Trustees may authorize to be paid as
provided by ordinance. When empowered by the Board of Trustees, he shall have
authority to engage the services of other individuals or corporations in the
maintenance of said system. (Ord. 78-10, 4-4-1978)
1-14-2: ASSISTANT SUPERINTENDENT OF PUBLIC WORKS:
An Assistant Superintendent of Public Works shall be appointed annually by the
President with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees, and shall hold
office until his successor is appointed and duly qualified. He shall assist the
Superintendent and shall exercise the powers of the Superintendent when said
Superintendent is ill, disabled or absent from the Village. (Ord. 78-10, 4-4-
1978)
CHAPTER 15
PUBLIC RELATIONS COMMISSIONER
SECTION:
1-15-1: Appointment; Duties
1-15-1: APPOINTMENT; DUTIES:
With the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees the President may annually
appoint a Commissioner of Public Relations who shall serve for a period of one
year and until his successor is appointed and duly qualified without
compensation, and whose duty it shall be to encourage the development of the
Village by attraction of new residents and industries and report to the Board
on the progress thereof together with any recommendations he might have for
their consideration, from time to time. (1940 Code Sec. 2-12)
CHAPTER 16
INSPECTOR OF WEIGHTS AND MEASURES
SECTION:
1-16-1: Appointment
1-16-2: Duties
1-16-3: Suitable Facilities
1-16-4: False Measures
1-16-1: APPOINTMENT:
The President may annually appoint with the advice and consent of the Board an
Inspector of Weights and Measures who shall receive as his compensation a
percent of all fees by him collected. He shall hold office for a period of one
year and until his successor is appointed and duly qualified. If no such
appointment is made, the Chief of Police or any duly appointed officer of the
Police Department, may exercise the powers and duties of this office. (1940
Code Sec. 2-11)
1-16-2: DUTIES:
His duties shall include the inspection once in each year of all weights,
measures, scales, balances, steelyards and other instruments used for weighing
and measuring devices in the Village except track scales and scales of a
capacity of three (3) tons or more and automatic or mechanical pumps or liquid
measuring devices which shall be inspected once in every six (6) months, and he
shall deliver to the owners thereof for money collected in accordance with
other sections of this Code. On the day of his receipt of fees he shall remit
the same, less his fees, together with a report thereon to the Clerk who shall
make report thereon at the next Board meeting and file the same for record,
remitting said funds to the Treasurer within one week of their receipts. The
Inspector shall have such police powers necessary to enforce applicable
provisions and regulations of this Code. (1940 Code Sec. 2-11)
1-16-3: SUITABLE FACILITIES:
Suitable facilities for proper measure in accordance with State standards shall
be made available to him. He is hereby given police powers to inspect packages
or accounts of commodities in order to determine whether they contain the
measure they are represented to have on sale and to make arrests with or
without warrant for violation of this Chapter. In the discretion of the
Inspector he may accept such evidence as may be available on the accuracy of
the weight or measure. (1940 Code Sec. 2-11)
1-16-4: FALSE MEASURES:
Any person found guilty of using false measures shall be fined as in this Code
provided. The Inspector is further empowered to condemn and confiscate false
weights and measures after lapse of ten (10) days from his notification to the
owner thereof of their inaccuracy. He shall also have power to seize and hold
false weights and measures as evidence in all procedures for violation of this
Chapter. (1940 Code Sec. 2-11)
CHAPTER 17
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER
SECTION:
1-17-1: Position Established
1-17-2: Function
1-17-3: Duties
1-17-4: Compensation
1-17-1: POSITION ESTABLISHED:
There is hereby established the position of Code Enforcement Officer for the
Village. (Ord. 66-143, 10-11-1966)
1-17-2: FUNCTION:
The function of the Code Enforcement Officer shall be to make inspections of
buildings and properties located within the Village to determine if they comply
with the Housing Code, National Building Code, National Fire Prevention Code,
Zoning Title and other codes and provisions of this Village Code. (Ord. 66-143,
10-11-1966)
1-17-3: DUTIES:
   (A)   The Code Enforcement Officer shall perform his duties and make
specific inspections only upon the direction of the corporate authorities.
   (B)   The Code Enforcement Officer shall make reports of all inspections to
the corporate authorities.
   (C)   Said Officer shall appear in court as directed by the corporate
authorities to testify in support of Code enforcement court actions. (Ord. 66-
143, 10-11-1966)
1-17-4: COMPENSATION:
The Code Enforcement Officer shall be paid a reasonable compensation based on
an hourly rate for services actually rendered, said rate to be determined by
the corporate authorities. (Ord. 66-143, 10-11-1966)
CHAPTER 18
BUILDING COMMISSIONER
SECTION:
1-18-1: Position Created
1-18-2: Appointment, Term
1-18-3: Duties
1-18-4: Powers
1-18-5: Salary
1-18-1: POSITION CREATED:
There is hereby created the position of Building Commissioner of the Village
who shall be under the supervision of the President and Board of Trustees, and
who shall see to the effective enforcement of all provisions of this Code
relating to buildings or zoning. (Ord. 76-7, 3-2-1976, eff. 4-30-1976)
1-18-2: APPOINTMENT, TERM:
A person competent to carry out the duties of the office of Building
Commissioner shall be appointed by the Village President with the advice and
consent of the Board of Trustees. Such appointment shall be for a term of one
year, and at such salary as may be provided by ordinance. The Building
Commissioner may be removed from office by the Village President at his
discretion. (Ord. 78-11, 4-4-1978)
1-18-3: DUTIES:
The Building Commissioner shall enforce all building and zoning provisions of
this Code. He shall have the power to order all work stopped on construction or
alteration or repair of buildings in the Village when such work is being done
in violation of any provisions relating thereto. Work shall not be resumed
after the issuance of such an order, except on the written permission of the
Building Commissioner; provided, that if the stop order is an oral one, it
shall be followed by a written stop order within one hour. (Ord. 69-186, 5-13-
1969)
1-18-4: POWERS:
The Building Commissioner shall have the power to make or cause to be made an
entry, at any reasonable hour, into any building or premises where the work of
altering, repairing or constructing any building or structure is going on, for
the purpose of making inspections. (Ord. 69-186, 5-13-1969)
1-18-5: SALARY:
The salary of the Building Commissioner of the Village is set at the sum of one
hundred dollars ($100.00) per month. (Ord. 87-6, 5-12-1987)
CHAPTER 19
PLUMBING INSPECTOR
SECTION:
1-19-1: Position Established
1-19-2: Function
1-19-3: Duties
1-19-4: Compensation
1-19-1: POSITION ESTABLISHED:
There is hereby established the position of Plumbing Inspector for the Village.
(Ord. 66-147, 11-22-1966)
1-19-2: FUNCTION:
The function of the Plumbing Inspector shall be to have immediate supervision
of all work done by plumbers, master sewer builders and certified drain layers
and gas fitters in connection with the plumbing, drainage and gas fitting of
buildings or structures in the Village and the connecting of such plumbing and
drainage with the sewer and water supply systems of the Village; he shall
investigate complaints pertaining to the drainage and plumbing of premises;
examine all plans as to drainage, plumbing and gas fitting, prior to the
issuance of permits for the work proposed to be done; he shall approve such
plans if the proposed work in all respects complies with the requirements of
provisions of this Code, he shall point out particulars, if any, in which the
proposed plans do not conform to the requirements of applicable Village Code
regulations. (Ord. 66-147, 11-22-1966)
1-19-3: DUTIES:
   (A)   The Plumbing Inspector shall be a master plumber and shall perform his
duties and make specific inspections only upon the direction of the corporate
authorities.
   (B)   The Plumbing Inspector shall make reports of all inspections to the
corporate authorities. (Ord. 66-147, 11-22-1966)
1-19-4: COMPENSATION:
The Plumbing Inspector shall be paid a reasonable compensation based on an
hourly rate for services actually rendered, said rate to be determined by the
corporate authorities. (Ord. 66-147, 11-22-1966)
CHAPTER 20
ORDINANCES
SECTION:
1-20-1: Style
1-20-2: Recording Of Votes Cast
1-20-3: Veto
1-20-4: Publications
1-20-5: Remittance Of Fines
1-20-6: Working Out Penalty
1-20-1: STYLE:
Ordinances passed by the Village may be in the following style: "Be it ordained
by the President and Board of Trustees of the Village of Forest View". (1940
Code Sec. 3-1)
1-20-2: RECORDING OF VOTES CAST:
The yeas and nays shall be taken upon the passage of all ordinances, on all
propositions to create any liability against the Village, for the appropriation
of expenditure of its money and in such other cases as any member of the Board
may direct. The concurrence of a majority of the Trustees elected to the Board
shall be necessary for the passage of any ordinance or other proposition, and
the yeas and nays on all propositions shall be recorded in the journal of the
Board's proceedings. (1940 Code Sec. 3-2)
1-20-3: VETO:
Before all ordinances shall take effect they shall be deposited in the office
of the Village Clerk after passage. If the President approves the ordinance, he
shall sign it. If he disapproves, he shall return it to the Board at its next
regular meeting occurring not less than five (5) days of the original roll call
and veto, together with his objections in writing. Such veto, in the case of an
appropriation ordinance, may extend to any one or more items of the ordinance
making an appropriation. Where the President fails to return said ordinance by
the time aforementioned with his objections, the ordinance shall take effect as
if, in fact, signed by him. Upon an ordinance's veto by the President it shall
require the affirmative vote of two-thirds (2/3) of the Trustees elected to
pass the same notwithstanding the veto. (1940 Code Sec. 3-3)
1-20-4: PUBLICATIONS:
Within one month after passage all ordinances imposing any fine, imprisonment,
forfeiture or making any appropriation shall be published by posting copies of
the same in three (3) public places within the Village limits, or in a
newspaper of general circulation in the Village, and shall not take effect
until ten (10) days after being so published. All other ordinances, unless
otherwise provided in the ordinance itself, shall take effect from and after
their passage. (1940 Code Sec. 3-4)
1-20-5: REMITTANCE OF FINES:
All fines and forfeitures for violation of ordinances shall be paid into the
Treasury by the officer receiving said fine within one week after their receipt
and be accompanied by a statement showing the name of the offender, the nature
of the offense and the amount of the fine. (1940 Code Sec. 3-5)
1-20-6: WORKING OUT PENALTY:
Where an offender is unable to pay the fine or penalty and costs assessed
against him in a proceeding, and said person is imprisoned in the Village Jail
it shall be the duty of the Superintendent of Public Works to provide suitable
labor, as provided by law, on a Village project until the fine is worked out.
Exclusive of board, the person shall be allowed a credit for each day's work on
account of such fine and costs 1 . (1940 Code Sec. 3-6)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/1-2-9.
CHAPTER 21
FINANCES
SECTION:
1-21-1: Deposit Of Funds
1-21-2: Depository Designated
1-21-3: Disbursal Of Funds
1-21-4: Audit
1-21-5: Clerk's Records
1-21-6: Appropriation And Levy
1-21-1: DEPOSIT OF FUNDS:
The Treasurer shall keep separate and distinct accounts of the gas tax, special
assessment and general funds of the Village and shall deposit all Village funds
received by him not later than the day following their receipt. These funds
shall be known and designated, respectively as "Village of Forest View, Motor
Fuel Tax Fund", "Village of Forest View Special Assessment Fund" and "Village
of Forest View, General Fund". Each shall be kept in a bank as designated by
Section
1-21-2 hereof, and said bank shall only remain qualified as a depository of
said funds upon furnishing the Village Board with a copy of all bank statements
it is required to furnish to the State Auditor of Public Accounts. Upon failure
to furnish said copies within a reasonable time of their issuance, the various
officers authorized to collaborate in the withdrawal of funds shall immediately
withdraw all of said funds and redeposit the funds which shall in the interim
remain in the custody of the Treasurer, within a reasonable time in an
appropriate bank. A special meeting of the Board to designate such new
depository shall be held before the redeposit of said funds. The Treasurer's
custody of funds shall at all times be in conformity with State laws. (1940
Code Sec. 4-1)
1-21-2: DEPOSITORY DESIGNATED:
The Bank of Lyons is hereby designated as one of the depositories of the funds
of the Village, and the officers or employees of the Village are hereby
authorized to endorse, in the name of the Village for the purpose of deposit
and collection in and with said Bank, checks, drafts, notes and other like
obligations, issued or drawn to and owned by the Village, and it is further
resolved that endorsements for deposit and collection may be by the written or
stamped endorsement of the Village without designation of the party making the
endorsement.
Said Bank is hereby authorized to pay out the funds of the Village on deposit
with it from time to time upon checks drawn upon said depository and signed in
the name of the Village by its Treasurer and countersigned by its President and
Clerk, whether said checks are payable to cash, bearer or the order of the
Village, or to any third party, or to the order of any signing or
countersigning officer of the Village or any other Village officer, in either
their individual or official capacity.
Said Bank shall not be in any manner whatsoever responsible for or required to
see to the application of any of the funds of the Village deposited with it,
checked out or borrowed from it, or secured by the discount of notes and other
obligations to it as hereinbefore provided, and all such transactions shall be
conclusively presumed to be legally binding upon the Village. (Ord. 66-142,
1966)
1-21-3: DISBURSAL OF FUNDS:
All warrants (which shall state the particular fund on which drawn) and all
withdrawals of the Village funds shall be signed by the President, Clerk and
Treasurer. When otherwise signed they shall be invalid, and, immediately upon
the change of personnel in any of said offices and at all times a resolution by
the Board shall be forwarded and kept on hand by depository incorporating
therein as exhibits the signatures of the authorized officers. It is a
mandatory duty of the President, Clerk and Treasurer to prepare, execute and
forward checks in payment of vouchers approved by the Board of Trustees within
ten (10) days of the date of approval. (Ord. 75-351, 10-7-1975)
1-21-4: AUDIT:
Annually at the close of the fiscal year it shall be the duty of the Board to
convene and cause to be audited the books, records and accounts of the
Treasurer, Collector, Clerk and all other officers who may have charge of the
collection, custody or disbursement of Village funds. If they deem it
necessary, a certified public accountant shall be retained to assist in said
audit. (1946 Code Sec. 4-3)
1-21-5: CLERK'S RECORDS:
The Clerk shall keep in form satisfactory to the Board a complete record of all
fees received by him and of the disposition of said fees. (1940 Code Sec. 4-4)
1-21-6: APPROPRIATION AND LEVY:
Appropriation and levy ordinances shall annually be passed by the Board in
accordance with State laws; and the fiscal year of the Village shall begin on
May 1 of each year. (1940 Code Sec. 4-5)
CHAPTER 22
VILLAGE SEAL
SECTION:
1-22-1: Village Seal
1-22-1: VILLAGE SEAL:
The seal of the Village shall be an obverse side bearing the legend "Village of
Forest View, Incorporated December 12, 1924" encircling and closest to its
outer rim, the word "Corporate"; within an inner circle, the word "Illinois" at
the reverse side of said circle and its lower rim, and the word "seal" in the
center. (1940 Code Sec. 2-1)
CHAPTER 23
CIVIL EMERGENCIES
SECTION:
1-23-1: Definitions
1-23-2: Emergency Declared
1-23-3: Regulations Imposed
1-23-4: Effective Period
1-23-5: Notice To News Media
1-23-6: Interpretation
1-23-1: DEFINITIONS:
ALCOHOLIC LIQUORS: For the purpose of this Chapter "alcoholic liquors" shall
mean an alcoholic liquor as that term is defined by section 5/1-3.05 of an Act
Relating to Alcoholic Liquors, approved January 31, 1934, as amended. (235
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-3.05)
CIVIL EMERGENCY: (A) A riot or unlawful assembly characterized by the use of
actual force or violence or any threat to use force if accompanied by immediate
power to execute by three (3) or more persons acting together without authority
of law; or
   (B)   Any natural disaster or man made calamity, including flood,
conflagration, cyclone, tornado, earthquake or explosion within the corporate
limits of the Village resulting in the death or injury of persons or the
destruction of property to such an extent that extraordinary measures must be
taken to protect the public health, safety and welfare.
CURFEW: A prohibition against any person or persons walking, running,
loitering, standing or motoring upon an alley, street, highway, public property
or vacant premises within the corporate limits of the Village, excepting
officials of any governmental unit and persons officially designated to duty
with reference to said civil emergency. (Ord. 68-176, 12-10-1968)
1-23-2: EMERGENCY DECLARED:
Whenever on emergency as defined in Section
1-23-1 hereof exists, the President of the Board of Trustees shall declare its
existence by means of a written declaration under oath, finding that the
foregoing standards have been met, setting forth facts to substantiate such
findings and describing the nature of the emergency; which statement or
declaration shall be filed with the Clerk of the Municipality as soon as
practicable. (Ord. 68-176, 12-10-1968)
1-23-3: REGULATIONS IMPOSED:
After proclamation of a civil emergency by the President of the Board of
Trustees, he may order:
   (A)   A general curfew applicable to such geographical areas of the Village,
or to the Village as a whole, as he deems advisable; and applicable during such
hours of the day or night as he deems necessary in the interest of the public
safety and welfare.
   (B)   Prohibit the sale or other transfer of possession, with or without
consideration, offer to sell or transfer, and the purchase of any ammunition,
guns and other firearms of any size or description.
   (C)   Prohibit the display by or in any store or shop of any ammunition,
guns and other firearms of any size or description.
   (D)   Prohibit the possession in a public place of a rifle or shotgun by any
person, except a duly authorized law enforcement official or person in military
service acting in the official performance of his duty.
   (E)   Prohibit the possession of any rifle or shotgun in any place, public
or private, by a nonresident who has not been issued a permit for the purchase
and possession of rifles and shotguns.
   (F)   Prohibit the sale of any alcoholic liquor.
   (G)   Prohibit the possession on the person in a public place of any
portable container containing any alcoholic liquor.
   (H)   Close places of public assemblage with designated exceptions.
   (I)   Prohibit the sale or other transfer of possession, with or without
consideration, of gasoline or any other flammable or combustible liquid
altogether or except by delivery into a tank properly affixed to an operable
motor-driven vehicle, bike, scooter, boat or airplane and necessary for the
propulsion thereof. (Ord. 68-176, 12-10-1968)
1-23-4: EFFECTIVE PERIOD:
The proclamation herein authorized shall be effective for a period of forty
eight (48) hours unless sooner terminated by a proclamation of the President of
the Board of Trustees indicating that the civil emergency no longer exists. The
President shall have the power to reproclaim the existence of a civil emergency
at the end of each forty eight (48) hour period during the time the said civil
emergency exists. (Ord. 68-176, 12-10-1968)
1-23-5: NOTICE TO NEWS MEDIA:
Upon issuing the proclamation herein authorized, the Chief of Police shall
notify the news media situated within the Village and cause three (3) copies of
the proclamation declaring the existence of the emergency to be posted at the
following places within the Village: the Village Hall, the police station and
the post office. (Ord. 68-176, 12-10-1968)
1-23-6: INTERPRETATION:
Nothing contained in this Chapter shall be construed to impair the powers
contained in the Municipal Code of the Village giving powers to the Police and
Fire Departments, but shall be construed together with existing provisions now
in effect for the safety and welfare of the citizens of the Village. (Ord. 68-
176, 12-10-1968)
CHAPTER 24
VILLAGE HALL
SECTION:
1-24-1: Use For Village Public Purpose; Residents Only
1-24-2: Private And Other Governmental Use; Application
1-24-3: Restrictions On Use
1-24-4: Sanctions; Revocation
1-24-5: Charges For Use Of Multi-Purpose Room Of Village Hall
1-24-1: USE FOR VILLAGE PUBLIC PURPOSE; RESIDENTS ONLY:
The Village Hall, or any part or facility thereof, including the Village multi-
purpose room, shall be used and occupied exclusively for the public purposes of
the Village, except as provided hereinbelow. The Village Hall and multi-purpose
room shall be available for use only for residents of the Village as described
further in this Chapter. (Ord. 92-12, 9-8-1992)
1-24-2: PRIVATE AND OTHER GOVERNMENTAL USE; APPLICATION:
Every person, group or organization desiring to use the Village Hall, or any
part or facility thereof, for a private purpose, or any governmental or school
authority desiring to use the Village Hall, or any part thereof, for an
official purpose, shall file an application therefor with the Village Clerk
upon a form furnished by the Village. Said application shall contain the
following information:
   (A)   Name, address and telephone number of applicant;
   (B)   If application is made on behalf of a group, club or organization, its
name and the names, addresses and telephone numbers of its officers;
   (C)   Date(s) and time period(s) of contemplated use and/or frequency
(weekly or monthly basis);
   (D)   Purpose of use;
   (E)   Food service or name and address of caterer, if any;
   (F)   Such additional information as the Board of Trustees shall deem
necessary.
All applications must be approved by a majority vote of the Board of Trustees.
(Ord. 74-314, 6-25-1974)
1-24-3: RESTRICTIONS ON USE:
The use of the Village Hall or any part thereof, shall be subject to the
following conditions and restrictions and such additional conditions as may be
imposed, from time to time, by the corporate authorities:
   (A)   Except in the case of a request by a governmental or school authority,
all applicants must be a resident of the Village. If application is made on
behalf of a civic, social, charitable or religious organization, club or group,
the application must establish that the majority of the active members of such
organization, club or group are residents of the Village. Use of the Village
Hall for a private party shall be limited to residents of the Village and their
immediate families who reside within the Village.
   (B)   All use of the Village Hall, or any part or facility thereof, must
terminate at or before one o'clock (1:00) A.M., and all persons will be
required to leave the premises at such time.
   (C)   Each applicant, group or organization must agree to indemnify and hold
harmless the Village against any claim, loss, action or judgment against the
Village, its officers, agents or employees, arising out of the use and
enjoyment of the Village Hall, or any part thereof, by such applicant, group or
organization. Further, each applicant shall agree to pay and reimburse the
Village for any damage to or destruction of Village property occurring as a
result of the use of the Village Hall.
   (D)   The Board room shall not be available for private parties. Under
exceptional circumstances, the Board room will be available for a Village party
or celebration. (Ord. 77-20, 12-20-1977)
1-24-4: SANCTIONS; REVOCATION:
If any person, group or organization shall submit an application that is found
to contain inaccurate or misleading statements or information, or if any
person, group or organization shall fail, refuse or neglect to fulfill its
obligations and commitments under its application, the Board of Trustees may
refuse to approve such application or any subsequent applications from such
person, group or organization. The Board of Trustees, after having granted an
application, may withdraw such permission if there is found any
misrepresentation or misstatement in connection therewith or if the Board
determines that such use would not be in the best interests of the Village.
(Ord. 74-314, 6-25-1974)
1-24-5: CHARGES FOR USE OF MULTI-PURPOSE ROOM OF VILLAGE HALL:
The Board shall, from time to time, establish charges, fees and other rules and
regulations relating to the use of the multi- purpose room. Such regulation
shall be approved by the Board by motion at a regular meeting or a special
meeting called for that purpose. Any such policies, procedures, or schedules
shall be made available to all parties interested in using the multi- purpose
room. (Ord. 93-23, 9-28-1993)
CHAPTER 25
POLICE PENSION FUND
SECTION:
1-25-1: Fund Established
1-25-2: Deposits
1-25-1: FUND ESTABLISHED:
There is hereby established in and for the Village a Police Pension Fund in
accordance with and subject to the terms and provisions of "An Act to provide
for the setting apart, formation and disbursement of a police pension fund in
cities, villages and incorporated towns having a population of not more than
two hundred thousand (200,000) inhabitants", approved June 14, 1909, as
amended. (Ord. 59-17, 5-19-1959)
1-25-2: DEPOSITS:
There shall be deposited in the Pension Fund the sums required by law, which
shall include five percent (5%) per month deducted from the salary of each
member of the police force, and the proceeds of an annual tax of not to exceed
five one-hundredths percent (0.05%) which shall be levied as from time to time
required; and also three-fourths (3/4) of the dog licenses, all the monies
received for special detail of police officers, ten percent (10%) of fines
collected for violation of provisions of this Code, money received as fines
imposed upon policemen, rewards turned over to the Pension Fund, and ten
percent (10%) of the license revenue exclusive of vehicle licenses, which shall
be contributed to the Pension Fund, as required by statute. (Ord. 59-17, 5-19-
1959)
CHAPTER 26
PARK SUPERINTENDENT
SECTION:
1-26-1: Creation
1-26-2: Duties; Term Of Office
1-26-3: Salary
1-26-4: Enforcement Of Regulations
1-26-1: CREATION:
There is hereby created the office of Park Superintendent of the Village of
Forest View, who shall be under the supervision of the Village President and
who shall see to the effective enforcement of all laws pertaining to park
property within the Village of Forest View. (Ord. 72-271, 2-22-1972)
1-26-2: DUTIES; TERM OF OFFICE:
The office of Park Superintendent shall be filled by an appointment made by the
Village President by and with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees,
of a person competent to carry out the duties of said office. Such appointment
shall be for a term of one year. The Park Superintendent may be removed from
office by the Village President at his discretion. (Ord. 72-271, 2-22-1972)
1-26-3: SALARY:
The salary for the Park Superintendent shall be at the rate of one hundred
dollars ($100.00) per month. (Ord. 72-271, 2-22-1972)
1-26-4: ENFORCEMENT OF REGULATIONS:
The Park Superintendent shall enforce all ordinances and regulations pertaining
to the operation of any park property within the Village of Forest View. The
Park Superintendent shall have such further powers as may be granted by the
President and Board of Trustees of the Village of Forest View. (Ord. 72-271, 2-
22-1972)
CHAPTER 27
WATER DEPARTMENT ADVISER
SECTION:
1-27-1: Position Created
1-27-2: Duties
1-27-3: Appointment
1-27-4: Compensation
1-27-1: POSITION CREATED:
There is hereby created the position of Special Adviser to the Water Department
of the Village of Forest View. (Ord. 72-289, 11-28-1972)
1-27-2: DUTIES:
Said Special Adviser of the Village shall have and exercise such duties as
assigned and delegated to him by the Superintendent of the Water Department,
Village President, and the Board of Trustees of the Village of Forest View that
are consistent with the laws of the State of Illinois. (Ord. 72-289, 11-28-
1972)
1-27-3: APPOINTMENT:
The President with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees shall
appoint the Special Adviser. Such Special Adviser shall serve at the discretion
of the Village President and may be removed at any time by the Village
President with the consent of the Board of Trustees. (Ord. 72-289, 11-28-1972)
1-27-4: COMPENSATION:
The compensation of said Special Adviser shall be on an hourly basis, at three
dollars ($3.00) per hour. (Ord. 72-289, 11-28-1972)
CHAPTER 28
HISTORICAL AND CULTURAL CENTER
SECTION:
1-28-1: Establishing Historical And Cultural Center
1-28-2: Commission
1-28-3: Expending Corporate Funds
1-28-4: Appointment
1-28-1: ESTABLISHING HISTORICAL AND CULTURAL CENTER:
There is hereby established the Forest View Historical and Cultural Center
within the Village Hall of the Village of Forest View. (Ord. 74-313, 5-14-1974)
1-28-2: COMMISSION:
There is hereby created the Forest View 50th Anniversary Commission, which
shall administer, encourage and conduct the activities, programs and affairs
related to the celebration of the 50th anniversary of the incorporation of this
Village during the year 1974, and thereafter shall administer, coordinate and
supervise the activities of the Forest View Historical and Cultural Center.
(Ord. 74-313, 5-14-1974)
1-28-3: EXPENDING CORPORATE FUNDS:
Subject to the direction and authority of the Board of Trustees, said 50th
Anniversary Commission may expend corporate funds as may be duly appropriated
for the objects and purposes of said 50th Anniversary and the Forest View
Historical and Cultural Center. (Ord. 74-313, 5-14-1974)
1-28-4: APPOINTMENT:
The members of the Forest View 50th Anniversary Commission shall be appointed
by the Village President with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees.
(Ord. 74-313, 5-14-1974)
CHAPTER 29
WATER DEPARTMENT CLERK
SECTION:
1-29-1: Position Created
1-29-2: Duties
1-29-3: Appointment
1-29-4: Compensation
1-29-1: POSITION CREATED:
There is hereby created the position of Water Department Clerk for the Village.
Any such person appointed to this position shall be deemed employed on a part-
time basis and shall not be entitled to paid vacation, nor shall such person be
eligible to participate in the hospitalization insurance plan provided by the
Village. (Ord. 79-9, 6-5-1979)
1-29-2: DUTIES:
Said Water Department Clerk shall be responsible for issuing all water bills
and recording payment entries therefor on a monthly basis and shall have such
other duties as may be assigned from time to time by the President and Board of
Trustees. (Ord. 79-9, 6-5-1979)
1-29-3: APPOINTMENT:
The President, with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees shall
appoint the Water Department Clerk. Said Clerk shall serve at the discretion of
the President and may be removed at any time by the President with the consent
of the Board of Trustees. (Ord. 79-9, 6-5-1979)
1-29-4: COMPENSATION:
The Water Department Clerk shall receive a compensation of one hundred dollars
($100.00) per month. (Ord. 79-9, 6-5-1979)
CHAPTER 30
OFFICE ADMINISTRATOR
SECTION:
1-30-1: Creation; Appointment
1-30-2: Duties
1-30-3: Salary
1-30-1: CREATION; APPOINTMENT:
There is hereby created in the Village the position of Office Administrator.
The Office Administrator shall be appointed by the President and Board of
Trustees acting jointly, and shall serve at the pleasure of the President and
Board of Trustees. (Ord. 82-3, 6-1-1982)
1-30-2: DUTIES:
The Office Administrator shall perform such clerical, bookkeeping and
administrative functions within the Village offices as may be assigned to him
from time to time by the President and Board of Trustees. (Ord. 82-3, 6-1-1982)
1-30-3: SALARY:
The Office Administrator shall be paid at an initial gross salary of one
thousand two hundred fifty dollars ($1,250.00) per month, and shall be
considered a full-time employee of the Village for insurance purposes. The
salary of such employee may be changed by the President and Board of Trustees
from time to time without the necessity for a formal amendment to this Chapter.
(Ord. 82-3, 6-1-1982)
CHAPTER 31
VILLAGE ADMINISTRATOR
SECTION:
1-31-1: Creation; Appointment
1-31-2: Qualifications
1-31-3: Bond
1-31-4: Compensation
1-31-5: Removal
1-31-6: Powers And Duties
1-31-1: CREATION; APPOINTMENT:
There is hereby created in the Village the position of Village Administrator.
The Village Administrator shall be appointed by the President subject to
confirmation by the Board of Trustees and shall serve at the pleasure of the
President and Board of Trustees as provided by law. (Ord. 90-6, 6-12-1990)
1-31-2: QUALIFICATIONS:
The Village Administrator shall be appointed solely on the basis of his proved
education, having knowledge and ability in the field of municipal
administration, and shall hold at least a bachelor's degree in public
administration, political science or a related field. (Ord. 90-6, 6-12-1990)
1-31-3: BOND:
The Village Administrator shall furnish a bond in such amount as may be
required and with such surety as may be approved by the Village Board. Said
bond shall be conditioned on the faithful performance of duties and shall be
conditioned to indemnify the Village for any loss by reason of any neglect of
duty or any act of the Administrator. The premium on the bond shall be paid by
the Village. (Ord. 90-6, 6-12-1990)
1-31-4: COMPENSATION:
The Village Administrator shall receive such compensation as the Village Board
shall fix from time to time. (Ord. 90-6, 6-12-1990)
1-31-5: REMOVAL:
The Village Administrator may be removed in accordance with 65 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/3-11-1. (Ord. 90-6, 6-12-1990)
1-31-6: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The Village Administrator shall be the chief administrative employee of the
Village. The Village Administrator shall be responsible to the President and
Board of Trustees for the proper administration of the affairs of the Village
and to that end shall have the power and shall be required to:
   (A)   See to it that all the laws and ordinances of the Village are
enforced.
   (B)   Attend all Village Board meetings, unless excused. The Village
Administrator shall have the right to take part in the discussion of all
matters coming before the Village Board but shall have no right to vote. The
Village Administrator shall be entitled to notice of all special and regular
meetings of the Village Board.
   (C)   Recommend to the Village Board adoption of such measures as the
Administrator may deem necessary to protect the health, safety or welfare of
the community, or for the improvement of the services rendered by the Village.
   (D)   Provide on behalf of the President and Board of Trustees, management,
supervision and coordination of all departments of the Village now in
existence, or that may hereafter be established.
   (E)   Make recommendations to the President and Board of Trustees, through
the President and Board of Trustees, on the following subjects:
      1.   Creation or abolition of positions of employment with the Village.
      2.   Wages and benefits for all Village employees.
      3.   Personnel regulations for Village employees.
   (F)   Recommend to the President and Board of Trustees rules and regulations
for the conduct and structure of the various departments of the Village.
   (G)   Investigate all complaints in relation to matters concerning the
administration of the government of the Village and the services maintained and
provided by the public utilities of the Village.
   (H)   Supervise purchasing and bidding for all materials, supplies, services
and equipment within the limits established by the annual appropriation
ordinance and the working budget. The spending authority of the Administrator
and All Department heads is one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00). The
Village Administrator shall have the authority to spend up to ten thousand
dollars ($10,000.00) in the case of an emergency. An emergency is defined as
meaning an imminent threat to the public health, safety or welfare of the
general public. The Village Administrator shall be authorized to make such
purchase and advise the Village Board of said purchase immediately.
   (I)   Prepare the budget annually and submit it to the Village Board
together with a message describing the important features and be responsible
for its administration after adoption.
   (J)   Prepare each year the annual appropriation ordinance in time for
consideration and enactment by the Village Board during the first quarter of
the fiscal year, and prepare the tax levy ordinance for passage and filing a
certified copy thereof with the County Clerk within the time required by law;
keep current accounts of the amounts appropriated and the amounts spent out of
each appropriation, showing the unexpended appropriations at all times.
   (K)   Prepare and submit to the President and Board of Trustees a written
report summarizing the activities of each department, office and operation of
the Village, including appropriate financial information annually at the end of
each fiscal year.
   (L)   Keep a current inventory showing all real and personal property of the
Village and the location of such property and be responsible for the care and
custody of all such property, including equipment, buildings, land and all such
property which is not by law assigned to some other officer or body for care
and control.
   (M)   Devote full time to the discharge of the duties assigned to the
Village Administrator.
   (N)   See to it that all terms of any contract to which the Village is a
party are fully performed.
   (O)   To enforce such work rules and other personnel procedures as may be
from time to time adopted by the corporate authorities by ordinance, resolution
or motion. (Ord. 90-6, 6-12-1990; amd. 7-26-2022; Ord. 23-04, 4-25-2023; Ord.
23-05, 4-25-2023)
CHAPTER 32
VILLAGE INVESTMENT POLICY
SECTION:
1-32-1: Fund Description
1-32-2: Statement Of Purpose
1-32-3: Objectives
1-32-4: Goals
1-32-5: Investment Instruments
1-32-6: Permissible Investments
1-32-7: Collateralization
1-32-8: Restrictions
1-32-9: Authority
1-32-10: Communications
1-32-11: Safekeeping Of Investments
1-32-12: Prudent Person Rule
1-32-13: Conflicts Of Interest
1-32-14: Indemnification
1-32-15: Conflict
1-32-16: Summary
1-32-1: FUND DESCRIPTION:
The Village is a Municipality incorporated in December 1924. As a local
municipality, the Village provides police, fire, public works and
administrative services to its residents. Revenues are derived from real estate
tax levies, sales tax, personal property replacement taxes as well as various
other revenue sharing programs as provided by law. These funds are accounted
for in the Village's annual financial report and include the General Corporate
Fund, Group Hospital and Death Benefit Fund, Motor Fuel Tax Fund, Emergency
Telephone Fund, Referendum and Non-Referendum General Obligation Bond Funds and
any other funds that may be created from time to time. All transactions
involving the financial assets and related activity of the foregoing funds
shall be administered in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter. (Ord.
99-6, 4-13-1999, eff. 4-13-1999)
1-32-2: STATEMENT OF PURPOSE:
The purpose of this Chapter is to establish a clear understanding between the
Village Board of Trustees and investment consultants, managers and brokers
regarding investment objectives, goals and guidelines for the portfolio.
This Chapter is intended to provide meaningful guidance in the management of
the Village's financial assets and not to be overly restrictive given the
changing economic, business, political and investment market conditions.
This Chapter should be reviewed on an annual basis by the Board and all related
parties should be notified of any changes. (Ord. 99-6, 4-13-1999, eff. 4-13-
1999)
1-32-3: OBJECTIVES:
It should be noted that the foremost purpose of the Village's financial assets
is to provide sufficient cash flow to provide necessary services including, but
not limited to, police and fire protection, public works and administrative
services to the residents and business owners of the Village, pay when due
principal and interest on their debt obligations and meet financial obligations
to their employees, vendors and suppliers. Investments shall be undertaken in a
manner that seeks to ensure the preservation of capital in the overall
portfolio.
In this context, the Village's financial assets should be managed in a prudent
manner as it relates to such issues as expected rate of return, investment
opportunities and diversification while allowing sufficient cash flow to make
necessary payments for operating expenses such as payroll, taxes and purchase
of supplies and equipment. (Ord. 99-6, 4-13-1999, eff. 4-13-1999)
1-32-4: GOALS:
The investment portfolio of the Village shall be designed to attain a market-
average rate of return throughout budgetary and economic cycles, taking into
account the Village's risk constraints, the cash flow characteristics of the
portfolio and legal restrictions for return on investment. (Ord. 99-6, 4-13-
1999, eff. 4-13-1999)
1-32-5: INVESTMENT INSTRUMENTS:
As a unit of local government, in the State, the Village is restricted by the
Illinois Compiled Statutes, "to draw and invest funds" to the following types
of securities:
   (A)   Interest bearing bonds or tax anticipation warrants of the United
States of America, or the State of Illinois, or any county, township, or
municipal corporation of the State.
   (B)   Insured withdrawable capital accounts of State chartered savings and
loan association.
   (C)   Insured withdrawable capital accounts of a federally chartered savings
and loan association if the withdrawable capital accounts are insured by the
Federal Savings and Loan Corporation which is now The Savings Association
Insurance Fund.
   (D)   Insured investments in credit unions if the investments are insured by
the National Credit Union Administration.
   (E)   In savings accounts or certificates of deposit of a national or State
bank. These accounts must be insured by the Bank Insurance Fund.
   (F)   State Treasurer's Investment Pool.
   (G)   Illinois Metropolitan Investment Fund.
Any financial institution selected by the Village shall provide normal banking
services, including, but not limited to: checking accounts, wire transfers,
purchase and sale of U.S. Treasury securities and safekeeping services. The
Village will not maintain funds in any financial institution that is not a
member of the FDIC or SAIF system. In addition, the Village will not maintain
funds in any institution not willing or capable of posting required collateral
for funds in excess of FDIC or SAIF insurable limits.
Fees for banking services shall be mutually agreed to by an authorized
representative of the financial institution and the Village Treasurer on an
annual basis. Fees for services shall be substantiated by a monthly account
analysis and shall be reimbursed by means of compensating balances. (Ord. 99-6,
4-13-1999, eff. 4-13-1999)
1-32-6: PERMISSIBLE INVESTMENTS:
The following is a list of permissible investments. This list is not all-
inclusive and may change as directed by State or Federal statutes. The purpose
of this list is to provide a guideline of permissible investments for the
Village. When in doubt, the Village shall review with its investment counselor
or advisor.
   (A)   U.S. Treasury bills, notes and bonds.
   (B)   Zero Coupon U.S. Treasury - only issues that are a direct obligation
of the U.S. Government.
   (C)   Government National Mortgage Association.
   (D)   Certificates of deposit.
   (E)   Money market mutual funds.
   (F)   Credit unions if insured.
   (G)   Federal home loan banks.
Please note that the Village is not obligated to use all of the above listed
investment instruments. They are listed only as a reference. (Ord. 99-6, 4-13-
1999, eff. 4-13-1999)
1-32-7: COLLATERALIZATION:
   (A)   It is the policy of the Village to require that time deposits in
excess of FDIC or SAIF insurable limits be secured by some form of collateral
to protect public deposits in a single financial institution if it were to
default due to poor management or economic factors.
Eligible collateral instruments and collateral ratios (market value divided by
deposit) are as follows:
      1.   U.S. Government securities   110%
      2.   Obligations of Federal agencies   110%
      3.   Obligations of Federal instrumentalities   110%
      4.   Obligations of State of Illinois   110%
      5.   General obligation bonds of the Village   110%
Village personnel shall review all collateral coverage on a quarterly basis.
   (B)   Third party safekeeping is required for all collateral. To accomplish
this, the securities can be held at the following locations:
      1.   Federal Reserve Bank or its branch office.
      2.   At another custodial facility - generally in a trust department
through book entry at the Federal Reserve, unless physical securities are
involved.
      3.   By an escrow agent of the pledging institution.
   (C)   Safekeeping will be documented by an approved written statement. This
may be in the form of a safekeeping agreement, trust agreement, escrow
agreement or custody agreement.
Substitution or exchange of securities held in safekeeping can be done without
prior written notice of the Village provided the market value of the
replacement securities is equal or greater than the market value of the
securities being replaced. The Village will be notified in writing of all
substitutions. (Ord. 99-6, 4-13-1999, eff. 4-13-1999)
1-32-8: RESTRICTIONS:
The Village President and Board of Trustees have determined the following
actions to be inappropriate and totally prohibited:
   (A)   Any margin (borrowing) of securities.
   (B)   Purchase or sale of commodities or options.
   (C)   Purchase of individual common stock.
   (D)   Purchase of individual corporate bonds.
   (E)   Any investment that would jeopardize the integrity of the Village of
Forest View Fund or cause the President and Trustees to violate their fiduciary
duties. (Ord. 99-6, 4-13-1999, eff. 4-13-1999)
1-32-9: AUTHORITY:
   (A)   Authority: The overall management authority is delegated to the
Village Treasurer, assisted by the Village Accountant, while providing
necessary information to the Village Board. The Village Accountant will gather
the information pertaining to the investments and provide this information to
the Village Treasurer for approval.
   (B)   Signees: The Village President, Village Clerk and Village Treasurer
are all on file to sign any documents related to the fund. Any two (2) of these
signatures will be acceptable to enforce a document. (Ord. 99-6, 4-13-1999,
eff. 4-13-1999)
1-32-10: COMMUNICATIONS:
The Village Clerk and Treasurer shall:
   (A)   Receive written confirmation on every transaction.
   (B)   Receive monthly statements detailing the cost, market value, income
and current yield of each security and where it is being held in custody.
   (C)   The Village Accountant will be responsible for maintaining files of
all statements, confirmations and investment agreements. The Treasurer will
receive duplicates of the same. (Ord. 99-6, 4-13-1999, eff. 4-13-1999)
1-32-11: SAFEKEEPING OF INVESTMENTS:
All investments shall be clearly held and accounted for to indicate ownership
by the Village. The Board may direct the registration of securities in their
own name or in its nominee's name for the expressed purpose of registration of
securities by a national or State bank or trust company authorized to conduct a
trust business in the State. (Ord. 99-6, 4-13-1999, eff. 4-13-1999)
1-32-12: PRUDENT PERSON RULE:
Under the law, the Treasurer's duties, with respect to Village investments,
should be performed with the care, skill, prudence, and diligence under the
circumstances then prevailing that a prudent person acting in a like capacity
and familiar with such matters would use in the conduct of an enterprise of a
like character with like aims.
The funds should be managed for the exclusive purpose of:
   (A)   Providing sufficient cash flow for necessary operations of the
Municipality including, but not limited to, police and fire protection, public
works and administrative services.
   (B)   Providing sufficient cash flow to pay principal and interest on debt
obligations as well as meet financial obligations to employees and vendors of
the Village. (Ord. 99-6, 4-13-1999, eff. 4-13-1999)
1-32-13: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST:
Any Village official or employee of the Village involved in the investment
process shall refrain from personal business activities that could conflict
with the proper execution of the Village's investment program or which could
impair the ability to make important investment decisions. Officials and
employees shall disclose any material financial interest in financial
institutions that conduct business with the Village, and shall subordinate
their personal investment transactions to those of the Village's particularly
with regard to the timing of purchases and sales. (Ord. 99-6, 4-13-1999, eff.
4-13-1999)
1-32-14: INDEMNIFICATION:
Officials and employees who are involved in the investment process for the
Village acting in accordance with this investment policy and written procedures
as have been established and exercising due diligence shall be relieved of
personal liability for an individual security's credit risk or market changes.
(Ord. 99-6, 4-13-1999, eff. 4-13-1999)
1-32-15: CONFLICT:
All Village ordinances and parts of ordinances and all resolutions or parts
thereof in conflict with this Chapter, or any parts thereof, are hereby
repealed. In the event of any conflict between this Chapter and the Illinois
Compiled Statutes or case decisions of the State, then the statutes and case
law decisions shall control. (Ord. 99-6, 4-13-1999, eff. 4-13-1999)
1-32-16: SUMMARY:
Village officials are required to conduct themselves faithfully and exercise
sound direction and to perform those duties in the same fashion as other
persons of like intelligence and discretion.
It is expected that all assets will be managed so that the results will meet
the objectives and goals set forth in this Chapter.
This Chapter is intended to be used as a guideline rather than a rigid
statement of policy from which there can be no deviations. This Chapter should
be reviewed annually and changes made only after review by the Board, with
assistance from its consultants. It is the sole responsibility of the Board to
establish and maintain this written policy. (Ord. 99-6, 4-13-1999, eff. 4-13-
1999)
CHAPTER 33
LOCALLY IMPOSED AND ADMINISTERED TAX RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITY
SECTION:
1-33-1: Title
1-33-2: Scope
1-33-3: Definitions
1-33-4: Notices
1-33-5: Late Payment
1-33-6: Payment
1-33-7: Certain Credits And Refunds
1-33-8: Audit Procedure
1-33-9: Appeal
1-33-10: Hearing
1-33-11: Interest And Penalties
1-33-12: Abatement
1-33-13: Installment Contracts
1-33-14: Statute Of Limitations
1-33-15: Voluntary Disclosure
1-33-16: Publication Of Tax Ordinances
1-33-17: Liens For Unpaid Taxes
1-33-18: Application
1-33-19: Vehicle Fuel Tax
1-33-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as, and may be cited as, the LOCALLY IMPOSED AND
ADMINISTERED TAX RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITY ORDINANCE. (Ord. 00-13, 12-4-2000)
1-33-2: SCOPE:
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the village's procedures in
connection with all of the village's locally imposed and administered taxes.
(Ord. 00-13, 12-4-2000)
1-33-3: DEFINITIONS:
Certain words or terms herein shall have the meanings ascribed to them as
follows:
ACT: The "local government taxpayers' bill of rights act".
CORPORATE AUTHORITIES: The village's president and board of trustees.
LOCAL TAX ADMINISTRATOR: The village's accountant is charged with the
administration and collection of the locally imposed and administered taxes,
including staff, employees or agents to the extent they are authorized by the
local tax administrator to act in the local tax administrator's stead. The
local tax administrator shall have the authority to implement the terms of this
chapter to give full effect to this chapter. The exercise of such authority by
the local tax administrator shall not be inconsistent with this chapter and the
act.
LOCALLY IMPOSED AND ADMINISTERED TAX OR TAX: Each tax imposed by the village
that is collected or administered by the village not an agency or department of
the state. It does not include any taxes imposed upon real property under the
property tax code or fees collected by the village other than infrastructure
maintenance fees.
NOTICE: Each audit notice, collection notice or other similar notice or
communication in connection with each of the village's locally imposed and
administered taxes.
TAX ORDINANCE: Each ordinance adopted by the village that imposes any locally
imposed and administered tax.
TAXPAYER: Any person required to pay any locally imposed and administered tax
and generally includes the person upon whom the legal incidence of such tax is
placed and with respect to consumer taxes includes the business or entity
required to collect and pay the locally imposed and administered tax to the
village.
VILLAGE: The village of Forest View, Illinois. (Ord. 00-13, 12-4-2000)
1-33-4: NOTICES:
Unless otherwise provided, whenever notice is required to be given, the notice
is to be in writing mailed not less than seven (7) calendar days prior to the
day fixed for any applicable hearing, audit or other scheduled act of the local
tax administrator. The notice shall be sent by the local tax administrator as
follows:
   (A)   First-class or express mail, or overnight mail, addressed to the
persons concerned at the persons' last known address, or
   (B)   Personal service or delivery. (Ord. 00-13, 12-4-2000)
1-33-5: LATE PAYMENT:
Any notice, payment, remittance or other filing required to be made to the
village pursuant to any tax ordinance shall be considered late unless it is: a)
physically received by the village on or before the due date, or b) received in
an envelope or other container displaying a valid, readable U.S. postmark dated
on or before the due date, properly addressed to the village, with adequate
postage prepaid. (Ord. 00-13, 12-4-2000)
1-33-6: PAYMENT:
Any payment or remittance received for a tax period shall be applied in the
following order: a) first to the tax due for the applicable period; b) second
to the interest due for the applicable period; and c) third to the penalty for
the applicable period. (Ord. 00-13, 12-4-2000)
1-33-7: CERTAIN CREDITS AND REFUNDS:
   (A)   The village shall not refund or credit any taxes voluntarily paid
without written protest at the time of payment in the event that a locally
imposed and administered tax is declared invalidly enacted or unconstitutional
by a court of competent jurisdiction. However, a taxpayer shall not be deemed
to have paid the tax voluntarily if the taxpayer lacked knowledge of the facts
upon which to protest the taxes at the time of payment or if the taxpayer paid
the taxes under duress.
   (B)   The statute of limitations on a claim for credit or refund shall be
one (1) year after the end of the calendar year in which payment in error was
made. The village shall not grant a credit or refund of locally imposed and
administered taxes, interest, or penalties to a person who has not paid the
amounts directly to the village.
   (C)   The procedure for claiming a credit or refund of locally imposed and
administered taxes, interest, or penalties paid in error shall be as follows:
      1.   The taxpayer shall submit to the local tax administrator in writing
a claim for credit or refund together with a statement specifying:
         (a)   The name of the locally imposed and administered tax subject to
the claim;
         (b)   The tax period for the locally imposed and administered tax
subject to the claim;
         (c)   The date of the tax payment subject to the claim and the
canceled check or receipt for the payment;
         (d)   The taxpayer's recalculation, accompanied by an amended or
revised tax return, in connection with the claim; and
         (e)   A request for either a refund or a credit in connection with the
claim to be applied to the amount of tax, interest and penalties overpaid, and
as applicable, related interest on the amount overpaid; provided, however, that
there shall be no refund and only a credit given in the event the taxpayer owes
any monies to the village.
      2.   Within ten (10) days of the receipt by the local tax administrator
of any claim for a refund or credit, the local tax administrator shall either:
         (a)   Grant the claim; or
         (b)   Deny the claim, in whole or in part, together with a statement
as to the reason for the denial or the partial grant and denial.
      3.   In the event the local tax administrator grants, in whole or in
part, a claim for refund or credit, the amount of the grant for refund or
credit shall bear interest at the rate of four percent (4%) per annum, based on
a year of three hundred sixty five (365) days and the number of days elapsed,
from the date of the overpayment to the date of the mailing of a refund check
or the grant of a credit. (Ord. 00-13, 12-4-2000; amd. Ord. 22-11, 3-22-2022)
1-33-8: AUDIT PROCEDURE:
Any request for proposed audit pursuant to any local administered tax shall
comply with the notice requirements of this chapter.
   (A)   Each notice of audit shall contain the following information:
      1.   The tax;
      2.   The time period of the audit; and
      3.   A brief description of the books and records to be made available to
the auditor.
   (B)   Any audit shall be conducted during normal business hours and if the
date and time selected by the local tax administrator is not agreeable to the
taxpayer, another date and time may be requested by the taxpayer within thirty
(30) days after the originally designated audit and during normal business
hours.
   (C)   The taxpayer may request an extension of time to have an audit
conducted. The audit shall be conducted not less than seven (7) days nor more
than thirty (30) days from the date the notice is given, unless the taxpayer
and local tax administrator agreed to some other convenient time. In the event
the taxpayer is unable to comply with the audit on the date in question, the
taxpayer may request another date within the thirty (30) days, approved in
writing, that is convenient to the taxpayer and the local tax administrator.
   (D)   Every taxpayer shall keep accurate books and records of the taxpayer's
business or activities, including original source documents and books of entry
denoting the transactions which had given rise or may have given rise to any
tax liability, exemption or deduction. All books shall be kept in the English
language and shall be subject to and available for inspection by the village.
   (E)   It is the duty and responsibility of every taxpayer to make available
its books and records for inspection by the village. If the taxpayer or tax
collector fails to provide the documents necessary for audit within the time
provided, the local tax administrator may issue a tax determination and
assessment based on the tax administrator's determination of the best estimate
of the taxpayer's tax liability.
   (F)   If an audit determines there has been an overpayment of a locally
imposed and administered tax as a result of the audit, written notice of the
amount of overpayment shall be given to the taxpayer within thirty (30) days of
the village's determination of the amount of overpayment.
   (G)   In the event a tax payment was submitted to the incorrect local
governmental entity, the local tax administrator shall notify the local
governmental entity imposing such tax. (Ord. 00-13, 12-4-2000)
1-33-9: APPEAL:
   (A)   The local tax administrator shall send written notice to a taxpayer
upon the local tax administrator's issuance of a protestable notice of tax due,
a bill, a claim denial, or a notice of claim reduction regarding any tax. The
notice shall include the following information:
      1.   The reason for the assessment;
      2.   The amount of the tax liability proposed;
      3.   The procedure for appealing the assessment; and
      4.   The obligations of the village during the audit, appeal, refund and
collection process.
   (B)   A taxpayer who receives written notice from the local tax
administrator of a determination of tax due or assessment may file with the
local tax administrator a written protest and petition for hearing, setting
forth the basis of the taxpayer's request for a hearing. The written protest
and petition for hearing must be filed with the local tax administrator within
forty five (45) days of receipt of the written notice of the tax determination
and assessment.
   (C)   If a timely written notice and petition for hearing is filed, the
local tax administrator shall fix the time and place for hearing and shall give
written notice to the taxpayer. The hearing shall be scheduled for a date
within fourteen (14) days of receipt of the written protest and petition for
hearing, unless the taxpayer requests a later date convenient to all parties.
   (D)   If a written protest and petition for hearing is not filed within the
forty five (45) day period, the tax determination, audit, or assessment shall
become a final bill due and owing without further notice.
   (E)   Upon the showing of reasonable cause by the taxpayer and the full
payment of the contested tax liability along with interest accrued as of the
due date of the tax, the local tax administrator may reopen or extend the time
for filing a written protest and petition for hearing. In no event shall the
time for filing a written protest and petition for hearing be reopened or
extended for more than ninety (90) days after the expiration of the forty five
(45) day period. (Ord. 00-13, 12-4-2000)
1-33-10: HEARING:
   (A)   Whenever a taxpayer or a tax collector has filed a timely written
protest and petition for hearing under section
1-33-9 of this chapter, the local tax administrator shall conduct a hearing
regarding any appeal.
   (B)   No continuances shall be granted except in cases where a continuance
is absolutely necessary to protect the rights of the taxpayer. Lack of
preparation shall not be grounds for a continuance. Any continuance granted
shall not exceed fourteen (14) days.
   (C)   At the hearing the local tax administrator shall preside and shall
hear testimony and accept any evidence relevant to the tax determination,
audit, or assessment. The strict rules of evidence applicable to judicial
proceedings shall not apply.
   (D)   At the conclusion of the hearing, the local tax administrator shall
make a written determination on the basis of the evidence presented at the
hearing. The taxpayer or tax collector shall be provided with a copy of the
written decision. (Ord. 00-13, 12-4-2000)
1-33-11: INTEREST AND PENALTIES:
In the event a determination has been made that a tax is due and owing, through
audit, assessment or other bill sent, the tax must be paid within the time
frame otherwise indicated.
   (A)   Interest: The village hereby provides for the amount of interest to be
assessed on a late payment, underpayment, or nonpayment of the tax, to be ten
percent (10%) per annum, based on a year of three hundred sixty five (365) days
and the number of days elapsed.
   (B)   Late Filing And Payment Penalties: If a tax return is not filed within
the time and manner provided by the controlling tax ordinance, a late filing
penalty of five percent (5%) of the amount of tax required to be shown as due
on a return shall be imposed; and a late payment penalty of five percent (5%)
of the tax due shall be imposed. If no return is filed within the time or
manner provided by the controlling tax ordinance and prior to the village
issuing a notice of tax delinquency or notice of tax liability, then a failure
to file penalty shall be assessed equal to twenty five percent (25%) of the
total tax due for the applicable reporting period for which the return was
required to be filed. A late filing or payment penalty shall not apply if a
failure to file penalty is imposed by the controlling ordinance. (Ord. 00-13,
12-4-2000)
1-33-12: ABATEMENT:
The local tax administrator shall have the authority to waive or abate any late
filing penalty, late payment penalty or failure to file penalty if the local
tax administrator shall determine reasonable cause exists for delay or failure
to make a filing. (Ord. 00-13, 12-4-2000)
1-33-13: INSTALLMENT CONTRACTS:
The village may enter into an installment contract with the taxpayer for the
payment of taxes under the controlling tax ordinance. The local tax
administrator may not cancel any installment contract so entered unless the
taxpayer fails to pay any amount due and owing. Upon written notice by the
local tax administrator that the payment is thirty (30) days delinquent, the
taxpayer shall have fourteen (14) working days to cure any delinquency. If the
taxpayer fails to cure the delinquency within the fourteen (14) day period or
fails to demonstrate good faith in restructuring the installment contract with
the local administrator, the installment contract shall be canceled without
further notice to the taxpayer. (Ord. 00-13, 12-4-2000)
1-33-14: STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS:
The village, through the local tax administrator, shall review all tax returns
in a prompt and timely manner and inform taxpayers of any amounts due and
owing. The taxpayer shall have forty five (45) days after receiving notice of
the reviewed tax returns to make any request for refund or provide any tax
still due and owing.
   (A)   No determination of tax due and owing may be issued more than four (4)
years after the end of the calendar year for which the return for the
applicable period was filed or for the calendar year in which the return for
the applicable period was due, whichever occurs later.
   (B)   If any tax return is not filed or if during any four (4) year period
for which a notice of tax determination or assessment may be issued by the
village, the tax paid was less than seventy five percent (75%) of the tax due,
the statute of limitations shall be six (6) years maximum after the end of the
calendar year in which the return for the applicable period was due or end of
the calendar year in which the return for the applicable period was filed.
   (C)   No statute of limitations shall apply if a fraudulent tax return was
filed by the taxpayer. (Ord. 00-13, 12-4-2000)
1-33-15: VOLUNTARY DISCLOSURE:
For any locally imposed and administered tax for which a taxpayer has not
received a written notice of an audit, investigation, or assessment from the
local tax administrator, a taxpayer is entitled to file an application with the
local tax administrator for a voluntary disclosure of the tax due. A taxpayer
filing a voluntary disclosure application must agree to pay the amount of tax
due, along with interest of one percent (1%) per month, for all periods prior
to the filing of the application but not more than four (4) years before the
date of filing the application. A taxpayer filing a valid voluntary disclosure
application may not be liable for any additional tax, interest, or penalty for
any period before the date the application was filed. However, if the taxpayer
incorrectly determined and underpaid the amount of tax due, the taxpayer is
liable for the underpaid tax along with applicable interest on the underpaid
tax, unless the underpayment was the result of fraud on the part of the
taxpayer, in which case the application shall be deemed invalid and void. The
payment of tax and interest must be made by no later than ninety (90) days
after the filing of the voluntary disclosure application or the date agreed to
by the local tax administrator. However, any additional amounts owed as a
result of the underpayment of tax and interest previously paid under this
section must be paid within ninety (90) days after a final determination and
the exhaustion of all appeals of the additional amount owed or the date agreed
to by the local tax administrator, whichever is longer. (Ord. 00-13, 12-4-2000)
1-33-16: PUBLICATION OF TAX ORDINANCES:
Any locally administered tax ordinance shall be published via normal or
standard publishing requirements. The posting of a tax ordinance on the
internet shall satisfy the publication requirements. Copies of all tax
ordinances shall be made available to the public upon request at the village
clerk's office. (Ord. 00-13, 12-4-2000)
1-33-17: LIENS FOR UNPAID TAXES:
The local tax administrator shall establish an internal review procedure
regarding any liens filed against any taxpayers for unpaid taxes. Upon a
determination by the local tax administrator that the lien is valid, the lien
shall remain in full force and effect. If the lien is determined to be
improper, the local tax administrator shall:
   (A)   Timely remove the lien at the village's expense;
   (B)   Correct the taxpayer's credit record; and
   (C)   Correct any public disclosure of the improperly imposed lien. (Ord.
00-13, 12-4-2000)
1-33-18: APPLICATION:
This chapter shall be liberally construed and administered to supplement all of
the village's tax ordinances. To the extent that any tax ordinance is in
conflict with or inconsistent with this chapter, this chapter shall be
controlling. (Ord. 00-13, 12-4-2000)
1-33-19: VEHICLE FUEL TAX:
   (A)   Title: This section shall be known and cited as the FOREST VIEW
VEHICLE FUEL TAX ORDINANCE, and the tax imposed herein shall be known and cited
as the FOREST VIEW VEHICLE FUEL TAX.
   (B)   Definitions: The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this
section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where
the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
    DISTRIBUTOR OR VEHICLE FUEL DISTRIBUTOR: Any person who produces, refines,
blends, compounds or manufactures vehicle fuel in the village; or transports or
has transported vehicle fuel to any location in the village, or receives in the
village vehicle fuel on which the village vehicle fuel tax has not been paid;
or sells vehicle fuel to a retail dealer for resale in the village. The term
"distributor" shall include any person who transports vehicle fuel into the
village or receives vehicle fuel in the village for his own use and
consumption, and not for sale or resale.
   PERSON: Any individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association,
corporation, joint venture, joint stock company, receiver, trustee,
conservator, legal representative, or other legally recognized entity.
   RETAIL DEALER OR RETAIL VEHICLE FUEL DEALER: Any person who is engaged in
the business of selling vehicle fuel in the village to a purchaser for the
purchaser's use or consumption, and not for resale in any form.
   SALE AT RETAIL: Any sale to a person for that person's use or consumption
and not for resale to another.
   SALE, RESALE OR PURCHASE: Any transfer of ownership or title or both, any
exchange or any barter, whether conditional or otherwise, in any manner or by
any means whatsoever for consideration.
   TAX: The village vehicle fuel tax.
   USE: The exercise of any right to or power over vehicle fuel incident to the
ownership thereof, including, but not limited to, the receipt of vehicle fuel
by any person into a fuel supply tank of a vehicle.
   VEHICLE: Any machine or device in, upon or by which any person or property
is or may be transported or drawn upon a rail, street, road, highway or
otherwise upon land, in or upon water, or through the air. The term "vehicle"
includes, without limitation, automobiles, trucks, buses, trains, motorcycles,
boats, airplanes and helicopters.
   VEHICLE FUEL: Any volatile and inflammable liquid or gas produced, blended
or compounded for the purpose of or which is suitable for operating a vehicle,
or which is used in propelling a vehicle. The term "vehicle fuel" includes,
without limitation, gasoline, gasohol, diesel oil, motor benzol, motor benzene,
propane gas fuel, kerosene and "special fuel" as defined in the motor fuel tax
law 1 .
   (C)   Tax Imposed: A tax is hereby imposed upon the privilege of purchasing
or using, in the village, vehicle fuel purchased in a sale at retail. The tax
shall be at a rate of four cents ($0.04) per gallon of vehicle fuel. The
ultimate incidence of and liability for payment of the tax shall be upon the
purchaser or user of the vehicle fuel, and nothing in this section shall be
construed to impose a tax upon the occupation of selling or distributing
vehicle fuel. It shall be a violation of this section for any distributor or
retail dealer to fail to add this tax to the retail price of vehicle fuel or to
absorb the tax. The tax shall be in addition to any and all other taxes.
   (D)   Payment On Retail Purchase: The term "use in the village" shall be
deemed to occur only at the place in the village where the vehicle fuel is
transferred into the vehicle by which it is to be consumed. To the extent that
a person has paid the tax imposed in this section on the retail purchase of
vehicle fuel, he/she shall be exempt from the payment of and liability for the
tax on the use of such fuel.
   (E)   Collection:
      1.   The village vehicle fuel tax shall be collected by each vehicle fuel
distributor who sells such fuel to a retail vehicle fuel dealer doing business
in the village. Any distributor who shall pay the tax to the village shall
collect the tax from any retail dealer to whom the distributor sells vehicle
fuel. The retail dealer shall in turn then collect the tax from the purchaser
of the vehicle fuel. Any distributor who sells vehicle fuel directly to a
purchaser or user, for delivery in the village, and not for resale, shall
collect the tax from the purchaser or user.
      2.   The retail dealer shall in turn then collect the tax from the
purchaser of the vehicle fuel. Any distributor who sells vehicle fuel directly
to a purchaser or user, for delivery in the village, and not for resale, shall
collect the tax from the purchaser or user.
      3.   If any retailer receives vehicle fuel upon which the village vehicle
fuel tax has not been collected by the distributor, the retail dealer shall
remit such tax directly to the village clerk by the last day of the month
following the month in which he received such vehicle fuel, and shall collect
such tax from his purchasers.
      4.   If any purchaser or user receives vehicle fuel upon which the
village vehicle fuel tax has not been collected by the distributor or retail
dealer, such purchaser or user shall pay the tax directly to the village by the
last day of the month following the month in which such purchaser or user made
the taxable purchase or use of the vehicle fuel.
      5.   Any tax remittance required to be made directly to the village shall
be made to the village clerk and shall be accompanied by a remittance form
prescribed by the village clerk.
      6.   Any person who collects the village vehicle fuel tax shall do so as
a trustee for and on account of the village.
   (F)   Registration; Return; Filing: Every vehicle fuel distributor doing
business on January 1, 2010, shall register with the village clerk by January
31, 2010. Every person who becomes a distributor after that date shall register
with the village clerk within thirty (30) days after the commencement of such
business. Every distributor shall file each month with the village clerk a
remittance return, containing a report of his sales of vehicle fuel to retail
dealers or users in the village occurring in the prior month. The return shall
be in a form prescribed and furnished by the village clerk. If mailed, the
return must be postmarked on or before the last day of the month following the
month for which the report is due. Each such return shall be accompanied by a
remittance of the appropriate amount of tax applicable to the sales reported.
Payment shall be made to the village clerk.
   (G)   Inventory Report: By January 31, 2010, every retail vehicle fuel
dealer shall file with the village clerk, on forms supplied by the village
clerk for that purpose, an inventory of all vehicle fuel in the retail dealer's
possession on January 1, 2010, at one minute after twelve o'clock (12:01) A.M.
The owner or chief executive officer of the retail dealer shall sign the
inventory report and attest under oath to its accuracy.
With the inventory report, the retail dealer shall pay to the village the
village vehicle fuel tax due on the sale of all vehicle fuel in the retail
dealer's possession on January 1, 2010, at one minute after twelve o'clock (12:
01) A.M. and for which such tax has not been collected on behalf of the village
by a vehicle fuel distributor.
   (H)   Failure To Pay Or File; Penalties And Interest:
      1.   Failure to pay or remit the tax or to file the remittance return
required by this section shall be subject to the following penalties and
interest:
         (a)   Any tax not paid or remitted when due shall bear an interest at
the rate of two percent (2%) per month, or fraction thereof, until the tax is
paid or remitted.
         (b)   In addition to any interest charged, any person who fails to pay
or to remit the tax when due shall be subject to a late penalty of ten percent
(10%) of such tax.
         (c)   In addition to any interest or penalty charged in subsection
(H)1(b) of this section, any person who fails to file a remittance return when
due shall be subject to a late filing penalty of ten percent (10%) of the total
tax liability due under the reporting period.
      2.   When the failure to pay or remit the tax or to file the remittance
return in a timely manner is due to reasonable cause beyond the control of the
person in charge with filing and paying the tax, the penalties described in
subsections (H)1(b) and (H)1(c) of this section may be waived by the village
clerk.
   (I)   Recordkeeping: Every distributor and every retail dealer required to
collect and remit the tax imposed in this section shall keep accurate and
complete books and records of his business of selling vehicle fuel, including
the maintenance of all invoices and other source documents. Every purchaser or
user shall keep accurate and complete books and records of his purchases and
uses of vehicle fuel in the village, including the maintenance of all invoices
and other source documents. All books and records shall be subject to
inspection by the village clerk or duly authorized agents or employees thereof,
at all times during regular business hours.
   (J)   Sales And Uses Presumed Taxable; Burden Of Proof: It shall be presumed
that all sales and uses of vehicle fuel in the village are subject to tax under
this section until the contrary is established. The burden of proving that a
sale or use is not taxable hereunder shall be upon the distributor, retail
dealer, purchaser or user so claiming.
   (K)   Exemptions: The tax imposed by this section shall not apply to the
following sales or uses of vehicle fuel:
      1.   Sale by a distributor to another distributor holding a valid
registration certificate.
      2.   Sale by a distributor or retailer of vehicle fuel whose place of
business is outside the village.
      3.   Sale or use for purposes other than for propulsion or operation of a
vehicle.
      4.   Sale or use by any transportation agency as defined in the regional
transportation authority act 2 , which is operated by, receiving a grant from
or has a service agreement with the regional transportation authority or any of
its service boards.
      5.   Sale of use to the extent the tax imposed by this section would
violate the state or United States constitution.
      6.   Sale to or use by the federal government or any state or local
governmental body.
      7.   Sale to or use by any air common carrier, certified by the carrier
to be used for consumption, shipment or storage in the conduct of its business
as an air common carrier, for a flight destined for a destination outside the
United States. (Ord. 09-09, 11-24-2009, eff. 1-1-2010; amd. Ord. 21-11, 11-9-
2021)
 
Notes
1 1. 35 ILCS 505/1 et seq.
2 1.    70 ILCS 3615/1.01 et seq.
CHAPTER 34
OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES ETHICS ACT
SECTION:
1-34-1: Definitions
1-34-2: Prohibited Political Activities
1-34-3: Gift Ban
1-34-4: Ethics Advisor
1-34-5: Penalties
1-34-1: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall be given these
definitions:
CAMPAIGN FOR ELECTIVE OFFICE: Any activity in furtherance of an effort to
influence the selection, nomination, election, or appointment of any individual
to any federal, state, or local public office or office in a political
organization, or the selection, nomination, or election of presidential or vice
presidential electors, but does not include activities: a) relating to the
support or opposition of any executive, legislative, or administrative action,
b) relating to collective bargaining, or c) that are otherwise in furtherance
of the person's official duties.
CANDIDATE: A person who has filed nominating papers or petitions for nomination
or election to an elected office, or who has been appointed to fill a vacancy
in nomination, and who remains eligible for placement on the ballot at a
regular election, as defined in section 1-3 of the election code 1 .
COLLECTIVE BARGAINING: Has the same meaning as that term is defined in section
3 of the Illinois public labor relations act 2 .
COMPENSATED TIME: With respect to an employee, any time worked by or credited
to the employee that counts toward any minimum work time requirement imposed as
a condition of his or her employment, but for purposes of this chapter, does
not include any designated holidays, vacation periods, personal time,
compensatory time off or any period when the employee is on a leave of absence.
With respect to officers or employees whose hours are not fixed, "compensated
time" includes any period of time when the officer is on premises under the
control of the employer and any other time when the officer or employee is
executing his or her official duties, regardless of location.
COMPENSATORY TIME OFF: Authorized time off earned by or awarded to an employee
to compensate in whole or in part for time worked in excess of the minimum work
time required of that employee as a condition of his or her employment.
CONTRIBUTION: Has the same meaning as that term is defined in section 9-1.4 of
the election code 3 .
EMPLOYEE: A person employed by the village, whether on a full time or part time
basis or pursuant to a contract, whose duties are subject to the direction and
control of an employer with regard to the material details of how the work is
to be performed, but does not include an independent contractor.
EMPLOYER: The village.
GIFT: Any gratuity, discount, entertainment, hospitality, loan, forbearance, or
other tangible or intangible item having monetary value including, but not
limited to, cash, food and drink, and honoraria for speaking engagements
related to or attributable to government employment or the official position of
an officer or employee.
IMMEDIATE FAMILY MEMBER: Parents, spouse, brothers, sisters, children,
grandparents, grandchildren, parents-in-law, brothers-in-law, sisters-in-law,
and legal guardians.
LEAVE OF ABSENCE: Any period during which an employee does not receive: a)
compensation for employment, b) service credit towards pension benefits, and c)
health insurance benefits paid for by the employer.
OFFICER: A person who holds, by election or appointment, an office created by
statute or ordinance, regardless of whether the officer is compensated for
service in his or her official capacity.
POLITICAL ACTIVITY: Any activity in support of or in connection with any
campaign for elective office or any political organization, but does not
include activities: a) relating to the support or opposition of any executive,
legislative, or administrative action, b) relating to collective bargaining, or
c) that are otherwise in furtherance of the person's official duties.
POLITICAL ORGANIZATION: A party, committee, association, fund, or other
organization (whether or not incorporated) that is required to file a statement
of organization with the state board of elections or a county clerk under
section 9-3 of the election code 4 , but only with regard to those activities
that require filing with the state board of elections or a county clerk.
PROHIBITED POLITICAL ACTIVITY: (A) Preparing for, organizing, or participating
in any political meeting, political rally, political demonstration, or other
political event.
   (B)   Soliciting contributions, including, but not limited to, the purchase
of, selling, distributing, or receiving payment for tickets for any political
fundraiser, political meeting, or other political event.
   (C)   Soliciting, planning the solicitation of, or preparing any document or
report regarding anything of value intended as a campaign contribution.
   (D)   Planning, conducting, or participating in a public opinion poll in
connection with a campaign for elective office or on behalf of a political
organization for political purposes or for or against any referendum question.
   (E)   Surveying or gathering information from potential or actual voters in
an election to determine probable vote outcome in connection with a campaign
for elective office or on behalf of a political organization for political
purposes or for or against any referendum question.
   (F)   Assisting at the polls on election day on behalf of any political
organization or candidate for elective office or for or against any referendum
question.
   (G)   Soliciting votes on behalf of a candidate for elective office or a
political organization or for or against any referendum question or helping in
an effort to get voters to the polls.
   (H)   Initiating for circulation, preparing, circulating, reviewing, or
filing any petition on behalf of a candidate for elective office or for or
against any referendum question.
   (I)   Making contributions on behalf of any candidate for elective office in
that capacity or in connection with a campaign for elective office.
   (J)   Preparing or reviewing responses to candidate questionnaires.
   (K)   Distributing, preparing for distribution, or mailing campaign
literature, campaign signs, or other campaign material on behalf of any
candidate for elective office or for or against any referendum question.
   (L)   Campaigning for any elective office or for or against any referendum
question.
   (M)   Managing or working on a campaign for elective office or for or
against any referendum question.
   (N)   Serving as a delegate, alternate, or proxy to a political party
convention.
   (O)   Participating in any recount or challenge to the outcome of any
election.
PROHIBITED SOURCE: Any person or entity who:
   (A)   Is seeking official action: 1) by an officer or 2) by an employee, or
by the officer or another employee directing that employee;
   (B)   Does business or seeks to do business: 1) with the officer or 2) with
an employee, or with the officer or another employee directing that employee;
   (C)   Conducts activities regulated: 1) by the officer or 2) by an employee,
or by the officer or another employee directing that employee; or
   (D)   Has interests that may be substantially affected by the performance or
nonperformance of the official duties of the officer or employee. (Ord. 04-06,
5-11-2004)
 
Notes
1 1. 10 ILCS 5/1-3.
2 2. 5 ILCS 315/3.
3 1. 10 ILCS 5/9-1.4.
4 2. 10 ILCS 5/9-3.
1-34-2: PROHIBITED POLITICAL ACTIVITIES:
   (A)   No officer or employee shall intentionally perform any prohibited
political activity during any compensated time. No officer or employee shall
intentionally use any property or resources of the village in connection with
any prohibited political activity.
   (B)   At no time shall any officer or employee intentionally require any
other officer or employee to perform any prohibited political activity: 1) as
part of that officer's or employee's duties, 2) as a condition of employment,
or 3) during any compensated time off (such as holidays, vacation or personal
time off).
   (C)   No officer or employee shall be required at any time to participate in
any prohibited political activity in consideration for that officer or employee
being awarded additional compensation or any benefit, whether in the form of a
salary adjustment, bonus, compensatory time off, continued employment or
otherwise, nor shall any officer or employee be awarded additional compensation
or any benefit in consideration for his or her participation in any prohibited
political activity.
   (D)   Nothing in this section prohibits activities that are permissible for
an officer or employee to engage in as part of his or her official duties, or
activities that are undertaken by an officer or employee on a voluntary basis
which are not prohibited by this chapter.
   (E)   No person either: 1) in a position that is subject to recognized merit
principles of public employment or 2) in a position the salary for which is
paid in whole or in part by federal funds and that is subject to the federal
standards for a merit system of personnel administration applicable to grant in
aid programs, shall be denied or deprived of employment or tenure solely
because he or she is a member or an officer of a political committee, of a
political party, or of a political organization or club. (Ord. 04-06, 5-11-
2004)
1-34-3: GIFT BAN:
   (A)   Recipients: Except as permitted by this section, no officer or
employee, and no spouse of or immediate family member living with any officer
or employee (collectively referred to herein as "recipients"), shall
intentionally solicit or accept any gift from any "prohibited source", as
defined herein, or which is otherwise prohibited by law or ordinance. No
prohibited source shall intentionally offer or make a gift that violates this
section.
   (B)   Exceptions: Subsection (A) of this section is not applicable to the
following:
      1.   Opportunities, benefits, and services that are available on the same
conditions as for the general public.
      2.   Anything for which the officer or employee, or his or her spouse or
immediate family member, pays the fair market value.
      3.   Any: a) contribution that is lawfully made under the election code
or b) activities associated with a fundraising event in support of a political
organization or candidate.
      4.   Educational materials and missions.
      5.   Travel expenses for a meeting to discuss business.
      6.   A gift from a relative, meaning those people related to the
individual as father, mother, son, daughter, brother, sister, uncle, aunt,
great aunt, great uncle, first cousin, nephew, niece, husband, wife,
grandfather, grandmother, grandson, granddaughter, father-in-law, mother-in-
law, son-in-law, daughter-in-law, brother-in-law, sister-in-law, stepfather,
stepmother, stepson, stepdaughter, stepbrother, stepsister, half brother, half
sister, and including the father, mother, grandfather, or grandmother of the
individual's spouse and the individual's fiance or fiancee.
      7.   Anything provided by an individual on the basis of a personal
friendship unless the recipient has reason to believe that, under the
circumstances, the gift was provided because of the official position or
employment of the recipient or his or her spouse or immediate family member and
not because of the personal friendship. In determining whether a gift is
provided on the basis of personal friendship, the recipient shall consider the
circumstances under which the gift was offered, such as: a) the history of the
relationship between the individual giving the gift and the recipient of the
gift, including any previous exchange of gifts between those individuals; b)
whether to the actual knowledge of the recipient the individual who gave the
gift personally paid for the gift or sought a tax deduction or business
reimbursement for the gift; and c) whether to the actual knowledge of the
recipient the individual who gave the gift also at the same time gave the same
or similar gifts to other officers or employees, or their spouses or immediate
family members.
      8.   Food or refreshments not exceeding seventy five dollars ($75.00) per
person in value on a single calendar day; provided that the food or
refreshments are: a) consumed on the premises from which they were purchased or
prepared or b) catered. For the purposes of this section, "catered" means food
or refreshments that are purchased ready to consume which are delivered by any
means.
      9.   Food, refreshments, lodging, transportation, and other benefits
resulting from outside business or employment activities (or outside activities
that are not connected to the official duties of an officer or employee), if
the benefits have not been offered or enhanced because of the official position
or employment of the officer or employee, and are customarily provided to
others in similar circumstances.
      10.   Intragovernmental and intergovernmental gifts. For the purpose of
this chapter, "intragovernmental gift" means any gift given to an officer or
employee from another officer or employee, and "intergovernmental gift" means
any gift given to an officer or employee by an officer or employee of another
governmental entity.
      11.   Bequests, inheritances, and other transfers at death.
      12.   Any item or items from any one prohibited source during any
calendar year having a cumulative total value of less than one hundred dollars
($100.00).
Each of the exceptions listed in this section is mutually exclusive and
independent of every other.
   (C)   Disposition Of Gifts: An officer or employee, his or her spouse or an
immediate family member living with the officer or employee, does not violate
this chapter if the recipient promptly takes reasonable action to return a gift
from a prohibited source to its source or gives the gift or an amount equal to
its value to an appropriate charity that is exempt from income taxation under
section 501(c)(3) of the internal revenue code of 1986, as now or hereafter
amended, renumbered, or succeeded. (Ord. 04-06, 5-11-2004)
1-34-4: ETHICS ADVISOR:
The municipal attorney, with the advice and consent of the board of trustees
shall serve as an ethics advisor for the village. The duties of the ethics
advisor may be delegated to an officer or employee of the village unless the
position has been created as an office by the village.
The ethics advisor shall provide guidance to the officers and employees of the
village concerning the interpretation of and compliance with the provisions of
this chapter and state ethics laws. The ethics advisor shall perform such other
duties as may be delegated by the village. (Ord. 04-06, 5-11-2004)
1-34-5: PENALTIES:
   (A)   A person who intentionally violates any provision of section
1-34-2 of this chapter may be punished by a term of incarceration in a penal
institution other than a penitentiary for a period of not more than three
hundred sixty four (364) days, and may be fined in an amount not to exceed two
thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00).
   (B)   A person who intentionally violates any provision of section
1-34-3 of this chapter is subject to a fine in an amount of not less than one
thousand one dollars ($1,001.00) and not more than five thousand dollars
($5,000.00).
   (C)   Any person who intentionally makes a false report alleging a violation
of any provision of this chapter to the local enforcement authorities, the
state's attorney or any other law enforcement official may be punished by a
term of incarceration in a penal institution other than a penitentiary for a
period of not more than three hundred sixty four (364) days, and may be fined
in an amount not to exceed two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00).
   (D)   A violation of section
1-34-2 of this chapter shall be prosecuted as a criminal offense by an attorney
for the village by filing in the circuit court an information, or sworn
complaint, charging such offense. The prosecution shall be under and conform to
the rules of criminal procedure. Conviction shall require the establishment of
the guilt of the defendant beyond a reasonable doubt.
A violation of section
1-34-3 of this chapter may be prosecuted as a quasi-criminal offense by an
attorney for the village, or, if an ethics commission has been created, by the
commission through the designated administrative procedure.
   (E)   In addition to any other penalty that may be applicable, whether
criminal or civil, an officer or employee who intentionally violates any
provision of section
1-34-2 or
1-34-3 of this chapter is subject to discipline or discharge. (Ord. 04-06, 5-
11-2004)
CHAPTER 35
TRAVEL EXPENSES
SECTION:
1-35-1: Definitions
1-35-2: Reimbursable Expenses
1-35-3: Reimbursement Expense Form
1-35-4: Expenses That Exceed Maximum
1-35-5: Entertainment
1-35-1: DEFINITIONS:
ENTERTAINMENT: Includes, but is not limited to, shows, amusement, theaters,
circuses, sporting events, or any other place of public or private
entertainment or amusement, unless ancillary to the purpose of the program or
event.
PUBLIC BUSINESS: Expenses incurred in the performance of a public purpose which
is required or useful for the benefit of the village to carry out the
responsibilities of village business.
TRAVEL: Any expenditure directly incident to official travel by employees and
officers of the village or by wards or charges of the village involving
reimbursement to travelers or direct payment to private agencies providing
transportation or related services. (Ord. 16-18, 12-13-2016)
1-35-2: REIMBURSABLE EXPENSES:
The village shall only reimburse the following types of travel, meal and
lodging expenses incurred by its employees and officers up to the following
maximum allowable amounts:
Any travel outside of a one hundred (100) mile radius of the village of Forest
View will require prior approval by the village president and board of
trustees.
Attendance/travel requiring expenditures of five hundred dollars ($500.00) or
less can be approved by the respective department head.
Attendance/travel requiring expenditures of five hundred one dollars ($501.00)
or more require approval of the village president and board of trustees.
Attendance/travel of a department head must be approved by village
administrator. Attendance/travel for conferences by the village administrator
must be approved by village president. (Ord. 16-18, 12-13-2016)
1-35-3: REIMBURSEMENT EXPENSE FORM:
No reimbursement of travel, meal, or lodging expenses incurred by a village
employee or officer shall be authorized unless the "travel, meal, and lodging
expense reimbursement request form" on file in the city, has been submitted and
approved. All documents and information submitted with the form shall be
subject to disclosure under the freedom of information act 1 . (Ord. 16-18, 12-
13-2016)
 
Notes
1 1. 5 ILCS 140/1 et seq.
1-35-4: EXPENSES THAT EXCEED MAXIMUM:
Expenses for travel, meals, and lodging of: a) any officer or employee that
exceeds the maximum reimbursement allowed under the regulations adopted under
section
1-35-2 of this chapter or b) any member of the corporate authorities of the
village may only be approved by roll call vote at an open meeting of the
corporate authorities of the village. However, in the event of an emergency or
other extraordinary circumstances, the corporate authorities may approve more
than the maximum allowable expenses set forth above. (Ord. 16-18, 12-13-2016)
1-35-5: ENTERTAINMENT:
The village shall not reimburse any elected official, employee, or officer for
any activities which would be considered entertainment. Activities which would
otherwise be considered entertainment, but which are excluded from the
prohibition on reimbursement due to being ancillary to the purpose of the
program or event, may be reimbursed in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter. (Ord. 16-18, 12-13-2016)
   Village of Forest View1-36-1   1-36-2
CHAPTER 36
ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION OF MUNICIPAL CODE VIOLATIONS
SECTION:
1-36-1: Purpose
1-36-2: Definitions
1-36-3: Creation Of Code Hearing Unit; Jurisdiction
1-36-4: Hearing Procedures Non-Exclusive
1-36-5: Code Hearing Unit
1-36-6: Ordinance Enforcement Administrator
1-36-7: Additional Duties Of Ordinance Enforcement Officer
1-36-8: Hearing Room Personnel
1-36-9: Compensation Of Code Hearing Unit Personnel
1-36-10: Complaints; Notices Of Hearings And Instituting Hearings
1-36-11: Administrative Hearing Procedures
1-36-12: Rules Of Evidence Shall Not Govern
1-36-13: Judicial Review
1-36-14: Enforcement Of Judgement
1-36-15: Procedures For Standing, Parking And Vehicle Compliance Violations
1-36-1: PURPOSE:
The stated purpose of this Chapter is to provide for the fair and efficient
enforcement and expeditious resolution of municipal ordinance violations, as
may be allowed by law and directed by this or any other ordinance, through the
administrative adjudication of violations of Village ordinances and by
establishing a schedule of fines and penalties, and authority and procedures
for collection of unpaid fines and penalties. (Ord. 25-08, 4-8-2025)
1-36-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this Chapter, unless the context requires otherwise:
            Any municipal ordinance, law, housing, or building codes or zoning ordinances
            that establishes construction, plumbing, heating, electrical, fire prevention,
BUILDING    sanitation or other health and safety standards that are applicable to structures
CODE:       and property in the Village of Forest View or any Village ordinance that
            requires, after notice, the cutting of weeds, the removal of garbage and debris,
            the removal of inoperable motor vehicles, or the abatement of nuisances from
            private property;
            Any state, county, fire protection district or municipal employee or contracted
BUILDING    inspector whose duties include the inspection or examination of structures in the
INSPECTOR:  Village to determine if building code property maintenance code or fire code or
            other adopted code violation exists;
BUILDING    The legal, equitable, or beneficial owner of a structure;
OWNER:
            The Forest View Municipal Code of Ordinances; and all adopted codes but excluding
            any offense under the Illinois Motor Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/1-100, et seq.) or
CODE:       a similar offense that is traffic regulating governing the movement of vehicles.
            The term code shall also include all traffic regulations concerning the standing,
            parking or condition of motor vehicles as set forth in Section 11-208.3 of the
            Illinois Motor Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/11-208.3);
CODE        Any infraction or violation of any Village of Forest View municipal ordinance, or
VIOLATION:  violation of any building code, law or rule or code adopted by reference.
HEARING     An attorney whose duty it is to:
OFFICER:
           1.   Preside at an administrative hearing called to determine whether or not a
            building code or other code violation exists;
           2.   Hear testimony and accept evidence from all interested parties relevant to
            the existence of a building code violation or other code violation;
           3.   Preserve and authenticate the transcript and record of the hearing and all
            exhibits and evidence introduced at the hearing; and
           4.   Issue and sign written Findings, Decisions and Orders as to whether a Code
            violation exists.
            Any person, corporation, partnership, whether such ownership is legal or
RESPONDENT: equitable, charged with a violation of any ordinance of the Village of Forest
            View, or its Municipal Code of Ordinances, or any of its adopted codes.
VILLAGE:    The Village of Forest View, Cook County, Illinois. (Ord. 25-08, 4-8-2025)
1-36-3: CREATION OF CODE HEARING UNIT; JURISDICTION:
There is hereby created within the Village of Forest View an executive
department of the municipal government to be known as the Code Hearing Unit,
which is authorized to provide for and operate a “system of administrative
adjudication,” which shall be defined as the adjudication of any code violation
or any other municipal ordinance violation of the Village of Forest View,
including, but not limited to, those actions brought pursuant to the Municipal
Code of the Village of Forest View, as well as the zoning ordinance (Unified
Development Ordinance or UDO) and adopted codes such as the building code, fire
code, plumbing code, electrical code, property maintenance code and health and
sanitation codes of the Village of Forest View, standing, parking and condition
of vehicle (compliance) violations brought pursuant to authority granted the
Village by Section 11-208.3 of the Illinois Motor Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/11-
208.3) and hereby adopted, excluding only those proceedings not within the
statutory authority granted to the Village, specifically any offense under the
Illinois Motor Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/1-100, et seq.) or similar offense that
is a traffic regulation governing the movement of vehicles, and any reportable
offense under Section 6-204 of the Illinois Motor Vehicle Code shall not be
subject to administrative adjudication pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter. (Ord. 25-08, 4-8-2025)
1-36-4: HEARING PROCEDURES NON-EXCLUSIVE:
The provisions of this Chapter shall not preclude the Village from using other
methods or proceedings to enforce the ordinances of the Village of Forest View,
including, but not limited to, the institution of any action in the Circuit
Court of Cook County, Illinois, or any other authorized proceeding.
   (A)   Administrative Adjudication Hearings for Automated Traffic Enforcement
violations shall be subject to the provisions and procedures of Title 9,
Chapter 1, of this Code. (Ord. 25-08, 4-8-2025)
1-36-5: CODE HEARING UNIT:
The Code Hearing Unit shall be composed of an Administrative Hearing Officer,
an Ordinance Enforcement Administrator, the Chief of Police or his designee,
hearing room personnel, and any other duly appointed person or persons deemed
necessary for the efficient administration of the Code Hearing Unit, with the
following powers, duties, and authority:
   (A)   All adjudicatory hearings shall be presided over by an Administrative
Hearing Officer who shall be an attorney licensed to practice law in the State
of Illinois for no less than three (3) years. The Administrative Hearing
Officer shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the
Village Board. Prior to conducting administrative adjudication hearings, the
Administrative Hearing Officers shall have successfully completed a formal
training program which includes the following:
      1.   instruction on the rules of procedure of the administrative hearings
which they will conduct;
      2.   orientation to each subject area of the code violations that they
will adjudicate;
      3.   observation of administrative hearings; and
      4.   participation in hypothetical cases, including ruling on evidence
and issuing final orders.
      5.   A person who has served as a judge in Illinois is not required to
fulfill the requirements of items (1) through (4) of this subsection.
   (B)   Administrative Hearing Officers are hereby authorized, empowered and
directed to:
      1.   preside over the administrative hearings established herein, as the
adjudicator;
      2.   administer oaths;
      3.   hear testimony and accept evidence that is relevant to the existence
of an ordinance violation;
      4.   issue subpoenas directing witnesses to appear and give relevant
testimony at the hearing or produce records or documents, upon the request of
the parties or their representatives;
      5.   rule upon objections and the admissibility of evidence;
      6.   preserve and authenticate the record of the hearing, including all
exhibits and evidence introduced at the hearing;
      7.   issue a determination, based on the preponderance of the evidence
presented at the hearing, of whether a code violation occurred or exists. The
Administrative Hearing Officer’s determination shall be in writing and shall
include written findings of fact, decision, and order including the fine,
penalty, including a reasonable amount of public or community service, or other
action with which the Respondent must comply; and
      8.   impose penalties consistent with applicable code provisions and
assessing costs upon finding a party liable for the charged violation, except,
however, that in no event shall the hearing officer have authority to (i)
impose a penalty of incarceration, or (ii) impose fines in excess of Fifty
Thousand Dollars ($50,000.00), or at the option of the municipality, such other
amount not to exceed the maximum amount established by the Mandatory
Arbitration System as prescribed by the Rules of the Illinois Supreme Court,
from time to time in effect, for the Circuit Court of Cook County.
      The Administrative Hearing Officer shall not be authorized to levy a
total fine and penalty in excess of Two Hundred Fifty Dollars ($250.00) for any
one violation of a standing, parking or compliance regulation except that the
total fine and penalty for any one violation of Section 11-1301.3 of the
Illinois Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/11-1301.3) or similar provision of the
Village of Forest View Municipal Code of Ordinances regarding parking for
persons with disabilities, shall not exceed Three Hundred Fifty Dollars
($350.00).
      9.   The maximum monetary fine under this subsection (B)(8) of this
Section shall, except as may otherwise be provided, be exclusive of costs of
enforcement or costs incurred by the Village to secure compliance with the
Village’s ordinances and shall not be applicable to cases to enforce the
collection of any tax imposed and collected by the Village of Forest View.
      10.   Retain jurisdiction of any adjudicated matter to monitor Respondent
compliance with any order issued by the hearing officer, including for the
Respondent to perform community or public service work and/or to complete an
education program as may be authorized by this Code. (Ord. 25-08, 4-8-2025)
1-36-6: ORDINANCE ENFORCEMENT ADMINISTRATOR:
The Ordinance Enforcement Administrator shall either be an employee of the
Village or an independent contractor or agency contracted by the Village to
perform such duties as enumerated herein. The Ordinance Enforcement
Administrator is hereby authorized, empowered and directed to:
   (A)   operate and manage the system of administrative adjudication of
vehicular standing and/or parking regulation violations, vehicle compliance
violations, vehicle license or sticker requirement violations, building, fire
and health code violations, and all other Village of Forest View Municipal Code
violations as may be permitted by law and directed by ordinance;
   (B)   adopt, distribute, and process all notices as may be required under
this chapter or as may reasonably be required to carry out the purpose of this
Chapter;
   (C)   collect moneys paid as fines and/or penalties assessed after a
determination of liability;
   (D)   certify copies of final determinations of vehicular standing and/or
parking regulation violation liability, vehicle compliance violations, vehicle
license or sticker requirement violations, building, fire and health code
violations or any other ordinance violation adjudicated pursuant to this
Chapter, as may be necessary;
   (E)   certify reports to the Secretary of State of Illinois concerning
initiation of suspension of driving privileges in accordance with the
provisions herein and those of 625 ILCS 5/6-306.5, as may be applicable;
   (F)   promulgate rules and regulations reasonably required to operate and
maintain the system of administrative adjudication hereby established; and
   (G)   collect unpaid fines and penalties including the use of private
collection agencies that may be retained by the Village or by directing the
Village Attorney to file complaints in the Circuit Court of Cook County, or by
selecting or appointing an individual or agency to act on behalf of the Village
in filing complaints, seeking judgments for unpaid fines or penalties and
pursuing all post-judgment remedies available under current law. All costs
incurred in enforcing or collecting unpaid fines or penalties shall be assessed
to the Respondent. (Ord. 25-08, 4-8-2025)
1-36-7: ADDITIONAL DUTIES OF ORDINANCE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER:
The Ordinance Enforcement Administrator is hereby further authorized,
empowered, and directed to operate and maintain computer programs for the
system of administrative adjudication hereby established, on a day-to-day
basis, including, but not limited to:
   (A)   inputting of violation notice information;
   (B)   establishing hearing dates and notice dates;
   (C)   recording fine and penalty assessment and payments;
   (D)   issuing payment receipts;
   (E)   issuing succeeding notices of hearing dates and/or final
determinations of liability and issuing notices, as may be required by this
Code or by 65 ILCS 5/1-2.1-1, et seq. of impending driver’s license suspension,
as may be required, in accordance with the Illinois Vehicle Code;
   (F)   keeping accurate records of appearances and non-appearances at
administrative hearings, pleas entered and fines and other penalties assessed
and paid. (Ord. 25-08, 4-8-2025)
1-36-8: HEARING ROOM PERSONNEL:
Hearing room personnel shall be appointed by the Chief of Police and may
include any police officer or auxiliary police officer, and such persons are
hereby authorized and directed to:
   (A)   maintain hearing room decorum;
   (B)   have and execute authority as is granted to courtroom deputies of the
Circuit Courts of Illinois;
   (C)   perform such other duties or acts as may reasonably be required and as
directed by the Administrative Hearing Officer or the Ordinance Enforcement
Administrator. (Ord. 25-08, 4-8-2025)
1-36-9: COMPENSATION OF CODE HEARING UNIT PERSONNEL:
Authorization for compensation for each of the above-stated positions shall be
made by the Mayor and Board of Trustees through the annual appropriation
process, and such compensation shall be determined by the Village Board. (Ord.
25-08, 4-8-2025)
1-36-10: COMPLAINTS; NOTICES OF HEARINGS AND INSTITUTING HEARINGS:
   (A)   The system of administrative adjudication of ordinance violations
shall afford all parties due process of law, including notice of a hearing and
an opportunity to be heard.
   (B)   A proceeding before an Administrative Hearing Officer shall be
instituted upon the filing of a written notice of violation or complaint by any
authorized official of the Village, including police officers, community
service officers and/or code enforcement officers, and such other employees,
agents or contractors, as may be authorized to issue notices of violation of
Village ordinances.
   (C)   Respondents shall be served with a copy of the notice of violation or
complaint along with a notice of adjudicatory hearing in any manner reasonably
calculated to give them actual notice of the proceeding instituted against them
including:
      1.   personal service upon a party;
      2.   service by certified mail return receipt requested at the party’s
address;
      3.   service by first class mail postage prepaid at the party’s address;
or
      4.   service by posting a copy of the sworn pleading or complaint upon
the property where the violation is found when the Respondent party is the
owner or manager of the property; and
      5.   in the case of a motor vehicle parking, standing or compliance
regulation service of the violation notice shall be by affixing the notice to
the vehicle.
   (D)   Notices of the adjudicatory hearing shall include:
      1.   the date, time, type, nature, and location of the alleged ordinance
violation to be adjudicated, and the signature and identification number, if
applicable, of the person issuing the violation;
      2.   the date, time, and location of the adjudicatory hearing;
      3.   the legal authority and jurisdiction under which the hearing is to
be held; and
      4.   the penalties for failure to appear at the hearing and in the case
of a motor vehicle parking, standing or compliance violation, the amount of the
fine, any penalty for late payment and that payment of the fine shall act as a
final disposition of the violation.
      5.   the correctness of the facts contained in the violation notice shall
be certified by the issuing person by:
         (a)   signing his or her name or identification number to the
violation notice at the time of issuance.
         (b)   any violation notices, citations issued, signed, and served in
accordance herewith, or a copy of the notice or computer-generated record shall
be prima facie correct and shall be prima facie evidence of the correctness of
the facts alleged therein, and shall be admissible in any subsequent
administrative or legal proceeding. (Ord. 25-08, 4-8-2025)
1-36-11: ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING PROCEDURES:
Parties shall be provided with an opportunity for a hearing during which they
may be represented by counsel, present witnesses, and cross-examine opposing
witnesses. Parties may request the Administrative Hearing Officer to issue
subpoenas to direct the attendance and testimony of relevant witnesses and the
production of relevant documents. Hearings shall be scheduled with reasonable
promptness, provided that for hearings scheduled in all non-emergency
situations, if requested by the Respondent, the Respondent shall have at least
fifteen (15) days after service of process to prepare for a hearing. For
purposes of this subsection, “non-emergency situation” means any situation that
does not reasonably constitute a threat to the public interest, safety, health,
or welfare. If service of the notice of violation is provided by mail, the
fifteen (15)-day period shall begin to run on the day that the notice is
deposited in the mail.
   (A)   Recording: All hearings shall be recorded.
   (B)   Failure to Appear: Persons who do not appear on their scheduled
administrative hearing date shall have a default judgment entered against them.
   (C)   Representation by Attorney: Persons appearing to contest an alleged
Code or ordinance violation on its merits may be represented by counsel of
their own choice at their own expense, present witnesses, present testimony,
and documents and cross-examine opposing witnesses. Parties may request the
Administrative Hearing Officer to issue subpoenas to direct the attendance and
testimony of relevant witnesses and the production of relevant documents.
   (D)   Village’s Presentation of Case: The case for the Village may be
presented by a Village employee, the Village Prosecutor, or by an attorney
designated by the Village Attorney, but not by an employee or other
representative of the Code Hearing Unit, subject to the following exception:
documentary evidence prepared by another department of the Village and
submitted to the Code Hearing Unit may be presented at the hearing by the
Administrative Hearing Officer.
   (E)   Respondent’s Presentation of Case: The case for the Respondent may be
presented by the Respondent or by an attorney on behalf of the Respondent.
Corporate or limited liability company Respondents must be represented by an
attorney. An attorney or agent appearing at an administrative hearing on behalf
of a Respondent shall present the Administrative Hearing Officer with a signed
appearance form stating on oath or affirmation that he or she has been
authorized by the defendant to represent the defendant at the hearing. (Ord.
25-08, 4-8-2025)
1-36-12: RULES OF EVIDENCE SHALL NOT GOVERN:
The formal and technical rules of evidence shall not apply in an adjudicatory
hearing authorized under this section. Evidence, including hearsay, may be
admitted only if it is of a type commonly relied upon by reasonably prudent
persons in the conduct of their affairs. (Ord. 25-08, 4-8-2025)
1-36-13: JUDICIAL REVIEW:
Any final decision by an Administrative Hearing Officer that a code violation
does or does not exist shall constitute a final determination for purposes of
judicial review and that decision shall be subject to review under the Illinois
Administrative Review Law (735 ILCS 5/3-101, et seq.). (Ord. 25-08, 4-8-2025)
1-36-14: ENFORCEMENT OF JUDGMENT:
   (A)   Any fine, other sanction, or costs imposed, or part of any fine, other
sanction, or costs imposed, remaining unpaid after the exhaustion of or the
failure to exhaust judicial review procedures under the Illinois Administrative
Review Law is a debt due and owing the Village of Forest View and may be
collected in accordance with applicable law.
   (B)   After expiration of the period in which judicial review under the
Illinois Administrative Review Law may be sought for a final determination of
an ordinance violation, unless stayed by a court of competent jurisdiction, the
findings, decision, and order of the Administrative Hearing Officer may be
enforced in the same manner as a judgment entered by a court of competent
jurisdiction.
   (C)   In any case in which a Respondent has failed to comply with a judgment
ordering that Respondent to correct an ordinance violation or imposing any fine
or other sanction as a result of an ordinance violation, any expenses incurred
by the Village to enforce the judgment entered against that defendant,
including, but not limited to, attorney’s fees, court costs, fees charged by
private collection agencies, and costs related to property demolition or
foreclosure, after they are fixed by a court of competent jurisdiction or a
hearing officer, shall be a debt due and owing the Village of Forest View and
may be collected in accordance with applicable law. Prior to any expenses being
fixed by the Administrative Hearing Officer pursuant to this section, the
Village shall provide a notice to the Respondent that states that the
Respondent shall appear at a hearing before the Administrative Hearing Officer
to determine whether the defendant has failed to comply with the judgment. The
notice shall set the date for such hearing, which shall not be less than seven
(7) days from the date that notice is served. If notice is served by first
class mail, the seven (7)-day period shall begin to run on the date that the
notice was deposited in the mail.
   (D)   Upon being recorded in the manner required by Article XII of the
Illinois Code of Civil Procedure (735 ILCS 5/12-101, et seq.), or by the
Uniform Commercial Code (810 ILCS 5/1-101, et seq.), a lien shall be imposed on
the real estate or personal estate, or both, of the Respondent in the amount of
any debt due and owing the Village under this Section. The lien may be enforced
in the same manner as a judgment lien pursuant to a judgment of a court of
competent jurisdiction.
   (E)   The Administrative Hearing Officer may set aside any judgment entered
by default and set a new hearing date, upon a petition filed by the Respondent
within thirty (30) days after the issuance of the order of default, if the
Administrative Hearing Officer determines that the Respondent’s failure to
appear at the hearing was for good cause, or at any time if the Respondent
establishes, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the Village did not
provide proper service of process. If any judgment is set aside pursuant to
this subsection, the Administrative Hearing Officer shall have authority to
enter an order extinguishing any lien which has been recorded for any debt due
and owing the Village as a result of the vacated default judgment. When a
judgment is vacated, the Administrative Hearing Officer shall set a new date
for a hearing on the underlying violation(s). (Ord. 25-08, 4-8-2025)
1-36-15: PROCEDURES FOR STANDING, PARKING AND VEHICLE COMPLIANCE VIOLATIONS:
The procedures for the system of administrative adjudication of vehicular
standing, parking, and condition of vehicles (compliance), violations of Title
9, Chapter 2 and Title 9, Chapter 4 of the Village Code shall be as follows:
   (A)   Violation Notice: A vehicular standing, parking, and compliance
regulation notice (“violation notice”) shall be issued by the persons
authorized by this Section and shall contain information and shall be served,
certified and have evidentiary admissibility as is hereinafter set forth.
   (B)   Authorization: All full time or part time police officers, community
service officers, and all code enforcement personnel shall have the authority
to issue violation notices.
   (C)   Detection of Violations: Any individual authorized to issue a
violation notice pursuant to this chapter who detects a violation of any
standing, parking or compliance provision of this code shall issue and serve a
notice of violation as set forth in this section.
   (D)   Contents of Violation Notice: The vehicular standing, parking,
compliance regulation violation notice shall contain, but shall not be limited
to, the following information:
      1.   The date, time, and place of the violation;
      2.   The particular vehicular standing, parking, compliance regulation
violated;
      3.   The vehicle make and state registration number;
      4.   The fine and any penalty which may be assessed for late payments;
      5.   The identification number of the person issuing the notice and his
or her signature which shall certify the correctness of the specified
information as provided in Section 11-208.3 of the Illinois Vehicle Code (625
ILCS 11-208.3), as amended;
      6.   Information as to the availability of an administrative hearing at
which the registered owner or lessee of the motor vehicle may appear in person
and contest the violation notice on its merits, and the time and manner in
which such hearing may be had;
      7.   The date, time, and place of an administrative hearing at which the
violation may be contested on its merits or a statement the person will be
notified of a hearing time;
      8.   Payment of the indicated fine shall operate as a final disposition
of the violation; and
      9.   Information as to the availability for a contest and adjudication by
mail by which the registered owner or lessee of the motor vehicle may contest
by mail, without personally appearing to contest the merits of the violation
notice, and the manner in which such contest by mail may be had.
   (E)   Service of Violation Notices: Service of the violation notices shall
be made by the person issuing such notice by:
      1.   offering the original or a facsimile of the notice of violation to
the unlawfully standing, parked or compliance violation vehicle;
      2.   handing the Notice of Violation to the operator of the operator of a
motor vehicle violating a parking, standing or compliance regulation; or
      3.   mailing the notice of violation to the address of the registered
owner or lessee of the cited vehicle as recorded with the Secretary of State or
lessor of the vehicle within thirty (30) days after the Secretary of State or
lessor of the motor vehicle notifies the Village of the identity of the owner
or lessee of the vehicle, but not later than ninety (90) days after the date of
the violation, except that in the case of a lessee of a motor vehicle, service
of the violation notice of a parking, standing or compliance violation may
occur no later than two hundred ten (210) days after the violation.
   (F)   Certification of Facts Alleged in Violation Notice: The correctness of
facts contained in the vehicular standing, parking, compliance regulation
notices shall be certified by the person authorized to issue said notice by
either:
      1.   Signing his or her name to the notices at the time of service; or
      2.   Signing a single certificate, to be retained by the Traffic
Compliance Administrator or Ordinance Enforcement Administrator, attesting to
the correctness of all notices produced by the device while under his/her
control when the violation notice is produced by a computer device.
   (G)   Retention of Violation Notices: The original or a facsimile of the
violation notice shall be retained by the Traffic Compliance Administrator or
Ordinance Enforcement Administrator and kept as a record in the ordinary course
of business.
   (H)   Prima Facie Evidence of Correctness: Any violation notice issued,
signed, and served in accordance herewith, or a copy of the notice, shall be
prima facie correct and shall be prima facie evidence of the correctness of the
facts shown on the notice.
   (I)   Admissibility: The violation notices or copies shall be admissible in
any subsequent administrative or legal proceeding.
   (J)   Action Upon Receiving Violation Notice/Opportunity for Hearing: A
person to whom a standing, parking, or compliance regulation violation notice
has been served pursuant to this section, shall, within twenty-one (21) days
from the date of the issuance of standing, parking or compliance violation
notice: 1) pay the indicated fine; or 2) submit the materials set forth in this
section to obtain an adjudication by mail; or 3) attend an administrative
hearing as set forth in this section to contest the charged violation. An
administrative hearing date will be assigned at the time the notice of
violation is issued. A response by mail shall be deemed timely if postmarked
within twenty-one (21) days of the issuance of the parking or compliance
violation notice.
   (K)   Contest by Mail: If the respondent submits documentary evidence to
contest by mail pursuant to this section, the respondent shall be served with a
copy of the hearing officer’s written determination of liability or non-
liability.
   (L)   Administrative Hearing: If the respondent requests an administrative
hearing to contest the merits of the standing, parking or compliance violation,
the respondent shall be served with notice of the date, time, and location of
the hearing. The formal or technical rules of evidence shall not apply at the
hearing.
      When a respondent either fails to pay the indicated fine prior to the
hearing, contest the violation by mail, or appear at a hearing, a determination
of standing, parking, or compliance liability, as the case may be, shall be
entered in the amount of the fine indicated on the notice of violation. Failure
to pay the fine within forty-two (42) days of issuance of a determination of
liability will result in the imposition of a late payment penalty. Failure to
pay the fine within sixty-two (62) days of a determination of liability shall
result in the imposition of an additional late payment penalty. Upon the
occurrence of a final determination of liability, any unpaid fine or penalty
will constitute a debt due and owing the Village. The respondent shall be
served with a notice of final determination of liability in accordance with
this section.
   (M)   Second Notice of Parking, Standing, or Compliance Violation: In the
event the first notice of violation was issued by affixing the original or
facsimile of the notice to the unlawfully parked vehicle or by handing the
notice to the operator, a second notice of standing, parking or compliance
violation to be sent to the respondent in accordance with subsection (E) of
this section. The second notice of violation shall specify the date and
location of the violation, the make and State registration number of the cited
vehicle, the Code provision violation, the applicable fine, and the time and
manner in which the respondent may obtain an adjudication, in writing, or
appear at the scheduled hearing to contest the violation.
      The second notice of standing, parking or compliance violation shall also
state that failure to pay the indicated fine and any applicable penalty, or to
appear at a hearing or contest a vehicular standing, parking, or vehicle
compliance violation in writing on the merits in the time and manner specified,
will result in a default judgment and final determination of liability for the
cited violation in the amount of the fine or penalty indicated, and that upon
the occurrence of a final determination of violation liability for the failure,
and the exhaustion of, or failure to exhaust, available administrative or
judicial procedures for review, or any unpaid fine or penalty, or both, will
constitute a debt due and owing the Village.
      The respondent shall have the option of avoiding an appearance at an
administrative hearing by completing either of the following options at least
twenty-one (21) days prior to the scheduled hearing date set forth in the
second notice of standing, parking or compliance violation: 1) paying the fine
and penalty amount; or 2) contest the violation notice as pursuant to
subsection (J) or contest the violation notice in writing pursuant to
subsection (K) of this Section. Payment of the fine is an admission of
liability and will act as a final disposition of the violation.
   (N)   Notice of Final Determination of Liability. A notice of final
determination of vehicular standing, parking, or vehicle compliance liability
shall be sent following a determination of liability for the standing, parking
or compliance violation and the conclusion of any administrative or judicial
review, as is herein after set forth, and the notice shall contain, but not be
limited to, the following information and warnings:
      1.   A statement that the unpaid fine or penalty, or both, is a debt due
and owing the Village; and
      2.   A warning that failure to pay the fine or penalty due and owing the
Village within twenty-one (21) days of the issuance of the final determination
of liability may result in the filing of a petition in the Circuit Court to
have the unpaid fine or penalty, or both, rendered a judgment as provided by
this section.
   (O)   A final determination of vehicular standing and parking violation and
vehicle compliance violation liability shall occur following the failure to pay
the total assessed fine and penalty after the Administrative Hearing Officer’s
determination of liability and the exhaustion of or the failure to exhaust any
judicial review procedures set forth in this section or the failure to file a
petition to vacate a default judgment as set forth in section 15-1-15(P) of
this Chapter.
      The Administrative Hearing Officer’s determination of liability of
vehicular standing and parking violations and vehicle compliance violations
made under this section, shall become final upon denial of a timely petition to
vacate and/or set aside that determination, or upon expiration of the period
for filing the petition to vacate without a filing have been made where a
person fails to appear at a hearing to contest the alleged violation in the
time and manner specified in a prior mailed notice.
   (P)   A petition to set aside a default judgment or determination of
liability may be filed by a person owing an unpaid fine or penalty in the
manner and subject to the restrictions and grounds hereinafter set forth:
      1.   A written petition to set aside a default judgment or determination
of liability must be filed with the Traffic Compliance Administrator or
Ordinance Enforcement Administrator, c/o Village of Forest View Police
Department, within, but not later than, twenty-one (21) days from the date the
default judgment or determination of liability is made;
      2.   The Administrative Hearing Officer shall act upon a petition timely
filed and render a decision thereon within thirty (30) days of the date filed;
      3.   The grounds for setting aside a determination of liability shall be
limited to the following:
         (a)   The person against whom the determination of liability is made
was not the owner or lessee of the cited vehicle on the date the vehicular
standing and parking violation or vehicle compliance violation notice was
issued;
         (b)   The person has already paid the fine and any penalty; and
         (c)   Excusable failure to appear at or request a new date for a
hearing.
      4.   Should the default judgment or determination of liability by the
Administrative Hearing Officer be set aside, the Traffic Compliance
Administrator or Ordinance Enforcement Administrator shall:
         (a)   Notify the registered owner, or lessee, as the case may be, that
the default judgment or determination of liability has been set aside;
         (b)   Notify the registered owner, or lessee, as the case may be, of
the date, time, and place for a new hearing on the merits of the violation for
which the default judgment or determination of liability has been set aside;
         (c)   Notice of setting aside of the default judgment or determination
of liability and the notice of the hearing date shall be by first class mail,
postage prepaid, to the address set forth on the petition to set aside the
default judgment or determination of liability; and
         (d)   Service of the notice shall be complete on the date the notices
are deposited in the United States mail;
   (Q)   Contest by Mail Procedures: Persons who have been served standing,
parking, or compliance regulation notices, in accordance with this section, may
contest the validity of the alleged violation without personally appearing at
an administrative hearing by:
      1.   Contest by mail: Completing, in full, the “contest by mail” section
of the violation notice, served upon him or her pursuant to this chapter.
      2.   Signature: Signing the “contest by mail” in the space specified in
the violation notice, and acknowledging that his or her personal appearance is
waived and submitting to adjudication based upon the signed statement and other
supporting materials filed by him or her and the facts contained in the
violation notice.
      3.   Filing materials: Filing by mail with the Traffic Compliance
Administrator or Ordinance Enforcement Administrator postmarked within twenty-
one (21) days of the violation notice issuance or within twenty-one (21) days
of the date of the additional violation notice, the following materials: the
violation notice with the “contest by mail” section fully completed; the full
name, address and telephone number(s) of the respondent; the make, model and
year of the vehicle, if applicable; any documentary evidence that rebuts the
charge; and a written statement signed by the respondent setting forth facts
relevant to establishing a defense to the charge.
      4.   Grounds for Review: A person charged with a parking, standing or
compliance regulation violation may contest the charge by mail by asserting one
or more defenses to the violation with appropriate evidence to support such
defense(s).
      5.   Determination of Liability. Upon review of the materials submitted,
the Administrative Hearing Officer shall make a determination of liability or
non-liability. The Administrative Hearing Officer shall, upon a determination
of liability, assess fines as authorized by this Code.
      6.   Notice of Determination: Notice of the determination of the hearing
officer shall be served upon the person contesting a violation notice by mail
by first class mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the person at the address
set forth in the materials submitted.
      7.   Service of Notice: Service of the notice of determination shall be
complete on the date the notice is placed in the United States mail.
   (R)   Penalties: The fines and penalties which shall be imposed for each
violation of a vehicular standing, parking or compliance regulation violation
shall be as set forth in Title 1, Chapter 1, as the case may be, of this Code.
The fines and penalties for a violation of parking in a parking space reserved
for persons with disabilities (handicapped parking) shall be not less than
Three Hundred Fifty Dollars ($350.00).
      1.   Excluding penalties for violations of parking in a parking space
reserved for persons with disabilities, failing to pay the indicated fine or
attend a scheduled hearing and the exhaustion of or failure to exhaust any
administrative review procedures shall result in the imposition of a late
payment penalty fee(s) in addition to the fine as follows:
         (a)   Excluding only handicapped parking violations, if the fine is
not paid within forty-two (42) days after a determination of liability, a late
payment fee of Twenty-Five Dollars ($25.00) will be assessed and, if the fine
remains unpaid after sixty-two (62) days after a determination of liability, an
additional Twenty-Five Dollar ($25.00) late payment fee will be assessed.
   (S)   The Village of Forest View hereby adopts, by reference, all current
and future amendments to the Illinois Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/1-100, et seq.)
governing the standing, parking or condition of motor vehicles (compliance),
for its enforcement and adjudication within the corporate boundaries of the
Village and in those areas subject to off-street parking agreements and all
current and future amendments to Article 1, Division 2.1 (65 ILCS 5/Art. 1 Div.
2.1) of the Illinois Municipal Code.
(Ord. 25-08, 4-8-2025; amd. Ord. 25-18, 8-26-2025)
TITLE 2
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
CHAPTER 1
PLANNING AND ZONING BOARD
SECTION:
2-1-1: Creation; Abolition
2-1-2: Meetings
2-1-3: Vote
2-1-4: Duties And Authority
2-1-5: Appeals
2-1-1: CREATION; ABOLITION:
There is hereby established a planning and zoning board for the village; said
board shall consist of seven (7) members to serve respectively for the
following terms: one for one year; one for two (2) years; one for three (3)
years; one for four (4) years; and one for five (5) years; one for six (6)
years; and one for seven (7) years. The successor to each member so appointed
shall serve for a term of five (5) years. (Ord. 61-56, 12-1961)
Effective January 1, 2015, the planning and zoning board is abolished.
Thereafter, any and all functions prescribed by the state statutes for the
planning and zoning board shall be undertaken by the committee of the whole of
the corporate authorities of the village of Forest View. All references to the
planning and zoning board and the plan commission in the village zoning
ordinance shall mean the committee of the whole. (Ord. 14-14, 12-9-2014)
2-1-2: MEETINGS:
All meetings of the committee of the whole shall be held at the call of the
village president and at such other times as the committee of the whole may
determine. All testimony by witnesses at any hearing provided for in the zoning
ordinance shall be given under oath. The village president, or in his absence,
the acting village president, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of
witnesses. All meetings of the committee of the whole shall be open to the
public, at which time every person has the right to be heard or to be
represented by a duly authorized agent or attorney. The committee of the whole
shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon
every question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating that fact, and
shall also keep records of its examinations and other official actions. In
every case the committee of the whole shall include in its official report the
reasons a request for a variation is denied. Every rule, regulation, every
amendment or repeal thereof, and every order, requirement, decision or
determination of the committee of the whole shall immediately be filed in the
office of the village clerk and shall be of public record. (Ord. 14-14, 12-9-
2014)
2-1-3: VOTE:
The concurring vote of four (4) members of the committee of the whole shall be
necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of the
zoning enforcement officer or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter
upon which it is authorized by the zoning ordinance to render a decision. The
committee of the whole shall make no recommendations except in a specific case
and after a public hearing. (Ord. 14-14, 12-9-2014)
2-1-4: DUTIES AND AUTHORITY:
The committee of the whole, acting in its capacity to hear zoning matters, is
hereby vested with the following duties and authority:
   (A)   To hear and decide appeals from any order, requirement, decision or
determination made by the zoning enforcement officer under the zoning
ordinance;
   (B)   To hear and submit findings and recommendations to the village board
on variations from the terms provided in the zoning ordinance in the manner and
subject to the standards set forth in said zoning ordinance;
   (C)   To hear and decide all matters referred to it or upon which it is
required to pass under the zoning ordinance;
   (D)   To receive from the village clerk copies of all applications for
amendments or special uses which have been introduced to the village board;
   (E)   To hold public hearings on all matters pertaining to applications for
special uses and amendments, and submit reports to the village board setting
forth its findings and recommendations in the manner prescribed in the zoning
ordinance for special uses and amendments;
   (F)   To initiate, direct and review, from time to time, studies of the
provisions of the zoning ordinance not less frequently than once each year; and
   (G)   To hear and decide all matters upon which it is required to pass under
the zoning ordinance. (Ord. 14-14, 12-9-2014)
2-1-5: APPEALS:
The committee of the whole shall hear and decide appeals from an administrative
order, requirement, decision or determination made by the zoning enforcement
officer or other authorized officials of the village, relating to the
regulations of the zoning ordinance. (Ord. 14-14, 12-9-2014)
CHAPTER 2
EMERGENCY SERVICES AND DISASTER AGENCY
SECTION:
2-2-1: Short Title
2-2-2: Intent And Purpose
2-2-3: Definitions
2-2-4: Establishment
2-2-5: Director
2-2-6: Functions
2-2-7: Service As Mobile Support Team
2-2-8: Compensation
2-2-9: Reimbursement By State
2-2-10: Purchases And Expenditures
2-2-11: Oath
2-2-12: Office
2-2-13: Appropriation; Levy Of Taxes
2-2-1: SHORT TITLE:
This Chapter shall be known and may be cited and referred to as the EMERGENCY
SERVICES AND DISASTER AGENCY ORDINANCE OF THE VILLAGE OF FOREST VIEW. (Ord. 78-
21, 6-20-1978)
2-2-2: INTENT AND PURPOSE:
   (A)   It is the intent and purpose of this Chapter to establish an
organization that will insure the complete and efficient utilization of all of
the Village's facilities to combat disaster resulting from enemy actions or
other disasters as defined herein, in accordance with the "Illinois Emergency
Services and Disaster Act of 1975".
   (B)   The Village of Forest View Emergency Services and Disaster Agency will
be the coordinating agency for all activity in connection with emergency
preparedness; it will be the instrument through which the Director may
exercise, the authority and discharge the responsibilities vested in him by
law.
   (C)   This Chapter shall not relieve any Village Department of the
responsibilities or authority given to it by law, nor will it adversely affect
the work of any volunteer agency organized for relief in disaster emergencies.
(Ord. 78-21, 6-20-1978)
2-2-3: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation of this Chapter:
ATTACK: A direct or indirect assault against the Village, its government, its
environs, or of the nation, by forces of a hostile nation or the agents
thereof, including assault by bombing, radiological, chemical or biological
warfare, or sabotage.
DIRECTOR: The Director of the Village Emergency Services and Disaster Agency,
appointed as provided in this Chapter.
DISASTER: Includes but is not limited to actual or threatened enemy attack,
sabotage, extraordinary fire, flood, storm, epidemic, or other impending or
actual calamity endangering or threatening to endanger health, life or property
or constituted government.
EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS: In its broad meaning is to carry out the basic
government functions of maintaining the public peace, health and safety during
an emergency. This shall include plans and preparations for protection from,
and relief, recovery and rehabilitation from, the effects of an attack on the
Village by the forces of an enemy nation or the agents thereof, and it shall
also include such activity in connection with disaster as defined herein. It
shall not, however, include any activity that is the primary responsibility of
the military forces of the United States.
EMERGENCY SERVICE FORCES: The employees, equipment and facilities of all
Village departments, boards, institutions and commissions; and in addition, it
shall include all volunteer personnel, equipment and facilities contributed by,
or obtained from, volunteer persons or agencies.
EMERGENCY SERVICE VOLUNTEER: Any person duly registered, identified and
appointed by the Coordinator of the Emergency Services and Disaster Agency and
assigned to participate in the civil defense activity.
REGULATIONS: Shall include plans, programs and other emergency procedures
deemed essential to emergency preparedness.
VOLUNTEER: Contributing a service, equipment or facilities to the Emergency
Services and Disaster Agency without remuneration. (Ord. 78-21, 6-20-1978)
2-2-4: ESTABLISHMENT:
There is hereby created the Forest View Emergency Services,and Disaster Agency
(hereinafter called ESDA) to prevent, minimize, repair, and alleviate injury or
damage resulting from disaster caused by enemy attack, sabotage, or other
hostile action, or from natural or manmade disaster, in accordance with "The
Illinois Emergency Services and Disaster Act of 1975".
ESDA shall consist of a Director and such additional members as may be selected
by the Director. (Ord. 78-21, 6-20-1978)
2-2-5: DIRECTOR:
The Director of ESDA shall be appointed by the Village President with the
advice and consent of the Board of Trustees for a one year term of office
commencing on May 1 and ending on the April 30 or until a successor shall have
been duly appointed and qualified.
The Director shall have direct responsibility for the organization,
administration, training, and operation of the ESDA, subject to the direction
and control of the Village President as provided by statute.
In the event of the absence, resignation, death or inability to serve as the
Director, the Village President or any person designated by him shall be and
act as Director until a new appointment is made as provided in this Chapter.
(Ord. 78-21, 6-20-1978)
2-2-6: FUNCTIONS:
The ESDA shall perform such ESDA functions within the Village as shall be
prescribed in and by the State ESDA plan and program prepared by the Governor,
and such orders, rules and regulations as may be, promulgated by the Governor,
and in addition shall perform such duties outside the corporate limits as may
be required pursuant to any mutual aid agreement with any other political
subdivision, entered into as provided in "The State ESDA Act of 1975". (Ord.
78-21, 6-20-1978)
2-2-7: SERVICE AS MOBILE SUPPORT TEAM:
All or any members of the ESDA may be designated as members of a mobile support
team created by the State Director ESDA as provided by law.
The leader of such mobile support team shall be designated by the Director.
Any member of a mobile support team who is a Village employee or officer while
serving on call to duty by the Governor, or the State Director, shall receive
the compensation and have the powers, duties, rights, and immunities incident
to such employment or office. Any such member who is not a paid officer or
employee of the Village, while so serving, shall receive from the State
reasonable compensation as provided by law. (Ord. 78-21, 6-20-1978)
2-2-8: COMPENSATION:
Members of ESDA who are paid employees or officers of the Village, if called
for training by the State Director of ESDA, shall receive for the time spent in
such training the same rate of pay as is attached to the position held; members
who are not Village employees or officers shall receive for such training time
such compensation as may be established by the Board of Trustees. (Ord. 78-21,
6-20-1978)
2-2-9: REIMBURSEMENT BY STATE:
The State Treasurer may receive and allocate to the appropriate fund, any
reimbursement by the State to the Village for expenses incident to training
members of ESDA as prescribed by the State Director of ESDA, compensation for
services and expenses of members of a mobile support team while serving outside
the Village in response to a call by the Governor or State Director of ESDA, as
provided by law, and any other reimbursement made by the State incident to ESDA
activities as provided by law. (Ord. 78-21, 6-20-1978)
2-2-10: PURCHASES AND EXPENDITURES:
The Board of Trustees may, on recommendation of the Director, authorize any
purchase or contracts necessary to place the Village in a position to combat
effectively any disaster resulting from the explosion of any nuclear or other
bomb or missile, and to protect the public health and safety, protect property,
and provide emergency assistance to victims in the case of such disaster, or
from manmade or natural disaster.
In the event of enemy caused or other disaster, the Director is authorized, on
behalf of the Village, to procure such services, supplies, equipment or
material as may be necessary for such purposes, in view of the exigency without
regard to the statutory procedures or formalities normally prescribed by law
pertaining to City contracts or obligations, as authorized by "The State ESDA
Act of 1975", provided that if the Village Board meets at such time he shall
act subject to the directions and restrictions imposed by that body. (Ord. 78-
21, 6-20-1978)
2-2-11: OATH:
Every person appointed to serve in any capacity in ESDA shall, before entering
upon his duties, subscribe to the following oath, which shall be filed with the
Director:
I,                      , do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will support and
defend and bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of the United
States and the Constitution of the State of Illinois, and the territory,
institutions, and facilities thereof, both public and private, against all
enemies, foreign and domestic; that I take this obligation freely, without any
mental reservation or purpose of evasion; and that I will well and faithfully
discharge the duties upon which I am about to enter. And I do further swear (or
affirm) that I do not advocate, nor am I nor have I been a member of any
political party or organization that advocates the overthrow of the government
of the United States or of this State by force or violence; and that during
such time as I am affiliated with the Forest View Emergency Services and
Disaster Agency, I will not advocate nor become a member of any political party
or organization that advocates the overthrow of the government of the United
States or of this State by force or violence.
(Ord. 78-21, 6-20-1978)
2-2-12: OFFICE:
The corporate authorities shall designate space in a Village building, or
elsewhere, for ESDA as its office. (Ord. 78-21, 6-20-1978)
2-2-13: APPROPRIATION; LEVY OF TAXES:
The corporate authorities may make an appropriation for ESDA purposes in the
manner provided by law, and may levy in addition for ESDA purposes only, a tax
not to exceed five cents ($0.05) per one hundred dollars ($100.00) of the
assessed value of all taxable property in addition to all other taxes, as
provided by the "State ESDA Act of 1975"; however, that amount collectable
under such levy shall in no event exceed twenty five cents ($0.25) per capita.
(Ord. 78-21, 6-20-1978)
CHAPTER 3
BUREAU OF FIRE PREVENTION
SECTION:
2-3-1: Establishment
2-3-2: Appointment
2-3-3: Duties
2-3-1: ESTABLISHMENT:
A Bureau of Fire Prevention in the Fire Department of the Village is hereby
established, which shall be operated under the supervision of the Chief of the
Fire Department. (Ord. 58-11, 10-14-1958)
2-3-2: APPOINTMENT:
The Chief of the Fire Department shall designate any member or members of the
Fire Department as inspector or inspectors of the Bureau of Fire Prevention who
shall hold this office at the pleasure of the Chief of the Fire Department.
(Ord. 58-11, 10-14-1958)
2-3-3: DUTIES:
It shall be the duty of the inspectors of the Bureau of Fire Prevention to
enforce the programs of the Fire Prevention Code as heretofore adopted by the
Village. The Chief of the Fire Department may delegate any of his powers or
duties under the Fire Prevention Code to the inspectors. (Ord. 58-11, 10-14-
1958)
CHAPTER 4
FIREMEN'S PENSION FUND BOARD
SECTION:
2-4-1: Board Created
2-4-2: Duties
2-4-3: Duties Of Village
2-4-4: Ex Officio Treasurer
2-4-1: BOARD CREATED:
The Board of Trustees of the Firemen's Pension Fund shall consist of the
President of the Village, the Village Clerk, the Attorney to the Village, the
Chief Officer of the Fire Department, and three (3) persons who shall be chosen
biennially from among the active firemen and one person to be chosen from among
the firemen who have duly retired under the Firemen's Pension Fund Act. (Ord.
64-99, 6-23-1964)
2-4-2: DUTIES:
The Pension Board shall perform all the duties under the provisions of an Act
entitled "An Act to Create a Firemen's Pension Fund in cities, incorporated
towns, villages and townships having a population of not less than five
thousand nor more than two hundred thousand inhabitants" and all amendments
thereto presently known as article 4 of the Illinois Pension Code, 40 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/4-101 et seq. (Ord. 64-99, 6-23-1964)
2-4-3: DUTIES OF VILLAGE:
The Village President and Board of Trustees shall perform all duties imposed
upon them by the provisions of the Act referred to in the two (2) preceding
sections, including the levying of a tax as provided in such Act, to be paid
into the Pension Fund. (Ord. 64-99, 6-23-1964)
2-4-4: EX OFFICIO TREASURER:
The Village Treasurer shall be Ex Officio Treasurer of the Firemen's Pension
Fund. (Ord. 64-99, 6-23-1964)
CHAPTER 5
POLICE PENSION FUND BOARD
SECTION:
2-5-1: Board Created
2-5-2: Meetings
2-5-1: BOARD CREATED:
A Board, composed of five (5) members, residents of the Village, to be chosen
as hereinafter provided, shall be and constitute a Board of Trustees to provide
for the disbursement of the Police Pension Fund and to designate the
beneficiaries thereof, which Board shall be known as the Board of Trustees of
the Police Pension Fund of the Village. Two (2) members of said Board shall be
appointed by the President of the Village. The third and fourth members of the
Board shall be elected from the regular police force of the Village by the
active members thereof. The fifth member shall be elected from the
beneficiaries of said Pension Fund. (Ord. 59-17, 5-19-1959)
2-5-2: MEETINGS:
Said Board shall meet at least quarterly as provided by law and shall hold such
additional meetings as may be duly called and shall keep records of all its
proceedings, which records shall be public. (Ord. 59-17, 5-19-1959)
CHAPTER 6
BOARD OF FIRE AND POLICE COMMISSIONERS
SECTION:
2-6-1: Creation; Abolition
2-6-2: Retirement
2-6-1: CREATION; ABOLITION:
There is hereby established a board of fire and police commissioners, which
shall consist of three (3) members, one of whom shall be chairman. The members
of the board shall be appointed by the village president with the consent of
the board of trustees; provided, however, that no appointment shall be made by
the president within thirty (30) days before the expiration of his term of
office. Vacancies on the board shall be filled in the manner provided above,
and appointments to such vacancies shall be effective until the end of the term
applicable to the commissioner being replaced, with the exception of the
initial appointments to the board, all reappointments or subsequent
appointments shall be for a three (3) year term. (Ord. 73-297, 6-12-1973)
Effective January 1, 2015, the board of fire and police commissioners is
abolished. Thereafter:
   (A)   The methodology for hiring full time police officers in the village
shall be approved by the president and board of trustees, from time to time,
based upon the recommendation of the chief of police.
   (B)   Promotions of full time police officers shall be in accordance with
procedures and criteria established, from time to time, by the president and
board of trustees. All promotional appointments shall be approved by the
president and board of trustees.
   (C)   In the event of the appeal of the suspension of a full time police
officer, or the proposed long term suspension or termination of a full time
police officer is being considered, the due process hearing procedures set
forth in section 10-2.1-17 of the Illinois municipal code shall be conducted by
a three (3) person committee appointed by the village president. The committee
shall have final decision making authority subject to judicial review as
provided by law. (Ord. 14-13, 12-9-2014)
2-6-2: RETIREMENT:
Retirement for full time police officers within the village shall be mandatory
upon attainment of age sixty five (65). (Ord. 14-13, 12-9-2014)
CHAPTER 7
ENVIRONMENTAL CONCERNS COMMITTEE
(Rep. by Ord. 03-11, 9-23-2003)
CHAPTER 8
RESERVED
SECTION:
2-8-1: Reserved by Ord. 19-02
2-8-1: RESERVED:
Reserved by Ord. 19-02.
TITLE 3
BUSINESS REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
COIN-OPERATED AMUSEMENT DEVICES
SECTION:
3-1-1: Definition
3-1-2: License Required
3-1-3: Application For License
3-1-4: License Fees
3-1-5: License Decals
3-1-6: Limitation On Number Of Devices
3-1-1: DEFINITION:
"Coin-operated amusement device" means any mechanical amusement machine or
device, not a gambling device, the operation of which is governed or controlled
by the deposit of a coin or token, including, without being limited thereto,
any such coin controlled instrument capable of producing or reproducing any
vocal or instrumental sounds, or operated as or for amusement, game, skill or
entertainment. (Ord. 61-55, 10-24-1961)
3-1-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of
keeping or maintaining any coin-operated amusement device within the Village
without first having obtained a license therefor as hereinafter provided.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain or use, or
permit the installation, keeping, maintenance or use upon his premises of any
coin-operated amusement device not licensed as hereinafter provided. (Ord. 61-
55, 10-24-1961)
3-1-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Application for license shall be made in writing to the Village Clerk which
shall set forth the name and address of the applicant, the number and type of
machines or devices to be licensed, the proposed location and such other
information as may be requested for the proper guidance of the officials in the
consideration thereof. (Ord. 61-55, 10-24-1961)
3-1-4: LICENSE FEES:
Every owner of a coin-operated amusement device maintained in the Village shall
pay an annual (calendar year) license fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00).
Said license shall not be assignable, nor shall the fee be prorated for periods
less than one year. (Ord. 94-18, 10-28-1994)
3-1-5: LICENSE DECALS:
The Village Clerk shall issue a decalcomania for each machine to the applicant,
which decalcomania shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the machines. In
addition thereto, it shall be the duty of each licensee to properly identify
each machine or device installed, kept or maintained by affixing a card, emblem
or suitable plate thereon which contains the name and address of the owner or
licensee thereof. (Ord. 61-55, 10-24-1961)
3-1-6: LIMITATION ON NUMBER OF DEVICES:
No premises or place of business within the Village shall maintain nor receive
licenses for more than five (5) coin- operated amusement devices in any such
premises. However, businesses which are holders of Class "A" liquor licenses
may receive licenses for up to eight (8) coin-operated amusement devices in
such premises. (Ord. 93-27, 10-12-1993)
CHAPTER 2
AUTOMATIC VENDING MACHINES
SECTION:
3-2-1: License Required
3-2-2: Application
3-2-3: Fees
3-2-4: Inspection, Analysis
3-2-5: Identification Of Machines
3-2-6: Machines, Location
3-2-7: Purchase Of Cigarettes By Minors
3-2-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall operate or maintain in the Village any automatic vending
machine for the sale of candy, nuts, soft drinks, including coffee and milk,
popcorn, sandwiches and other foods, cigarettes or gum without first having
obtained a license for each of such automatic vending machines as provided in
this Chapter. Such license shall be renewed annually. (Ord. 61-54, 10-24-1961)
3-2-2: APPLICATION:
Any person desiring to sell candy, nuts, soft drinks, including coffee and
milk, popcorn, sandwiches and other foods, cigarettes or gum by means of
automatic vending machines shall make application for a license for that
purpose to the Village Clerk, in which application shall be set forth the full
name and address of the applicant and the number and type of machines for which
the applicant desires licenses, the proposed location of each machine, and the
owner of each machine, if other than applicant. (Ord. 61-54, 10-24-1961)
3-2-3: FEES:
The following fees are hereby set for a license pursuant to the provisions of
this Chapter: (Ord. 81-13, 12-15-1981)
   (A)   The person in possession of each vending machine offering candy, nuts,
soft drinks, coffee, milk, popcorn, sandwiches and other foods or gum where the
cost of any item is not less than twenty five cents ($0.25), shall pay an
annual (calendar year) fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) for each machine operating
in the Village. Said license shall not be assignable, nor shall the fee be
prorated for periods less than one year.
   (B)   The person in possession of any cigarette vending machine or a machine
or device making any sale of cigarettes in bulk or by the package, shall pay an
annual (calendar year) fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) for each machine operated
in the Village, and for each establishment where such sales are made. Said
license shall not be assignable, nor shall the fee be prorated for periods less
than one year. (Ord. 94-18, 10-28-1994)
The Clerk shall issue a decalcomania for each machine to the applicant, which
decalcomania shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the machine. Said
licenses shall be issued on a calendar year basis. Said license fees shall not
be prorated for periods less than one year and shall not be assignable. (Ord.
81-13, 12-15-1981)
3-2-4: INSPECTION, ANALYSIS:
It shall be the duty of the Health Officer and he is hereby authorized and
empowered to inspect and examine all food or drink being offered for sale by
means of automatic vending machines for the purpose of ascertaining whether the
laws of the State and of the Village in relation to sales from the vending
machines are complied with and that the food and drink so offered for sale have
been kept fresh, clean and wholesome; and it shall be the duty of all persons
operating the vending machines, upon the demand of the Health Officer, to
furnish to him for his inspection samples of all such food and drink which
samples may be analyzed by or under the direction of the Health Officer and a
record of such analysis shall be made and kept in his office for the inspection
of the public.
The Health Officer shall also inspect all locations where the machines are
placed in order to ascertain that the candy, nuts, soft drinks, including
coffee and milk, popcorn, sandwiches and other foods and gum shall be free from
contamination and in a wholesome condition; and all machines shall be kept
within the enclosure of a substantial building, and the owners of the machines
shall, on the request of the Health Officer, furnish keys for the machines, so
that the contents of same may be inspected in company with a representative
that the owner of the machine may designate. (Ord. 61-54, 10-24-1961)
The inspections called for by this Section shall be made by the Health Officer
or his designee at least once every two (2) months. (Ord. 81-13, 12-15-1981)
3-2-5: IDENTIFICATION OF MACHINES:
It shall be the duty of each licensee to properly identify each machine or
device licensed hereunder by affixing a card, emblem or plate to said machine
which contains the name and address of the owner or licensee thereof. (Ord. 61-
54, 10-24-1961)
3-2-6: MACHINES, LOCATION:
No candy, nut, soft drink, including coffee and milk, popcorn, sandwich and
other foods or gum machines shall be installed or kept in any toilet or
washroom. (Ord. 61-54, 10-24-1961)
3-2-7: PURCHASE OF CIGARETTES BY MINORS:
It shall be unlawful for any licensee or any person in charge of the premises
where a cigarette vending machine is located, to permit any minor to use,
operate or make purchase from said cigarette vending machine. (Ord. 61-54, 10-
24-1961)
CHAPTER 3
LIQUOR
SECTION:
3-3-1: Definitions
3-3-2: Right To Sell
3-3-3: Classification Of Licenses; Fees
3-3-4: Payment Of License Fees
3-3-5: Limitation (Rep. by Ord. 89-17, 11-28-1989, eff. 1-1-1990)
3-3-6: Election Day Closing (Rep. by Ord. 77-7, 7-19-1977)
3-3-7: Application For License
3-3-8: License Fees Paid With Application
3-3-9: Other Provisions, Laws To Apply
3-3-10: Location Restrictions
3-3-11: Inspection
3-3-12: Sanitary Regulations
3-3-13: Local Liquor Commissioner; Powers
3-3-14: View Of Interior
3-3-15: Acts Of Agents Or Employees
3-3-16: Solicit For Prostitution
3-3-17: Female Bartender (Rep. by Ord. 86-4, 4-8-1986)
3-3-18: Revocation Of License
3-3-19: Minors
3-3-20: Sign Displayed
3-3-21: Responsibility Of Parents; Owners
3-3-22: Video Gaming
3-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
All words and phrases defined in the Liquor Control Act of the State 1  are
hereby incorporated and made a part of this chapter the same as if set forth at
length herein. (Ord. 59-13, 1-27-1959)
 
Notes
1 1. 235 ILCS 5/1-3.01 et seq.
3-3-2: RIGHT TO SELL:
Only such persons as shall be granted a liquor license in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter shall be permitted to sell or offer for sale,
alcoholic liquors in the Village. (Ord. 59-13, 1-27-1959)
3-3-3: CLASSIFICATION OF LICENSES; FEES:
There shall be the following classifications of liquor licenses, each
classification being subject to an annual license fee and a limitation of hours
of operation, as indicated:
Class A (limit of 2).
The holder of a Class A license shall be authorized to sell alcoholic liquor at
retail for consumption on the premises where sold.
The holder of a Class A license shall not sell or offer for sale any alcoholic
liquor between the hours of two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and eight o'clock (8:00)
A.M. on any day except Sunday, and not between the hours of two o'clock (2:00)
A.M. and nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. on Sunday. All patrons of a licensed premises
shall vacate the premises, including adjacent parking lot areas, within twenty
(20) minutes after the commencement of the hours during which sale of alcohol
is prohibited. In addition, the holder of the Class A license shall require
that all patrons shall so vacate within the time prescribed by this section.
While no alcoholic liquor shall be sold during the aforementioned prohibited
times, a licensee shall be allowed twenty (20) minutes after the commencement
of such a prohibited time to clean and close the licensed premises.
The annual fee for a Class A license to sell alcoholic liquor at retail for
consumption on the premises shall be one thousand dollars ($1,000.00).
Class B (limit of 1).
The holder of a Class B license shall be authorized to sell at retail only beer
and wine in the original package and not for consumption on the premises of
sale or at tables for consumption on the premises of sale, provided such sale
is accessory to another use on the premises, such as sale of gasoline, food
goods or similar items.
The holder of a Class B license shall not sell or offer for sale any such
alcoholic liquor, between the hours of two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and six o'clock
(6:00) A.M. on any day except Sunday, and not between the hours of two o'clock
(2:00) A.M. and nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. on Sunday.
The annual fee for a Class B license to sell beer and wine at retail in the
original package, but not for consumption on the premises, shall be one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00).
Class C (limit of 1).
The holder of a Class C license shall be authorized to sell alcoholic liquor at
retail in the original package and not for consumption on the premises of sale,
provided such sale is accessory to another use on the premises such as sale of
food goods or similar items.
The holder of a Class C license shall not sell or offer for sale any such
alcoholic liquor between the hours of two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and six o'clock
(6:00) A.M. on any day except Sunday and not between the hours of two o'clock
(2:00) A.M. and nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. on Sunday.
The annual fee for a Class C license to sell alcoholic liquor at retail in the
original package but not for consumption on the premises shall be one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00).
Class D (limit of 5).
The holder of a Class D license shall be authorized to sell both: a) alcoholic
liquor at retail in the original package and not for consumption on the
premises of sale, provided such sale is accessory to another use on the
premises such as sale of food goods or similar items, and b) beer and wine for
consumption on the premises. The sale of beer and wine for consumption on the
premises is limited as follows:
   (A)   No individual shall be sold more than two (2) alcoholic beverages
during the course of a visit.
   (B)   The hours of retail sale shall be from eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. to
two o’clock (2:00) A.M. on any day except Sunday and between the hours of nine
o’clock (9:00) A.M. and two o’clock (2:00) A.M. on Sunday.
The holder of a Class D license shall not sell or offer for sale any package
liquor between the hours of two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M.
on any day except Sunday and not between the hours of two o'clock (2:00) A.M.
and nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. on Sunday.
The annual fee for a Class D license to sell both: a) alcoholic liquor at
retail in the original package and not for consumption on the premises of sale,
provided such sale is accessory to another use on the premises such as sale of
food goods or similar items, and b) beer and wine for consumption on the
premises shall be one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). (Ord. 21-15, 12-14-2021;
amd. Ord. 2022-03, 1-11-2022)
3-3-4: PAYMENT OF LICENSE FEES:
All such fees shall be payable to the Local Liquor Commissioner at the time an
application for liquor license is made. Such liquor license shall be purely a
personal privilege and shall not be transferable. Such license shall be good
for not exceeding the calendar year in which it is issued, unless sooner
revoked for cause as provided by law.
There shall be no apportioning of said fee for fractions of a year, nor shall
there be any refund in case of a revocation of said license.
All license fees are due and payable January 2 of each calendar year, and it
shall be unlawful for any place of business wherein alcoholic liquor is sold or
offered for sale, or kept for sale, to be open to the public until such fee is
paid and license issued. (Ord. 59-13, 1-27-1959)
3-3-5: LIMITATION:
(Rep. by Ord. 89-17, 11-28-1989, eff. 1-1-1990)
3-3-6: ELECTION DAY CLOSING:
(Rep. by Ord. 77-7, 7-19-1977)
3-3-7: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
An applicant for a license shall submit an application under oath, on forms
obtainable from the Clerk stating, among other things, the following:
   (A)   His name and residence address.
   (B)   That he is a citizen of the United States.
   (C)   His place of birth, and if a naturalized citizen, the time and place
of naturalization.
   (D)   That he has never been convicted of a felony, or an offense involving
moral turpitude.
   (E)   The location where he proposes to sell at retail, alcoholic liquors.
   (F)   That the proposed location is not within one hundred feet (100') of
any church, school, hospital, home for aged or indigent persons or for
veterans, their wives or children or any military or naval station.
   (G)   That he will not violate any of the provisions of this Code, or the
laws of the State of Illinois or the United States, in the conduct of his place
of business.
   (H)   In the case of partnership or corporation, the information required by
this section shall be furnished as to each partner and the principal officers
of the corporation.
   (I)   That he has never been convicted of being the keeper of a disorderly
house and that he is not now the keeper of a house of ill-fame.
   (J)   That he has never been convicted of pandering or other crime or
misdemeanor opposed to decency and morality.
   (K)   Said application, in duplicate, shall be made to the Liquor Control
Commissioner and the Liquor Control Commissioner shall thereupon immediately
furnish to the Chief of Police, a copy of said application, and he is hereby
directed to make an immediate investigation of the said applicant and to
furnish the chairman of the Local Liquor Commission promptly after his
investigation, a report of what his investigation discloses concerning the said
applicant, which report shall be made a permanent record of the local Liquor
Commission and shall be filed together with the application with the Liquor
Control Commission to be kept as a permanent Village record. (Ord. 59-13, 1-27-
1959)
3-3-8: LICENSE FEES PAID WITH APPLICATION:
All license fees shall be tendered with the application for such license and
such fees shall be paid by certified check or bank draft payable to the
Village. Upon the Liquor Commissioner's approving the issuance of any license,
the fee for such license shall be delivered to the Village Treasurer to be
deposited to the General Corporate Fund. (Ord. 59-13, 1-27-1959)
3-3-9: OTHER PROVISIONS, LAWS TO APPLY:
Nothing in this Chapter shall excuse or relieve the owner, proprietor, or
person in charge of any tavern, or other place in the Village where alcoholic
liquor is sold, from the restrictions and requirements of any other provisions
of this Code or of the statutes of the State. (Ord. 59-13, 1-27-1959)
3-3-10: LOCATION RESTRICTIONS:
No license shall be issued for the sale of any alcoholic liquors on any
premises within one hundred feet (100') of any church, school, hospital, home
for aged or indigent persons, or for veterans, their wives or children or a
military or naval station. In determining the distance provided for in this
Section, the boundaries of the lot, parcel or land upon which a church, school,
hospital or home as herein defined, shall be construed as being the point from
which measurement shall be taken. The word "premises" as herein defined, shall
include the lot, plot or parcel or land upon which said alcoholic liquors are
sold. (Ord. 59-13, 1-27-1959)
3-3-11: INSPECTION:
All premises in the Village where alcoholic liquors are sold shall be inspected
at least every six (6) months by the Police Department to insure compliance
with the provisions of this Chapter. (Ord. 59-13, 1-27-1959)
3-3-12: SANITARY REGULATIONS:
All premises used for the sale of alcoholic liquors shall be kept in a clean
and sanitary condition. No refuse of any sort shall be permitted to accumulate
thereon, and all such premises shall be thoroughly cleaned at least once in
every twenty four (24) hours (provided that no cleaning shall be required on
Sundays or holidays if no business is conducted on the premises on such days).
In all premises wherein alcoholic liquors are licensed to be sold for
consumption there shall be maintained two (2) toilets, one for men and one for
women. Said toilet rooms shall have a concrete floor or other floor of
waterproof material and shall at all times be kept in a clean and sanitary
condition. (Ord. 59-13, 1-27-1959)
3-3-13: LOCAL LIQUOR COMMISSIONER; POWERS 1 :
The President of the Board of Trustees of the Village shall be the Local Liquor
Commissioner for the Village. (Ord. 59-13, 1-27-1959)
 
Notes
1 1. 235 ILCS 5/4-2.
3-3-14: VIEW OF INTERIOR:
There shall be a full view from the street, road or sidewalk of the interior of
premises where alcoholic liquor is sold. All premises where liquor is sold for
consumption upon the premises shall be continuously lighted during business
hours by natural light or artificial white light so that all parts of the
interior of the premises shall be clearly visible. (Ord. 59-13, 1-27-1959)
3-3-15: ACTS OF AGENTS OR EMPLOYEES:
Every act or omission of whatsoever nature, constituting a violation of any of
the provisions of this Chapter by any officer, director, manager, or other
agent or employee of any licensee, if said act is committed or omission is made
with the authorization, knowledge or approval of the licensee shall be deemed
and held to be the act of such employer or licensee and said employer or
licensee shall be punishable in the same manner as if said act or omission had
been done or omitted by him personally. (Ord. 59-13, 1-27-1959)
3-3-16: SOLICIT FOR PROSTITUTION:
No holder of a liquor license, nor his agent or employee shall allow, permit,
or suffer to remain on his premises any female who shall solicit herself or
others for prostitution, or shall solicit any patron to purchase alcoholic or
nonalcoholic beverages. (Ord. 86-4, 4-8-1986)
3-3-17: FEMALE BARTENDER:
(Rep. by Ord. 86-4, 4-8-1986)
3-3-18: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
Any license granted under the provisions of this chapter may be revoked or
suspended upon the violation by any licensee, his agents or employees, of any
provision of this code or state or federal law pertaining to the sale of
alcoholic liquors or by said licensee, his agents, or employees, doing or
permitting anything to be done on the premises so licensed that in the opinion
of the village local liquor commissioner is contrary to the best interests and
good morals of the citizens of the village. (Ord. 59-13, 1-27-1959)
3-3-19: MINORS:
   (A)   No licensee shall sell, give or deliver alcoholic liquor to any minor
or to any intoxicated person, or to any person known by him to be a habitual
drunkard, spendthrift, insane, feeble minded, or distracted person. (Ord. 59-
13, 1-27-1959)
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any licensee or any officer, associate,
member, representative, agent or employee of such licensee to engage or employ
or permit any person under the age of twenty one (21) years to tend bar or to
draw, pour or mix any alcoholic liquor in any licensed retail premises. (Ord.
80-11, 8-19-1980)
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of twenty one (21)
years to purchase or obtain any alcoholic liquor in any tavern or other place
in the village where alcoholic liquor is sold.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of twenty one (21)
years to misrepresent his age for the purpose of purchasing or obtaining
alcoholic liquor in any tavern or other place in the village where alcoholic
liquor is sold. (Ord. 59-13, 1-27-1959; amd. Ord. 64-90, 3-10-1964)
3-3-20: SIGN DISPLAYED:
Every tavern or other place in the village where alcoholic liquor is sold for
beverage purposes shall display at all times in a prominent place a printed
card which shall be issued by the clerk and which shall read substantially as
follows:
   Warning To Minors
You are subject to a fine up to five hundred dollars ($500.00) under the
provisions of the Village Code, if you purchase alcoholic liquor, or
misrepresent your age for the purpose of purchasing or obtaining alcoholic
liquor.
(Ord. 59-13, 1-27-1959)
3-3-21: RESPONSIBILITY OF PARENTS; OWNERS:
   (A)   No holder of a liquor license, or his agent or employee, shall suffer
or permit any minor to be or remain in any room or compartment adjoining or
adjacent to or situated in the room or place in which such licensed premises is
located; provided, that this paragraph shall not apply to any minor who is
accompanied by his parents or guardian.
   (B)   Any holder of a liquor license, or his agent or employee who shall
violate the provisions of section
3-3-20 of this chapter and this section shall be subject to a fine, or to the
revocation or suspension of his retail liquor dealer's license, or both such
fine and revocation of license.
   (C)   Any parent or guardian who shall knowingly suffer or permit any minor
child of which he may be the parent or guardian to violate any provisions of
this chapter shall be subject to a fine as in this code provided. (Ord. 59-13,
1-27-1959)
3-3-22: VIDEO GAMING:
   (A)   Licensed Video Gaming Exemption: The prohibitions of this section and
any other chapter or section of this code that may reference or govern gambling
or gaming shall not apply to any video gaming terminal that has a valid gaming
terminal sticker and is being operated by a licensed establishment that has a
valid village video gaming establishment license and is in full compliance with
this section.
   (B)   Definitions:
    VIDEO GAMING ACT: The Illinois video gaming act, 230 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 40/1 et seq., and as amended from time to time.
   VIDEO GAMING TERMINAL: Any electronic video game machine that, upon
insertion of cash, is available to play or simulate the play of a video game,
including, but not limited to, video poker, line up, and blackjack, utilizing a
video display and microprocessors in which the player may receive free games or
credits that can be redeemed for cash. The term does not include a machine that
directly dispenses coins, cash or tokens or is for amusement purposes only.
   (C)   Licensed Premises: Video gaming terminals may be located in the
following establishments:
      1.   Licensed retail establishments where alcoholic liquor is drawn,
poured, mixed or otherwise served for consumption on the premises, and as
otherwise defined in the video gaming act;
      2.   Licensed truck stop establishments as defined in the video gaming
act;
      3.   Licensed fraternal establishments where a qualified fraternal
organization that derives its charter from a national fraternal organization
regularly meets; and
      4.   Licensed veteran establishments where a qualified veterans'
organization that derives its charter from a national veterans' organization
regularly meets.
      5.   Licensed large truck stop establishments as defined in the video
gaming act.
   (D)   Video Gaming Establishment License: In order for an establishment to
operate a video gaming terminal, the owner of the establishment is required to
obtain an annual video gaming establishment license from the village by
submitting a written application, on a form provided by the village clerk. The
burden is upon the applicant to demonstrate its suitability for licensure. All
video gaming establishment licenses issued by the village shall expire December
31, next, after the date of issue, with an annual license fee of seven hundred
fifty dollars ($750.00) payable in full at the time the application is filed
with the village. A license is purely a personal privilege, and shall be good
for only the calendar year in which it is issued, unless sooner revoked for
cause as provided by law. There shall be no apportioning of said fee for
fractions of a year, nor shall there be any refund in case of a revocation of
said license. Said license shall not constitute property, nor shall it be
subject to attachment, garnishment, or execution, nor shall it be alienable or
transferable, voluntarily or involuntarily, or subject to being encumbered.
   (E)   Video Gaming Terminal Permit Sticker: In order for a video gaming
terminal to be operated at a licensed establishment, the licensed establishment
is required to obtain an annual video gaming terminal permit sticker from the
village for each video gaming terminal located on its premises by submitting a
written application, on a form provided by the village clerk. Each video gaming
permit sticker issued by the village shall expire December 31, next, after the
date of issue, with an annual fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00) per video
gaming terminal payable in full at the time the annual application is filed
with the village. This annual fee shall be shared equally between the terminal
operator and the applicable licensed establishment.
   (F)   Regulations Governing Licensed Establishments Operating Video Gaming
Terminals: The following regulations apply to all licensed establishments
operating a video gaming terminal on its premises with a valid gaming
establishment license and valid gaming terminal permit stickers for each of its
video gaming terminals:
      1.   Video gaming terminals may not be operated on any premises that are
located within one hundred feet (100') of a school or place of worship.
      2.   A valid village gaming establishment license must be clearly
displayed at all times.
      3.   A valid village video gaming terminal permit sticker shall be
clearly displayed at all times on each video gaming terminal.
      4.   A licensed establishment, as set forth in section (C)1. through 4.
may operate up to six (6) video gaming terminals on its premises at any time or
as defined in the video gaming act. A licensed large truck stop establishment,
as set forth in section (C)5. may operate up to ten (10) video gaming terminals
on its premises at any time or as defined in the video gaming act.
      5.   All video gaming terminals must be located in an area restricted to
persons twenty one (21) years of age or older. The entrance to such area must,
at all times, be within the view of at least one employee who is at least
twenty one (21) years of age.
      6.   No licensed establishment may cause or permit any person under the
age of twenty one (21) years of age to use, play or operate a video gaming
terminal.
      7.   No video gaming terminal may be played except during the legal hours
of operation allowed for the consumption of alcoholic beverages at the licensed
establishment, except truck stops and fraternal organizations, pursuant to this
chapter.
      8.   It shall be unlawful for any person to install, keep, maintain, or
use, or permit the installation, keeping, maintenance, or use upon the premises
of any video gaming terminal unless a valid license issued under this section
for the video gaming terminal is in effect.
      9.   It shall be unlawful for any person to deliver video gaming
terminals within the Village for use by any other person for gain or profit
from the operation thereof unless a license therefor has been issued by the
Village and the license fee has been paid for the current calendar year.
      10.   The licensed establishment must fully comply with the Illinois
Gaming Act and all rules, regulations and restrictions imposed by the Illinois
Gaming Board.
      11.   The licensed establishment must fully comply with this chapter,
except truck stops and fraternal organizations, and all other provisions of
this Code as well as Federal and Illinois law and rules and regulations.
      12.   Where a video gaming license is issued for a premises which also
includes a gas station, no individual shall be sold more than two (2) alcoholic
beverages during the course of a visit.
   (G)   Inspection Of Premises: Every licensed establishment where a video
gaming terminal is kept shall be subject to inspection by the Chief of Police
or his/her authorized agents, at any time, to ensure the compliance with this
Code. This includes licensed establishments applying for a video gaming
establishment license and/or video gaming terminal permit sticker. It shall be
unlawful for any person to hinder, resist, oppose or attempt to hinder, resist
or oppose the Chief of Police or his/her respective agents in the course of an
inspection.
   (H)   Revocation Of License And Permit Sticker: The Village President may
revoke or suspend any video gaming establishment license and any video gaming
terminal permit sticker issued by the Village if it determines that the
licensed establishment has violated any of the provisions of this chapter. No
license shall be so revoked or suspended, except after a public hearing before
the Village President or his/her designated agent, with a three (3) day written
notice to the licensed establishment affording the licensed establishment an
opportunity to appear and defend. Notwithstanding the foregoing, any licensed
establishment that has its liquor license revoked or suspended by the Village
under section
3-3-18 of this chapter or by the Illinois State Liquor Commission, or has its
video gaming license revoked or suspended by the Illinois Gaming Board, shall
automatically, without a hearing before the Village President or his/her
designated agent, have its Village video gaming establishment license and all
Village video gaming terminal permit stickers revoked or suspended for the same
time frame as its liquor and/or Illinois Gaming Board license, whichever
applies.
   (I)   Seizure Of Unlawful Video Gaming Terminals: Every video gaming
terminal that does not have a valid video gaming terminal permit sticker or is
otherwise unlawful shall be considered a gambling device subject to seizure and
shall be turned over to the Illinois Gaming Board in accordance with board
rules and regulations and applicable law, unless otherwise ordered by a court
of competent jurisdiction.
   (J)   Terminal Operators' Tax: A tax is imposed for the privilege of
operating a video gaming terminal within the Village upon the terminal operator
of a video gaming terminal at a rate of one cent ($0.01) per play on a video
gaming terminal.
   (K)   Tax Additional: The tax imposed in this Section is in addition to all
other taxes imposed by the State of Illinois or any municipal corporation or
political subdivision thereof.
   (L)   Rules: The Village Administrator is authorized to adopt, promulgate,
and enforce any additional rules and regulations pertaining to the
interpretation, collection, administration, and enforcement of this Section.
   (M)   Payment And Accounting: By the 20th day of each month payment of the
tax for the preceding month shall be remitted to the Village along with a
completed tax return form as prescribed by the Village. It shall be deemed a
violation of this Chapter for any person to knowingly furnish false or
inaccurate information to the Village.
A terminal operator of any video gaming terminal(s) shall be subject to audit,
inspection, and record keeping provisions of this Code. It shall be unlawful
for any terminal operator and/or person to prevent, hinder, or interfere with
the Village's officials, employees, and/or agents designated to discharge their
respective duties in the performance and enforcement of the provisions of this
Chapter. It is the duty of every terminal operator of a video gaming terminal
(s) to keep accurate and complete books and records to which the Village's
officials, employees, and/or agents will at all times have full access.
   (N)   Penalty: Whoever violates any provision of this section shall be
punished by a fine of not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for a first
offense in any twelve (12) month period, and a fine of not less than seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for a second offense and each subsequent
offense in a twelve (12) month period. Each day any violation continues shall
constitute a separate offense. This monetary penalty shall be in addition to
any and all other remedies which may be available to the Village under this
chapter or any other provision of this Code, or Federal or Illinois law.
   (O)   Conflict: In the case of any conflict or inconsistency between this
section and the Video Gaming Act, the Video Gaming Act shall control. (Ord. 13-
03, 3-12-2013; amd. Ord. 17-07, 4-11-2017; Ord. 18-12, 9-25-2018; Ord. 19-16,
8-13-2019; Ord. 21-06, 7-27-2021; Ord. 22-30, 11-8-2022)
CHAPTER 4
VEHICLE LICENSES 1
SECTION:
3-4-1: License Required
3-4-2: Application; Contents
3-4-3: Fees
3-4-4: Transfer Fee
3-4-5: Expiration; Pro Rata Fee
3-4-6: Plate Kept Clear
 
Notes
1 1. For violation settlements, see subsection
  9-1-3(A) of this code.
3-4-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any resident of the village to own a motor vehicle or
for any person to use a motor vehicle owned by a resident of the village in the
village unless the owner of such motor vehicle is licensed for the current year
by the village to use the same and said license is displayed on the windshield
of the motor vehicle. For the purposes of this section the term "resident of
the village" shall include a corporation or any business entity having its
principal place of business in the village. (Ord. 59-21, 9-22-1959)
3-4-2: APPLICATION; CONTENTS:
Any person desiring a license for any automobile or other vehicle shall prepare
an application upon a form provided by the clerk, setting forth the name and
address of the applicant, a description of the automobile or vehicle for which
the license is desired, its state license number, if any, and the place where
such automobile or vehicle is to be kept when not in use; also, the number and
kind of other automobiles or vehicles kept by the applicant at such place, and
such other information as may be prescribed. Such application shall be
transmitted to the clerk, and upon payment by the applicant of the license fee
provided for in section
3-4-3 of this chapter, to the clerk, the clerk shall issue a license which
shall be attested by him authorizing the use of such automobile, or other
vehicle within the village until the expiration of such license. (Ord. 59-21,
9-22-1959)
3-4-3: FEES:
Effective June 1, 2003, the annual license fees for the license required by
section
3-4-1 of this chapter shall be as follows:
   (A)   Passenger car   $10.00
   (B)   Recreational vehicle   15.00
Senior citizens age sixty five (65) or older and military veterans shall pay a
discounted fee of two dollars ($2.00) (limit 1 discounted permit per household
- passenger sticker discounted only). If a veteran owns multiple vehicles and
is also eligible for a senior discount, that person is entitled to two (2)
discounts. If a veteran has only one vehicle and is eligible for a senior
discount, then the fee is waived in its entirety.
   (C)   Second division vehicle (truck or truck tractor, but not recreational
vehicle) as classified for purposes of the state flat weight tax (section 5/3-
815 of the Illinois vehicle code 1 ).
Class A, B   $ 25.00
Class C   35.00
Class D    45.00
Class F, H, J, K and bus   100.00
Class N, P, R, S, T, V, X, Z and all vehicles   140.00
for which a mileage weight tax is paid
   (D)   All vehicles shall display a current village sticker within thirty
(30) days after acquisition. All parties who fail to obtain a license within
this period or a replacement license by June 30 shall pay the following late
charges:
0–30 days late   25 percent of fee
31–60 days late   50 percent of fee
61 and greater   100 percent of fee
(Ord. 02-05, 10-8-2002; amd. Ord. 21-09, 10-12-2021; Ord. 21-10, 10-26-2021)
 
Notes
1 1.    625 ILCS.
3-4-4: TRANSFER FEE:
The vehicle license transfer fee for all classes of vehicles is one dollar
($1.00). (Ord. 93-14, 8-10-1993)
3-4-5: EXPIRATION; PRO RATA FEE:
   (A)   All licenses required by this chapter shall expire on June 30 of the
year for which they are issued, and the fee to be paid shall be the full annual
rate for that year; provided, however, that if such vehicle has been purchased
or otherwise acquired by the applicant on or after January 1 of the license
year, the fee to be paid for the remainder of the license year shall be in an
amount equal to one-half (1/2) of the annual license fee; but the applicant
shall be entitled to such reduced fee only upon submission to the village clerk
of satisfactory evidence that the vehicle was purchased or otherwise acquired
on or after January 1 of the license year. (Ord. 93-14, 8-10-1993)
3-4-6: PLATE KEPT CLEAR:
Any person carrying a vehicle license decalcomania device shall keep the same
clear of dust and mud so that the same can be plainly seen at all times. (Ord.
59-21, 9-22-1959)
CHAPTER 5
ROOMING HOUSES
SECTION:
3-5-1: Definitions
3-5-2: License Required
3-5-3: Application
3-5-4: Investigations
3-5-5: Fee
3-5-6: Regulations
3-5-7: Inspections
3-5-8: Register
3-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
When used in this Chapter:
HOTEL: Every building, structure or any part thereof used, kept or maintained
as or advertised or held out to the public to be an inn, hotel, family hotel,
apartment hotel, lodging house, motel, dormitory or other place where sleeping
accommodations are furnished or maintained for hire or rent for twenty (20) or
more transient persons, whether with or without meals.
ROOMING HOUSE: Every building, structure or any part thereof used, kept or
maintained as or advertised or held out to the public to be a rooming house,
furnished rooming house, lodging house, boarding house, private club, dormitory
or other place where sleeping or lodging accommodations are furnished or
maintained for hire or rent by prearrangement for a definite period of time for
three (3) or more persons, hereinafter called roomers, who are not husband or
wife, son or daughter, mother or father, sister or brother, grandparents,
grandchildren, niece or nephew, or domestic employees, not to exceed two (2) in
number, of the owner or operator, in contradistinction to hotels which are open
to transients. (Ord. 70-225, 8-11-1970)
3-5-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall conduct, keep, manage or operate, or cause to be conducted,
kept, managed or operated, either a hotel or a rooming house without first
having obtained a license therefor. (Ord. 70-225, 8-11-1970)
3-5-3: APPLICATION:
An application for a hotel license or a rooming house license shall be made
with the Clerk on the form provided for that purpose. The application shall
state the proposed premises where such hotel or rooming house is located, the
number of rooms in such building, which of such rooms in the building are to be
occupied as sleeping rooms, the number of persons proposed to be accommodated
or allowed in each room and, in the case of rooming houses, the number of
roomers. (Ord. 70-225, 8-11-1970)
3-5-4: INVESTIGATIONS:
The Building Commissioner, the Health Officer, and the Chief of the Fire
Department shall make or cause to be made such investigations as they deem
necessary to determine whether the applicant's proposed hotel or rooming house
premises comply with all the applicable provisions of this Code relating to
building, zoning, fire prevention, health and sanitation. No license shall be
issued to any applicant whose proposed premises do not comply with applicable
provisions of this Code. Said Village officials shall indicate on the
application for a license the results of their investigation and their approval
or disapproval of said application. (Ord. 70-225, 8-11-1970)
3-5-5: FEE:
The annual fee for a rooming house license shall be fifteen dollars ($15.00)
per room available for rent. The annual fee for a hotel license shall be one
hundred dollars ($100.00). (Ord. 94-18, 10-28-1994)
3-5-6: REGULATIONS:
No house, building or accessory structure hereafter constructed or erected in
the Village shall be used as a hotel or rooming house, and no house, building
or accessory structure hereafter erected and not now used for such purpose, or
any building, house, structure or portion thereof which is now used or intended
to be used or occupied for hotel or rooming house purposes shall be converted
into, used as, or leased for a hotel or rooming house, unless such building and
every part thereof shall conform to the requirements of this Chapter and to
such other requirements of the building, zoning, housing, fire prevention,
health and sanitation regulations of this Code as may be applicable. (Ord. 70-
225, 8-11-1970)
3-5-7: INSPECTIONS:
The Building Commissioner, the Health Officer, and the Chief of the Fire
Department shall inspect or cause to be inspected as often as they deem
necessary, in accordance with the housing regulations of the Village, every
hotel and rooming house in the Village to determine whether all applicable
provisions of this Code are being complied with. (Ord. 70-225, 8-11-1970)
3-5-8: REGISTER:
The landlord, proprietor, manager, keeper or clerk of every hotel or rooming
house shall keep a register in which shall be entered the name, and if a
transient, the permanent address and license plate number, if any, of every
person who becomes a roomer, boarder, lodger or paying guest therein. Such
register shall also show the number and location of the room or bed occupied by
such person, the date of his arrival and the period for which the guest engaged
boarding or lodging. The register shall be accessible, without charge, to the
Police Chief or any police officer and to the Building Commissioner, the Health
Officer, the Chief of the Fire Department, or to any of their duly authorized
representative. (Ord. 70-225, 8-11-1970)
CHAPTER 6
MOBILE FOOD DISPENSERS
SECTION:
3-6-1: Definition
3-6-2: License Required
3-6-3: Application
3-6-4: Inspection
3-6-5: Vehicles; Requirements
3-6-6: Dispensing Requirements
3-6-7: Refrigeration
3-6-8: Heating
3-6-9: Milk
3-6-10: Utensils
3-6-11: Labelling
3-6-12: Repackaging
3-6-13: Storage Of Perishables
3-6-14: Location
3-6-15: Employees' Health Provisions
3-6-16: Sanitary Facilities
3-6-17: Sinks; Water Supply
3-6-18: Refuse Receptacles
3-6-19: Additional Regulations
3-6-20: Fee
3-6-1: DEFINITION:
"Mobile food dispenser" shall mean any person that shall, by traveling from
place to place, or upon the public ways serve food or drink from a wheeled
vehicle in the Village. (1961)
3-6-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of mobile food
dispenser without first having obtained a license so to do. Such license shall
be posted in a conspicuous place in the vehicle. (1961)
3-6-3: APPLICATION:
Application for a license as a mobile food dispenser shall be made to the Clerk
on such forms as he may prescribe.
If operator is other than the owner of the vehicle, the name of the operator
shall also appear on the application. (1961)
3-6-4: INSPECTION:
Before a license for a mobile food dispenser shall be issued, the Village
Health Officer shall cause an inspection to be made of the vehicle to be used
by the mobile food dispenser and the equipment contained therein. The Health
Officer shall ascertain where the vehicle is cleaned and stored when not in
use. (1961)
3-6-5: VEHICLES; REQUIREMENTS:
Every vehicle used by a mobile food dispenser in the conduct of said business
shall comply with the following requirements:
   (A)   The vehicle shall be enclosed with top and sides.
   (B)   The interior floor, walls and ceiling of each such vehicle shall be of
smooth, not readily corrodible, impervious material capable of withstanding
repeated washing and scrubbing, and shall be finished in a light color. Each
such vehicle shall be well painted, in good repair, in good sanitary condition,
and shall not be used for any other purpose except as provided in this Section.
   (C)   The food service sections of the vehicle shall be insect and rodent
proof.
   (D)   The name, address and mobile food dispenser license number shall
appear on both sides of the vehicle in letters at least three inches (3") in
height, in contrasting color.
   (E)   All food service equipment utilized in the mobile food dispenser shall
be of easily cleanable construction and shall be maintained in good repair and
shall be clean. (1961)
3-6-6: DISPENSING REQUIREMENTS:
It shall be unlawful to dispense food from a mobile vehicle except as
hereinafter provided.
No food other than individual portions that are totally enclosed in a wrapper
or container and which has been prepared in a duly licensed food establishment
licensed by the Village or another municipality shall be served from or by a
mobile food dispenser, except the following:
   (A)   Coffee, sugar and cream in approves container. Cream is to be
refrigerated and kept in a covered single service container, or an approved
cream dispenser. Sugar shall be served only in wrapped individual packages or
in a covered closed pouring-spout-type container, or in any other manner
approved by the Health Officer which is effective in preventing contamination
by the customer.
   (B)   Other bulk soft drinks or beverages other than milk, shall be
dispensed from an approved dispenser only. These approved bulk soft drink
dispensers shall be serviced and filled only at a duly licensed food
establishment which serves as a commissary for the mobile food dispenser. The
drink outlet on all bulk liquid dispensers shall be protected from flies, dust
and contamination by customers.
   (C)   All food products shall be completely enclosed, covered and protected
while being conveyed, transported or dispensed.
   (D)   Ice cream, ice milk, frozen dessert mix, sodas, sundries and other
frozen desserts manufactured or processed on or served from the mobile vehicle
shall be prepared from ingredients dispensed from an approved dispenser only.
Customers shall be served in single service containers. (1961)
3-6-7: REFRIGERATION:
Adequate mechanical refrigeration equipment or its equivalent as approved by
the Health Officer shall be provided and all meat, milk, dairy products, fish,
poultry and other perishable products, including meat sandwiches and cream-
filled pies shall be stored in the vehicle at a temperature not in excess of
forty two degrees Fahrenheit (42°F) excepting that perishable food products
commonly served as a hot food shall be stored in a heating appliance or oven
that shall be equipped with a thermometer showing the internal temperature of
such heating appliance, oven or device. (1961)
3-6-8: HEATING:
Heating appliance or oven temperature shall be kept at a minimum temperature of
one hundred eighty degrees Fahrenheit (180°F) during the period that the foods
are being heated. Heated foods shall have an internal temperature of at least
one hundred forty five degrees Fahrenheit (145°F) until served. (1961)
3-6-9: MILK:
All milk and milk products shall be served only in the individual containers in
which the product was filled in a Grade A milk plant holding a Chicago Board of
Health permit. (1961)
3-6-10: UTENSILS:
Only single service food utensils shall be used. All single service food
utensils such as cups, straws, knives, forks, spoons and stirrers, shall be
individually wrapped, kept in a clean place, properly handled and shall be used
only once. All cups and containers for bulk drinks shall be stored in closed
cartons and served from dispensers which protect their rims from contamination
by customers, dust, dirt or flies. (1961)
3-6-11: LABELLING:
All individually wrapped portions of perishable food products, including
sandwiches, pies and other similar portions, shall be plainly marked on the
wrapper or container in such a manner as to plainly identify the day and the
month on which such individual portion was prepared and wrapped in an
establishment approved by the Village as hereinbefore provided. The name and
address of the person processing or manufacturing and wrapping portions of
perishable food products shall appear on each individual portion. (1961)
3-6-12: REPACKAGING:
No person shall keep or offer for sale individual portions of perishable food
products which have been rewrapped or repackaged or portions of which the
identifying date on the wrapper has been altered, disfigured or changed in any
manner. (1961)
3-6-13: STORAGE OF PERISHABLES:
All perishable food products shall be stored as provided in this Chapter until
served to the customer. (1961)
3-6-14: LOCATION:
Mobile food dispenser vehicles shall not be operated in a fixed location and
shall move from place to place upon the public ways. Stops are to be made only
to service customers, and should not exceed thirty (30) minutes in duration.
The Board of Trustees may permit a mobile food dispenser upon receipt of an
official request in writing to remain in a fixed location for a period of not
to exceed thirty (30) days for the purpose of permitting the sale of food from
mobile food dispensers at circuses or temporary attractions. (1961)
3-6-15: EMPLOYEES' HEALTH PROVISIONS:
All persons employed on a mobile food dispenser vehicle shall be clean, free
from communicable diseases and shall comply with all of the food handler
requirements as set forth in applicable regulations of the Village. (1961)
3-6-16: SANITARY FACILITIES:
Adequate toilet and handwashing facilities must be convenient for the use of
the operators. (1961)
3-6-17: SINKS; WATER SUPPLY:
All mobile food dispenser vehicles shall be equipped with a handwashing sink
and an adequate supply of running hot water. The hot water storage tank shall
be self-draining and be cleaned and flushed not less than twice in each six (6)
month period. Liquid waste from the handwashing sink shall be piped in fixed
piping to a waste water retention storage container or tank of adequate size
not located in food storage or food serving sections of the vehicle. The
connection between piping from sink and waste water container shall be tight-
fitting and comply with the provisions of the Village plumbing regulations.
The waste water tank or container is to be emptied daily or more often if
necessary, and only into a sanitary drainage facility in a manner and place
approved by the Health Officer. (1961)
3-6-18: REFUSE RECEPTACLES:
The operator shall maintain a suitable, tight, nonabsorbent washable receptacle
for refuse. He shall be responsible for sanitation of the environs of the place
of operation. This said container shall be adjacent to but not an integral part
of the mobile food dispenser unit. (1961)
3-6-19: ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS:
The Village Health Officer is hereby authorized to make such rules and
regulations to implement the provisions of this Chapter as are deemed necessary
for the protection of the public health. (1961)
3-6-20: FEE:
The annual license fee for the mobile food dispenser is one hundred fifty
dollars ($150.00) per vehicle for the period January 1 to December 31 of each
year. Said fee will not be prorated for periods less than the full calendar
year. (Ord. 80-22, 11-11-1980)
CHAPTER 7
RESTAURANTS
SECTION:
3-7-1: Definitions
3-7-2: License Required
3-7-3: Application For License
3-7-4: Fees
3-7-5: Health Certificate Required
3-7-6: Employee Requirements
3-7-7: Inspection Of Restaurants
3-7-8: Revocation Of License
3-7-9: Regulations And Standards
3-7-10: Utilities And Equipment
3-7-11: Handling Of Specific Foods
3-7-12: Wholesomeness Of Food And Drink
3-7-13: Storage, Display And Serving Of Food And Drink
3-7-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of
this Chapter:
APPROVED: Approved by the Health Officer.
BACTERICIDAL TREATMENT: The application of any method or substance for the
destruction of pathogens and all other organisms, so far as practicable, and
which, in the opinion of the Health Officer, is effective and does not
adversely affect the food, drink or equipment with which it comes in contact,
or the health of the consumer of such food or drink.
EMPLOYEE: Any person working in a restaurant establishment, including the
proprietor, who handles food or drink during the preparation or serving, or who
comes in contact with any eating or cooking utensils, or who is employed in a
room in which food or drink is prepared or served.
HEALTH OFFICER: The Commissioner of Health of the Village or his authorized
representatives.
ITINERANT RESTAURANT: One operating for a temporary period in connection with a
fair, carnival, circus, public exhibition or other similar gathering.
RESTAURANT: Any place that keeps for sale, sells and serves to the general
public, for consumption on the premises, any article of food or drink for human
consumption. Restaurants, ordinaries, coffee houses, ice cream parlors,
lunchrooms, tea rooms, lunch stands, box lunch deliveries, luncheonettes,
cafeterias and retail drugstores serving counter lunches and drinks, caterers
and industrial food servers dispensing food or drinks to office personnel or
employees of an industrial plant shall be included under the term "restaurant".
UTENSILS: Any kitchenware, tableware, glassware, cutlery, utensils, containers
or other equipment with which food or drink comes in contact during storage,
preparation or serving. (Ord. 64-101, 7-14-1964)
3-7-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a restaurant in the Village who
does not possess an unrevoked license from the Health Officer, and the license
so required hereunder shall be posted in a conspicuous place in that part of
the restaurant to which the public has access. Any person conducting an
itinerant restaurant shall be required to secure a license, and only persons
who comply with the requirements of this Chapter shall be entitled to receive
and retain such a license. (Ord. 64-101, 7-14-1964)
3-7-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
An application for a restaurant license shall be made in writing to the Clerk
in such form as he shall require. Each application shall state the name of the
applicant, location of the premises and shall contain such further information
as may be required by the Health Officer in order to inform him fully as to the
size and nature of the place to be used for the purposes of the business and
the conditions, equipment and facilities for conducting the business therein,
the health of persons to be employed, and the regulations and facilities
provided for them.
Before any license shall be issued the Health Officer shall cause an inspection
to be made of the premises to be occupied by the applicant as a restaurant, the
equipment contained therein, the persons to be employed therein, the sanitary
and hygienic features and conditions, and all other matters relating to the
business which he considers necessary or proper to inquire into from the
standpoint of health and sanitation. Before any such license shall be issued
for a restaurant establishment the Building Commissioner of the Village shall
cause an inspection to be made of the premises to see that all building
provisions of this Chapter are complied with. (Ord. 64-101, 7-14-1964)
3-7-4: FEES:
The annual license fee for a restaurant is hereby fixed as follows: fifty
dollars ($50.00) for each place or establishment. This fee shall entitle the
licensee to maintain on the licensed premises service accommodations for
fifteen (15) persons.
Where the number of service accommodations exceed fifteen (15) but not twenty
five (25), the license fee shall be sixty dollars ($60.00).
Where service accommodations exceed twenty five (25) but not one hundred (100),
the license fee shall be seventy five dollars ($75.00) and an additional charge
of fifty cents ($0.50) for each service accommodation over one hundred (100).
The license fee for drive-in type restaurants shall be one hundred dollars
($100.00). (Ord. 74-327, 11-26-1974)
3-7-5: HEALTH CERTIFICATE REQUIRED:
Every person connected with a restaurant or about to be employed therein, whose
work brings him in contact with the handling of food, drink, utensils or
equipment, shall first obtain a health certificate from the Health Officer.
Prior to issuing such certificate, a doctor's certificate as to the medical
history and blood test of such person shall be submitted to the Health Officer.
Such person shall also furnish a chest X-ray taken by an approved laboratory or
public agency with the laboratory's or agency's interpretation thereof. If such
examination or history suggests that such person may be a carrier of or
infected with the organisms of typhoid or paratyphoid fever or any other
communicable disease likely to be transmitted through food, drink or utensils,
the Health Officer shall secure appropriate specimens of body discharges and
cause them to be examined in a laboratory approved by him or by the State
Health authorities for such examination, and if the results justify, such
person shall be barred from such employment. If such person is free from
infection, he shall be entitled to a health certificate which shall be
effective for a one-year period; provided, however, that such person shall
furnish such information, submit to such physical examination, and submit such
laboratory specimens as the Health Officer may require for the purpose of
determining freedom from infection. A fee of fifty cents ($0.50) shall be
charged for each specimen submitted for examination. Blood specimen tests are
to be repeated every six (6) months thereafter. (Ord. 64-101, 7-14-1964)
3-7-6: EMPLOYEE REQUIREMENTS:
   (A)   No person who is affected with any disease in a communicable form, or
is a carrier of such disease, shall work in any restaurant. No restaurant shall
employ any such person or any persons suspected of being a carrier of such
disease. If the person in charge of any restaurant suspects that any employee
has contracted any disease in a communicable form, or has become a carrier of
such disease, he shall notify the Health Officer immediately.
   (B)   When suspicion arises as to the probability of transmission of
infection from any restaurant employee, the Health Officer is authorized to
require the following measures:
      1.   The immediate exclusion of the employee from all restaurants.
      2.   The immediate closing of the restaurant concerned until no further
danger of disease outbreak exists, in the opinion of the Health Officer.
      3.   Adequate medical examinations of the employee and of his associates,
with such laboratory examinations as may be deemed necessary under the
circumstances. (Ord. 64-101, 7-14-1964)
3-7-7: INSPECTION OF RESTAURANTS:
   (A)   Every restaurant shall display at all times, in a place designated by
the Health Officer, a notice approved by the Health Officer.
   (B)   Samples of food, drink and other substances may be taken and examined
by the Health Officer as often as may be necessary for the detection of
unwholesomeness or adulteration. The Health Officer may condemn and forbid the
sale of, or cause to be removed or destroyed, any food or drink which is
unwholesome or adulterated.
   (C)   The Health Officer shall inspect every restaurant located within the
Village. In case the Health Officer discovers the violation of any item of
sanitation required for the license then held, he shall make a second
inspection after the lapse of such time as he deems necessary for the defect to
be remedied. Any violation of the same item of this Chapter on such second
inspection shall call for the immediate suspension of the permit.
   (D)   One copy of the inspection report shall be posted by the Health
Officer upon an inside wall of the restaurant, and the inspection report shall
not be defaced or removed by any person except the Health Officer. Another copy
of the inspection report shall be filed with the records of the Health
Department.
   (E)   The person operating the restaurant shall, upon request of the Health
Officer, permit access to all parts of the establishment and shall permit the
copying of any or all records of food purchased.
   (F)   Within one week after the receipt of a satisfactory application,
accompanied by a statement signed by the applicant to the effect that the
violated provision or provisions of this Chapter have been conformed with, the
Health Officer shall make a reinspection, and thereafter as many additional
reinspections as he may deem necessary to assure himself that the applicant is
again complying with the regulations, and, in case the finding indicates
compliance, shall reinstate the permit. (Ord. 64-101, 7-14-1964)
3-7-8: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
Any license issued under this Chapter may be temporarily suspended by the
Health Officer upon the violation by the holder of any of the terms of this
Chapter, or revoked after an opportunity for a hearing by the Health Officer
upon serious or repeated violation. (Ord. 64-101, 7-14-1964)
3-7-9: REGULATIONS AND STANDARDS:
All restaurants shall comply with the following regulations and minimum
standards:
   (A)   Floors: The floors of all rooms in which food or drink is stored or
prepared, or in which utensils are washed, shall be smooth and have such
construction as to be easily cleaned, and shall be kept clean and in good
repair. If floor drains are used, the floor shall be graded to the drain, and
such drain shall be provided with proper traps so constructed as to minimize
clogging. All floors shall be kept free and clean from litter. Dustless methods
of floor cleaning shall be used, or dust-arresting sweeping compounds and
pushbrooms shall be employed; and all except emergency floor cleaning shall be
done during those periods when the least amount of food and drink is exposed.
   (B)   Walls And Ceilings: Walls and ceilings of all rooms in which food or
drink is prepared or stored shall be pointed or finished in light color, and
shall be refinished as often as necessary in a manner approved by the Health
Officer. Nothing in this Section shall prohibit the use of tiled or varnished
wood walls. The walls of all kitchens, sculleries and other rooms where food is
stored, prepared or mixed shall have a smooth, washable surface up to the level
reached by splash or spray from cooking, dishwashing or other equipment used in
the operation of such establishments. Walls shall have a cove base at the
floor.
   (C)   Doors And Windows: When flies and other flying insects are prevalent,
all openings to the outer air shall be effectively screened with not less than
sixteen (16) mesh wire or plastic cloth; all doors shall be self-closing and
screen doors to the outer air shall open outward or fans of sufficient power to
prevent the entrance of flies and other flying insects shall be in use at all
otherwise ineffectively protected openings. Window and door screens shall be
tight fitting and free of holes. This shall include screens for skylights and
transoms.
   (D)   Lighting: Artificial light sources shall be provided which furnish
twenty (20) foot-candles on all working surfaces in rooms in which food or
drink is prepared or in which utensils are washed, as measured by a suitable
right meter, and shall be in use except when equivalent natural light is
present. This intensity of light does not apply to the dining room. Storage
rooms shall be considered to be sufficiently well lighted if approximately four
(4) foot- candles are provided at a distance of thirty inches (30") from the
floor.
   (E)   Ventilation: All rooms in which food or drink is stored, prepared or
served, or in which utensils are washed, shall be adequately ventilated so as
to be reasonably free of disagreeable odors and condensation. Ventilation
equipment supplementary to windows and doors, such as adequate exhaust fans or
stove hoods, shall be provided if necessary. This requirement shall not apply
to cold storage rooms.
   (F)   Toilet And Lavatory Facilities: Adequate and convenient washing and
toilet facilities shall be provided for employees in all restaurant
establishments, and the location of the same with reference to their proximity
to the place where the business of the establishment is carried on, and to the
place where foods are kept, stored or served shall be subject to the approval
of the Health Officer.
In all such places where foods are dispensed for consumption on the premises,
such facilities shall include hot running water and signs shall be placed by
the licensee in compartments containing any urinal or water closet, directing
employees to wash their hands before returning to work after visiting such
compartments or using such toilet facilities. Such signs shall be of a
permanent nature, printed, engraved or stamped on water proof, nonfragile
material, and shall be printed in letters not less than one inch (1") in
height. A sign shall be posted in each water closet compartment, kitchen or
employee's locker room, reading as follows: "No person who is affected with any
disease in a communicable form or is a carrier of such disease, or who has a
gastrointestinal disturbance, sore throat or a discharging or infected wound,
sore or lesion, shall handle food, drink, utensils or equipment." Toilet rooms
shall be so lighted as to yield at least ten (10) foot-candles of light by
standard illuminometer test at a height thirty inches (30") above the floor.
In establishments which may be hereafter constructed, where food or drink is
served, there shall be an intervening room or vestibule between any toilet room
and any room in which food or drink is prepared, served or stored, or where any
food utensils are handled or stored. This intervening room or vestibule shall
be equipped with tight-fitting, self-closing doors, and shall be of such
dimensions as to prevent both doors being opened simultaneously by the same
person. Toilet room doors shall be equipped with self-closing devices.
Toilet rooms and fixtures shall be kept clean and in good repair, and free from
flies. Adequate and convenient hand washing facilities shall be provided and
shall be kept clean. Hot and cold running water and individual approved
sanitary towels or efficiently operated blower shall be provided. The use of a
common towel is prohibited. No employee shall resume work after using a toilet
room without first washing his hands. Sinks used for the washing of dishes or
equipment shall not be used for hand washing. Soap shall be provided at all
hand washing sinks.
   (G)   Water Supply: Continuous, running hot and cold water under pressure
shall be easily accessible to all rooms in which food is prepared or utensils
are washed, and the water supply shall be of a safe, sanitary quality and ample
in quantity for all cleaning purposes.
   (H)   Kitchen: The kitchen in all restaurant establishments shall have
adequate light and ventilation, and the air flow shall always be from the
dining room through the kitchen. The discharge from kitchen fans shall always
be through a duct to a point above the roof line to protect the occupants of
the building in which the establishment is located or of adjoining buildings
from nuisance. Ranges, refrigerators and other bulky equipment shall be so
arranged as not to obstruct the light and ventilation, and tables for clean and
dirty dishes and food shall be so arranged that the dirty dishes will be as far
removed from the food rack and clean dishes as may be possible. Ranges shall be
hooded so that the cooking odors may be effectively carried off by a stock, an
exhaust fan or a skylight immediately above. The walls and ceilings shall be in
good repair and easily cleaned. The floors and walls should be proof against
rats and vermin. Ranges, steam tables, shelves, racks, blocks, tables or other
machinery or furniture used in mixing, cutting, grinding, cooking or otherwise
preparing the foods for service shall be of such material and construction that
they may be kept scrupulously clean at all times.
   (I)   Construction Of Utensils And Equipment: All multi-use utensils, all
show and display cases or windows, counters, shelves, tables, refrigerating
equipment, sinks and other equipment used in connection with the operation of
such establishment shall be so constructed and located as to be easily cleaned,
and shall be kept in good repair. Utensils made of or plated with cadmium or
lead shall not be used. Solder containing lead may be used for jointing.
All surfaces of utensils coming in contact with food or drink shall be of
smooth construction, shall be made of not readily corrodible material and shall
be free of breaks, corrosion, open seams, cracks or chipped surfaces. This
requirement precludes the use of any type of equipment so designed as to permit
food or drink to come in contact with V-type threaded surfaces: The joint
between the moving and stationary surfaces of food equipment shall be close
fitting. All surfaces of equipment and utensils with which food or drink comes
in contact shall be easily accessible for cleaning. Tanks, kettles, large
containers and other equipment, used for the storage or preparation of liquid
or semi-liquid food, shall be self-draining. All piping used for the conveyance
of food shall be so constructed as to be easily dismounted for cleaning, and
all surfaces of equipment used for the preparation, storage or conservation of
food and drink shall be accessible to sight or touch for the purpose of
cleaning. No new mechanical equipment designed to meet the requirements of this
Chapter or equipment having valves or pipes shall be installed unless the same
or complete drawings thereof shall have been submitted to the Health Officer
for approval prior to installation.
   (J)   Disposal Of Wastes: Every person owning or controlling any restaurant
establishment shall cause all offal, table refuse, shells and animal or
vegetable matter commonly known and described as garbage, to be placed in
proper metallic cans, which shall be practically air and water tight and easily
washable and which are covered with close-fitting lids at all times except when
opened for the deposit or removal of garbage, and shall cause all such
substances deposited in such cans or receptacles to be removed daily, or as
often as required by the Health Officer, from his premises and to be disposed
of either by burning in a properly constructed crematory which shall have been
approved by the Health Officer, or by dumping the same at any dumping ground or
place where garbage is dumped or disposed of by the Village. The removal and
disposition of such substances shall be done by such person at his own expense
solely, and in accordance with the provisions of this Code and the directions
or rules of the Health Officer relating to the disposition and removal of such
substances.
All garbage receptacles shall be washed when empty and, if necessary, treated
with a disinfectant.
   (K)   Refrigeration:
      1.   All readily perishable food or drink shall be kept at or below fifty
degrees Fahrenheit (50°F) except when being prepared or served. This shall
include all custard-filled pastries, milk and milk products, egg products,
meat, fish, shellfish, gravy, poultry stuffing, sauces, dressings and salads
containing meat, fish, eggs or milk or milk products. Raw meats should be
stored at or below forty degrees Fahrenheit (40°F).
      2.   All ice shall be of safe, sanitary quality and stored and handled in
such a manner as to prevent contamination. Water used to wash ice shall comply
with the safety standards of subsection (G) of this Section.
      3.   To prevent contamination of the refrigerator contents by possible
sewage backflow, all waste water from refrigeration equipment shall drain into
an open sink or drain, properly trapped and sewer connected; provided, that
where sewer connections are not available, clean, adequate, water tight drip
pans may be used, or the drainage is disposed of in an approved manner.
   (L)   Cleanliness Of Employees: All employees shall be clean in person and
no individual having an infectious disease in a communicable form or who is a
carrier of infectious disease, or who has diarrhea, sore throat or a
discharging or apparently infected wound, shall be employed in, or remain in a
restaurant establishment in any capacity which will require him to handle food
or handle dishes or other receptacles in which food is sold or served.
Employees preparing and handling foods shall be required to wear clean outer
garments and use hairnets, head bands or caps. Employees shall not expectorate
or use tobacco in any form in any room in which food is prepared or served. The
hands of all persons shall be kept clean while such persons are engaged in the
handling of food, drink, utensils or equipment; provided, however, that an
employee who does not prepare or serve food shall not be required to wear a cap
or other hair confiner.
   (M)   Sanitary Conditions: All restaurants shall be kept in a clean and
wholesome condition, dry and adequately ventilated so as to ensure a free
circulation of fresh air at all times.
Such places shall be kept free from rats, mice, flies and other insects and
vermin. No domestic animal shall be permitted in any such place where flour or
meal or other foodstuffs are kept or prepared.
The premises of all food establishments shall be kept clean and free of litter
or rubbish. Adequate lockers or dressing rooms shall be provided outside of the
kitchen or other food processing rooms, for employee's clothing. Soiled linens,
coats and aprons shall be kept in containers provided for this purpose in the
lockers or dressing room. None of the operations connected with a restaurant
shall be conducted in any room used as living or sleeping quarters. (Ord. 64-
101, 7-14-1964)
3-7-10: UTILITIES AND EQUIPMENT:
   (A)   Cleaning And Bactericidal Treatment Of Utilities And Equipment:
      1.   All equipment, including display cases, counters, shelves, tables,
meat blocks, refrigerators, stoves and hoods shall be kept clean and free from
dust, dirt, insects and other contaminating material.
      2.   All tablecloths, napkins and cloths used by waiters, chefs and other
employees shall be clean.
      3.   Single-service articles, such as paper cups, plates, straws, and
milk-bottle caps shall be used once only.
      4.   All multi-service eating and drinking utensils shall be thoroughly
cleaned after each usage, and all multi-use utensils used in the preparation or
serving of food and drink shall be thoroughly cleaned immediately following the
day's operation, in such manner as to be clean to the sight and touch. A
suitable detergent shall be used.
The cleaning shall be accomplished by the use of warm water, one hundred ten
degrees Fahrenheit (110°F) to one hundred twenty degrees Fahrenheit (120°F),
containing an adequate amount of an effective soap or detergent to remove
grease and solids. The soapy wash water shall be changed at sufficiently
frequent intervals to keep it reasonably clean. In machine washing, dishes
should be stacked in the racks or trays so as to avoid overcrowding and so as
to permit the wash and rinse waters to reach all surfaces of each article.
      5.   After cleaning, all utensils shall be effectively subjected to one
or more of the following or other equivalent bactericidal processes:
         (a)   Immersion for at least two (2) minutes in clean, hot water at a
temperature of at least one hundred seventy degrees Fahrenheit (170°F) or for
one-half (1/2) minute in boiling water. Unless actual boiling water is used a
thermometer shall be available convenient to the vat. The pouring of scalding
water over washed utensils shall not be accepted as satisfactory compliance.
Wherever practicable, bactericidal treatment shall be obtained through the use
of hot water in the manner above described. For this method of bactericidal
treatment two (2) adjacent deep sinks shall be provided and fitted with a
porcelain, metal or other impervious drainboard. After washing in the first
sink, the glasses, dishes, etc., should be placed in metal baskets and immersed
in the hot water in the second sink for the required period of time. Baskets
may be lined with wooden strips to prevent marking of the chinaware. Upon
removal from the hot water they should remain in the baskets until dry and then
be stored in such manner as not to become contaminated before again being used.
Where hot water is used for bactericidal treatment, there shall be provided a
hot water heater (preferably controlled by a thermostat) capable of maintaining
a water temperature of at least one hundred seventy degrees Fahrenheit (170°F)
in the vat at all times during work hours, and water at such temperature shall
be available at all times while utensils are being washed and given
bactericidal treatment. The heating device may be integral with the immersion
vat. Provision should be made for compensating for heat loss to the utensils,
especially when large numbers are submerged at any time.
Equipment that is too large to immerse may be treated: 1) with live steam from
a hose, in the case of equipment in which steam can be confined, 2) by boiling
water rinse, or 3) by spraying or swabbing with chlorine solution of at least
fifty (50) parts per million strength.
         (b)   Immersion for at least two (2) minutes in a lukewarm chlorine
bath containing at least fifty (50) parts per million of available chlorine.
The both should be made up at a strength of one hundred (100) parts per million
or more and shall not be used after its strength has been reduced to fifty (50)
parts per million. A test kit or test papers for checking concentration of the
chlorine solution shall be provided for use of the employees.
Where chlorine or other chemical treatment is used, a three (3) compartment vat
shall be required, the first compartment to be used for washing, the second for
plain rinsing and the third for chlorine or other chemical immersion; provided,
that for existing installations the second or rinsing compartment may be
omitted if a satisfactory rinsing or spraying device is substituted. The first
basket of utensils will remain in the chlorine bath for at least two (2)
minutes while the second basket is in the plain rinse and the third basket is
being washed. Upon removal from the chlorine bath the utensils may be rinsed in
safe running water, if desired, and allowed to dry either in the basket or
inverted on a drain shelf or tray.
Silver and silver-plated tableware should not be treated with chlorine, for
silver chlorides are formed which blacken the silver.
         (c)   Other chemical bactericides shall be applied in a manner similar
to that of chlorine in subsection (b) above.
      6.   In dishwashing machines.
         (a)   The washing period shall be at least forty (40) seconds with the
wash water temperature one hundred twenty degrees Fahrenheit (120°F) to one
hundred forty degrees Fahrenheit (140°F).
         (b)   The rinse period shall be at least twenty (20) seconds with the
rinse water temperature at one hundred seventy degrees Fahrenheit (170°F) or
higher.
Dishwashing machines must be kept clean. The pumps and the wash and rinse
sprays or jets, if any, should be so designed that a forceful stream of water
will reach all of the utensils when they are properly racked. Periodic
inspection and cleaning of wash and rinse sprays are essential to continued
satisfactory operation, and these parts of the machine should, therefore, be
readily accessible for inspection and cleaning. The wash tank water should be
changed during operation as often as is found necessary to keep it reasonably
clean. An effective concentration of detergent should be maintained at all
times.
New dishwashing machines should be provided with: 1) properly operating
automatic detergent dispensers, 2) thermostatic control of the temperature of
the wash water as well as that of the rinse water, and 3) thermometers in both
the wash and rinse water lines and in such a location as to be readily visible.
Adequate hot water heating and storage facilities are essential. These
specifications are not intended to be mandatory, but to serve as a guide.
      7.   Drying cloths, if used, shall be clean and shall be used for no
other purpose. It is recommended that whenever possible utensils be permitted
to drain dry without the use of drying cloths.
      8.   No article, polish or other substance containing any cyanide
preparation or other poisonous material shall be used for the cleansing or
polishing of utensils.
   (B)   Storage And Handling Of Utensils And Equipment:
      1.   All containers and utensils shall be stored above the floor in a
clean, dry place protected from flies, splash, dust, overhead leakage,
condensation and other contamination. Wherever practicable containers and
utensils shall be covered or inverted.
      2.   Drain racks, trays and shelves shall be made of not readily
corrodible material, and shall be kept clean.
      3.   Containers and utensils shall not be handled by the surfaces which
come in contact with food or drink. Fingers should not touch the inside
surfaces of glasses, cups, dishes, etc., nor the bowls of spoons, the tines of
forks or the blades of knives.
      4.   Paper cups, plates, straws, spoons, forks and other single service
containers and utensils shall be purchased in sanitary cartons and stored
therein in a clean, dry place until used, and after removal from the cartons
these articles shall be handled in a sanitary manner. Laundered cloths and
napkins shall be stored in a clean place until used.
      5.   Spoons, spatulas, dippers, scoops, etc., used for dispensing frozen
desserts shall be, when not in use, kept either in water maintained at one
hundred seventy degrees Fahrenheit (170°F) or in safe, running water. (Ord. 64-
101, 7-14-1964)
3-7-11: HANDLING OF SPECIFIC FOODS:
   (A)   Custard-Filled Products: All custard-filled and custard cream-filled
pastries shall be rebaked after filling at an oven temperature of at least four
hundred twenty five degrees Fahrenheit (425°F) for at least twenty (20)
minutes, and cooled to fifty degrees Fahrenheit (50°F) or less within one hour
thereafter, or the filling shall be heated before the pastry shells are filled,
so that every particle of the custard or custard-cream mix is held at a
temperature of at least one hundred ninety degrees Fahrenheit (190°F) for at
least ten (10) minutes, and cooled either before or after filling the pastry
shells to fifty degrees Fahrenheit (50°F) or less within one hour after
heating, and shall be maintained at that temperature until served or sold.
   (B)   Milk Products: All milk, fluid milk products, ice cream, frozen
custard, sherbet, ices and similar frozen desserts served shall be obtained
from sources approved by the Health Officer. Only Grade A pasteurized milk and
milk products shall be used.
In the case of milk drinks prepared, served or sold, the milk used shall
include the entire contents of the original container, or shall be from an
approved bulk dispenser. All milk drinks shall be mixed in a sanitary manner.
All milk and fluid milk products shall be served in the individual original
containers in which they were received from the distributor, or from a bulk
container equipped with an approved dispensing device complying with the
following specifications:
      1.   It shall comply with the requirements of subsection
3-7-9(I) of this Chapter, pertaining to the construction of utensils and
equipment.
      2.   No surface with which milk or milk products come in contact, except
the delivery orifice, while the dispenser is in use, shall be accessible to
manual contact, droplet infection, dust or flies.
      3.   All parts of the dispenser with which milk comes in contact,
including any measuring device, shall be cleaned and subjected to a
bactericidal treatment at the milk plant where filled and not at the restaurant
establishment.
      4.   The dispenser shall be filled and sealed with two (2) seals at the
milk plant in such a manner as to make it impossible to withdraw any of its
contents without breaking one seal and impossible to replace any of its
contents without breaking the other.
      5.   The dispensing device shall be so constructed as to automatically
mix the milk and cream thoroughly with each dispensing operation except in the
case of milk products which remain homogeneous without mixing. All milk and
milk products and cream served from dispensers shall be kept at a temperature
of fifty degrees Fahrenheit (50°F) or less until served. In the enforcement of
this requirement the Health Officer may make an exception in the case of cream
served with coffee, cereals, etc. The Health Officer may permit the serving of
cream from the original container or from a dispenser which complies with
subsections 1 and 2 above, and which can be filled in a sanitary manner, kept
clean, and frequently subjected to bactericidal treatment.
   (C)   Shellfish: Oysters, clams and mussels shall be obtained from a source
approved by the United States Public Health Service. Shucked shellfish shall be
kept, until sold, served or used, in the containers in which they were placed
in the shucking plant.
   (D)   Pork: All food products which in whole or in part shall contain raw
pork, shall be deemed unwholesome if they have not been thoroughly cooked or
otherwise treated by the method approved by the Health Officer to ensure the
destruction of trichinae. (Ord. 64-101, 7-14-1964)
3-7-12: WHOLESOMENESS OF FOOD AND DRINK:
It shall be unlawful for any person to use in any restaurant establishment, or
to bring into or keep in the same with the intention of selling, any food,
condiment, confection or drink which is unclean, unwholesome, tainted, putrid,
decayed, adulterated, poisoned, infected or in any other manner rendered unsafe
or unwholesome for human food. For the purposes of this Chapter, such food
products shall be deemed unwholesome for human food if the same have been
contaminated by flies or other insects, vermin, dust, dirt or other foreign
contamination; if they contain any poisonous or deleterious or injurious
ingredients in kind and quantities so as to render such articles injurious or
detrimental to health; or if they contain the whole or part of any uninspected
and unpassed meat or meat food products; or if such articles are or have been
submerged in brine or other solutions which are unclean, sour, putrid, spoiled
or contaminated. (Ord. 64-101, 7-14-1964)
3-7-13: STORAGE, DISPLAY AND SERVING OF FOOD AND DRINK:
   (A)   All food and drink shall be stored and displayed in such a manner as
to be protected from dust, flies, vermin, unnecessary handling, droplet
infection, overhead leakage and condensation, sewage backflow and other
contamination. Evidence of the presence of rodents, roaches, ants or other
vermin shall be considered as a violation of this Chapter. Food or drink shall
not be stored or prepared beneath overhead sewer or drain pipes unless such
pipes are provided with suitable means to carry off possible leakage or
condensation. Food or drink shall not be stored directly on floors which are
subject to flooding from sewage backflow. The pouring lips of bottles
containing milk or other beverages in nonleakproof containers shall not be
submerged in water or cooling.
   (B)   All food and drink shall be handled, prepared and served in such a
manner as to minimize the opportunities for contamination. Serving of sliced
butter and cracked ice shall not be by direct contact with fingers or hands,
and manual contact with all food or drink shall be avoided insofar as is
possible.
   (C)   All unwrapped or unenclosed food and drink on display shall be
protected by glass or otherwise from public handling or other contamination,
except that approved hand openings for self-service may be permitted on counter
fronts.
Bread, pies, cakes or other like articles of food shall not be carried or
transported through any public or private way unless such articles of food are
carried or transported in a flyproof and dustproof receptacle.
   (D)   No animals or fowl shall be kept or allowed in any room in which food
or drink is prepared or stored.
   (E)   All enclosed spaces within double walls, between ceilings and floors,
beneath floors, and in fixtures and equipment, which provide harborage and
potential breeding places for rodents, shall be eliminated by the removal of
the sheathing or interior walls which form the enclosed spaces; or all exposed
edges of such walls, floors and sheathings shall be protected against gnawing
by rats by the installation of approved rat-proof material, and all openings in
walls, floors and ceilings through which pipes, electric cables and other
conduits pass shall be properly sealed with snuggly-fitting collars of metal or
other approved ratproof material securely fastened in place and so maintained;
and propagation of rats and invasion and infestation of the premises by them
shall be permanently prevented.
   (F)   All supplementary means necessary for the elimination of flies,
roaches and rodents shall be employed. For the elimination of flies, fly-
repellent fans, flypaper, fly traps or fly-killing sprays or powders may be
used. All poisonous compounds used in the extermination of rodents or insects
shall be so colored as to be easily identified; however, poisonous substances
should be used with extreme caution and compounds harmless to humans should be
substituted wherever possible. Poisonous compounds shall not be stored in
kitchens or food preparation rooms. (Ord. 64-101, 7-14-1964)
CHAPTER 8
DRIVER TRAINING
SECTION:
3-8-1: Permission Required
3-8-2: Locations To Conduct Training
3-8-3: Restrictions
3-8-1: PERMISSION REQUIRED:
No person shall operate, maintain or conduct any driver training program or
instruction without first obtaining permission from the Chief of Police of the
Village. (Ord. 70-220, 5-26-1970)
3-8-2: LOCATIONS TO CONDUCT TRAINING:
The Chief of Police of the Village may designate certain locations within the
Village where driver training education or instruction may be conducted and
shall designate certain hours during which such education or instruction may
take place. (Ord. 70-220, 5-26-1970)
3-8-3: RESTRICTIONS:
The Chief of Police of the Village may prohibit or restrict the operation and
conduct of any driver training program or instruction which may be detrimental
to the safety of citizens and property in the Village. (Ord.70-220, 5-26-1970)
CHAPTER 9
SERVICE STATION FOOD SALES
SECTION:
3-9-1: License Required
3-9-2: Application
3-9-3: License Fee
3-9-4: Inspection
3-9-5: Food To Be Packaged
3-9-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No automobile service station shall be permitted to sell or offer for sale
perishable food products without first obtaining a license for such sales from
the Village. (Ord. 74-331, 11-26-1974)
3-9-2: APPLICATION:
Any automobile service station desiring a license to offer such products for
sale shall first make application, specifying those items to be offered for
sale, to the Health Officer of the Village, who shall report on such
application to the President and Board of Trustees. No license to sell such
food products shall be issued unless approved by the Health Officer of the
Village. (Ord. 74-331, 11-26-1974)
3-9-3: LICENSE FEE:
The annual fee for such license shall be fifty dollars ($50.00). The amount of
such fee shall be paid to the Clerk at the time application is made either for
the issuance of a license or the renewal thereof and shall be forthwith turned
over to the Village Treasurer. (Ord. 74-331, 11-26-1974)
3-9-4: INSPECTION:
The Health Officer of the Village is hereby authorized and directed to make
periodic inspections of any premises granted a license under the provisions of
this Chapter. Such inspections shall be at intervals not to exceed ninety (90)
days. The Health Officer may prohibit the sale of any food products if the
sanitary conditions of the premises are in the opinion of said Health Officer
detrimental to the health and welfare of the citizens of the Village. (Ord. 74-
331, 11-26-1974)
3-9-5: FOOD TO BE PACKAGED:
No item shall be sold or offered for sale under the provisions of this Chapter
unless it is contained within an unopened, sealed package or container. (Ord.
74-331, 11-26-1974)
CHAPTER 10
MUNICIPAL RETAILERS' OCCUPATION TAX
SECTION:
3-10-1: Tax Imposed
3-10-2: File Report
3-10-3: Administration And Enforcement
3-10-1: TAX IMPOSED:
A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of selling
tangible personal property other than an item of tangible personal property
titled or registered with an agency of this state's government at retail in the
village of Forest View at the rate of one percent (1%) of the gross receipts
from such sales made in the course of such business while this chapter is in
effect, in accordance with the provisions of the Illinois municipal code, 65
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-1. This "home rule municipal retailer's
occupation tax" shall not be applicable to the sales of food for human
consumption which is to be consumed off the premises where it is sold (other
than alcoholic beverages, soft drinks, and food that has been prepared for
immediate consumption) and prescription and nonprescription medicines, drugs,
medical appliances and insulin, urine testing materials, syringes and needles
used by diabetics. (Ord. 04-07, 6-8-2004, eff. 7-1-2004)
The exclusion contained in section 2(d) of the "retailers' occupation tax act"
approved June 28, 1933, as amended, shall not apply to property within the
village. (Ord. 79-1, 1-16-1979)
3-10-2: FILE REPORT:
Every such person engaged in such retail business in the village shall file on
or before the last day of each calendar month, the report to the state
department of revenue required by the retailers' occupation tax act, 35
Illinois Compiled Statutes 120/1 et seq. (Ord. 69-200, 8-21-1969)
3-10-3: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT:
The tax hereby imposed, and all civil penalties that may be assessed as an
incident thereto, shall be collected and enforced by the Illinois department of
revenue. The department of revenue shall have full power to administer and
enforce the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 04-07, 6-8-2004, eff. 7-1-2004)
CHAPTER 10A
NONHOME RULE MUNICIPAL RETAILERS' OCCUPATION TAX
(Rep. by Ord. 04-08, 7-13-2004, eff. 1-1-2005)
CHAPTER 11
MUNICIPAL SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX
SECTION:
3-11-1: Tax Imposed
3-11-2: File Report
3-11-3: Administration And Enforcement
3-11-1: TAX IMPOSED:
A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the village of Forest View
in the business of making sales of service at the rate of one percent (1%) of
the selling price of all tangible personal property transferred by said
servicemen either in the form of all tangible personal property or in the form
of real estate as an incident to a sale of service, in accordance with the
provisions of the Illinois municipal code, 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-
11-5. This "home rule municipal service occupation tax" shall not be applicable
to the sales of food for human consumption which is to be consumed off the
premises where it is sold (other than alcoholic beverages, soft drinks, and
food that has been prepared for immediate consumption) and prescription and
nonprescription medicines, drugs, medical appliances and insulin, urine testing
materials, syringes and needles used by diabetics. (Ord. 04-07, 6-8-2004, eff.
7-1-2004)
The exclusion contained in section 2(e) of the "service occupation tax act"
approved July 10, 1961, as amended, shall not apply to property within the
village. (Ord. 79-1, 1-16-1979)
3-11-2: FILE REPORT:
Every supplier or serviceman required to account for municipal service
occupation tax for the benefit of this municipality shall file, on or before
the last day of each calendar month, the report to the state department of
revenue required by section 9 of the "service occupation tax act", approved
July 810, 1961, as amended. (Ord. 69-203, 8-26-1969)
3-11-3: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT:
The tax hereby imposed, and all civil penalties that may be assessed as an
incident thereto, shall be collected and enforced by the Illinois department of
revenue. The department of revenue shall have full power to administer and
enforce the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 04-07, 6-8-2004, eff. 7-1-2004)
CHAPTER 11A
NONHOME RULE MUNICIPAL SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX
(Rep. by Ord. 04-08, 7-13-2004, eff. 1-1-2005)
CHAPTER 12
SOLICITOR'S REGISTRATION
SECTION:
3-12-1: Solicitation Defined
3-12-2: Exceptions From Solicitation Activities
3-12-3: Uninvited Soliciting Prohibited
3-12-4: Investigation
3-12-5: Time Limit On Solicitation
3-12-6: Signs Posted
3-12-7: Severance Clause
3-12-8: Penalty
3-12-1: SOLICITATION DEFINED:
For the purpose of this section the term "solicitation" shall be defined and
shall include any one or more of the following activities:
   (A)   Seeking to obtain orders either for immediate or future delivery, for
the purchase of goods, wares, merchandise, foodstuffs, services of any kind,
character or description whatever, for any kind of consideration whatever; or
   (B)   Seeking to obtain prospective customers for application or purchase of
insurance of any type, kind or character; or
   (C)   Seeking to obtain subscriptions to books, magazines, periodicals,
newspapers and every other type or kind of publication; or
   (D)   Going upon any premises and ringing the doorbell upon or near any
door, or creating any sound in any manner calculated to attract the attention
of the occupant of such residence, for the purpose of engaging in any of the
activities described in subsections (A) through (C) of this section. (Ord. 73-
290, 1-9-1973)
3-12-2: EXCEPTIONS FROM SOLICITATION ACTIVITIES:
For the purpose of this section the term "solicitation" shall not include the
following activities:
   (A)   Seeking to obtain contributions on behalf of any charitable,
religious, civic, local fire or police auxiliary, school or scouting
organization or any other not for profit organization in good standing in the
State of Illinois; or
   (B)   Seeking to obtain signatures to petitions on political or public
policy questions or matters; or
   (C)   Seeking to conduct any of the activities enumerated in subsections
3-12-1(A) through (D) of this chapter when undertaken by any person pursuant to
a previous appointment or invitation of the party being contacted. (Ord. 73-
290, 1-9-1973)
3-12-3: UNINVITED SOLICITING PROHIBITED:
No person shall engage in solicitation upon any premises or in any dwelling
house, apartment or other residence located thereon within this Village after
having been asked by the owner or occupant thereof to leave such premises or
residence, nor shall any person engage in solicitation upon any premises or in
any dwelling house, apartment, or other residence located thereon if such
premises or dwelling building is posted against solicitation by means of a
notice prominently displayed, upon which is printed the legend:
"NO SOLICITORS" or "NO SOLICITORS INVITED" or "NO TRESPASSING"
which notice is posted or exhibited at or near the main entrance to the
premises or on or near the main door to any dwelling or residence thereon or at
any point of approach or entry thereto. (Ord. 73-290, 1-9-1973)
3-12-4: INVESTIGATION:
The Chief of Police may make or cause to be made such investigation as he deems
necessary to determine the character and reputation of the solicitor. All
solicitors are required to register with the Police Department prior to
solicitation and to be issued a solicitor's badge attached to a lanyard which
should be worn around the neck with the badge hanging in front and outside of
clothing. (Ord. 11-16, 11-8-2011; amd. Ord. 17-07, 4-11-2017)
3-12-5: TIME LIMIT ON SOLICITATION:
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in solicitation at any time prior
to nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. or after five o'clock (5:00) P.M., local time,
Monday through Saturday or at any time on a Sunday or on a state or national
holiday. (Ord. 11-16, 11-8-2011)
3-12-6: SIGNS POSTED:
The village clerk is hereby directed to post appropriate signs at the limits of
the village with the following language:
SOLICITORS AND PEDDLERS MUST BE REGISTERED. APPLY AT MUNICIPAL BUILDING, 7010
WEST 46TH STREET.
(Ord. 73-290, 1-9-1973)
3-12-7: SEVERANCE CLAUSE:
If any section, paragraph, clause or provision of this ordinance is held
invalid, the invalidity thereof shall not affect any of the other provisions of
this ordinance. (Ord. 73-290, 1-9-1973)
3-12-8: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not less than thirty five dollars
($35.00) nor more than the maximum penalty provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 11-16, 11-8-2011)
CHAPTER 13
SCAVENGERS
SECTION:
3-13-1: License Required; Fee
3-13-2: Application For Permit; Approval
3-13-3: Vehicle Requirements
3-13-4: Disposal, Storage Of Refuse Restricted
3-13-5: Recycling Requirements And Reporting Requirements For Licensees
3-13-1: LICENSE REQUIRED; FEE:
No person shall engage in the business of scavenger or in the business of
collecting or disposing of garbage, refuse or ashes within the Village without
having first secured a license therefor. Such license shall allow the holder to
solicit for any scavenger service within the Municipality with the exception
that the corporate authorities may enter into a contract with a single
regularly licensed scavenger for the collection of refuse from single family
residences within the Village. The fee for such regular license shall be seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for a calendar year or portion thereof. (Ord.
80-20, 11-11-1980)
3-13-2: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT; APPROVAL:
Applications for such permits shall be made to the Village Clerk, and shall be
referred by him to the President and Board of Trustees. No such permit shall be
issued unless and until the application is reviewed and approved by the
President and Board of Trustees. (Ord. 74-329, 11-26-1979)
3-13-3: VEHICLE REQUIREMENTS:
Any vehicle used by a scavenger in his business shall be watertight and
equipped with airtight covers for such portions as are used for the
transportation of garbage, refuse or ashes. No such vehicle shall be operated
or driven on, along or through any streets in the Village on a Sunday. (Ord.
74-329, 11-26-1979)
3-13-4: DISPOSAL, STORAGE OF REFUSE RESTRICTED:
It shall be unlawful for any scavenger to dispose of or to store any garbage,
refuse or ashes in any place within the Village limits or within one mile
thereof. (Ord. 74-329, 11-26-1979)
3-13-5: RECYCLING REQUIREMENTS AND REPORTING REQUIREMENTS FOR LICENSEES:
   (A)   All holders of a scavenger license shall offer recycling services to
customers within the Village, which services shall include at least two (2)
materials such as glass, aluminum, paper or other suitable recycling materials.
   (B)   At the time of applying for renewal of a scavenger license, each such
licensee shall provide the Village with two (2) reports. One report shall
detail the amount of refuse collected in the Village by the licensee. The
second report shall provide the Village with the types and quantities of
recyclable materials collected by the scavenger during the prior license year.
(Ord. 93-18, 8-24-1993, eff. 1-1-1994)
CHAPTER 14
ICE CREAM DEALERS AND CATERERS
SECTION:
3-14-1: License Required
3-14-2: License Fees
3-14-3: Pure Ingredients Required
3-14-4: Sanitary Receptacles Required
3-14-5: Utensils And Equipment
3-14-6: Sanitary Regulations For Premises
3-14-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall sell, offer for sale, expose for sale, exchange or deliver ice
cream, dispose of ice cream, or engage in the business of ice cream caterer, in
or from any store, stand, booth, market, depot, warehouse, dairy or any
building or establishment, or in or from any wagon, truck or other vehicle
without first having obtained a license therefor. (Ord. 74-328, 11-26-1974)
3-14-2: LICENSE FEES:
The annual fee for a license to engage in any of the above acts shall be as
follows:
   (A)   For each store, stand, booth, market
   depot, warehouse, dairy or building
   or establishment   $25.00
   (B)   For each wagon, truck or other vehicle   35.00
(Ord. 74-328, 11-26-1974)
3-14-3: PURE INGREDIENTS REQUIRED:
   (A)   No person shall manufacture, sell or deliver or offer for sale or
delivery any ice cream or frozen ices in the Village which contain any
poisonous, impure or unwholesome ingredients or preservatives or which are in a
decomposed, poisonous, impure or unwholesome condition.
   (B)   No person shall make, sell or deliver in the Village ice cream or
fruit ices from substances other than eggs, milk, cream, condensed milk,
fruits, gelatine, nuts and harmless flavoring and coloring matters. (Ord. 74-
328, 11-26-1974)
3-14-4: SANITARY RECEPTACLES REQUIRED:
No person shall keep or store ice cream for sale or disposal, or transport the
same over any street or public way in the Village except in a receptacle which
is clean, dustproof and flyproof. (Ord. 74-328, 11-26-1974)
3-14-5: UTENSILS AND EQUIPMENT:
All utensils and equipment used in the manufacture, handling or sale of ice
cream shall be of nonabsorbent material, free from rust or corrosion,
constructed in such a manner that they may be easily cleaned and sterilized and
shall be kept clean and sterilized at all times. (Ord. 74-328, 11-26-1974)
3-14-6: SANITARY REGULATIONS FOR PREMISES:
   (A)   Every room or other place used or occupied for the manufacture,
handling or storage of ice cream or frozen ices shall be closely sealed, well
ventilated and lighted and all windows and doors shall be provided with tight
screens to prevent the passage of flies.
   (B)   The walls and floors of such premises shall be constructed as to
permit rapid and thorough cleansing.
   (C)   Every factory or place for the preparation of ice cream or frozen ices
shall be equipped with appliances for the washing and sterilizing of all
utensils employed in the manufacture, handling and sale of such products. (Ord.
74-328, 11-26-1974)
CHAPTER 15
GENERAL BUSINESS REGULATIONS
SECTION:
3-15-1: License Required; Penalty; Subjects Of Licensing Authority; Lease
Reporting
3-15-2: Applications
3-15-3: Investigation
3-15-4: Approval; Disapproval
3-15-5: License Term; Expiration; Renewal
3-15-6: Licenses Not Assignable; Unlawful Use
3-15-7: Building And Premises
3-15-8: Location
3-15-9: Nuisances Prohibited
3-15-10: Working Conditions
3-15-11: Inspections
3-15-12: Enforcement
3-15-13: Suspension, Revocation Of License Or Permit
3-15-14: Appeal
3-15-15: License To Be Posted; Destruction, Removal Of License
3-15-16: Business Vehicle Sticker
3-15-17: Fees
3-15-18: Limitation On Number Of Yearly Garage Sales
3-15-1: LICENSE REQUIRED; PENALTY; SUBJECTS OF LICENSING AUTHORITY; LEASE
REPORTING:
No person shall conduct, engage in, maintain, operate, carry on or manage any
business, occupation, activity or establishment, either by himself or itself,
or through an agent, employee or partner, without first having obtained a
license for such business, occupation, activity or establishment. Any person
convicted of violating this section shall be fined not less than ten dollars
($10.00) nor more than the maximum penalty provided in section
1-4-1 of this code.
Any person shall be subject to the requirement if, by himself or itself, or
through an agent, employee or partner, he or it is held forth as being engaged
in the business, activity, or occupation, or if he or it solicits patronage
therefor, actively or passively, or if he or it performs or attempts to perform
any part of such business, activity, or occupation in the village. (Ord. 75-
335, 12-28-1975; amd. Ord. 95-23, 10-10-1995)
   (A)   Effective immediately any property owner/landlord who leases out or
rents any property within any business/industrial district of the village of
Forest View shall notify the village clerk within ten (10) business days of the
signing of said lease the following:
      1.   Name of tenant.
      2.   Address of property leased.
      3.   Type of business to be operated on premises.
      4.   Personal contact information for the tenant.
      5.   Business contact information for tenant's office.
   (B)   Property owners/landlords subject to the requirements set forth in
subsection (A) of this section must provide the village clerk the following
information on all current tenants prior to close of business on June 1, 2011:
      1.   Name of tenant.
      2.   Address of property leased.
      3.   Type of business in operation.
      4.   Personal contact information for the tenant.
      5.   Business contact information for the tenant's office. (Ord. 11-05,
4-12-2011)
3-15-2: APPLICATIONS:
Applications for all licenses and permits shall be made to the village clerk in
writing on a form provided for that purpose, except as otherwise provided.
If the applicant is an individual (sole proprietorship), the application shall
contain his name, residence address and telephone number. If the applicant is a
partnership or other noncorporate business entity, the application shall
contain the name and address of each partner, principal or member thereof. If
the applicant is a corporation, the application shall contain the name and
address of each principal officer and the registered agent thereof.
Each application also shall contain: a) a designation of the type or kind of
license or permit desired, b) the location or proposed location of the place of
business, occupation or activity, c) the applicable fee to be paid, d) the
number of the certificate of registration required under the retailer's
occupation tax act, service occupation tax act and/or use tax act, if
applicable, and e) such additional information as may be needed for the proper
guidance of village officials in the evaluation of such application. (Ord. 75-
335, 1-28-1975)
3-15-3: INVESTIGATION:
   (A)   Where this code authorizes or necessitates an investigation or
inspection by any department or official of the village before the issuance of
a license, and requires the approval by such department or official regarding
the proper location or condition of the premises in which the business,
occupation or activity for which a license is applied is to be managed,
conducted, operated or carried on, or regarding the condition and nature of the
equipment and methods intended to be used by the applicant in such business,
occupation or activity, then the village clerk, within forty eight (48) hours
of the time an application for such license is received by him, shall transmit
to the appropriate official or department such information necessary for the
required investigation or inspection.
   (B)   Within ten (10) days after the receipt of such information from the
village clerk, such official or department: 1) shall make all necessary
investigations and inspections, and the results thereof shall be reported in
writing to the village clerk, and 2) shall indicate on the application a
recommendation for the approval or disapproval thereof.
   (C)   Upon receipt of all related investigative and inspection reports, the
village clerk shall forward such reports, together with the application, to the
village president for final determination. (Ord. 75-335, 1-28-1975)
3-15-4: APPROVAL; DISAPPROVAL:
   (A)   If, after due consideration of the information contained within the
application and related investigative and inspection reports, the village
president determines that the application is satisfactory, he shall approve the
application. Thereupon, the village clerk shall notify the applicant that his
or its application is approved, and the license or permit shall be issued.
   (B)   If, after due consideration of the information contained within the
application and related investigative and inspection reports, the village
president determines that matters concerning the application are
unsatisfactory, he shall disapprove the application, indicating the reasons
therefor. Thereupon, the village clerk shall notify the applicant that his or
its application has not been approved and that no license or permit will be
issued. (Ord. 75-335, 1-28-1975)
3-15-5: LICENSE TERM; EXPIRATION; RENEWAL:
   (A)   Each license shall indicate the term thereof. All annual licenses
shall be operative and the license year for the village shall commence on
January 1 of each year. No license shall be granted for a period longer than
one year. Except where otherwise provided herein, every license shall expire on
December 31 following the date of issuance.
   (B)   The village clerk shall endeavor to notify each annual licensee of the
expiration time of the license held by the licensee at least twenty one (21)
days prior to such expiration date. Provided, however, that a failure to make
such notification or the licensee's failure to receive it, shall not excuse the
licensee from the obligation to obtain a new license or a renewal thereof.
   (C)   Except as otherwise provided herein, each license may be renewed upon
proper application and payment of the required fee. The requirements and
procedures for granting and issuing a license renewal shall be the same as
provided in sections
3-15-1 through
3-15-4 of this section. (Ord. 75-335, 1-28-1975)
   (D)   Any licensee who fails to pay his license renewal fee by the date due,
shall pay a penalty of ten percent (10%) of the license fee for the first
calendar month or fraction thereof during which the license fee is overdue. A
penalty of an amount equal to the cost of the license shall be assessed for the
second month or fraction thereof during which the license fee is overdue. A
penalty of an amount equal to double the cost of the license shall be assessed
for the third month, or a fraction thereof during which the license fee is
overdue. The minimum late penalty shall be ten dollars ($10.00) per month.
(Ord. 11-06, 4-12-2011)
3-15-6: LICENSES NOT ASSIGNABLE; UNLAWFUL USE:
   (A)   No license or permit may be assigned, sold, loaned, transferred, used
as collateral or otherwise encumbered. No person, firm or corporation shall use
or display any license certificate, tag, badge, or sticker which has been
improperly acquired.
   (B)   No person, firm or corporation shall alter, deface, forge or
counterfeit any license, certificate, plate, tag, badge or sticker issued by
the village. (Ord. 75-335, 1-28-1975)
3-15-7: BUILDING AND PREMISES:
No license shall be issued for the conduct of any business, and no permit shall
be issued for any purpose or activity, if the premises and building to be used
for the purpose do not fully comply with all applicable ordinances and
regulations of the village and the state of Illinois. (Ord. 75-335, 1-28-1975)
3-15-8: LOCATION:
   (A)   No license or permit for the operation of a business, establishment,
or activity in the village shall be construed to permit its operation in more
than one location in the village; a separate license or permit shall be
required for each location. For the purposes of this code, the existence of a
single location shall be evidenced by the fact that all buildings containing
the principal or accessory uses: 1) shall be connected or shall be located on
the same lot or parcel, 2) shall be operated and managed by the same person or
owner, and 3) shall be an establishment with the same classification.
   (B)   The location of any licensed business or occupation, or the location
of any permitted act, may be changed provided that ten (10) days' notice
thereof is given to the village clerk in the absence of any provision to the
contrary; provided, however, that all applicable ordinances and regulations of
the Village shall be complied with. (Ord. 75-335, 1-28-1975)
3-15-9: NUISANCES PROHIBITED:
   (A)   Generally: No business, occupation, activity or establishment shall be
so conducted or operated as to constitute a nuisance in fact; and no building,
vehicle, structure, yard, lot, premises, or part thereof, shall be used, kept,
maintained, or operated in connection with any business or establishment so as
to occasion any nuisance, or so as to be dangerous to life or detrimental to
health.
   (B)   Unsafe Or Unhealthful Business:
      1.   No building or structure, utilized, constructed, or maintained in
connection with any business or occupation, shall evidence an unsanitary,
unsafe, or dangerous condition.
      2.   No substance, matter, or thing of any kind whatever, which shall be
dangerous or detrimental to health, shall be allowed to exist in connection
with any business or occupation, or be used in any work or labor performed in
the Village.
   (C)   Refuse Disposal:
      1.   Refuse Containers: The standard refuse container required by this
Code shall be a receptacle of not less than twenty (20) nor more than thirty
two (32) gallons capacity, of impervious material and sturdy construction, with
a tight fitting cover, and equipped with handles properly placed to facilitate
handling.
      2.   Duty To Provide Refuse Containers: The occupant of every building
structure, or premises used or maintained in connection with any business,
activity or occupation shall provide and maintain in good condition and repair
a sufficient number of refuse containers for the temporary storage of all
refuse accumulating between collections.
All refuse which is placed for collection service outside any building or
structure must be kept in standard refuse containers.
      3.   Refuse Removal: It shall be the duty of the occupant of every
building, structure, or premises used or maintained in connection with any
business or occupation to cause to be removed at his own cost and expense at
least once each week all refuse produced therein.
      4.   Removal Of Restaurant Garbage: Every person owning or controlling
any hotel, restaurant, cafe, or retail food establishment where more than
thirty two (32) gallons of refuse is normally produced weekly shall cause all
garbage to be placed in sanitary refuse containers and shall cause all
substances deposited in such containers to be removed daily from his premises
and to be disposed of at his own expense. (Ord. 75-335, 1-28-1975)
3-15-10: WORKING CONDITIONS:
   (A)   Health Requirements: No owner, lessee, manager, or superintendent of
any store, factory, workshop, or other place where persons are employed shall
cause or permit such place, or any room or part thereof, to be overcrowded or
inadequate or faulty in respect to light, ventilation, heat, or cleanliness.
   (B)   Sanitation: All such places of employment shall be kept in a clean
condition, free from the effluvia of a sewer, drain, privy, stable, or other
nuisance; also as far as practicable such premises shall be free from all
gases, vapors, dust, or other impurities generated by manufacturing processes
or otherwise which are injurious to health. Sufficient washroom facilities for
male and female employees shall be provided and such facilities shall be
properly ventilated.
   (C)   Heat Required:
      1.   It shall be the duty of every person owning or controlling the
heating plant which furnishes heat to any factory or workshop, to maintain a
temperature within such factory or workshop of not less than sixty eight
degrees Fahrenheit (68°F) without such undue restriction of ventilation as to
interfere with proper sanitary conditions therein; provided, however, that this
requirement shall not apply to any factory or workshop where the business
conducted therein is of such a nature that a higher or lower temperature than
sixty eight degrees Fahrenheit (68°F) is necessary or expedient for the work or
manufacturing processes of such business.
      2.   It shall be the duty of any person owning or controlling the heating
plant which furnishes heat to any office, store, or other place of employment
to maintain a temperature therein of not less than sixty eight degrees
Fahrenheit (68°F) without such undue restriction of ventilation as to interfere
with proper sanitary conditions herein, between the hours of eight o'clock (8:
00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) P.M. from October 1 of each year to June 1 of
the succeeding year, Sundays and legal holidays excepted.
   (D)   Inspection: The health officer and the Building Commissioner shall
visit or cause to be visited all such places of employment in the Village as
often as they shall deem necessary to assure compliance with the provisions of
this Section, and to have such arrangements made as may be deemed necessary for
the health and safety of the employees. (Ord. 75-335, 1-28-1975)
3-15-11: INSPECTIONS:
   (A)   Whenever inspections of the premises used for or in connection with
the operation of a licensed business or occupation are provided for or required
by ordinance, or are reasonably necessary to assure compliance with the
provisions of any ordinance or regulation of the Village, or to detect
violations thereof, it shall be the duty of the licensee or the person in
charge of the premises to admit thereto for the purpose of making the
inspection any officer or employee of the Village who is duly authorized to
make such inspection at any reasonable time that such admission or entry is
requested.
   (B)   Whenever an analysis of any commodity or material is reasonably
necessary to assure compliance with the provisions of any ordinance or
regulation, or to detect violations thereof, it shall be the duty of the
licensee or the person in charge of the premises to give to any duly authorized
officer or employee of the Village requesting the same sufficient samples of
such material or commodity for such analysis upon official request.
   (C)   In addition to any other penalty which may be provided, the Village
President may revoke the license of any owner or operator of a licensed
business in the Village who refuses to permit any duly authorized officer or
employee to make such inspection or to take an adequate sample of said
commodity, or who interferes with such officer or employee while in the
performance of his duties; provided, however, that no license shall be subject
to revocation for such cause unless such officer or employee has been refused
permission to enter upon the premises in the name of the Village after first
having presented a warrant authorizing such entry. (Ord. 75-335, 1-28-1975)
3-15-12: ENFORCEMENT:
   (A)   Whenever any person shall neglect or refuse to procure any license
required by this Code, the Village Clerk with the assistance of the Police
Department, is authorized to cause appropriate action and proceedings to be
instituted to enforce the license requirement.
   (B)   The Code Enforcement Officer shall take all necessary and appropriate
action to compel compliance with the regulatory provisions of this Chapter.
When necessary and expedient, he shall call upon the Chief of Police to assist
in such enforcement, and it shall be the duty of the Chief of Police to perform
such enforcement acts as may be required of him. (Ord. 75-335, 1-28-1975)
3-15-13: SUSPENSION, REVOCATION OF LICENSE OR PERMIT:
   (A)   When the conduct or operation of any business occupation, activity or
establishment shall constitute a nuisance in fact and a clear and present
danger to the public health, safety or general welfare, the Village President
shall be authorized to summarily order the cessation of business, the closing
of the premises, and the suspension of any license or permit for a period not
to exceed ten (10) days.
   (B)   Within eight (8) days after he has so acted, the Village President
shall call a hearing for the purpose of determining whether or not the license
or permit should be revoked.
   (C)   Licenses and permits issued under the ordinances of the Village,
unless otherwise provided, may be revoked by the Village President after notice
and hearing as provided in subsections (D) and (E) of this Section for any of
the following causes:
      1.   Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the
application for the license or permit;
      2.   Any violation by the licensee or permittee of ordinance provisions
relating to the license or permit, the subject matter of the license or permit
or the premises occupied;
      3.   Conviction of the licensee or permittee of any felony or of a
misdemeanor involving moral turpitude;
      4.   Failure of the licensee or permittee to pay any fine or penalty
owing to the Village;
      5.   Refusal to permit any inspection or sampling, or any interference
with a duly authorized Village officer or employee while in the performance of
his duties in making such inspections, as provided in section
3-15-11 of this chapter.
Such revocation, if ordered, shall not preclude prosecution and imposition of
any other penalties provided for the violation of other applicable ordinances
of the Village.
   (D)   Notice of the hearing for revocation of a license or permit shall be
given in writing setting forth specifically the grounds of the complaint and
the time and place of the hearing. Such notice shall be sent by certified mail
(return receipt requested) to the licensee or permittee at his last known
address at least five (5) days prior to the date set for the hearing. (Ord. 75-
335, 1-28-1975)
   (E)   At the hearing the Village law firm shall present the complaint and
shall represent the Village. The licensee or permittee shall be permitted
counsel and shall have the right to submit evidence and cross examine
witnesses. The Village President shall preside and shall render the decision.
(Ord. 75-335, 1-28-1975; amd. Ord. 76-4, 3-2-1976)
3-15-14: APPEAL:
Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Village President in regard to the
denial of an application for a business license, as provided in sections
3-15-3 and
3-15-4 of this chapter, or in connection with the revocation of a license or
permit, as provided in section
3-15-13 of this chapter, shall have the right to appeal to the Board of
Trustees. Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the Village Clerk, within
ten (10) days after notice of a denial of an application or a revocation of a
license or permit, a written statement under oath setting forth specifically
the grounds for appeal. The Board of Trustees shall thereupon set the time and
place for a hearing on such appeal, and notice of such hearing shall be given
to the applicant or licensee or permittee in the same manner as provided in
section
3-15-13 of this chapter. The decision of the Board of Trustees on such appeal
shall be final. (Ord. 75-335, 1-28-1975)
3-15-15: LICENSE TO BE POSTED; DESTRUCTION, REMOVAL OF LICENSE:
   (A)   It shall be the duty of any person conducting a licensed business in
the Village to keep his license in a prominent place on the premises used for
such business at all times.
   (B)   No person shall destroy, obliterate, take, remove or carry away
without the consent of the owner any license, certificate, plate or sticker
which has been issued by the Village except that such license, certificate,
plate or sticker may be removed after the licensed business, occupation or
activity has been discontinued or the licensed premises have been abandoned.
Nothing herein shall prevent the Village President or his duly authorized
representative from removing any license, certificate, plate or sticker from
the possession of a former licensee, his premises, any vehicle or any machine
when said license has been revoked under the provisions of this Code. (Ord. 75-
335, 1-28-1975)
3-15-16: BUSINESS VEHICLE STICKER:
Whenever the number of vehicles used is the basis, in whole or in part, for a
license fee, the Village Clerk shall furnish the licensee with a tag or sticker
for each vehicle covered by the license, and such tag or sticker shall be
posted or affixed in a conspicuous place on each such vehicle. (Ord. 75-335, 1-
28-1975)
3-15-17: FEES:
   (A)   The license and permit fee for the conduct, maintenance, operation,
management or carrying on of any business, occupation or activity, not
specifically listed below, shall be the annual sum of two hundred dollars
($200.00). (Ord. 16-19, 12-13-2016)
   (B)   In the event an individual residing in a single-family home engages in
a permitted home occupation in which business involves no deliveries of product
or merchandise, limited customer contact, and no similar activity which may
tend to increase the congestion of the neighborhood or otherwise interfere with
the quiet use and enjoyment of adjoining properties, the annual license fee
shall be fifty dollars ($50.00). (Ord. 17-06, 3-25-2017)
   (C)   The annual licenses and permits for specific businesses are as
follows:
Categories Annual Fee
Categories                                                        Annual Fee
Airport parking facilities                                        $250.00
Automobile and/or truck rental facilities                         250.00
Automobile and/or truck repair facilities                         250.00
Automobile and truck sales (new or used) including related repair 250.00
facilities
Bars and taverns                                                  250.00
Brick manufacturing facilities                                    250.00
Food manufacturing, distribution and warehouse facilities         500.00
Gasoline service stations                                         250.00
Manufacturing and/or machine shops                                250.00
Recycling/waste transfer facilities                               500.00
Shipping container storage facilities                             500.00
Towing service facilities                                         250.00
Truck driving schools                                             250.00
 
   (D)   The annual licenses and permits for specific businesses including boat
storage facilities; concrete services facilities; construction companies;
construction equipment rental facilities; general distribution and warehouse
facilities; petroleum distribution and storage facilities, trucking or cartage,
including motor freight terminals; shall be based upon the combined square feet
area of the structure, storage and parking areas as follows:
 
Square Feet     Annual Fee
0 to 5,000      $250.00
5,001 to 50,000 500.00
Over 50,001     750.00
 
(Ord. 16-19, 12-13-2016)
3-15-18: LIMITATION ON NUMBER OF YEARLY GARAGE SALES:
   (A)   Garage Sale Defined: Sale of items generally found in the home, garage
or yard. The sale shall include only on site items and not merchandise/goods
manufactured or produced for resale. The term "garage sale" shall also include:
yard sales, estate sales, rummage sales and moving sales, however not arts or
crafts sales.
   (B)   Limitation: Property owners shall be limited to two (2) garage sale
events per calendar year. Each garage sale event may extend from one to three
(3) consecutive days in duration.
   (C)   Permit Required: Any person or persons wishing to hold a garage sale
must first obtain a free of charge, written permit from the village clerk's
office at least three (3) days prior to the event.
   (D)   Fine Imposed: If it is determined that any household engages in more
than two (2) yearly garage sales, they shall be subject to a fine. It is
unlawful for any person to place upon public property, e.g., lampposts, stop
signs, etc., any advertisement for said garage sale. Any sign advertising said
garage sale must be removed within twenty four (24) hours of the completion of
that sale.
   (E)   Time Limits: Garage sales shall not begin before nine o'clock (9:00)
A.M. and shall conclude no later than five o'clock (5:00) P.M. (Ord. 97-23, 11-
25-1997)
CHAPTER 16
MUNICIPAL UTILITIES TAX 1
SECTION:
3-16-1: Tax Imposed
3-16-2: Definitions
3-16-3: Exceptions To Tax
3-16-4: Tax Additional To Other Fees
3-16-5: Payment Of Tax
3-16-6: Tax Paid In Error, Recovery
3-16-7: Failure To Make Return, Pay Tax
3-16-8: Action To Recover Amount Due
 
Notes
1 1. The rates set forth in this Chapter shall be applicable to gross receipts
  paid to the taxpayer for services billed on or after December 1, 1993.
3-16-1: TAX IMPOSED:
A tax is imposed on all persons engaged in the following occupations or
privileges:
   (A)   Persons engaged in the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing
or selling gas for use or consumption within the corporate limits of the
Village, and not for resale, at the rate of two percent (2%) of the gross
receipts therefrom. The rate shall increase to three and a half percent (3.5%)
of the gross receipts therefrom with respect to bills issued on or after May 1,
2022 through and including December 31, 2022, provided, however, that any
amounts due or payable for any tax periods ending prior to May 1, 2022 are
nevertheless to remain payable as if the rate had not been increased. The rate
shall increase to four percent (4.0%) of the gross receipts therefrom with
respect to bills issued on or after January 1, 2023, through and including
December 31, 2023, provided, however, that any amounts due or payable for any
tax periods ending prior to January 1, 2023 are nevertheless to remain payable
as if the rate had not been increased. The rate shall increase to four and a
half percent (4.5%) of the gross receipts therefrom with respect to bills
issued on or after January 1, 2024, through and including December 31, 2024,
provided, however, that any amounts due or payable for any tax periods ending
prior to January 1, 2024 are nevertheless to remain payable as if the rate had
not been increased. The rate shall increase to five percent (5.0%) of the gross
receipts therefrom with respect to bills issued on or after January 1, 2025,
provided, however, that any amounts due or payable for any tax periods ending
prior to January 1, 2025 are nevertheless to remain payable as if the rate had
not been increased.
   (B)   Persons engaged in the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing
or selling electricity for use or consumption within the corporate limits of
the Village, and not for resale, at the rate of three and a half percent (3.5%)
of the gross receipts therefrom, provided that the tax imposed pursuant to this
subsection shall not apply with respect to gross receipts from the
distribution, supply, furnishing or sale of electricity where the use or
consumption of the electricity is subject to the tax imposed pursuant to
Chapter 16A of this Title. Said rate shall increase to four percent (4.0%) on
January 1, 2023, to four and a half percent (4.5%) on January 1, 2024, and to
five percent (5.0%) on January 1, 2025. (Ord. 22-11, 3-22-2022)
3-16-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this Chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
GROSS RECEIPTS: The consideration received for distributing, supplying,
furnishing or selling gas or electricity, for use or consumption and not for
resale, as the case may be; and for all services rendered in connection
therewith valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise, including
cash, credit, services and property of every kind and material and for all
services rendered therewith; and shall be determined without any deduction on
account of the cost of the service, product or commodity supplied, the cost of
materials used, labor or service cost, or any other expenses whatsoever. The
term "gross receipts" shall not include any charges added to customers' bills
pursuant to the provisions of section 9-221 or 9-222 of the Illinois Public
Utilities Act, 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes, or any other separately stated
charge added to customers' bills in respect of any tax or other governmental
imposition.
PERSON: Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association,
joint stock company, joint venture, corporation, municipal corporation or
political subdivision of the State, or a receiver, trustee, conservator or
other representative appointed by order of any court. (Ord. 93-35, 12-14-1993)
3-16-3: EXCEPTIONS TO TAX:
No tax is imposed by this Chapter with respect to any transaction in interstate
commerce or otherwise to the extent to which such business may not, under the
Constitution and statutes of the United States, be made subject to taxation by
the State or any political subdivision thereof; nor shall any persons engaged
in the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing or selling gas or
electricity, be subject to taxation under the provisions of this Chapter for
such transactions as are or may become subject to taxation under the provisions
of the "Municipal Retailers' Occupation Tax Act" authorized by 65 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-1. (Ord. 93-35, 12-14-1993)
3-16-4: TAX ADDITIONAL TO OTHER FEES:
The tax hereby imposed shall be in addition to the payment of money, or value
of products or services furnished to the Village by the taxpayer as
compensation for the use of its streets, alleys or other public places, or
installation and maintenance therein, thereon or thereunder of poles, wires,
pipes or other equipment used in the operation of the taxpayer's business.
(Ord. 93-35, 12-14-1993)
3-16-5: PAYMENT OF TAX:
On or before January 31, 1994, each taxpayer shall make a return to the Village
Treasurer for the month of December 1993 stating:
   (A)   His name.
   (B)   His principal place of business.
   (C)   His gross receipts during that month upon the basis of which tax is
imposed.
   (D)   Amount of tax.
   (E)   Such other reasonable and related information as the corporate
authorities may require.
On or before the last day of every month thereafter, each taxpayer shall make a
like return to the Village Treasurer for a corresponding one month period.
The taxpayer making the return herein provided for shall, at the time of making
such return, pay to the Village Treasurer, the amount of tax herein imposed;
provided, that in connection with any return the taxpayer may, if he so elects,
report and pay an amount based upon his total billings of business subject to
the tax during the period for which the return is made (exclusive of any
amounts previously billed) with prompt adjustments of late payments based upon
any differences between such billings and the taxable gross receipts. (Ord. 93-
35, 12-14-1993)
3-16-6: TAX PAID IN ERROR, RECOVERY:
Taxpayers seeking credits and refunds under this Chapter 16 shall have those
rights and responsibilities as set forth in Title 1, Chapter 33, Locally
Imposed and Administered Taxpayer Rights and Responsibilities. (Ord. 22-11, 3-
22-2022)
3-16-7: FAILURE TO MAKE RETURN, PAY TAX:
Any taxpayer who fails to make a return, or who makes a fraudulent return, or
who willfully violates any other provision of this Chapter 16 shall have those
rights and responsibilities as set forth in Title 1, Chapter 33, Locally
Imposed and Administered Taxpayer Rights and Responsibilities. (Ord. 22-11, 3-
22-2022)
3-16-8: ACTION TO RECOVER AMOUNT DUE:
Taxpayers seeking to recover any amount due under this Chapter 16A shall have
those rights and responsibilities as set forth in Title 1, Chapter 33, Locally
Imposed and Administered Taxpayer Rights and Responsibilities. (Ord. 22-11, 3-
22-2022)
CHAPTER 16A
MUNICIPAL ELECTRIC UTILITY TAX
SECTION:
3-16A-1: Definitions
3-16A-2: Tax Imposed
3-16A-3: Collection Of Tax
3-16A-4: Tax Remittance And Return
3-16A-5: Resales
3-16A-6: Books And Records
3-16A-7: Credits And Refunds
3-16A-8: Failure To Make Return, Pay Tax
3-16A-9: Action To Recover Amount Due
3-16A-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires.
PERSON: Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association,
joint stock company, joint venture, corporation, limited liability company,
municipal corporation, the State or any of its political subdivisions, any
State university created by statute, or a receiver, trustee, conservator or
other representative appointed by order of any court.
PERSON MAINTAINING A PLACE OF BUSINESS IN THIS STATE: Any person having or
maintaining within this State, directly or by a subsidiary or other affiliate,
an office, generation facility, distribution facility, transmission facility,
sales office or other place of business, or any employee, agent, or other
representative operating within this State under the authority of the person or
its subsidiary or other affiliate, irrespective of whether such place of
business or agent or other representative is located in this State permanently
or temporarily, or whether such person, subsidiary or other affiliate is
licensed or qualified to do business in this State.
PURCHASE AT RETAIL: Any acquisition of electricity by a purchaser for the
purposes of use or consumption, and not for resale, but shall not include the
use of electricity by a public utility, as defined in section 8-11-2 of the
Illinois Municipal Code 1 , directly in the generation, production,
transmission, delivery or sale of electricity.
PURCHASER: Any person who uses or consumes, within the corporate limits of the
Village, electricity required in a purchase at retail.
TAX COLLECTOR: The person delivering electricity to the purchaser.
VILLAGE: The Village of Forest View. (Ord. 98-9, 7-28-1998)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/8-11-2.
3-16A-2: TAX IMPOSED:
   (A)   Pursuant to section 8-11-2 of the Illinois Municipal Code and any and
all other applicable authority, a tax is imposed upon the privilege of using or
consuming electricity acquired in a purchase at retail and used or consumed
within the corporate limits of the Village at the following rates, calculated
on a monthly basis for each purchaser:
Starting May 1, 2022
Kilowatt-Hours Consumed In A Month Tax (Cents Per Kilowatt-Hour)
Kilowatt-Hours Consumed In A Month Tax (Cents Per Kilowatt-Hour)
1. For the first 2,000             $0.390
2. For the next 48,000             0.255
3. For the next 50,000             0.230
4. For the next 400,000            0.224
5. For the next 500,000            0.217
6. For the next 2,000,000          0.205
7. For the next 2,000,000          0.202
8. For the next 5,000,000          0.198
9. For the next 10,000,000         0.195
10. In excess of 20,000,000        0.192
 
Starting January 1, 2023
Kilowatt-Hours Consumed In A Month Tax (Cents Per Kilowatt-Hour)
Kilowatt-Hours Consumed In A Month Tax (Cents Per Kilowatt-Hour)
1. For the first 2,000             $0.454
2. For the next 48,000             0.298
3. For the next 50,000             0.268
4. For the next 400,000            0.261
5. For the next 500,000            0.253
6. For the next 2,000,000          0.238
7. For the next 2,000,000          0.235
8. For the next 5,000,000          0.231
9. For the next 10,000,000         0.227
10. In excess of 20,000,000        0.224
 
Starting January 1, 2024
Kilowatt-Hours Consumed In A Month Tax (Cents Per Kilowatt-Hour)
Kilowatt-Hours Consumed In A Month Tax (Cents Per Kilowatt-Hour)
1. For the first 2,000             $0.537
2. For the next 48,000             0.352
3. For the next 50,000             0.317
4. For the next 400,000            0.308
5. For the next 500,000            0.299
6. For the next 2,000,000          0.281
7. For the next 2,000,000          0.277
8. For the next 5,000,000          0.273
9. For the next 10,000,000         0.268
10. In excess of 20,000,000        0.264
 
Starting January 1, 2025
Kilowatt-Hours Consumed In A Month Tax (Cents Per Kilowatt-Hour)
Kilowatt-Hours Consumed In A Month Tax (Cents Per Kilowatt-Hour)
1. For the first 2,000             $0.593
2. For the next 48,000             0.389
3. For the next 50,000             0.350
4. For the next 400,000            0.340
5. For the next 500,000            0.331
6. For the next 2,000,000          0.311
7. For the next 2,000,000          0.306
8. For the next 5,000,000          0.301
9. For the next 10,000,000         0.297
10. In excess of 20,000,000        0.282
 
   (B)   The tax is in addition to all taxes, fees and other revenue measures
imposed by the Village, the State or any other political subdivision of the
State.
   (C)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this Chapter, the tax shall not
be imposed if and to the extent that imposition or collection of the tax would
violate the Constitution or statutes of the United States or the constitution
of the State of Illinois.
   (D)   The tax shall be imposed with respect to the use or consumption of
electricity by residential customers beginning with the first bill issued on or
after September 1, 1998; and with respect to the use or consumption of
electricity by nonresidential customers beginning with the first bill issued to
such customers for delivery services in accordance with section 16-104 of the
Public Utilities Act 1 , or the first bill issued to such customers on or after
January 1, 2001, whichever issuance occurs sooner. (Ord. 98-9, 7-28-1998; amd.
Ord. 22-11, 3-22-2022)
 
Notes
1 1. 220 ILCS 5/16-104.
3-16A-3: COLLECTION OF TAX:
   (A)   Subject to the provisions of Section
3-16A-5 of this Chapter regarding the delivery of electricity to resellers, the
tax imposed under this Chapter shall be collected from purchasers by the person
maintaining a place of business in this State who delivers electricity to such
purchasers. This tax shall constitute a debt of the purchaser to the person who
delivers the electricity to the purchaser and is recoverable at the same time
and in the same manner as the original charge delivering the electricity.
   (B)   Any tax required to be collected by this Chapter, and any tax in fact
collected, shall constitute a debt owed to the Village by the person delivering
the electricity, provided, that the person delivering electricity shall be
allowed credit for such tax related to deliveries of electricity the charges
for which are written off as uncollectible, and provided further, that if such
charges are thereafter collected, the delivering supplier shall be obligated to
remit such tax.
   (C)   Persons delivering electricity shall collect the tax from the
purchaser by adding such tax to the gross charge for delivering the
electricity. Persons delivering electricity shall also be authorized to add to
such gross charge an amount equal to three percent (3%) of the tax they collect
to reimburse them for their expenses incurred in keeping records, billing
customers, preparing and filing returns, remitting the tax and supplying data
to the Village upon request. For the purposes of this Chapter, any partial
payment of a billed amount not specifically identified by the purchaser shall
be deemed to be for the delivery of electricity. (Ord. 98-9, 7-28-1998)
3-16A-4: TAX REMITTANCE AND RETURN:
   (A)   Each person required by Section
3-16A-3 of this Chapter to collect the tax imposed pursuant to subsection
3-16A-2(A) of this Chapter shall file a return with the Village on the last day
of the month following each month covered during which the tax imposed by
subsection
3-16A-2(A) of this Chapter is collected or is required to be collected under
this Chapter. The return shall state:
      1.   The person's name.
      2.   The address of the person's principal place of business in the State
or residence if the person is filing the return is a natural person.
      3.   The month for which the return is being filed.
      4.   The total number of kilowatt-hours of electricity used or consumed
in each of the categories set forth in subsections
3-16A-2(A)1 through (A)10 of this Chapter, inclusive, for which the person was
required to collect payment of the tax imposed by subsection
3-16A-2(A) of this Chapter from the purchasers during the month covered by the
return, and if different, the total number of kilowatt-hours of electricity
used or consumed in each of the categories set forth in subsection
3-16A-2(A) of this Chapter for which the person in fact collected payment from
purchasers of the tax imposed by subsection
3-16A-2(A) of this Chapter.
      5.   The amount of the tax imposed by subsection
3-16A-2(A) of this Chapter which was collected and the amount of the tax being
remitted to the Village with the return.
      6.   Such other reasonable and related information as the Village may
require.
   (B)   Each person filing a return provided for in this Section shall, at the
time the return is filed, remit and pay over to the Village the amount of the
tax imposed pursuant to subsection
3-16A-2(A) of this Chapter which such person collected during the month for
which the return is being filed. Such person shall also remit and pay over to
the Village, at the time the return is filed, any other amounts of the tax
imposed pursuant to subsection
3-16A-2(A) of this Chapter which, as of the end of the month for which the
return is being filed, otherwise constituted a debt owed to the Village by the
person pursuant to subsection
3-16A-3(B) of this Chapter.
   (C)   The Village Administrator may prescribe the form of the return or
authorize the use of a form for the return required to be filed by this
Section.
   (D)   If the person delivering electricity to a purchaser fails to collect
the tax imposed pursuant to subsection
3-16A-2(A) of this Chapter from the purchaser, the purchaser shall file a
purchaser's tax return with the Village containing the information set forth in
subsections
3-16A-4(A)1 through (A)3 of this Chapter. The purchaser's tax return shall also
state the amount of the electricity used or consumed during the month for which
the return is being filed according to the categories set forth in subsections
3-16A-2(A)1 through (A)10 of this Chapter, inclusive and the amount of the tax
imposed on the electricity used or consumed by the purchaser during the month
for which the return is being filed. Payment of the amount of the tax imposed
shall be made to the Village at the time the purchaser's tax return is filed.
The purchaser's tax return shall be filed no later than the last day of the
month following the month for which the return is being made. (Ord. 98-9, 7-28-
1998)
3-16A-5: RESALES:
   (A)   Electricity that is delivered to a person in this Village shall be
considered to be for use and consumption by that person unless the person
receiving the electricity has an active resale number issued by the Village and
furnishes that number to the person who delivers the electricity and certifies
to that person that the sale is either entirely of partially nontaxable as a
sale for resale.
   (B)   If a person who receives electricity in the Village claims to be an
authorized reseller of electricity, that person shall apply to the Village for
a resale number. The applicant shall state facts showing why it is not liable
for the tax imposed by this Chapter on any purchases of electricity and shall
furnish such additional information as the Village may reasonably require.
   (C)   Upon approval of the application, the Village shall assign a resale
number to the applicant and shall certify the number to the applicant.
   (D)   The Village may cancel the resale number of any person if the person
fails to pay any tax payable under this Chapter for electricity used or
consumed by the person, or if the number: 1) was obtained through
misrepresentation, or 2) is no longer necessary because the person has
discontinued making resales.
   (E)   1. If a reseller has acquired electricity partly for use or
consumption and partly for resale, the reseller shall pay the tax imposed by
this Chapter directly to the Village pursuant to subsection
3-16A-3(B) of this Chapter on the amount of electricity that the reseller uses
or consumes, and shall collect the tax pursuant to Section
3-16A-2 of this Chapter and remit the tax pursuant to subsection
3-16A-5(A) of this Chapter on the amount of electricity delivered by the
reseller to a purchaser.
      2.   Any person who delivers electricity to a reseller having an active
resale number and complying with all other conditions of this Section shall be
excused from collecting and remitting the tax on any portion of the electricity
delivered to the reseller, provided that the person reports to the Village the
total amount of electricity delivered to the reseller, and such other
information that the Village may reasonably require. (Ord. 98-9, 7-28-1998)
3-16A-6: BOOKS AND RECORDS:
Every person required by Section
3-16A-3 of this Chapter to collect the tax imposed by subsection
3-16A-2(A) of this Chapter and each purchaser required by subsection
3-16A-4(D) of this Chapter to file a purchaser's tax return shall keep accurate
books and records of its business or activity, including contemporaneous books
and records denoting the transactions that gave rise, or may have given rise,
to any tax liability under this Chapter. The books and records shall be subject
to and available for inspection at all times during business hours of the day.
(Ord. 98-9, 7-28-1998)
3-16A-7: CREDITS AND REFUNDS:
Taxpayers seeking credits and refunds under this Chapter 16A shall have those
rights and responsibilities as set forth in Title 1, Chapter 33, Locally
Imposed and Administered Taxpayer Rights and Responsibilities. (Ord. 22-11, 3-
22-2022)
3-16A-8: FAILURE TO MAKE RETURN, PAY TAX:
An taxpayer who fails to file a return and remit payment of the tax imposed
pursuant to subsection
3-16A-2(A) of this Chapter required by Section
3-16A-4 of this Chapter or who makes a fraudulent return, shall have those
rights and responsibilities as set forth in Title 1, Chapter 33, Locally
Imposed and Administered Taxpayer Rights and Responsibilities. (Ord. 22-11, 3-
22-2022)
3-16A-9: ACTION TO RECOVER AMOUNT DUE:
Taxpayers seeking to recover any amount due under this Chapter 16A shall have
those rights and responsibilities as set forth in Title 1, Chapter 33, Locally
Imposed and Administered Taxpayer Rights and Responsibilities. (Ord. 22-11, 3-
22-2022)
CHAPTER 16B
MUNICIPAL GAS USE TAX
SECTION:
3-16B-1: Short Title
3-16B-2: Definitions
3-16B-3: Tax
3-16B-4: Collection Of Tax By Public Utility
3-16B-5: Books And Records
3-16B-1: SHORT TITLE:
The tax imposed by this Chapter shall be known as the “Municipal Gas Use Tax”
and is imposed in addition to all other taxes imposed by the Village of Forest
View, the State of Illinois, or any other municipal corporation or political
subdivision thereof. (Ord. 22-10, 3-22-2022)
3-16B-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this Chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
 
           Any individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association, joint stock
PERSON:    company, joint venture, corporation, limited liability company, municipal
           corporation or political subdivision of this state, or a receiver, trustee,
           conservator or other representative appointed by order of any court.
PUBLIC
UTILITIES  The Public Utilities Act as amended, (220 ILCS 5/1-101 et seq.).
ACT:
PUBLIC     A public utility as defined in Section 3-105 of the Public Utilities Act.
UTILITY:
RETAIL     Any Person who purchases gas in a Sale at Retail.
PURCHASER:
           Any sale of gas by a retailer to a Person for use or consumption, and not for
SALE AT    resale. For this purpose, the term “retailer” means any Person engaged in the
RETAIL:    business of distributing, supplying, furnishing or selling gas. (Ord. 22-10, 3-
           22-2022)
 
3-16B-3: TAX:
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided by this Chapter, a tax is imposed on the
privilege of using or consuming gas in the Village that is purchased in a Sale
at Retail at the rate of three and a half cents ($0.035) per therm with respect
to bills issued on or after May 1, 2022 through and including December 31,
2022. The rate shall increase to four cents ($0.04) per therm with respect to
bills issued on or after January 1, 2023, through and including December 31,
2023, provided, however, that any amounts due or payable for any tax periods
ending prior to January 1, 2023 are nevertheless to remain payable as if the
rate had not been increased. The rate shall increase to four and a half cents
($0.045) per therm with respect to bills issued on or after January 1, 2024,
through and including December 31, 2024, provided, however, that any amounts
due or payable for any tax periods ending prior to January 1, 2024 are
nevertheless to remain payable as if the rate had not been increased. The rate
shall increase to five cents ($0.05) per therm with respect to bills issued on
or after January 1, 2025, provided, however, that any amounts due or payable
for any tax periods ending prior to January 1, 2025 are nevertheless to remain
payable as if the rate had not been increased.
   (B)   The ultimate incidence of and liability for payment of the tax is on
the Retail Purchaser, and nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to impose
a tax on the occupation of distributing, supplying, furnishing, selling or
transporting gas.
   (C)   The Retail Purchaser shall pay the tax, measured by therms of gas
delivered to the Retail Purchaser’s premises, to the Public Utility designated
to collect the tax pursuant to Section
3-16B-4 of this Chapter on or before the payment due date of the Public
Utility’s bill first reflecting the tax, or directly to the Village Treasurer
on or before the fifteenth day of the second month following the month in which
the gas is delivered to the Retail Purchaser if no Public Utility has been
designated to collect the tax pursuant to Section
3-16B-4 or if the gas is delivered by a person other than a Public Utility so
designated.
   (D)   Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to impose a tax upon any
person, business or activity which, under the constitutions of the United
States or State of Illinois, may not be made the subject of taxation by the
Village.
   (E)   A Person who purchases gas for resale and therefore does not pay the
tax imposed by this Chapter with respect to the use or consumption of the gas,
but who later uses or consumes part or all of the gas, shall pay the tax
directly to the Village Treasurer on or before the fifteenth day of the second
month following the month in which the gas is used or consumed.
   (F)   The tax shall apply to gas for which the delivery to the Retail
Purchaser is billed by a Public Utility on or after May 1, 2022.
   (G)   To prevent multiple taxation, the use of gas in the Village by a
Retail Purchaser shall be exempt from the tax imposed by this Chapter if the
gross receipts from the Sale at Retail of such gas to the Retail Purchaser are
properly subject to a tax imposed upon the seller of such gas pursuant to the
Village’s municipal utility tax (Title 3 Chapter 16), as amended from time to
time and authorized pursuant to Section 8-11-2 of the Illinois Municipal Code
(65 ILCS 5/8-11-2). (Ord. 22-10, 3-22-2022)
3-16B-4: COLLECTION OF TAX BY PUBLIC UTILITY:
The Village President Village Treasurer, Village Manager and Village Finance
Director are each authorized to enter into a contract for collection of the tax
imposed by this Chapter with any Public Utility providing gas service in the
Village. The contract shall include and substantially conform with the
following provisions:
   (A)   The Public Utility will collect the tax from Retail Purchasers as an
independent contractor;
   (B)   The Public Utility will remit collected taxes to the Village Treasurer
no more often than once each month;
   (C)   The Public Utility will be entitled to withhold from tax collections a
service fee equal to 3% of the amounts collected and timely remitted to the
Village Treasurer;
   (D)   The Public Utility shall not be responsible to the Village for any tax
not actually collected from a Retail Purchaser; and
   (E)   Such additional terms as the parties may agree upon. (Ord. 22-10, 3-
22-2022)
3-16B-5: BOOKS AND RECORDS:
Every taxpayer shall keep accurate books and records, including original source
documents and books of entry, denoting the activities or transactions that gave
rise, or may have given rise to any tax liability or exemption under this
Chapter. All such books and records shall, at all times during business hours,
be subject to and available for inspection by the Village. (Ord. 22-10, 3-22-
2022)
CHAPTER 17
MUNICIPAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS TAX
SECTION:
3-17-1: General
3-17-2: Definitions
3-17-3: Tax Imposed
3-17-4: Collection Of Tax By Retailers
3-17-5: Filing Returns And Remittances By Retailers
3-17-6: Registration
3-17-7: Obligation Of Taxpayers To File Returns And Pay Tax
3-17-8: Resale Numbers
3-17-9: Maintaining Books And Records
3-17-10: Severability
3-17-1: GENERAL:
This Chapter shall be known and cited as the VILLAGE OF FOREST VIEW
TELECOMMUNICATIONS TAX ORDINANCE. The tax imposed by this Chapter shall be
known as the "Forest View Telecommunications Tax" and is imposed in addition to
all other taxes imposed by the Village, the State or any other municipal
corporation or political subdivision thereof. (Ord. 93-25, 10-12-1993)
3-17-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this Chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
AMOUNT PAID: The amount charged to the taxpayer's service address located in
the Village regardless of where such amount is billed or paid.
BAD DEBT: Any portion of a debt that is related to a sale at retail for which
gross charges are not otherwise deductible or excludable that has become
worthless or uncollectible as determined by applicable Federal income tax
standards.
GROSS CHARGE: The amount paid for the act or privilege of originating or
receiving telecommunications in the Village and for all services rendered in
connection therewith, valued in money or otherwise, including cash, credits,
services and property of every kind or nature, and shall be determined without
any deduction on account of the cost of such telecommunications, the cost of
the materials used, labor or service costs or any other expense whatsoever. In
case credit is extended, the amount thereof shall be included only as and when
paid. "Gross charge" shall not include:
   (A)   Any amounts added to a purchaser's bill because of a charge made
pursuant to:
      1.   The tax imposed by this Chapter;
      2.   Additional charges added to a purchaser's bill pursuant to section
9-222 of the Illinois Public Utilities Act, 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/9-
222;
      3.   The tax imposed by the Illinois Telecommunications Excise Tax Act,
35 Illinois Compiled Statutes 630/1 et seq.; or
      4.   The tax imposed by section 4251 of the U.S. Internal Revenue Code,
26 USC §4251;
   (B)   Charges for a sent collect telecommunication received outside of the
Village;
   (C)   Charges for leased time in equipment or charges for the storage of
data or information or subsequent retrieval or the processing of data or
information intended to change its form or content. This Chapter applies to,
but is not limited to, the use of calculators, computers, data processing
equipment, tabulating equipment and accounting equipment and also applies to
the usage of computers under a time-sharing agreement;
   (D)   Charges for customer equipment, including such equipment that is
leased or rented by the customer from any source, wherein such charges are
disaggregated and separately identified from other charges;
   (E)   Charges to business enterprises certified under section 9-222.1 of the
Illinois Public Utilities Act to the extent of such exemption and during the
period of time specified by the Illinois Department of Commerce and Community
Affairs;
   (F)   Charges for telecommunications and all services and equipment provided
in connection therewith between a parent corporation and its wholly owned
subsidiaries, or between wholly owned subsidiaries when the tax imposed under
this Chapter has already been paid to a retailer, but only to the extent that
the charges between the parent corporation and wholly owned subsidiaries, or
between wholly owned subsidiaries represent expense allocation between the
corporations and not the generation of profit for the corporation rendering
such service;
   (G)   Bad debts; provided however, that if any portion of a debt deemed to
be bad is subsequently paid, the retailer shall report and pay the tax on that
portion of the debt paid during the reporting period; or
   (H)   Charges paid by inserting coins in coin-operated telecommunication
devices.
INTERSTATE TELECOMMUNICATIONS: All telecommunications that either originate or
terminate outside the State of Illinois.
INTRASTATE TELECOMMUNICATIONS: All telecommunications that originate and
terminate within the State of Illinois.
PERSON: Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association,
joint stock company, joint venture, corporation, any receiver, trustee,
guardian or other representative appointed by order of any court, the Federal
government, state governments, state universities created by statute, or any
city, town, county or other political subdivision of the State of Illinois.
PURCHASE AT RETAIL: The acquisition, consumption or use of telecommunications
through a sale at retail.
RETAILER: Means and includes every person engaged in the business of making
sales at retail as defined in this Chapter.
RETAILER MAINTAINING A PLACE OF BUSINESS IN THIS STATE (or any like
designation): Means and includes any retailer having or maintaining within the
State of Illinois, directly or by a subsidiary, an office, distribution
facilities, transmission facilities, sales office, warehouse or other place of
business, or any agent or other representative operating within the State of
Illinois under the authority of the retailer or its subsidiary, irrespective of
whether such place of business or agent or other representative is located here
permanently or temporarily, or whether such retailer or subsidiary is licensed
to do business in Illinois.
SALE AT RETAIL: The transmitting, supplying or furnishing of telecommunications
and all services rendered in connection therewith for a consideration:
   (A)   To persons other than the Village, the Federal and state governments,
and state universities created by statute; and
   (B)   Other than between a parent corporation and its wholly owned
subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, but only when the tax has
already been paid to a retailer and the gross charge made by one such
corporation to another such corporation is not greater than the gross charge
paid to the retailer for their use or consumption and not for resale.
SERVICE ADDRESS: The location of telecommunications equipment from which
telecommunications services are originated or at which telecommunications
services are received by a taxpayer. If this is not a defined location, as in
the case of mobile phones, paging systems, maritime systems, air-to-ground
systems and the like, "service address" shall mean the location of a taxpayer's
primary use of the telecommunication equipment as defined by telephone number,
authorization code or location in Illinois where bills are sent.
TAXPAYER: A person who individually or through its agents, employees or
permittees, engages in the act or privilege of originating or receiving
telecommunications in the Village and that incurs a tax liability under this
Chapter.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS: In addition to the usual and popular meaning, includes, but
is not limited to:
   (A)   Messages or information transmitted through use of local, toll and
wide area telephone service, channel services, telegraph services,
teletypewriter service, computer exchange services, cellular mobile
telecommunications service, specialized mobile radio services, paging service,
or any other form of mobile and portable one-way or two-way communications, or
any other transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar
means, between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave,
radio, satellite or similar facilities.
   (B)   The definition of "telecommunications" set forth above, shall not
include:
      1.   Value added services in which computer processing applications are
used to act on the form, content, code and protocol of the information for
purposes other than transmission; or
      2.   Purchase of telecommunications by a telecommunications service
provider for use as a component part of the service provided by it to the
ultimate retail consumer who originates or terminates the taxable end-to-end
communications.
TREASURER: The Village Treasurer.
VILLAGE: The Village of Forest View, Illinois. (Ord. 93-25, 10-12-1993)
3-17-3: TAX IMPOSED:
   (A)   A tax is hereby imposed upon:
      1.   The act or privilege of originating in the Village or receiving in
the Village intrastate telecommunications by a person at a rate of four percent
(4%) of the gross charge for such telecommunications purchased at retail from a
retailer; and
      2.   The act or privilege of originating in the Village or receiving in
the Village interstate telecommunications by a person at a rate of four percent
(4%) of the gross charge for such telecommunications purchased at retail from a
retailer.
   (B)   To prevent actual multi-state taxation of the act or privilege that is
subject to taxation under subsection (A)2 of this Chapter, any taxpayer, upon
proof that the taxpayer has paid a tax in another state on the same event,
shall be allowed a credit against the tax authorized by subsection (A)2 to the
extent of the amount of such tax properly due and paid in such other state
which was not previously allowed as a credit against any other state or local
tax in Illinois.
   (C)   The tax imposed by this Chapter is not imposed on any act or privilege
to the extent that such act or privilege may not, under the Constitution or
statutes of the United States, be made the subject of taxation by the Village.
   (D)   Carrier access charges, right of access charges, charges for use of
inter-company facilities and all telecommunications resold in the subsequent
provision used as a component of, or integrated into end-to-end
telecommunications service are sales for resale and are not subject to the tax
imposed by this Chapter. (Ord. 93-25, 10-12-1993)
3-17-4: COLLECTION OF TAX BY RETAILERS:
   (A)   Retailers Within Illinois:
      1.   Any retailer maintaining a place of business in Illinois and making
or effecting a sale at retail shall collect the tax authorized by this Chapter
from the taxpayer and remit it to the Village Treasurer as provided by Section
3-17-5 of this Chapter.
      2.   Any tax required to be collected pursuant to this Chapter and any
tax collected by the retailer shall constitute a debt owed by the retailer to
the Village.
      3.   The retailer shall collect the tax from the taxpayer by adding the
tax to the gross charge for the act or privilege of originating or receiving
telecommunications when sold for use in the manner prescribed by this Chapter.
      4.   The tax authorized by this Chapter shall constitute a debt of the
purchaser to the retailer providing taxable services until paid and, if unpaid,
is recoverable at law in the same manner as the original charge for taxable
services.
      5.   If the retailer fails to collect the tax from a taxpayer, the
taxpayer shall pay the tax directly to the Village as provided in Section
3-17-7 of this Chapter.
   (B)   Retailers Outside Illinois: The Village Treasurer shall, upon
application, authorize the collection of this tax by any retailer not
maintaining a place of business in Illinois who, to the satisfaction of the
Village Treasurer, furnishes adequate security to ensure collection and payment
of the tax. Such retailer shall be issued, without charge, a permit to collect
the tax imposed by this Chapter. When so authorized, it shall be the duty of
the retailer to collect the tax upon all of the gross charges for
telecommunications originated or received in the Village in the same manner,
and subject to the same requirements, as a retailer maintaining a place of
business in Illinois.
   (C)   Distinct And Separate Item: The tax authorized by this Chapter shall,
when collected, be stated as a distinct item separate and apart from the gross
charge for telecommunications. (Ord. 93-25, 10-12-1993)
3-17-5: FILING RETURNS AND REMITTANCES BY RETAILERS:
On or before the last day of each calendar month, every retailer maintaining a
place of business in Illinois and every retailer authorized by the Village
Treasurer to collect the tax imposed by this Chapter shall file with the
Village Treasurer a remittance return and remit all applicable tax for the
preceding calendar month. The return shall be filed on a form prescribed by the
Village Treasurer, containing such information as he or she may reasonably
require. (Ord. 93-25, 10-12-1993)
3-17-6: REGISTRATION:
Every retailer maintaining a place of business in Illinois shall register with
the Village Treasurer within thirty (30) days after the effective date of this
Chapter or the date of becoming such a retailer, whichever is later. (Ord. 93-
25, 10-12-1993)
3-17-7: OBLIGATION OF TAXPAYERS TO FILE RETURNS AND PAY TAX:
   (A)   If a retailer fails to collect the tax imposed by this Chapter from a
taxpayer, as required by Section
3-17-4, then the taxpayer shall pay the tax directly to the Village Treasurer.
   (B)   On or before the last day of each calendar month, every taxpayer that
has not paid the tax imposed by this Chapter to a retailer, shall file with the
Village Treasurer a tax return and pay the tax upon the gross charges the
taxpayer paid to the retailer during the preceding calendar month. The return
shall be filed on a form prescribed by the Village Treasurer, containing such
information as he or she may reasonably require. (Ord. 93-25, 10-12-1993)
3-17-8: RESALE NUMBERS:
   (A)   If a person who originates or receives telecommunications in the
Village claims to be a reseller of telecommunications, that person shall apply
to the Village Treasurer for a resale number. The applicant shall state facts
showing why it is not liable for the tax imposed by this Chapter on any
purchases of telecommunications and shall furnish such additional information
as the Village Treasurer may reasonably require.
   (B)   Upon approval of the application, the Village Treasurer shall assign a
resale number to the applicant and shall certify the number to the applicant.
   (C)   The Village Treasurer may cancel the resale number of any person if
the number:
      1.   Was obtained through misrepresentation;
      2.   Is used to originate or receive telecommunications tax-free when
such telecommunications are not for resale; and
      3.   Is no longer necessary because the person has discontinued making
resales.
   (D)   The act or privilege of originating or receiving telecommunications in
the Village shall not be made tax-free on the ground of being a sale for resale
unless the person has an active resale number issued by the Village Treasurer
and furnishes that number to the retailer in connection with certifying to the
retailer that a sale is nontaxable as a sale for resale. (Ord. 93-25, 10-12-
1993)
3-17-9: MAINTAINING BOOKS AND RECORDS:
Every retailer maintaining a place of business in Illinois, every retailer
authorized by the Village Treasurer to collect the tax imposed by this Chapter
and every taxpayer required by Section
3-17-7 to pay the tax directly to the Village Treasurer shall keep accurate
books and records of its business or activity, including original source
documents and books of entry denoting the transactions that gave rise, or may
have given rise, to any tax liability or exemption. All such books and records
shall be kept in the English language and, at all times during business hours
of the day, shall be subject to and available for inspection by the Village
Treasurer or his duly designated agent. (Ord. 93-25, 10-12-1993)
3-17-10: SEVERABILITY:
If any provision of this Chapter, or the application of any provision of this
Chapter, is held unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, such occurrence shall
not affect other provisions of this Chapter, or their application, that can be
given effect without the unconstitutional or invalid provision, or application
of such provision, is severable, unless otherwise provided by this Chapter. In
particular, if subsection
3-17-3(A)2 of this Chapter is declared unconstitutional or otherwise invalid,
the tax imposed under subsection
3-17-3(A)1 shall remain in full force and effect. (Ord. 93-25, 10-12-1993)
CHAPTER 18
TELECOMMUNICATIONS
SECTION:
3-18-1: Purpose
3-18-2: Definitions
3-18-3: Registration
3-18-4: Telecommunications License
3-18-5: Telecommunications Franchise
3-18-6: Cable Television Franchise
3-18-7: Application To Existing Franchise Ordinances And Agreements
3-18-8: Penalties
3-18-9: Other Remedies
3-18-10: Severability
3-18-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose and intent of this Chapter is to:
   (A)   Establish a local policy concerning telecommunications providers and
services;
   (B)   Establish clear local guidelines, standards and time frames for the
exercise of local authority with respect to the regulation of
telecommunications providers and services;
   (C)   Promote competition in telecommunications;
   (D)   Minimize unnecessary local regulation of telecommunications providers
and services;
   (E)   Encourage the provision of advanced and competitive telecommunications
services on the widest possible basis to the businesses, institutions and
residents of the Village;
   (F)   Permit and manage reasonable access to the public ways of the Village
for telecommunications purposes on a competitively neutral basis;
   (G)   Conserve the limited physical capacity of the public ways held in
public trust by the Village;
   (H)   Assure that the Village's current and ongoing costs of granting and
regulating private access to and use of the public ways are fully paid by the
persons seeking such access and causing such costs;
   (I)   Secure fair and reasonable compensation to the Village and the
residents of the Village for permitting private use of the public ways;
   (J)   Assure that all telecommunications carriers providing facilities or
services within the Village comply with the ordinances, rules and regulations
of the Village;
   (K)   Assure that the Village can continue to fairly and responsibly protect
the public health, safety and welfare;
   (L)   Enable the Village to discharge its public trust consistent with
rapidly evolving Federal and State regulatory policies, industry competition
and technological development. (Ord. 95-27, 11-14-1995)
3-18-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this Chapter, and the interpretation and enforcement
thereof, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings,
unless the context of the sentence in which they are used shall indicate
otherwise:
AFFILIATE: A person that (directly or indirectly) owns or controls, is owned or
controlled by, or is under common ownership or control with another person.
ANNUAL GROSS REVENUE: (Reserved)
CABLE ACT: The Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, 47 U.S.C. §532 et seq.,
as now and hereafter amended.
CABLE OPERATOR: A telecommunications carrier providing or offering to provide
"cable service" within the Village as that term is defined in the Cable Act.
CABLE SERVICE: For the purpose of this Chapter shall have the same meaning
provided by the Cable Act.
CORPORATE AUTHORITIES: The President and Board of Trustees of the Village.
EXCESS CAPACITY: The volume or capacity in any existing or future duct,
conduit, manhole, handhole or other utility facility within the public way that
is or will be available for use for additional telecommunications facilities.
FCC OR FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION: The Federal administrative agency, or
lawful successor, authorized to regulate and oversee telecommunications
carriers, services and providers on a national level.
ICC OR ILLINOIS COMMERCE COMMISSION: The State administrative agency, or lawful
successor, authorized to regulate and oversee telecommunications carriers,
services and providers in the State of Illinois.
OTHER WAYS: The highways, streets, alleys, utility easements or other rights of
way within the Village, but under the jurisdiction and control of a
governmental entity other than the Village.
OVERHEAD FACILITIES: Utility poles, utility facilities and telecommunications
facilities located above the surface of the ground, including the underground
supports and foundations for such facilities.
PERSON: Means and includes corporations, companies, associations, joint stock
companies or associations, firms, partnerships, limited liability companies and
individuals and includes their lessors, trustees and receivers.
PUBLIC STREET: Any highway, street, alley or other public right of way for
motor vehicle travel under the jurisdiction and control of the Village which
has been acquired, established, dedicated or devoted to highway purposes not
inconsistent with telecommunications facilities.
PUBLIC WAY: Means and includes all public streets and utility easements, as
those terms are defined herein, now or hereafter owned by the Village, but only
to the extent of the Village's right, title, interest or authority to grant a
license or franchise to occupy and use such streets and easements for
telecommunications facilities.
STATE: The State of Illinois.
SURPLUS SPACE: That portion of the usable space on a utility pole which has the
necessary clearance from other pole users, as required by the orders and
regulations of the Illinois Commerce Commission, to allow its use by a
telecommunications carrier for a pole attachment.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS CARRIER: Means and includes every person that directly or
indirectly owns, controls, operates or manages a plant, equipment or property
within the Village, used or to be used for the purpose of offering
telecommunications service.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES: The plant, equipment and property, including,
but not limited to, cables, wires, conduits, ducts, pedestals, antennas,
electronics and other appurtenances used or to be used to transmit, receive,
distribute, provide or offer telecommunications services.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER: Means and includes every person who provides
telecommunications service over telecommunications facilities without any
ownership or management control of the facilities.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE: The providing or offering for rent, sale or lease,
or in exchange for other value received, of the transmittal of voice, data,
image, graphic and video programming information between or among points by
wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite or similar
facilities, with or without benefit of any closed transmission medium.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM: See definition of Telecommunications Facilities.
UNDERGROUND FACILITIES: Utility and telecommunications facilities located under
the surface of the ground, excluding the underground foundations or supports
for overhead facilities.
USABLE SPACE: The total distance between the top of a utility pole and the
lowest possible attachment point that provides the minimum allowable vertical
clearance as specified in the orders and regulations of the Illinois commerce
commission.
UTILITY EASEMENT: Any easement owned by the village and acquired, established,
dedicated or devoted for public utility purposes not inconsistent with
telecommunications facilities.
UTILITY FACILITIES: The plant, equipment and property, including, but not
limited to, the poles, pipes, mains, conduits, ducts, cables, wires, plant and
equipment located under, on or above the surface of the ground within the
public ways of the village and used or to be used for the purpose of providing
utility or telecommunications services.
VILLAGE: The village of Forest View.
VILLAGE PROPERTY: Means and includes all real property owned by the village,
other than public streets and utility easements as those terms are defined
herein, and all property held in a proprietary capacity by the village, which
are not subject to right of way licensing and franchising as provided in this
chapter. (Ord. 95-27, 11-14-1995)
3-18-3: REGISTRATION:
Except as otherwise provided herein, all telecommunications carriers and
providers engaged in the business of transmitting, supplying or furnishing of
telecommunications originating or terminating in the village shall register
with the village pursuant to article A of this chapter. (Ord. 95-27, 11-14-
1995)
3-18-4: TELECOMMUNICATIONS LICENSE:
Except as otherwise provided herein, any telecommunications carriers who desire
to construct, install, operate, maintain, or otherwise locate
telecommunications facilities in, under, over or across any public way of the
village for the sole purpose of providing telecommunications service to persons
and areas outside the village shall first obtain a license granting the use of
such public ways from the village pursuant to article B of this chapter. (Ord.
95-27, 11-14-1995)
3-18-5: TELECOMMUNICATIONS FRANCHISE:
Except as otherwise provided herein, any telecommunications carriers who desire
to construct, install, operate, maintain or otherwise locate telecommunications
facilities in, under, over or across any public way of the village, and to also
provide telecommunications service to persons or areas in the village, shall
first obtain a franchise granting the use of such public ways from the village
pursuant to article C of this chapter. (Ord. 95-27, 11-14-1995)
3-18-6: CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE:
Except as otherwise provided herein, any telecommunications carrier who desires
to construct, install, operate, maintain or locate telecommunications
facilities in any public way of the village for the purpose of providing cable
service to persons in the village shall first obtain a cable franchise from the
village as provided in title 8, chapter 4 of this code. (Ord. 95-27, 11-14-
1995)
3-18-7: APPLICATION TO EXISTING FRANCHISE ORDINANCES AND AGREEMENTS:
This chapter shall have no effect on any existing franchise ordinance or
franchise agreement until:
   (A)   The expiration of said franchise ordinance or agreement;
   (B)   An amendment to an unexpired franchise ordinance or franchise
agreement, unless both parties agree to defer full compliance to a specific
date not later than the present expiration date. (Ord. 95-27, 11-14-1995)
3-18-8: PENALTIES:
Any person found guilty of violating, disobeying, omitting, neglecting or
refusing to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall be fined
not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00) for each offense. A separate and distinct offense shall be
deemed committed each day on which a violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 95-
27, 11-14-1995)
3-18-9: OTHER REMEDIES:
Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed as limiting any judicial remedies
that the Village may have, at law or in equity, for enforcement of this
Chapter. (Ord. 95-27, 11-14-1995)
3-18-10: SEVERABILITY:
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or other portion of this
Chapter, or its application to any person, is, for any reason, declared
invalid, in whole or in part by any court or agency of competent jurisdiction,
said decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof.
(Ord. 95-27, 11-14-1995)
ARTICLE A. REGISTRATION OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS CARRIERS AND PROVIDERS
SECTION:
3-18A-1: Registration Required
3-18A-2: Registration Fee
3-18A-3: Purpose Of Registration
3-18A-1: REGISTRATION REQUIRED:
All telecommunications carriers and providers that offer or provide any
telecommunications service for a fee directly to the public, either within the
Village, or outside the corporate limits from telecommunications facilities
within the Village, shall register with the Village pursuant to this Article on
forms to be provided by the Village Clerk, which shall include the following:
   (A)   The identity and legal status of the registrant, including any
affiliates.
   (B)   The name, address and telephone number of the officer, agent or
employee responsible for the accuracy of the registration statement.
   (C)   A description of registrant's existing or proposed telecommunications
facilities within the Village.
   (D)   A description of the telecommunications service that the registrant
intends to offer or provide, or is currently offering or providing, to persons,
firms, businesses or institutions within the Village.
   (E)   Information sufficient to determine whether the registrant is subject
to public way licensing or franchising under this Chapter.
   (F)   Information sufficient to determine whether the transmission,
origination or receipt of the telecommunications services provided or to be
provided by the registrant constitutes an occupation or privilege subject to
any Municipal telecommunications tax, utility message tax or other occupation
tax imposed by the Village.
   (G)   Information sufficient to determine that the applicant has applied for
and received any certificate of authority required by the Illinois Commerce
Commission to provide telecommunications services or facilities within the
Village.
   (H)   Information sufficient to determine that the applicant has applied for
and received any construction permit, operating license or other approvals
required by the Federal Communications Commission to provide telecommunications
services or facilities within the Village.
   (I)   Such other information as the Village Clerk may reasonably require.
(Ord. 95-27, 11-14-1995)
3-18A-2: REGISTRATION FEE:
Each application for registration as a telecommunications carrier or provider
shall be accompanied by a fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00). (Ord. 95-27, 11-
14-1995)
3-18A-3: PURPOSE OF REGISTRATION:
The purpose of registration under this Article is to:
   (A)   Provide the Village with accurate and current information concerning
the telecommunications carriers and providers that offer or provide
telecommunications services within the Village, or that own or operate
telecommunication facilities within the Village;
   (B)   Assist the Village in enforcement of this Chapter;
   (C)   Assist the Village in the collection and enforcement of any Municipal
taxes, franchise fees, license fees or charges that may be due the Village;
   (D)   Assist the Village in monitoring compliance with local, State and
Federal laws. (Ord. 95-27, 11-14-1995)
ARTICLE B. TELECOMMUNICATIONS LICENSE
SECTION:
3-18B-1: Telecommunications License
3-18B-2: License Application
3-18B-3: Determination By The Village
3-18B-4: Agreement
3-18B-5: Nonexclusive Grant
3-18B-6: Rights Granted
3-18B-7: Term Of Grant
3-18B-8: License Route
3-18B-9: Location Of Facilities
3-18B-10: Construction Permits
3-18B-11: Compensation To Village
3-18B-12: Service To Village Users
3-18B-13: Amendment Of Grant
3-18B-14: Renewal Applications
3-18B-15: Renewal Determinations
3-18B-16: Obligation To Cure As A Condition Of Renewal
3-18B-1: TELECOMMUNICATIONS LICENSE:
A telecommunications license shall be required of any telecommunications
carrier who desires to occupy specific public ways of the Village for the sole
purpose of providing telecommunications services to persons or areas outside
the Village. (Ord. 95-27, 11-14-1995)
3-18B-2: LICENSE APPLICATION:
Any person that desires a telecommunications license pursuant to this Article
shall file an application with the Village which shall include the following
information:
   (A)   The identity of the license applicant, including all affiliates of the
applicant.
   (B)   A description of the telecommunications services that are or will be
offered or provided by licensee over its telecommunications facilities.
   (C)   A description of the transmission medium that will be used by the
licensee to offer or provide such telecommunications services.
   (D)   Preliminary engineering plans, specifications and a network map of the
facilities to be located within the Village, all in sufficient detail to
identify:
      1.   The location and route requested for applicant's proposed
telecommunications facilities.
      2.   The location of all overhead and underground public utility,
telecommunication, cable, water, sewer drainage and other facilities in the
public way along the proposed route.
      3.   The location(s), if any, for interconnection with the
telecommunications facilities of other telecommunications carriers.
      4.   The specific trees, structures, improvements, facilities and
obstructions, if any, that applicant proposes to temporarily or permanently
remove or relocate.
   (E)   If applicant is proposing to install overhead facilities, evidence
that surplus space is available for locating its telecommunications facilities
on existing utility poles along the proposed route.
   (F)   If applicant is proposing an underground installation in existing
ducts or conduits within the public ways, information in sufficient detail to
identify:
      1.   The excess capacity currently available in such ducts or conduits
before installation of applicant's telecommunications facilities;
      2.   The excess capacity, if any, that will exist in such ducts or
conduits after installation of applicant's telecommunications facilities.
   (G)   If applicant is proposing an underground installation within new ducts
or conduits to be constructed within the public ways:
      1.   The location proposed for the new ducts or conduits;
      2.   The excess capacity that will exist in such ducts or conduits after
installation of applicant's telecommunications facilities.
   (H)   A preliminary construction schedule and completion date.
   (I)   A preliminary traffic control plan in accordance with the IDOT Manual
on Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
   (J)   Financial statements prepared in accordance with generally accepted
accounting principles demonstrating the applicant's financial ability to
construct, operate, maintain, relocate and remove the facilities.
   (K)   Information in sufficient detail to establish the applicant's
technical qualifications, experience and expertise regarding the
telecommunications facilities and services described in the application.
   (L)   Information to establish that the applicant has obtained all other
governmental approvals and permits to construct and operate the facilities and
to offer or provide the telecommunications services.
   (M)   All fees, deposits or charges required pursuant to Article E of this
Chapter.
   (N)   Such other and further information as may be required by the Village
Administrator. (Ord. 95-27, 11-14-1995)
3-18B-3: DETERMINATION BY THE VILLAGE:
Within one hundred twenty (120) days after receiving a complete application
under Section
3-18B-2 of this Article, the corporate authorities shall issue a written
determination granting or denying the application in whole or in part, applying
the following standards. If the application is denied, the written
determination shall include the reasons for denial.
   (A)   The financial and technical ability of the applicant.
   (B)   The legal ability of the applicant.
   (C)   The capacity of the public ways to accommodate the applicant's
proposed facilities.
   (D)   The capacity of the public ways to accommodate additional utility and
telecommunications facilities if the license is granted.
   (E)   The damage or disruption, if any, of public or private facilities,
improvements, service, travel or landscaping if the license is granted.
   (F)   The public interest in minimizing the cost and disruption of
construction within the public ways.
   (G)   The service that applicant will provide to the community and region.
   (H)   The effect, if any, on public health, safety and welfare if the
license is granted.
   (I)   The availability of alternate routes and/or locations for the proposed
facilities.
   (J)   Applicable Federal and State telecommunications laws, regulations and
policies.
   (K)   Such other factors as may demonstrate that the grant to use the public
ways will serve the community interest. (Ord. 95-27, 11-14-1995)
3-18B-4: AGREEMENT:
No license granted hereunder shall be effective until the applicant and the
Village have executed a written agreement setting forth the particular terms
and provisions under which the license to occupy and use public ways of the
Village will be granted. (Ord. 95-27, 11-14-1995)
3-18B-5: NONEXCLUSIVE GRANT:
No license granted under this Article shall confer any exclusive right,
privilege, license or franchise to occupy or use the public ways of the Village
for delivery of telecommunications services or any other purposes. (Ord. 95-27,
11-14-1995)
3-18B-6: RIGHTS GRANTED:
No license granted under this Article shall convey any right, title or interest
in the public ways, but shall be deemed a license only to use and occupy the
public ways for the limited purposes and term stated in the grant. Further, no
license shall be construed as any warranty of title. (Ord. 95-27, 11-14-1995)
3-18B-7: TERM OF GRANT:
Unless otherwise specified in a license agreement, a telecommunications license
granted hereunder shall be in effect for a term of five (5) years. (Ord. 95-27,
11-14-1995)
3-18B-8: LICENSE ROUTE:
A telecommunications license granted under this Article shall be limited to a
grant of specific public ways and defined portions thereof. (Ord. 95-27, 11-14-
1995)
3-18B-9: LOCATION OF FACILITIES:
Unless otherwise specified in a license agreement, all facilities shall be
constructed, installed and located in accordance with the following terms and
conditions:
   (A)   Telecommunications facilities shall be installed within an existing
underground duct or conduit whenever excess capacity exists within such utility
facility.
   (B)   A licensee with permission to install overhead facilities shall
install its telecommunications facilities on pole attachments to existing
utility poles only, and then only if surplus space is available.
   (C)   Whenever any existing electric utilities, cable facilities or
telecommunications facilities are located underground within a public way of
the Village, a licensee with permission to occupy the same public way must also
locate its telecommunications facilities underground.
   (D)   Whenever any new or existing electric utilities, cable facilities or
telecommunications facilities are located or relocated underground within a
public way of the Village, a grantee that currently occupies the same public
way shall relocate its facilities underground within a reasonable period of
time, which shall not be later than the end of the grant term. Absent
extraordinary circumstances or undue hardship as determined by the Village
Engineer, such relocation shall be made concurrently to minimize the disruption
of the public ways.
   (E)   Whenever new telecommunications facilities will exhaust the capacity
of a public street or utility easement to reasonably accommodate future
telecommunications carriers or facilities, the grantee shall provide additional
ducts, conduits, manholes and other facilities for nondiscriminatory access to
future telecommunications carriers. (Ord. 95-27, 11-14-1995)
3-18B-10: CONSTRUCTION PERMITS:
All licensees are required to obtain construction permits for
telecommunications facilities as required in Article F of this Chapter
provided, however, that nothing in this Article shall prohibit the Village and
a licensee from agreeing to alternative plan review, permit and construction
procedures in a license agreement, provided such alternative procedures provide
substantially equivalent safeguards for responsible construction practices.
(Ord. 95-27, 11-14-1995)
3-18B-11: COMPENSATION TO VILLAGE:
Each license granted under this Article is subject to the Village's right,
which is expressly reserved, to annually fix a fair and reasonable compensation
to be paid for the property rights granted to the licensee; provided, nothing
in this Article shall prohibit the Village and a licensee from agreeing to the
compensation to be paid. (Ord. 95-27, 11-14-1995)
3-18B-12: SERVICE TO VILLAGE USERS:
A licensee may be permitted to offer or provide telecommunications services to
persons or areas within the Village upon submitting an application for approval
pursuant to Article C of this Chapter. (Ord. 95-27, 11-14-1995)
3-18B-13: AMENDMENT OF GRANT:
   (A)   A new license application and grant shall be required of any
telecommunications carrier that desires to extend or locate its
telecommunications facilities in public ways of the Village which are not
included in a license previously granted under this Chapter.
   (B)   If ordered by the Village to locate or relocate its telecommunications
facilities in public ways not included in a previously granted license, the
Village shall grant a license amendment without further application. (Ord. 95-
27, 11-14-1995)
3-18B-14: RENEWAL APPLICATIONS:
A grantee that desires to renew its license under this Article shall, in not
more than one hundred eighty (180) days nor less than ninety (90) days before
expiration of the current license, file an application with the Village for
renewal of its license which shall include the following information:
   (A)   The information required pursuant to Section
3-18B-2 of this Article.
   (B)   Any information required pursuant to the license agreement between the
Village and the grantee. (Ord. 95-27, 11-14-1995)
3-18B-15: RENEWAL DETERMINATIONS:
Within ninety (90) days after receiving a complete application under Section
3-18B-4 of this Article, the corporate authorities shall issue a written
determination granting or denying the renewal application in whole or in part,
applying the following standards. If the renewal application is denied, the
written determination shall include the reasons for nonrenewal.
   (A)   The financial and technical ability of the applicant.
   (B)   The legal ability of the applicant.
   (C)   The continuing capacity of the public ways to accommodate the
applicant's existing facilities.
   (D)   The applicant's compliance with the requirements of this Chapter and
the license agreement.
   (E)   Applicable Federal, State and local telecommunications laws, rules and
policies.
   (F)   Such other factors as may demonstrate that the continued grant to use
the public ways will serve the community interest. (Ord. 95-27, 11-14-1995)
3-18B-16: OBLIGATION TO CURE AS A CONDITION OF RENEWAL:
No license shall be renewed until any ongoing violations or defaults in the
licensee's performance of the license agreement, or of the requirements of this
Chapter, have been cured, or a plan detailing the corrective action to be taken
by the grantee has been approved by the Village. (Ord. 95-27, 11-14-1995)
ARTICLE C. TELECOMMUNICATIONS FRANCHISE
SECTION:
3-18C-1: Telecommunications Franchise
3-18C-2: Franchise Application
3-18C-3: Determination By The Village
3-18C-4: Agreement
3-18C-5: Nonexclusive Grant
3-18C-6: Term Of Grant
3-18C-7: Rights Granted
3-18C-8: Franchise Territory
3-18C-9: Location Of Facilities
3-18C-10: Construction Permits
3-18C-11: Compensation To Village
3-18C-12: Nondiscrimination
3-18C-13: Service To The Village
3-18C-14: Amendment Of Grant
3-18C-15: Renewal Applications
3-18C-16: Renewal Determinations
3-18C-17: Obligation To Cure As A Condition Of Renewal
3-18C-1: TELECOMMUNICATIONS FRANCHISE:
A telecommunications franchise shall be required of any telecommunications
carrier who desires to occupy public ways of the Village and to provide
telecommunications services to any person or area in the Village. (Ord. 95-27,
11-14-1995)
3-18C-2: FRANCHISE APPLICATION:
Any person that desires a telecommunications franchise pursuant to this Article
shall file an application with the Village which shall include the following
information:
   (A)   The identity of the franchise applicant, including all affiliates of
the applicant.
   (B)   A description of the telecommunications services that are or will be
offered or provided by the franchise applicant over its existing or proposed
facilities.
   (C)   A description of the transmission medium that will be used by the
franchisee to offer or provide such telecommunications services.
   (D)   Preliminary engineering plans, specifications and a network map of the
facilities to be located within the Village, all in sufficient detail to
identify:
      1.   The location and route requested for applicant's proposed
telecommunications facilities.
      2.   The location of all overhead and underground public utility,
telecommunication, cable, water, sewer drainage and other facilities in the
public way along the proposed route.
      3.   The location(s), if any, for interconnection with the
telecommunications facilities of other telecommunications carriers.
      4.   The specific trees, structures, improvements, facilities and
obstructions, if any, that applicant proposes to temporarily or permanently
remove or relocate.
   (E)   If applicant is proposing to install overhead facilities, evidence
that surplus space is available for locating its telecommunications facilities
on existing utility poles along the proposed route.
   (F)   If applicant is proposing an underground installation in existing
ducts or conduits within the public ways, information in sufficient detail to
identify:
      1.   The excess capacity currently available in such ducts or conduits
before installation of applicant's telecommunications facilities;
      2.   The excess capacity, if any, that will exist in such ducts or
conduits after installation of applicant's telecommunications facilities.
   (G)   If applicant is proposing an underground installation within new ducts
or conduits to be constructed within the public ways:
      1.   The location proposed for the new ducts or conduits;
      2.   The excess capacity that will exist in such ducts or conduits after
installation of applicant's telecommunications facilities.
   (H)   A preliminary construction schedule and completion dates.
   (I)   A preliminary traffic control plan in accordance with the IDOT Manual
on Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
   (J)   Financial statements prepared in accordance with generally accepted
accounting principles demonstrating the applicant's financial ability to
construct, operate, maintain, relocate and remove the facilities.
   (K)   Information in sufficient detail to establish the applicant's
technical qualifications, experience and expertise regarding the
telecommunications facilities and services described in the application.
   (L)   Information to establish that the applicant has obtained all other
governmental approvals and permits to construct and operate the facilities and
to offer or provide the telecommunications services.
   (M)   Whether the applicant intends to provide cable service, video dial
tone service or other video programming service, and sufficient information to
determine whether such service is subject to cable franchising.
   (N)   An accurate map showing the location of any existing
telecommunications facilities in the Village that applicant intends to use or
lease.
   (O)   A description of the services or facilities that the applicant will
offer or make available to the Village and other public, educational and
governmental institutions.
   (P)   A description of applicant's access and line extension policies.
   (Q)   The area or areas of the Village the applicant desires to serve and a
schedule for build-out to the entire franchise area.
   (R)   All fees, deposits or charges required pursuant to Article E of this
Chapter.
   (S)   Such other and further information as may be requested by the Village
Administrator. (Ord. 95-27, 11-14-1995)
3-18C-3: DETERMINATION BY THE VILLAGE:
Within one hundred fifty (150) days after receiving a complete application
under Section
3-18B-2 of this Chapter, the corporate authorities shall issue a written
determination granting or denying the application in whole or in part, applying
the following standards. If the application is denied, the written
determination shall include the reasons for denial.
   (A)   The financial and technical ability of the applicant.
   (B)   The legal ability of the applicant.
   (C)   The capacity of the public ways to accommodate the applicant's
proposed facilities.
   (D)   The capacity of the public ways to accommodate additional utility and
telecommunications facilities if the franchise is granted.
   (E)   The damage or disruption, if any, of public or private facilities,
improvements, service, travel or landscaping if the franchise is granted.
   (F)   The public interest in minimizing the cost and disruption of
construction within the public ways.
   (G)   The service that applicant will provide to the community and region.
   (H)   The effect, if any, on public health, safety and welfare if the
franchise requested is granted.
   (I)   The availability of alternate routes and/or locations for the proposed
facilities.
   (J)   Applicable Federal and State telecommunications laws, regulations and
policies.
   (K)   Such other factors as may demonstrate that the grant to use the public
ways will serve the community interest. (Ord. 95-27, 11-14-1995)
3-18C-4: AGREEMENT:
No franchise shall be granted hereunder unless the applicant and the Village
have executed a written agreement setting forth the particular terms and
provisions under which the franchise to occupy and use public ways of the
Village will be granted. (Ord. 95-27, 11-14-1995)
3-18C-5: NONEXCLUSIVE GRANT:
No franchise granted under this Article shall confer any exclusive right,
privilege, license or franchise to occupy or use the public ways of the Village
for delivery of telecommunications services or any other purposes. (Ord. 95-27,
11-14-1995)
3-18C-6: TERM OF GRANT:
Unless otherwise specified in a franchise agreement, a telecommunications
franchise granted hereunder shall be valid for a term of ten (10) years. (Ord.
95-27, 11-14-1995)
3-18C-7: RIGHTS GRANTED:
No franchise granted under this Article shall convey any right, title or
interest in the public ways, but shall be deemed a franchise only to use and
occupy the public ways for the limited purposes and term stated in the grant.
Further, no franchise shall be construed as any warranty of title. (Ord. 95-27,
11-14-1995)
3-18C-8: FRANCHISE TERRITORY:
A telecommunications franchise granted under this Article shall be limited to
the specific geographic area of the Village to be served by the franchise
grantee, and the specific public ways necessary to serve such areas. (Ord. 95-
27, 11-14-1995)
3-18C-9: LOCATION OF FACILITIES:
Unless otherwise specified in a franchise agreement, all facilities shall be
constructed, installed and located in accordance with the following terms and
conditions:
   (A)   Telecommunications facilities shall be installed within an existing
underground duct or conduit whenever excess capacity exists within such utility
facility.
   (B)   A franchisee with permission to install overhead facilities shall
install its telecommunications facilities on pole attachments to existing
utility poles only, and then only if surplus space is available.
   (C)   Whenever any existing electric utilities, cable facilities or
telecommunications facilities are located underground within a public way of
the Village, a franchisee with permission to occupy the same public way must
also locate its telecommunications facilities underground.
   (D)   Whenever any new or existing electric utilities, cable facilities or
telecommunications facilities are located or relocated underground within a
public way of the Village, a grantee that currently occupies the same public
way shall relocate its facilities underground within a reasonable period of
time, which shall not be later than the end of the grant term. Absent
extraordinary circumstances or undue hardship as determined by the Village
Engineer, such relocation shall be made concurrently to minimize the disruption
of the public ways.
   (E)   Whenever new telecommunications facilities will exhaust the capacity
of a public street or utility easement to reasonably accommodate future
telecommunications carriers or facilities, the grantee shall provide additional
ducts, conduits, manholes and other facilities for nondiscriminatory access to
future carriers. (Ord. 95-27, 11-14-1995)
3-18C-10: CONSTRUCTION PERMITS:
All franchisees are required to obtain construction permits for
telecommunications facilities as required in Article F of this Chapter
provided, however, that nothing in this Article shall prohibit the Village and
a franchisee from agreeing to alternative plan review, permit and construction
procedures in a franchise agreement, provided such alternative procedures
provide substantially equivalent safeguards for responsible construction
practices. (Ord. 95-27, 11-14-1995)
3-18C-11: COMPENSATION TO VILLAGE:
Each franchise granted under this Article is subject to the Village's right,
which is expressly reserved, to annually fix a fair and reasonable compensation
to be paid for the property rights granted to the franchisee; provided, nothing
in this Article shall prohibit the Village and a franchisee from agreeing to
the compensation to be paid. (Ord. 95-27, 11-14-1995)
3-18C-12: NONDISCRIMINATION:
A franchisee shall make its telecommunications services available to any
customer within its franchise area who shall request such service, without
discrimination as to the terms, conditions, rates or charges for grantee's
services; provided, however, that nothing in this Article shall prohibit a
franchisee from making any reasonable classifications among differently
situated customers. (Ord. 95-27, 11-14-1995)
3-18C-13: SERVICE TO THE VILLAGE:
A franchisee shall make its telecommunications services available to the
Village at its most favorable rate for similarly situated users, unless
otherwise provided in a license or franchise agreement. (Ord. 95-27, 11-14-
1995)
3-18C-14: AMENDMENT OF GRANT:
   (A)   A new franchise application and grant shall be required of any
telecommunications carrier that desires to extend its franchise territory or to
locate its telecommunications facilities in public ways of the Village which
are not included in a franchise previously granted under this Chapter.
   (B)   If ordered by the Village to locate or relocate its telecommunications
facilities in public ways not included in a previously granted franchise, the
Village shall grant a franchise amendment without further application. (Ord.
95-27, 11-14-1995)
3-18C-15: RENEWAL APPLICATIONS:
A grantee that desires to renew its franchise under this Article shall, not
more than two hundred forty (240) days nor less than one hundred fifty (150)
days before expiration of the current franchise, file an application with the
Village for renewal of its franchise which shall include the following
information:
   (A)   The information required pursuant to Section
3-18C-2 of this Article.
   (B)   Any information required pursuant to the franchise agreement between
the Village and the grantee. (Ord. 95-27, 11-14-1995)
3-18C-16: RENEWAL DETERMINATIONS:
Within one hundred fifty (150) days after receiving a complete application
under Section
3-18C-15 of this Article, the corporate authorities shall issue a written
determination granting or denying the renewal application in whole or in part,
applying the following standards. If the renewal application is denied, the
written determination shall include the reasons for nonrenewal.
   (A)   The financial and technical ability of the applicant.
   (B)   The legal ability of the applicant.
   (C)   The continuing capacity of the public ways to accommodate the
applicant's existing facilities.
   (D)   The applicant's compliance with the requirements of this Chapter and
the franchise agreement.
   (E)   Applicable Federal, State and local telecommunications laws, rules and
policies.
   (F)   Such other factors as may demonstrate that the continued grant to use
the public ways will serve the community interest. (Ord. 95-27, 11-14-1995)
3-18C-17: OBLIGATION TO CURE AS A CONDITION OF RENEWAL:
No franchise shall be renewed until any ongoing violations or defaults in the
grantee's performance of the franchise agreement, or of the requirements of
this Chapter, have been cured, or a plan detailing the corrective action to be
taken by the grantee has been approved by the Village. (Ord. 95-27, 11-14-1995)
ARTICLE D. RESERVED
(Ord. 95-27, 11-14-1995)
ARTICLE E. FEES AND COMPENSATION
SECTION:
3-18E-1: Purpose
3-18E-2: Application And Review Fee
3-18E-3: Other Village Costs
3-18E-4: Reserved Compensation For Public Ways
3-18E-5: Compensation For Village Property
3-18E-6: Construction Permit Fee
3-18E-7: Annual Fees
3-18E-8: Cable Fees
3-18E-9: Regulatory Fees And Compensation Not A Tax
3-18E-1: PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of this Article to provide for the payment and recovery of
all direct and indirect costs and expenses of the Village related to the
enforcement and administration of this Chapter. (Ord. 95-27, 11-14-1995)
3-18E-2: APPLICATION AND REVIEW FEE:
   (A)   Any applicant for a license or franchise pursuant to Article B or C of
this Chapter shall pay a fee of two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00)
or one-half of one percent (0.5%) of the estimated cost of applicant's proposed
telecommunications facilities, as certified by the applicant's professional
engineer, whichever is greater.
   (B)   The application and review fee shall be deposited with the Village as
part of the application filed pursuant to Article B or Article C of this
Chapter.
   (C)   An applicant whose license or franchise application has been
withdrawn, abandoned or denied shall, within sixty (60) days of its application
and review fee written request, be refunded the balance of its deposit under
this Section, less:
      1.   Seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) and
      2.   All ascertainable costs and expenses incurred by the Village in
connection with the application. (Ord. 95-27, 11-14-1995)
3-18E-3: OTHER VILLAGE COSTS:
All license or franchise grantees shall, within thirty (30) days after written
demand therefor, reimburse the Village for all direct and indirect costs and
expenses incurred by the Village in connection with any modification,
amendment, renewal or transfer of the license or franchise or any license or
franchise agreement. (Ord. 95-27, 11-14-1995)
3-18E-4: RESERVED COMPENSATION FOR PUBLIC WAYS:
The Village reserves its right to annually fix a fair and reasonable
compensation to be paid for the property rights granted to a telecommunications
license or franchise grantee. Nothing in this Article shall prohibit the
Village and a grantee from agreeing to the compensation to be paid for the
granted property rights. (Ord. 95-27, 11-14-1995)
3-18E-5: COMPENSATION FOR VILLAGE PROPERTY:
If the right is granted, by lease, license, franchise or other manner, to use
and occupy Village property for the installation of telecommunications
facilities, the compensation to be paid shall be fixed by the Village. (Ord.
95-27, 11-14-1995)
3-18E-6: CONSTRUCTION PERMIT FEE:
Prior to issuance of a construction permit, the permittee shall pay a permit
fee equal to one-half of one percent (0.5%) of the estimated cost of
constructing the telecommunication facilities, as certified by the applicant's
engineer and approved by the Village Engineer, whichever is greater. (Ord. 95-
27, 11-14-1995)
3-18E-7: ANNUAL FEES:
Unless otherwise agreed in a license or franchise grant agreement, each license
or franchise grantee shall pay an annual license fee to the Village equal to
seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) as reimbursement for the Village's costs
in connection with reviewing, inspecting and supervising the use and occupancy
of the public ways on behalf of the public and existing or future users. (Ord.
95-27, 11-14-1995)
3-18E-8: CABLE FEES:
Cable television franchisees shall be subject to the franchise fees, payments
and costs provided in Article D of this Chapter. (Ord. 95-27, 11-14-1995)
3-18E-9: REGULATORY FEES AND COMPENSATION NOT A TAX:
The regulatory fees and costs provided for in this Article, and any
compensation charged and paid for the public ways provided for in Section
3-18E-4 of this Article, are separate from, and additional to, any and all
Federal, State, local and Village taxes as may be levied, imposed or due from a
telecommunications carrier or provider, its customers or subscribers, or on
account of the lease, sale, delivery or transmission of telecommunications
services. (Ord. 95-27, 11-14-1995)
ARTICLE E. FEES AND COMPENSATION
SECTION:
3-18E-1: Purpose
3-18E-2: Application And Review Fee
3-18E-3: Other Village Costs
3-18E-4: Reserved Compensation For Public Ways
3-18E-5: Compensation For Village Property
3-18E-6: Construction Permit Fee
3-18E-7: Annual Fees
3-18E-8: Cable Fees
3-18E-9: Regulatory Fees And Compensation Not A Tax
3-18E-1: PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of this Article to provide for the payment and recovery of
all direct and indirect costs and expenses of the Village related to the
enforcement and administration of this Chapter. (Ord. 95-27, 11-14-1995)
3-18E-2: APPLICATION AND REVIEW FEE:
   (A)   Any applicant for a license or franchise pursuant to Article B or C of
this Chapter shall pay a fee of two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00)
or one-half of one percent (0.5%) of the estimated cost of applicant's proposed
telecommunications facilities, as certified by the applicant's professional
engineer, whichever is greater.
   (B)   The application and review fee shall be deposited with the Village as
part of the application filed pursuant to Article B or Article C of this
Chapter.
   (C)   An applicant whose license or franchise application has been
withdrawn, abandoned or denied shall, within sixty (60) days of its application
and review fee written request, be refunded the balance of its deposit under
this Section, less:
      1.   Seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) and
      2.   All ascertainable costs and expenses incurred by the Village in
connection with the application. (Ord. 95-27, 11-14-1995)
3-18E-3: OTHER VILLAGE COSTS:
All license or franchise grantees shall, within thirty (30) days after written
demand therefor, reimburse the Village for all direct and indirect costs and
expenses incurred by the Village in connection with any modification,
amendment, renewal or transfer of the license or franchise or any license or
franchise agreement. (Ord. 95-27, 11-14-1995)
3-18E-4: RESERVED COMPENSATION FOR PUBLIC WAYS:
The Village reserves its right to annually fix a fair and reasonable
compensation to be paid for the property rights granted to a telecommunications
license or franchise grantee. Nothing in this Article shall prohibit the
Village and a grantee from agreeing to the compensation to be paid for the
granted property rights. (Ord. 95-27, 11-14-1995)
3-18E-5: COMPENSATION FOR VILLAGE PROPERTY:
If the right is granted, by lease, license, franchise or other manner, to use
and occupy Village property for the installation of telecommunications
facilities, the compensation to be paid shall be fixed by the Village. (Ord.
95-27, 11-14-1995)
3-18E-6: CONSTRUCTION PERMIT FEE:
Prior to issuance of a construction permit, the permittee shall pay a permit
fee equal to one-half of one percent (0.5%) of the estimated cost of
constructing the telecommunication facilities, as certified by the applicant's
engineer and approved by the Village Engineer, whichever is greater. (Ord. 95-
27, 11-14-1995)
3-18E-7: ANNUAL FEES:
Unless otherwise agreed in a license or franchise grant agreement, each license
or franchise grantee shall pay an annual license fee to the Village equal to
seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) as reimbursement for the Village's costs
in connection with reviewing, inspecting and supervising the use and occupancy
of the public ways on behalf of the public and existing or future users. (Ord.
95-27, 11-14-1995)
3-18E-8: CABLE FEES:
Cable television franchisees shall be subject to the franchise fees, payments
and costs provided in Article D of this Chapter. (Ord. 95-27, 11-14-1995)
3-18E-9: REGULATORY FEES AND COMPENSATION NOT A TAX:
The regulatory fees and costs provided for in this Article, and any
compensation charged and paid for the public ways provided for in Section
3-18E-4 of this Article, are separate from, and additional to, any and all
Federal, State, local and Village taxes as may be levied, imposed or due from a
telecommunications carrier or provider, its customers or subscribers, or on
account of the lease, sale, delivery or transmission of telecommunications
services. (Ord. 95-27, 11-14-1995)
ARTICLE G. CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS
SECTION:
3-18G-1: General
3-18G-2: Construction Codes
3-18G-3: Construction Permits
3-18G-4: Applications
3-18G-5: Engineer's Certification
3-18G-6: Traffic Control Plan
3-18G-7: Issuance Of Permit
3-18G-8: Construction Schedule
3-18G-9: Compliance With Permit
3-18G-10: Display Of Permit
3-18G-11: Survey Of Underground Facilities
3-18G-12: Noncomplying Work
3-18G-13: Completion Of Construction
3-18G-14: As-Built Drawings
3-18G-15: Restoration Of Improvements
3-18G-16: Landscape Restoration
3-18G-17: Construction Surety
3-18G-18: Exceptions
3-18G-19: Responsibility Of Owner
3-18G-1: GENERAL:
No person shall commence or continue with the construction, installation or
operation of telecommunications facilities within the Village except as
provided in this Article. (Ord. 95-27, 11-14-1995)
3-18G-2: CONSTRUCTION CODES:
Telecommunications facilities shall be constructed, installed, operated and
maintained in accordance with all applicable Federal, State and local codes,
rules and regulations including the National Electrical Safety Code. (Ord. 95-
27, 11-14-1995)
3-18G-3: CONSTRUCTION PERMITS:
No person shall construct or install any telecommunications facilities within
the Village without first obtaining a construction permit therefor, provided,
however:
   (A)   No permit shall be issued for the construction or installation of
telecommunications facilities within the Village unless the telecommunications
carrier has filed a registration statement with the Village pursuant to Article
A of this Chapter.
   (B)   No permit shall be issued for the construction or installation of
telecommunications facilities in the public ways unless the telecommunications
carrier has applied for and received a license or franchise pursuant to Article
B, C or D of this Chapter.
   (C)   No permit shall be issued for the construction or installation of
telecommunications facilities without payment of the construction permit fee
established in Section
3-18E-6 of this Chapter. (Ord. 95-27, 11-14-1995)
3-18G-4: APPLICATIONS:
Applications for permits to construct telecommunications facilities shall be
submitted upon forms to be provided by the Village and shall be accompanied by
drawings, plans and specifications in sufficient detail to demonstrate:
   (A)   That the facilities will be constructed in accordance with all
applicable codes, rules and regulations.
   (B)   The location and route of all facilities to be installed on existing
utility poles.
   (C)   The location and route of all facilities to be located under the
surface of the ground, including the line and grade proposed for the burial at
all points along the route which are within the public ways.
   (D)   The location of all existing underground utilities, conduits, ducts,
pipes, mains and installations which are within the public ways along the
underground route proposed by the applicant.
   (E)   The location of all other facilities to be constructed within the
Village, but not within the public ways.
   (F)   The construction methods to be employed for protection of existing
structures, fixtures, and facilities within or adjacent to the public ways.
   (G)   The location, dimension and types of all trees within or adjacent to
the public ways along the route proposed by the applicant, together with a
landscape plan for protecting, trimming, removing, replacing and restoring any
trees or areas to be disturbed during construction. (Ord. 95-27, 11-14-1995)
3-18G-5: ENGINEER'S CERTIFICATION:
All permit applications shall be accompanied by the certification of a
registered professional engineer that the drawings, plans and specifications
submitted with the application comply with applicable technical codes, rules
and regulations. (Ord. 95-27, 11-14-1995)
3-18G-6: TRAFFIC CONTROL PLAN:
All permit applications which involve work on, in, under, across or along any
public ways shall be accompanied by a traffic control plan demonstrating the
protective measures and devices that will be employed, consistent with Uniform
Manual of Traffic Control Devices, to prevent injury or damage to persons or
property and to minimize disruptions to efficient pedestrian and vehicular
traffic. (Ord. 95-27, 11-14-1995)
3-18G-7: ISSUANCE OF PERMIT:
Within forty five (45) days after submission of all plans and documents
required of the applicant and payment of the permit fees required by this
Chapter, the Village Engineer, if satisfied that the applications, plans and
documents comply with all requirements of this Chapter, shall issue a permit
authorizing construction of the facilities, subject to such further conditions,
restrictions or regulations affecting the time, place and manner of performing
the work as he may deem necessary or appropriate. (Ord. 95-27, 11-14-1995)
3-18G-8: CONSTRUCTION SCHEDULE:
The permittee shall submit a written construction schedule to the Village
Engineer ten (10) working days before commencing any work in or about the
public ways. The permittee shall further notify the Village Engineer not less
than two (2) working days in advance of any excavation or work in the public
ways. (Ord. 95-27, 11-14-1995)
3-18G-9: COMPLIANCE WITH PERMIT:
All construction practices and activities shall be in accordance with the
permit and approved final plans and specifications for the facilities. The
Village Engineer and his representatives shall be provided access to the work
and such further information as he or she may require to ensure compliance with
such requirements. (Ord. 95-27, 11-14-1995)
3-18G-10: DISPLAY OF PERMIT:
The permittee shall maintain a copy of the construction permit and approved
plans at the construction site, which shall be displayed and made available for
inspection by the Village Engineer or his representatives at all times when
construction work is occurring. (Ord. 95-27, 11-14-1995)
3-18G-11: SURVEY OF UNDERGROUND FACILITIES:
If the construction permit specifies the location of facilities by depth, line,
grade, proximity to other facilities or other standard, the permittee shall
cause the location of such facilities to be verified by a registered Illinois
land surveyor. The permittee shall relocate any facilities which are not
located in compliance with permit requirements. (Ord. 95-27, 11-14-1995)
3-18G-12: NONCOMPLYING WORK:
Upon order of the Village Engineer, all work which does not comply with the
permit, the approved plans and specifications for the work, or the requirements
of this Chapter, shall be removed. (Ord. 95-27, 11-14-1995)
3-18G-13: COMPLETION OF CONSTRUCTION:
The permittee shall promptly complete all construction activities so as to
minimize disruption of the Village ways and other public and private property.
All construction work authorized by a permit within Village ways, including
restoration, must be completed within one hundred twenty (120) days of the date
of issuance. (Ord. 95-27, 11-14-1995)
3-18G-14: AS-BUILT DRAWINGS:
Within sixty (60) days after completion of construction, the permittee shall
furnish the Village with two (2) complete sets of plans, drawn to scale and
certified to the Village as accurately depicting the location of all
telecommunications facilities constructed pursuant to the permit. (Ord. 95-27,
11-14-1995)
3-18G-15: RESTORATION OF IMPROVEMENTS:
Upon completion of any construction work, the permittee shall promptly repair
any and all public ways and provide property improvements, fixtures, structures
and facilities in the public ways damaged during the course of construction,
restoring the same as nearly as practicable to its condition before the start
of construction. (Ord. 95-27, 11-14-1995)
3-18G-16: LANDSCAPE RESTORATION:
   (A)   All trees, landscaping and grounds removed, damaged or disturbed as a
result of the construction, installation maintenance, repair or replacement of
telecommunications facilities, whether such work is done pursuant to a
franchise, license, permit shall be replaced or restored as nearly as may be
practicable, to the condition existing prior to performance of work.
   (B)   All restoration work within the public ways shall be done in
accordance with landscape plans approved by the Village Engineer. (Ord. 95-27,
11-14-1995)
3-18G-17: CONSTRUCTION SURETY:
Prior to issuance of a construction permit, the permittee shall provide a
performance bond, as provided in Section 3-18F-21 of this Chapter. (Ord. 95-27,
11-14-1995)
3-18G-18: EXCEPTIONS:
Unless otherwise provided in a license or franchise agreement, all
telecommunications carriers are subject to the requirements of this Article.
(Ord. 95-27, 11-14-1995)
3-18G-19: RESPONSIBILITY OF OWNER:
The owner of the facilities to be constructed and, if different, the license or
franchise grantee, are responsible for performance of and compliance with all
provisions of this Article. (Ord. 95-27, 11-14-1995)
ARTICLE H. TELECOMMUNICATIONS INFRASTRUCTURE MAINTENANCE FEE
SECTION:
3-18H-1: Definitions
3-18H-2: Registration Of Telecommunication Providers
3-18H-3: Municipal Telecommunications Infrastructure Maintenance Fee
3-18H-4: Collection, Enforcement, And Administration Of Fees
3-18H-5: Compliance With Other Laws
3-18H-6: Existing Franchises And Licenses
3-18H-7: Penalties
3-18H-8: Enforcement
3-18H-9: Severability
3-18H-10: Conflict
3-18H-11: Waiver And Fee Implementation
3-18H-12: Effective Date Of Infrastructure Maintenance Fee
3-18H-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
GROSS CHARGES: The amount paid to a telecommunications retailer for the act or
privilege of originating or receiving telecommunications within the Village,
and for all services rendered in connection therewith, valued in money whether
paid in money or otherwise, including cash, credits, services, and property of
every kind or nature, and shall be determined without any deduction on account
of the cost of such telecommunications, the cost of the materials used, labor
or service costs, or any other expense whatsoever. In case credit is extended,
the amount thereof shall be included only as and when paid. "Gross charges" for
private line service shall include charges imposed at each channel point within
the Village, charges for channel mileage between each channel point within the
Village, and charges for that portion of the interstate interoffice channel
provided within the Village. However, "gross charges" shall not include:
   (A)   Any amounts added to a purchaser's bill because of a charge made
under: 1) the fee imposed by this Section, 2) additional charges added to a
purchaser's bill under section 9-221 or 9-222 of the Public Utilities Act, 3)
amounts collected under section 8-11-17 of the Illinois Municipal Code, 4) the
tax imposed by the Telecommunications Excise Tax Act, 5) 911 surcharges, or 6)
the tax imposed by section 4251 of the Internal Revenue Code;
   (B)   Charges for a sent collect telecommunication received outside the
Village;
   (C)   Charges for leased time on equipment or charges for the storage of
data or information or subsequent retrieval or the processing of data or
information intended to change its form or content. Such equipment includes,
but is not limited to, the use of calculators, computers, data processing
equipment, tabulating equipment, or accounting equipment and also includes the
usage of computers under a time- sharing agreement;
   (D)   Charges for customer equipment, including such equipment that is
leased or rented by the customer from any source, wherein such charges are
disaggregated and separately identified from other charges;
   (E)   Charges to business enterprises certified under section 9-222.1 of the
Public Utilities Act to the extent of such exemption and during the period of
time specified by the Village;
   (F)   Charges for telecommunications and all services and equipment provided
in connection therewith between a parent corporation and its wholly owned
subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, and only to the extent that
the charges between the parent corporation and wholly owned subsidiaries or
between wholly owned subsidiaries represent expense allocation between the
corporations and not the generation of profit other than a regulatory required
profit for the corporation rendering such services;
   (G)   Bad debts ("bad debt" means any portion of a debt that is related to a
sale at retail for which gross charges are not otherwise deductible or
excludable that has become worthless or uncollectible, as determined under
applicable Federal income tax standards; if the portion of the debt deemed to
be bad is subsequently paid, the retailer shall report and pay the tax on that
portion during the reporting period in which the payment is made);
   (H)   Charges paid by inserting coins in coin- operated telecommunications
devices; or
   (I)   Charges for telecommunications and all services and equipment provided
to the Village.
PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY: Any Municipal street, alley, water or public right of way
dedicated or commonly used for utility purposes, including utility easements
wherein the Village has acquired the right and authority to locate or permit
the location of utilities consistent with telecommunications facilities.
"Public right of way" shall not include any real or personal Village property
that is not specifically described in the previous sentence and shall not
include Village buildings and other structures or improvements, regardless of
whether they are situated in the public right of way.
RETAILER MAINTAINING A PLACE OF BUSINESS IN THIS STATE (Or Any Like Term):
Means and includes any retailer having or maintaining with the State of
Illinois, directly or by a subsidiary, an office, distribution facilities,
transmission facilities, sales office, warehouse, or other place of business,
or any agent or other representative operating within this State under the
authority of the retailer or its subsidiary, irrespective of whether such place
of business or agent or other representative is located here permanently or
temporarily, or whether such retailer or subsidiary is licensed to do business
in this State.
SALE OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS AT RETAIL: The transmitting, supplying, or
furnishing of telecommunications and all services rendered in connection
therewith for a consideration, other than between a parent corporation and its
wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, when the gross
charge made by one such corporation is not greater than the gross charge paid
to the retailer for their use or consumption and not for sale.
SERVICE ADDRESS: The location of telecommunications equipment from which
telecommunications services are originated or at which telecommunications
services are received. If this is not a defined location, as in the case of
wireless telecommunications, paging systems, maritime systems, air-to- ground
systems, and the like, "service address" shall mean the location of the
customer's primary use of the telecommunications equipment as defined by the
location in Illinois where bills are sent.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS: Includes, but is not limited to, messages or information
transmitted through use of local, toll, and wide area telephone service,
channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter services, computer
exchange services, private line services, specialized mobile radio services, or
any other transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar
means, between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave,
radio, satellite, or similar facilities. Unless the context clearly requires
otherwise, "telecommunications" shall also include "wireless
telecommunications" as hereinafter defined. "Telecommunications" shall not
include value added services in which computer processing applications are used
to act on the form, content, code, and protocol of the information for purposes
other than transmission. "Telecommunications" shall not include purchase of
telecommunications by a telecommunications service provider for use as a
component part of the service provided by him or her to the ultimate retail
consumer who originates or terminates the end-to-end communications. Retailer
access charges, right of access charges, charges for use of intercompany
facilities, and all telecommunications resold in the subsequent provision and
used as a component of, or integrated into, end-to-end telecommunications
service shall not be included in gross charges as sales for resale.
"Telecommunications" shall not include the provision of cable services through
a cable system as defined in the Cable Communications Act of 1984 (47 USC
section 521 and following) as now or hereafter amended or cable or other
programming services subject to an open video system fee payable to the Village
through an open video system as defined in the Rules of the Federal
Communications Commission (47 CDF 76.1550 and following) as now or hereafter
amended.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER: (A) Any telecommunications retailer and
   (B)   Any person that is not a telecommunications retailer that installs,
owns, operates or controls equipment in the public right of way that is used or
designed to be used to transmit telecommunications in any form.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS RETAILER OR RETAILER OR CARRIER: Means and includes every
person engaged in the business of making sales of telecommunications at retail
as defined in this Section. The Village may, in its discretion, upon
application, authorize the collection of the fee hereby imposed by any retailer
not maintaining a place of business within this State, who, to the satisfaction
of the Village, furnishes adequate security to ensure collection and payment of
the fee. When so authorized, it shall be the duty of such retailer to pay the
fee upon all of the gross charges for telecommunications in the same manner and
subject to the same requirements as a retailer maintaining a place of business
within the Village.
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS: Includes cellular mobile telephone services,
personal wireless services as defined in section 704(C) of the
Telecommunications Act of 1996 (Public Law No. 104-104), 42 USC section 332(c)
(7), as now or hereafter amended, including all commercial mobile radio
services, and paging services. (Ord. 97-18, 10-28-1997; amd. Ord. 98-1, 1-13-
1998)
3-18H-2: REGISTRATION OF TELECOMMUNICATION PROVIDERS:
   (A)   Every "telecommunications provider" as defined by this Article shall
register with the Village within thirty (30) days after the effective date of
this Article or becoming a telecommunications provider, whichever is later, on
a form to be provided by the Village, provided, however, that any
telecommunications retailer that has filed a return pursuant to subsection
3-18H-4(C) of this Article shall be deemed to have registered in accordance
with this Section.
   (B)   Every telecommunications provider who has registered with the Village
pursuant to subsection (A) of this Section has an affirmative duty to submit an
amended registration form or current return as required by subsection
3-18H-4(C) of this Article, as the case may be, to the Village within thirty
(30) days from the date of the occurrence of any changes in the information
provided by the telecommunications provider in the registration form or most
recent return on file with the Village. (Ord. 97-18, 10-28-1997; amd. Ord. 98-
1, 1-13-1998)
3-18H-3: MUNICIPAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS INFRASTRUCTURE MAINTENANCE FEE:
   (A)   A Village telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee is hereby
imposed upon all telecommunications retailers in the amount of one percent
(1.0%) of all gross charges charged by the telecommunications retailer to
service addresses within the Village for telecommunications originating or
received in the Village.
   (B)   Upon the effective date of the infrastructure maintenance fee
authorized in this Article, the Village infrastructure maintenance fee
authorized hereunder shall be the only fee or compensation for the use of all
public rights of way within the Village by telecommunications retailers.
Imposition of the infrastructure maintenance fee provided under this Article
does not, however, serve as a limitation on the levying of any taxes or
imposition of any fees otherwise authorized by law.
   (C)   The Village telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee
authorized by this Section shall be collected, enforced, and administered as
set forth in Section
3-18H-4 of this Article. (Ord. 97-18, 10-28-1997; amd. Ord. 98-1, 1-13-1998)
3-18H-4: COLLECTION, ENFORCEMENT, AND ADMINISTRATION OF FEES:
   (A)   A telecommunications retailer shall charge to and collect from each
customer an additional charge in an amount equal to the Village infrastructure
maintenance fee attributable to that customer's service address.
   (B)   Unless otherwise approved by the Village Administrator the
infrastructure maintenance fee shall be remitted by the telecommunications
retailer to the Village not later than the last day of the month subsequent to
the month in which a bill is issued to the customer; provided, however, that
the telecommunications retailer may retain an amount not to exceed two percent
(2%) of the Village infrastructure maintenance fee collected by it to reimburse
itself for expenses incurred in accounting for and remitting the fee.
   (C)   Remittance of the Municipal infrastructure fee to the Village shall be
accompanied by a return, in a form to be prescribed by the Village
Administrator which shall contain such information as the Village Administrator
may reasonably require.
   (D)   Any infrastructure maintenance fee required to be collected pursuant
to this Article and any such infrastructure maintenance fee collected by such
telecommunications retailer shall constitute a debt owed by the
telecommunications retailer to the Village. The charge imposed under subsection
(A) of this Section by the telecommunications retailer pursuant to this Article
shall constitute a debt of the purchaser to the telecommunications retailer who
provides such services until paid and, if unpaid, is recoverable at law in the
same manner as the original charge for such services.
   (E)   If it shall appear that an amount of infrastructure maintenance fee
has been paid that was not due under the provisions of this Article, whether as
a result of a mistake of fact or an error of law, then such amount shall be
credited against any infrastructure maintenance fee due, or to become due,
under this Article, from the telecommunications retailer who made the erroneous
payment; provided, however, the Village Administrator may request, and
telecommunications retailer shall provide, written substantiation for such
credit.
   (F)   Amounts paid under this Article by telecommunications retailers shall
not be included in the tax base under any of the following acts as described
immediately below:
      1.   "Gross charges" for purposes of the Telecommunications Excise Tax
Act;
      2.   "Gross receipts" for purposes of the municipal utility tax as
prescribed in section 8-11-2 of the Illinois Municipal Code;
      3.   "Gross charges" for purposes of the municipal telecommunications tax
as prescribed in section 8-11-17 of the Illinois Municipal Code;
      4.   "Gross revenue" for purposes of the tax on annual gross revenue of
public utilities prescribed in section 2-202 of the Public Utilities Act.
   (G)   The Village shall have the right, in its discretion, to audit the
books and records of all telecommunications retailers subject to this Article
to determine whether the telecommunications retailer has properly accounted to
the Village for the Village infrastructure maintenance fee. Any underpayment of
the amount of the Village infrastructure maintenance fee due to the Village by
the telecommunications retailer shall be paid to the Village plus five percent
(5%) of the total amount of the underpayment determined in an audit. If the
audit indicates that the underpayment was more than three percent (3%) of the
amount remitted to the Village in a timely manner as provided in this Article,
then the telecommunications retailer shall reimburse the Village for any costs
incurred by the Village in conducting the audit. Any amounts payable to the
Village pursuant to this subsection shall be paid to the Village within twenty
one (21) days after the date of issuance of an invoice for same.
   (H)   The Village Administrator, or his or her designee, may promulgate such
further or additional regulations concerning the administration and enforcement
of this Article, consistent with its provisions, as may be required from time
to time and shall notify all telecommunications retailers that are registered
pursuant to Section
3-18H-2 of this Article of such regulations. (Ord. 97-18, 10-28-1997; amd. Ord.
98-1, 1-13-1998)
3-18H-5: COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER LAWS:
Nothing in this Article shall excuse any person or entity from obligations
imposed under any law, including, but not limited to:
   (A)   Generally applicable taxes; and
   (B)   Standards for construction on, over, under, or within, use of or
repair of the public rights of way, including standards relating to
freestanding towers and other structures upon the public rights of way, as
provided; and
   (C)   Any liability imposed for the failure to comply with such generally
applicable taxes or standards governing construction on, over, under, or
within, use of or repair of the public rights of way; and
   (D)   Compliance with any ordinance or provision of this Code concerning
uses or structures not located on, over, or within the right of way. (Ord. 97-
18, 10-28-1997; amd. Ord. 98-1, 1-13-1998)
3-18H-6: EXISTING FRANCHISES AND LICENSES:
Any franchise, license, or similar agreements between telecommunications
retailers and the Village entered into before the effective date of this
Article regarding the use of public rights of way shall remain valid according
to and for their stated terms except for any fees, charges or other
compensation to the extent waived. (Ord. 97-18, 10-28-1997; amd. Ord. 98-1, 1-
13-1998)
3-18H-7: PENALTIES:
Any telecommunications provider who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or
refuses to comply with any of the provisions of this Article shall be subject
to fine in accordance with the general penalty provisions of this Code. (Ord.
97-18, 10-28-1997; amd. Ord. 98-1, 1-13-1998)
3-18H-8: ENFORCEMENT:
Nothing in this Article shall be construed as limiting any additional or
further remedies that the Village may have for enforcement of this Article.
(Ord. 97-18, 10-28-1997; amd. Ord. 98-1, 1-13-1998)
3-18H-9: SEVERABILITY:
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this Article
is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and
independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the
remaining portions hereof. (Ord. 97-18, 10-28-1997; amd. Ord. 98-1, 1-13-1998)
3-18H-10: CONFLICT:
This Article supersedes all ordinances, rules, or regulations or any part of an
ordinance, rule or regulation adopted prior hereto which conflicts with the
provisions of this Article to the extent of such conflict. (Ord. 97-18, 10-28-
1997; amd. Ord. 98-1, 1-13-1998)
3-18H-11: WAIVER AND FEE IMPLEMENTATION:
   (A)   Effective February 1, 1998, or ninety (90) days after due notice of
this waiver is given as provided in section 25(f) of the Act, whichever is
later, and during the time the Village imposes the telecommunications
infrastructure maintenance fee provided herein, the Village waives all fees,
charges, and other compensation that may accrue, after the effective date of
the waiver, to the Village by a telecommunications retailer pursuant to any
existing Village franchise, license, or similar agreement with a
telecommunications retailer. This waiver shall only be effective during the
time the infrastructure maintenance fee provided for in this Article is subject
to being lawfully imposed on the telecommunications retailer and collected by
the telecommunications retailer from the customer. Any fees, charges or other
compensation that may be due and payable for the period through January 31,
1998, are not waived.
   (B)   The Village Clerk shall send a notice of the waiver by certified mail,
return receipt requested, to each telecommunications retailer with whom the
Village has a franchise agreement. (Ord. 97-18, 10-28-1997; amd. Ord. 98-1, 1-
13-1998)
3-18H-12: EFFECTIVE DATE OF INFRASTRUCTURE MAINTENANCE FEE:
The Village infrastructure maintenance fee imposed by Section
3-18H-3 of this Article shall become effective and charged on customer bills
issued on or after the later of February 1, 1998, or the first day of the month
first beginning ninety (90) days after the written waiver notices referred to
in Section
3-18H-11 of this Article have been given. (Ord. 97-18, 10-28-1997; amd. Ord.
98-1, 1-13-1998)
CHAPTER 19
PARKING LOT TAX
SECTION:
3-19-1: Definitions
3-19-2: Tax Imposed; Rate; Payment; Collection
3-19-3: Tickets And Tags
3-19-4: Tax Remittance And Returns
3-19-5: Maintenance Of Records
3-19-6: Inspection
3-19-7: Tax To Be Paid Into Village Treasury
3-19-8: Action By Village Attorney; Suspension Of License
3-19-9: Penalty For Violation
3-19-10: Severability
3-19-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, whenever any of the following words, terms or
definitions are used, they shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this
section:
 
                                        A corporation, organization, group or
                                        agency that enters into a contract with
                                        the owner or operator of a parking lot
                                        or garage for the parking of a motor
CONTRACTUAL CUSTOMER:                   vehicle in or upon the parking lot or
                                        garage. Examples of a contractual
                                        customer include, but are not limited
                                        to, corporations, AAA, senior group or
                                        organization, tour operator.
MOTOR VEHICLE:                          Any vehicle which is self-propelled.
                                        The area of an outdoor oversized
                                        vehicle parking area exclusive of
NET LEASABLE AREA:                      building footprint or other areas not
                                        designated for the parking of oversized
                                        vehicles.
                                        Any person conducting the operation of
                                        a "parking lot or garage" or "outdoor
OPERATOR:                               oversized vehicle area" as defined
                                        herein or receiving the consideration
                                        for parking or storage of motor
                                        vehicles at such parking place.
                                        An outdoor area within the Village of
                                        Forest View being used for the parking
OUTDOOR OVERSIZED VEHICLE PARKING AREA: of oversized vehicles, including but
                                        not limited to trucks, semi-trailers,
                                        and similar vehicles.
                                        Any building, structure, premises,
                                        enclosure or other place, whether
                                        enclosed or not, except a public way,
                                        within the village of Forest View,
                                        where two (2) or more motor vehicles
                                        are stored, housed, or parked for hire,
                                        charge, fee or other valuable
                                        consideration in a condition ready for
                                        use, or where rent or compensation is
                                        paid to the owner, manager or lessor of
                                        the premises for the housing, storage,
                                        sheltering, keeping or maintaining of
                                        such motor vehicles; provided, however,
                                        that said terms shall not include
                                        residential parking provided for
PARKING LOT OR GARAGE:                  single-family homes or multi-family
                                        dwelling units, wherein an arrangement
                                        for such parking is provided on a
                                        rental basis, the consideration
                                        therefor being set forth in the house
                                        or apartment lease, or in a separate
                                        writing between the landlord and
                                        tenant, or if in a condominium between
                                        the condominium association and the
                                        owner, occupant or guest of a unit,
                                        whether the parking charge is payable
                                        to the landlord, condominium
                                        association, or to the operator of the
                                        parking lot or garage; and provided
                                        further, however, that said terms shall
                                        not include motor vehicle dead storage
                                        lots.
                                        Any natural person, trustee, court
                                        appointed representative, syndicate,
                                        association, partnership, limited
                                        liability company, firm, club, company,
                                        corporation, business trust,
                                        institution, agency, government
                                        corporation, municipal corporation,
                                        district or other political
                                        subdivision, contractor, supplier,
PERSON:                                 vendor, vendee, operator, user or
                                        owner, or any officers, agents,
                                        employees or other representatives,
                                        acting either for him/herself or for
                                        any other person in any capacity or any
                                        other entity recognized by law as the
                                        subject of rights and duties. The
                                        masculine, feminine, singular or plural
                                        is included in any circumstances. (Ord.
                                        04-09, 6-22-2004; amd. Ord. 22-29, 11-
                                        8-2022)
 
3-19-2: TAX IMPOSED; RATE; PAYMENT; COLLECTION:
   (A)   There is imposed upon the use and privilege of parking a motor vehicle
in or upon any parking lot or garage in the Village of Forest View a tax for
each motor vehicle parked in or upon each parking lot or garage for every
twenty-four (24)-hour period or fraction thereof, at the following rates:
      1.   Tax of eighty-five cents ($0.85) for every twenty-four (24)-hour
period or fraction thereof.
      2.   As of September 1, 2021, a tax of one dollar ($1.00) for every
twenty-four (24)-hour period or fraction thereof.
   (B)   There is imposed upon the use and privilege of operating an outdoor
oversized vehicle parking area at the following rates:
      1.   For properties with less than one hundred thousand (100,000) square
feet of Net Leasable Area: five hundred dollars ($500.00) per month.
      2.   For properties with one hundred thousand or more and less than five
hundred thousand square feet (100,000-499,999) of Net Leasable Area: seven
hundred and fifty dollars ($750.00) per month.
      3.   For properties with five hundred thousand (500,000) or more square
feet of Net Leasable Area: five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) per month.
   (C)   The ultimate incidence of and liability for payment of said tax is on
the person who seeks the privilege of occupying space within said parking lot
or garage (said person hereinafter referred to as the "recipient").
   (D)   The tax imposed by this chapter shall not apply to residential off
street parking for single-family homes, multi-family dwelling units, apartment
tenants or condominiums, wherein an arrangement for such parking is provided in
the lease or a separate writing between the landlord and tenant, or if in a
condominium, between the condominium association and the owner, occupant or
guest of a unit, whether the parking charge is payable to the landlord,
condominium association, or to the operator of the parking lot or garage.
   (E)   The tax herein levied and imposed by this chapter shall be paid in
addition to any and all other taxes. It shall be the duty of the operator of
every parking lot or garage to secure the tax from the recipient of the parking
privilege and to remit the tax to the Village Treasurer under procedures
prescribed by the Village Treasurer, and/or as otherwise provided in this
chapter.
   (F)   Every person required to collect the tax herein levied and imposed by
this chapter shall secure the tax from the recipient at the time the price,
charge or rent to which it applies is collected. If the recipient is given any
invoice, receipt or other statement of the price, charge or rent paid or
payable, the tax shall be stated, charged and shown separately on the document.
(Ord. 11-08, 4-26-2011; amd. Ord. 17-05, 3-28-2017; Ord. 21-05, 7-27-2021; Ord.
22-29, 11-8-2022; Ord. 24-15, 10-8-2024)
3-19-3: TICKETS AND TAGS:
   (A)    It shall be the duty of every operator to issue to all persons
seeking the privilege of parking a motor vehicle on a daily basis a distinctive
ticket in the form and manner provided by this section. Tickets shall be issued
by the operator in numerical sequence.
   (B)   Each ticket issued by an operator shall indicate the name of the
operator and the address of the parking lot or garage upon or in which the
motor vehicle is parked. Unless the parking lot is equipped with an automated
ticket dispenser which triggers the opening of a gate, tickets shall consist of
three (3) parts, one part shall be issued by the operator to the recipient; one
part shall be retained by the operator, who shall indicate on the back thereof
the time of arrival and departure of the motor vehicle; and one part shall be
attached to the parked motor vehicle for the purpose of identification. All
three (3) part tickets shall contain the same serial number on each part of the
ticket.
   (C)   It shall be the duty of every operator to issue to all persons seeking
the privilege of parking a motor vehicle on a daily basis a receipt showing the
parking charge paid by the recipient and the amount of tax paid. Unless a cash
register is used which produces daily summary tapes showing the number of motor
vehicles parked, the total charge paid and the amount of tax collected as
described in section
3-19-2 of this chapter, and the tapes are maintained as required by section
3-19-5 of this chapter, the receipt shall be in the form of a two (2) part
numerical receipt and the operator shall retain one part and issue one part to
the recipient. Each part shall show the parking charge and the amount of tax
paid.
   (D)   Every operator shall require a tag to be attached to each motor
vehicle that is permitted to park on a weekly or monthly basis, or other basis
longer than one day. Each tag shall show the name of the operator and address
of the parking lot or garage upon which or in which the motor vehicle is
parked; an identification number; the number and issuing state of the license
plate of the parked motor vehicle; and whether the motor vehicle is parked on a
weekly or monthly or other basis longer than one day, indicating starting and
ending dates of the week, month or other period. Tags shall be issued by the
operator in numerical sequence.
   (E)   The operator shall keep a book record of all tags issued, showing each
tag's date of issuance, identification number and parking charge imposed. The
operator shall remove, or cause to be removed, and shall void each tag at the
end of the week, month or other applicable period, and shall cause a new tag to
be attached to the motor vehicle at the beginning of each new period.
   (F)   Any operator that fails to issue or attach one or more tickets, tags
or receipts in the form or manner provided by this chapter shall be subject to
a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than two hundred
dollars ($200.00) for each motor vehicle to which a ticket, tag or receipt in
the proper form was not issued or upon which a ticket or tag was not attached.
   (G)   In order to ensure the sound and efficient administration and
enforcement of the tax imposed by this chapter, the village treasurer by rule
may impose record keeping, ticket or tag requirements in addition to the
requirements contained in this chapter. (Ord. 04-09, 6-22-2004; amd. Ord. 22-
29, 11-8-2022)
3-19-4: TAX REMITTANCE AND RETURNS:
   (A)   On or before the last day of each calendar month, every operator shall
file with the village t a remittance return showing tax receipts with respect
to each parking lot or garage and remit all tax due for the preceding calendar
month. In the case of an outdoor oversized parking area operator, the monthly
return shall be based on the net leasable area. The return shall be filed on a
form prescribed by the village treasurer, containing such information as the
village treasurer may reasonably require.
   (B)   In addition to any other information required by the village
treasurer, every operator shall report on the remittance return the total
amount of charges collected from recipients during the preceding calendar month
for the privilege of parking a motor vehicle in or upon a parking lot or garage
located in the village of Forest View. (Ord. 04-09, 6-22-2004; amd. Ord. 22-29,
11-8-2022)
3-19-5: MAINTENANCE OF RECORDS:
   (A)   It shall be the duty of every operator to keep accurate and complete
books and records to which the village treasurer shall at all times have full
access. These books and records shall include all cash register or other
receipts and all cash register tapes required by section
3-19-3 of this chapter, all tickets and voided tags required by section
3-19-3 of this chapter and a daily sheet for each location showing:
      1.   The number of motor vehicles parked in or upon each parking lot or
garage, segregated on a daily, weekly, monthly or other basis, and also
segregated by the amount of the charge or fee imposed for parking; and
      2.   The actual parking lot or garage tax receipts collected from all
transactions.
   (B)   All books and records required by this section shall be retained for
at least four (4) years after the end of the calendar year in which they are
created; provided, however, that an operator on an annual basis may request
approval from the village treasurer to discard tickets or tags that were issued
more than one year earlier and the village treasurer shall grant such approval
if he/she determines that the operator's books and records satisfy the
requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 04-09, 6-22-2004; amd. Ord. 22-29, 11-8-
2022)
3-19-6: INSPECTION:
The village treasurer, or any person certified by him/her as his/her
representative, may enter the premises of any parking lot or garage for
inspection and examination of books and records for the proper administration
of this chapter and enforcement of the collection of the tax imposed. It is
unlawful for any person to prevent, hinder, or interfere with the village
treasurer, or his/her duly authorized representative in the discharge of his/
her duties in the enforcement of this chapter. (Ord. 04-09, 6-22-2004; amd.
Ord. 22-29, 11-8-2022)
3-19-7: TAX TO BE PAID INTO VILLAGE TREASURY:
All proceeds resulting from the imposition of the tax under this chapter,
including penalties and interest, shall be paid into the treasury of the
Village of Forest View and shall be credited to and deposited in the corporate
fund of the village. (Ord. 04-09, 6-22-2004; amd. Ord. 22-29, 11-8-2022)
3-19-8: ACTION BY VILLAGE ATTORNEY; SUSPENSION OF LICENSE:
   (A)   Whenever any person shall fail to pay any tax as herein provided, the
village attorney shall, upon the request of the village treasurer, bring or
cause to be brought an action to enforce the payment of said tax in behalf of
the village in any court of competent jurisdiction.
   (B)   If the village president, after hearing held by or for him/her, shall
find that any person has willfully avoided payment of the tax imposed by this
chapter, he/she may suspend or revoke all village licenses held by such tax
evader. The operator shall have an opportunity to be heard at such hearing to
be held not less than five (5) days after notice of the time and place of the
hearing to be held, addressed to the operator at his/her last known place of
business. Pending notice, hearing and finding, any village business license of
which the operator may be possessed shall be temporarily suspended. Any
suspension or revocation of any license shall not release or discharge the
operator of a parking lot or garage from his/her civil liberty for the
repayment of the tax nor from prosecution from such offense. (Ord. 04-09, 6-22-
2004; amd. Ord. 22-29, 11-8-2022)
3-19-9: PENALTY FOR VIOLATION:
Any person found guilty of violating, disobeying, omitting, neglecting or
refusing to comply with, or resisting or opposing the enforcement of any
provisions of this chapter, except when otherwise specifically provided, upon
conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine of not less than one hundred
dollars ($50.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) each
offense. Provided, however, that all actions seeking the imposition of fines
only shall be filed as quasi-criminal actions subject to the provisions of the
Illinois civil practice act, 735 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-101 et seq.
Repeated offenses in excess of three (3) within any one hundred eighty (180)
day period may also be punishable as a misdemeanor by incarceration in the
county jail for a term not to exceed six (6) months under the procedure set
forth in the Illinois municipal code, 65 ILCS 5/1-2.1, and under the provisions
of the Illinois code of criminal procedure, in a separate proceeding. A
separate and distinct offense shall be regarded as committed each day upon
which said person shall continue any such violation or permit any such
violation to exist after notification thereof. (Ord. 04-09, 6-22-2004; amd.
Ord. 22-29, 11-8-2022)
3-19-10: SEVERABILITY:
If any provision of this chapter, or the application thereof to any person or
circumstance, is held invalid, the remainder of this chapter and the
application of such provisions to other persons or circumstances shall not be
affected thereby. (Ord. 04-09, 6-22-2004; amd. Ord. 22-29, 11-8-2022)
CHAPTER 20
CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEE AND PEG ACCESS SUPPORT FEE
SECTION:
3-20-1: Definitions
3-20-2: Cable/Video Service Provider Fee Imposed
3-20-3: PEG Access Support Fee Imposed
3-20-4: Applicable Principles
3-20-5: No Impact On Other Taxes Due From Holder
3-20-6: Audits Of Cable/Video Service Provider
3-20-7: Late Fees; Payments
3-20-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
CABLE SERVICE: That term as defined in 47 USC section 522(6).
COMMISSION: The Illinois commerce commission.
GROSS REVENUES: All consideration of any kind or nature, including, without
limitation, cash, credits, property, and in-kind contributions received by the
holder for the operation of a cable or video system to provide cable service or
video service within the holder's cable service or video service area within
the village.
   (A)   Gross revenues shall include the following:
      1.   Recurring charges for cable or video service.
      2.   Event based charges for cable service or video service, including,
but not limited to, pay per view and video on demand charges.
      3.   Rental of set top boxes and other cable service or video service
equipment.
      4.   Service charges related to the provision of cable service or video
service, including, but not limited to, activation, installation, and repair
charges.
      5.   Administrative charges related to the provision of cable service or
video service, including, but not limited to, service order and service
termination charges.
      6.   Late payment fees or charges, insufficient funds check charges, and
other charges assessed to recover the costs of collecting delinquent payments.
      7.   A pro rata portion of all revenue derived by the holder or its
affiliates pursuant to compensation arrangements for advertising or for
promotion or exhibition of any products or services derived from the operation
of the holder's network to provide cable service or video service within the
village. The allocation shall be based on the number of subscribers in the
village divided by the total number of subscribers in relation to the relevant
regional or national compensation arrangement.
      8.   Compensation received by the holder that is derived from the
operation of the holder's network to provide cable service or video service
with respect to commissions that are received by the holder as compensation for
promotion or exhibition of any products or services on the holder's network,
such as a "home shopping" or similar channel, subject to subsection (A)9 of
this definition.
      9.   In the case of a cable service or video service that is bundled or
integrated functionally with other services, capabilities, or applications, the
portion of the holder's revenue attributable to the other services,
capabilities, or applications shall be included in the gross revenue unless the
holder can reasonably identify the division or exclusion of the revenue from
its books and records that are kept in the regular course of business.
      10.   The service provider fee permitted by 220 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/21-801(b).
   (B)   Gross revenues do not include any of the following:
      1.   Revenues not actually received, even if billed, such as bad debt,
subject to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(c)(1)(vi).
      2.   Refunds, discounts, or other price adjustments that reduce the
amount of gross revenues received by the holder of the state issued
authorization to the extent the refund, rebate, credit, or discount is
attributable to cable service or video service.
      3.   Regardless of whether the services are bundled, packaged, or
functionally integrated with cable service or video service, any revenues
received from services not classified as cable service or video service,
including, without limitation, revenue received from telecommunication
services, information services, or the provision of directory or internet
advertising, including yellow pages, white pages, banner advertisement, and
electronic publishing or any other revenues attributed by the holder to
noncable service or nonvideo service in accordance with the holder's books and
records and records kept in the regular course of business and any applicable
laws, rules, regulations, standards, or orders.
      4.   The sale of cable services or video services for resale in which the
purchaser is required to collect the service provider fee from the purchaser's
subscribers to the extent the purchaser certifies in writing that it will
resell the service within the village and pay the fee permitted by 220 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(b) with respect to the service.
      5.   Any tax or fee of general applicability imposed upon the subscribers
or the transaction by a city, state, federal, or any other governmental entity
and collected by the holder of the state issued authorization and required to
be remitted to the taxing entity, including sales and use taxes.
      6.   Security deposits collected from subscribers.
      7.   Amounts paid by subscribers to "home shopping" or similar vendors
for merchandise sold through any home shopping channel offered as part of the
cable service or video service.
   (C)   Revenue of an affiliate of a holder shall be included in the
calculation of gross revenues to the extent the treatment of the revenue as
revenue of the affiliate rather than the holder has the effect of evading the
payment of the fee permitted by 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(b)
which would otherwise be paid by the cable service or video service.
HOLDER: A person or entity that has received authorization to offer or provide
cable or video service from the commission pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/21-401.
PEG: Public, education and governmental.
PEG ACCESS SUPPORT FEE: The amount paid under this chapter and 220 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(d) by the holder to the village for the service
areas within its territorial jurisdiction.
SERVICE: The provision of "cable service" or "video service" to subscribers and
the interaction of subscribers with the person or entity that has received
authorization to offer or provide cable or video service from the commission
pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-401.
SERVICE PROVIDER FEE: The amount paid under this chapter and 220 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/21-801 by the holder to the village for the service areas
within its territorial jurisdiction.
VIDEO SERVICE: Video programming and subscriber interaction, if any, that is
required for the selection or use of such video programming services, and which
is provided through wireline facilities located at least in part in the public
right of way without regard to delivery technology, including internet protocol
technology. This definition does not include any video programming provided by
a commercial mobile service provider defined in 47 USC section 332(d) or any
video programming provided solely as part of, and via, service that enables
users to access content, information, electronic mail, or other services
offered over the public internet. (Ord. 07-10, 11-13-2007)
3-20-2: CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEE IMPOSED:
   (A)   Fee Imposed: A fee is hereby imposed on any holder providing cable
service or video service in the village.
   (B)   Amount Of Fee: The amount of the fee imposed hereby shall be five
percent (5%) of the holder's gross revenues.
   (C)   Notice To The Village: The holder shall notify the village at least
ten (10) days prior to the date on which the holder begins to offer cable
service or video service in the village.
   (D)   Holder's Liability: The holder shall be liable for and pay the service
provider fee to the village. The holder's liability for the fee shall commence
on the first day of the calendar month following thirty (30) days after receipt
of the ordinance adopting this chapter by the holder. The ordinance adopting
this chapter shall be sent by mail, postage prepaid, to the address listed on
the holder's application notice sent pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/21-401(b)(6) to the village.
   (E)   Payment Date: The payment of the service provider fee shall be due on
a quarterly basis, forty five (45) days after the close of the calendar
quarter. If mailed, the fee is considered paid on the date it is postmarked.
Each payment shall include a statement explaining the basis for the calculation
of the fee.
   (F)   Exemption: The fee hereby imposed does not apply to existing cable
service or video service providers that have an existing franchise agreement
with the village in which a fee is paid.
   (G)   Credit For Other Payments: An incumbent cable operator that elects to
terminate an existing agreement pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/
21-301(c) with credit for prepaid franchise fees under that agreement may
deduct the amount of such credit from the fees that operator owes under
subsection (B) of this section. (Ord. 07-10, 11-13-2007)
3-20-3: PEG ACCESS SUPPORT FEE IMPOSED:
   (A)   PEG Fee Imposed: A PEG access support fee is hereby imposed on any
holder providing cable service or video service in the village in addition to
the fee imposed pursuant to section
3-20-2 of this chapter.
   (B)   Amount Of Fee: The amount of the PEG access support fee imposed hereby
shall be one percent (1%) of the holder's gross revenues or, if greater, the
percentage of gross revenues that incumbent cable operators pay to the village
or its designee for PEG access support in the village.
   (C)   Payment: The holder shall pay the PEG access support fee to the
village or to the entity designated by the village to manage PEG access. The
holder's liability for the PEG access support fee shall commence on the date
set forth in subsection
3-20-2(D) of this chapter.
   (D)   Payment Due: The payment of the PEG access support fee shall be due on
a quarterly basis, forty five (45) days after the close of the calendar
quarter. If mailed, the fee is considered paid on the date it is postmarked.
Each payment shall include a statement explaining the basis for the calculation
of the fee.
   (E)   Credit For Other Payments: An incumbent cable operator that elects to
terminate an existing agreement pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/
21-301(c) shall pay, at the time they would have been due, all monetary
payments for PEG access that would have been due during the remaining term of
the agreement had it not been terminated pursuant to that section. All payments
made by an incumbent cable operator pursuant to the previous sentence may be
credited against the fees that the operator owes under subsection (B) of this
section. (Ord. 07-10, 11-13-2007)
3-20-4: APPLICABLE PRINCIPLES:
All determinations and calculations under this chapter shall be made pursuant
to generally accepted accounting principles. (Ord. 07-10, 11-13-2007)
3-20-5: NO IMPACT ON OTHER TAXES DUE FROM HOLDER:
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to exempt a holder from
any tax that is or may later be imposed by the village, including any tax that
is or may later be required to be paid by or through the holder with respect to
cable service or video service. A state issued authorization shall not affect
any requirement of the holder with respect to payment of the village's
simplified municipal telecommunications tax or any other tax as it applies to
any telephone service provided by the holder. A state issued authorization
shall not affect any requirement of the holder with respect to payment of the
local unit of government's 911 or E911 fees, taxes or charges. (Ord. 07-10, 11-
13-2007)
3-20-6: AUDITS OF CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER:
   (A)   Audit Requirement: The village will notify the holder of the
requirements it imposes on other cable service or video service providers to
submit to an audit of its books and records. The holder shall comply with the
same requirements the village imposes on other cable service or video service
providers in its jurisdiction to audit the holder's books and records and to
recompute any amounts determined to be payable under the requirements of the
village. If all local franchises between the village and cable operator
terminate, the audit requirements shall be those adopted by the village
pursuant to the local government taxpayers' bill of rights act, 50 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 45/1 et seq. No acceptance of amounts remitted should be
construed as an accord that the amounts are correct.
   (B)   Additional Payments: Any additional amount due after an audit shall be
paid within thirty (30) days after the village's submission of an invoice for
the sum. (Ord. 07-10, 11-13-2007)
3-20-7: LATE FEES; PAYMENTS:
All fees due and payments which are past due shall be governed by ordinances
adopted by this village pursuant to the local government taxpayers' bill of
rights act, 50 Illinois Compiled Statutes 45/1 et seq. (Ord. 07-10, 11-13-2007)
CHAPTER 21
CABLE AND VIDEO CUSTOMER PROTECTION LAW
SECTION:
3-21-1: Customer Service And Privacy Protection Law
3-21-2: Enforcement
3-21-3: Penalties
3-21-4: Customer Credits
3-21-1: CUSTOMER SERVICE AND PRIVACY PROTECTION LAW:
   (A)   Adoption: The regulations of 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/70-501
are hereby adopted by reference and made applicable to the cable or video
providers offering services within the village's boundaries.
   (B)   Amendments: Any amendment to the cable and video customer protection
law that becomes effective after the effective date of this chapter shall be
incorporated into this chapter by reference and shall be applicable to cable or
video providers offering services within the municipality's boundaries.
However, any amendment that makes its provisions optional for adoption by
municipalities shall not be incorporated into this chapter by reference without
formal action by the corporate authorities of the village. (Ord. 07-09, 11-13-
2007)
3-21-2: ENFORCEMENT:
The village does hereby pursuant to law declare its intent to enforce all of
the customer service and privacy protection standards of the cable and video
customer protection law with respect to complaints received from residents
within the village. (Ord. 07-09, 11-13-2007)
3-21-3: PENALTIES:
   (A)   Pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/70-501(r)(1), the village
does hereby provide for a schedule of penalties for any material breach of the
cable and video customer protection law by cable or video providers, which
penalties shall be in addition to the penalties provided in the law. The
monetary penalties shall apply on a competitively neutral basis and shall not
exceed seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each day of the material
breach, and shall not exceed twenty five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) for each
occurrence of a material breach per customer.
   (B)   For purposes of this chapter, "material breach" means any substantial
failure of a cable or video provider to comply with service quality and other
standards specified in any provision of the cable and video customer protection
law.
   (C)   The village shall give the cable or video provider written notice of
any alleged material breaches of the cable and video customer protection law
and allow such provider at least thirty (30) days from the receipt of the
notice to remedy the specified material breach.
   (D)   For the purposes of assessing penalties, a material breach of the
cable and video customer protection law shall be deemed to occur for each day
that a material breach has not been remedied by the cable or video service
provider after notice as provided in subsection (C) of this section. (Ord. 07-
09, 11-13-2007)
3-21-4: CUSTOMER CREDITS:
The village hereby adopts the schedule of customer credits for violations set
forth in 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/70-501(s). Those credits shall be
applied on the statement issued to the customer for the next billing cycle
following the violation or following the discovery of the violation. The cable
or video provider is responsible for providing the credits and the customer is
under no obligation to request the credit. (Ord. 07-09, 11-13-2007)
CHAPTER 22
MOTOR VEHICLE RENTAL TRANSACTION TAX
SECTION:
3-22-1: Title
3-22-2: Definitions
3-22-3: Tax Imposed
3-22-4: Exempt Lessees
3-22-5: Collection And Remittance Responsibilities Of Lessors
3-22-6: Tax Remittance And Returns
3-22-7: Registration
3-22-8: Contents Of Lease Agreements
3-22-9: Maintaining Books And Records
3-22-10: Inspection
3-22-11: Tax To Be Paid Into Village Treasury
3-22-12: Action By Village Attorney; Suspension Of License
3-22-13: Penalty For Violation
3-22-14: Severability
3-22-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the MOTOR VEHICLE RENTAL
TRANSACTION TAX. The tax imposed by this chapter is imposed in addition to all
other taxes imposed by the village of Forest View, the state of Illinois or any
other municipal corporation or political subdivision of the state of Illinois.
(Ord. 15-16, 10-13-2015)
3-22-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, whenever any of the following words, terms or
definitions are used, they shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this
section:
LEASE OR RENTAL: Any transfer of the possession or use of a motor vehicle, but
not title or ownership, to a user for consideration, whether or not designated
as a lease, rental, license or by some other term.
"Lease" or "rental" shall not be construed to include an agreement which
constitutes a bona fide conditional sale of a motor vehicle. The primary
consideration in determining whether an agreement is a conditional sale rather
than a lease or rental is whether the lessee under the agreement both is
required to make payments the sum of which is at least equal to the lessor's
cost of the motor vehicle and under the terms of the agreement, has the option
of taking title to or ownership of the motor vehicle for additional, nominal or
no consideration after all payments required under the agreement have been
made.
LEASE OR RENTAL PAYMENT PERIOD: The length of time or period of use that is
covered by single lease or rental payment as agreed to under the terms of the
lease or rental agreement.
LEASE PRICE OR RENTAL PRICE: The consideration for the lease or rental of a
motor vehicle, valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise,
including cash, credits, property and services, determined without any
deduction for costs or expenses whatsoever, but not including charges that are
added to the price by a lessor on account of the tax imposed by this chapter or
on account of any other tax imposed on the lessee for the lease or rental of
the motor vehicle. The term "lease price" or "rental price" shall exclude
separately stated optional charges not for the use of the motor vehicle.
LESSEE: Any person who leases or rents a motor vehicle from another, whether
the lease or rental price is paid by the lessee or by another person.
LESSOR: Any person, including the assignee of any lease or rental agreement,
who leases or rents motor vehicles to users.
PERSON: Any individual, receiver, administrator, executor, conservator, estate,
partnership, joint venture, club, joint stock company, business trust,
corporation, association, limited liability company, membership organization,
syndicate, society, or any group of individuals acting as a unit, whether
mutual, cooperative, fraternal, nonprofit, or otherwise, or the state of
Illinois or any political subdivision thereof, or the United States or any
instrumentality thereof.
USE: The exercise of any right to or power over a motor vehicle by a lessee
incident to the lease or rental of that motor vehicle by the lessee. "Use" by a
lessee includes not only the use of the motor vehicle directly by the lessee
but also the use of the motor vehicle by the lessee's agents, representatives
or other authorized designees.
VILLAGE: The village of Forest View, Cook County, Illinois. (Ord. 15-16, 10-13-
2015)
3-22-3: TAX IMPOSED:
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, a tax is imposed upon
the lease or rental in the village of a motor vehicle. The incidence of the tax
and the obligation to pay the tax are upon the lessee of the motor vehicle.
   (B)   The rate of the tax shall be five percent (5%) of the lease or rental
price. The tax shall be paid by the lessee at the time of each lease or rental
payment, and each tax payment shall be determined by applying the tax rate to
the lease or rental payment.
   (C)   For purposes of this chapter, the lease or rental of a motor vehicle
shall be deemed to take place at the location where the lessee takes possession
or delivery of the motor vehicle; provided, however, if the motor vehicle
rental agency provides pick up service to the lessee and the lessee is at a
nonvillage location, the lease or rental of a motor vehicle shall be deemed to
take place at the location of the motor vehicle agency within the village.
(Ord. 15-16, 10-13-2015)
3-22-4: EXEMPT LESSEES:
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the following lessees
shall be exempt from the tax imposed by this chapter:
   (A)   A lessee that is a governmental body.
   (B)   A lessee that is an organization organized and operated exclusively
for charitable, educational or religious services and such organization has
been deemed tax exempt by the U.S. internal revenue service and the state of
Illinois. (Ord. 15-16, 10-13-2015)
3-22-5: COLLECTION AND REMITTANCE RESPONSIBILITIES OF LESSORS:
   (A)   It shall be the duty of each lessor to collect the tax imposed by this
chapter from the lessee at the time of each lease or rental payment, and to
remit the tax to the village treasurer in accordance with section
3-22-6 of this chapter. In the event that a lessor fails to collect or remit
the tax required to be collected by this section, the lessor shall be liable to
the village for the amount of such tax.
   (B)   In the case of an assignment of a lease or rental agreement, the
original lessor shall not be required to collect and remit tax which becomes
due after the assignment, provided that the original lessor separately stated
the amount of the tax on the face of the agreement.
   (C)   The tax imposed by this chapter, when collected or billed, shall be
stated as a distinct item separate and apart from the lease or rental price of
the motor vehicle. (Ord. 15-16, 10-13-2015)
3-22-6: TAX REMITTANCE AND RETURNS:
   (A)   On or before the last day of each calendar month, every lessor shall
file with the village treasurer a remittance return showing tax receipts with
respect to each lease or rental payment for each motor vehicle leased or rented
from lessor and remit all tax due for the preceding calendar month. The return
shall be filed on a form prescribed by the village treasurer, containing such
information as the village treasurer may reasonably require.
   (B)   In addition to any other information required by the village
treasurer, every lessor shall report on the remittance return the total amount
of charges subject to the tax imposed by this chapter collected from lessees
during the preceding calendar month. (Ord. 15-16, 10-13-2015)
3-22-7: REGISTRATION:
   (A)   Every lessor who operates a motor vehicle lease or rental agency
within the village and is required to collect the tax imposed by this chapter
shall register with the village treasurer within thirty (30) days after
establishing a lease or rental agency in the village or becoming subject to tax
collection responsibilities, as the case may be.
   (B)   If any information provided by a lessor on a registration form ceases
to be accurate, then the lessor shall file a corrected form with the village
treasurer within thirty (30) days of any changes. (Ord. 15-16, 10-13-2015)
3-22-8: CONTENTS OF LEASE AGREEMENTS:
Every lease or rental agreement, or memorandum of lease or rental, shall
indicate the date of the transaction which it evidences, the name of the lessor
and the lessee, the motor vehicle to which it relates, the number and duration
of lease or rental payment periods, and the amount of each lease or rental
payment. All formal leases, rental agreements and memoranda of leases or
rentals shall bear a number upon their face. No more than one formal lease or
rental agreement, or memorandum of lease or rental, made by lessor on any given
date shall bear the same number. The number identifying the lease or rental
agreement, or memorandum of lease or rental shall be entered and recorded in
the books of account required to be kept by section
3-22-9 of this chapter. (Ord. 15-16, 10-13-2015)
3-22-9: MAINTAINING BOOKS AND RECORDS:
   (A)   It shall be the duty of every lessor to keep accurate and complete
books and records of each transaction or activity requiring the lessor to
collect and remit or pay the tax imposed by this chapter. The village treasurer
shall at all times have full access to such books and records during business
hours of the day. All such books and records shall be kept in the English
language.
   (B)   All books and records required by this section shall be retained for
at least five (5) years after the end of the calendar year in which they are
created. (Ord. 15-16, 10-13-2015)
3-22-10: INSPECTION:
The village treasurer, or any person certified by him/her as his/her
representative, may enter the premises of any motor vehicle lease or rental
agency for inspection and examination of books and records for the proper
administration of this chapter and enforcement of the collection of the tax
imposed. It is unlawful for any person to prevent, hinder, or interfere with
the village treasurer, or his/her duly authorized representative in the
discharge of his/her duties in the enforcement of this chapter. (Ord. 15-16,
10-13-2015)
3-22-11: TAX TO BE PAID INTO VILLAGE TREASURY:
All proceeds resulting from the imposition of the tax under this chapter,
including penalties and interest, shall be paid into the treasury of the
village of Forest View and shall be credited to and deposited in the corporate
fund of the village. (Ord. 15-16, 10-13-2015)
3-22-12: ACTION BY VILLAGE ATTORNEY; SUSPENSION OF LICENSE:
   (A)   When any person shall fail to pay any tax as herein provided, the
village attorney shall, upon the request of the village treasurer, bring or
cause to be brought an action to enforce the payment of said tax on behalf of
the village in any court of competent jurisdiction.
   (B)   If the village president, after a hearing held by him or for him/her,
shall find that any person has wilfully avoided payment of the tax imposed by
this chapter, he/she may suspend or revoke all village licenses held by such
tax evader. The lessor shall have an opportunity to be heard at such hearing to
be held not less than five (5) days after written notice of the time and place
of the hearing to be held, addressed to the lessor at his/her last known place
of business. Pending notice, hearing and finding, any village business license
of which the lessor may be possessed shall be temporarily suspended. Any
suspension or revocation of any license shall not release or discharge the
lessor from the repayment of the tax nor from prosecution from such offense.
(Ord. 15-16, 10-13-2015)
3-22-13: PENALTY FOR VIOLATION:
Any person found guilty of violating, disobeying, omitting, neglecting or
refusing to comply with, or resisting or opposing the enforcement of any
provisions of this chapter, except when otherwise specifically provided, upon
conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine of not less than fifty dollars
($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for the first offense,
and not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00) for the second and each subsequent offense in any one hundred
eighty (180) day period; provided, however, that all actions seeking the
imposition of fines only shall be filed as quasi-criminal actions subject to
the provisions of the Illinois civil practice act, 735 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/1-101 et seq. Repeated offenses in excess of three (3) within any
one hundred eighty (180) day period may also be punishable as a misdemeanor by
incarceration in the county jail for a term not to exceed six (6) months under
the procedures set forth in the Illinois municipal code, 65 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/1-2.1, and under the Illinois code of criminal procedure, in a
separate proceeding. A separate and distinct offense shall be regarded as
committed each day upon which said person shall continue any such violation, or
permit any such violation to exist after notification thereof. (Ord. 15-16, 10-
13-2015)
3-22-14: SEVERABILITY:
If any provision of this chapter, or the application thereof to any person or
circumstance, is held invalid, the remainder of this chapter and the
application of such provisions to other persons or circumstances shall not be
affected thereby. (Ord. 15-16, 10-13-2015)
CHAPTER 23
MINIMUM WAGE
SECTION:
3-23-1: Definitions
3-23-2: Minimum Hourly Wage
3-23-3: Occupations Receiving Gratuities
3-23-4: Overtime
3-23-5: Conflict With Cook County Minimum Wage Ordinance
3-23-1: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, whenever any of the following words, terms or
definitions are used, they shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this
section:
EMPLOYEE: Employee shall have the meaning ascribed to that term in the Illinois
Minimum Wage Law.
EMPLOYER: Any individual, partnership, association, corporation, limited
liability company, business trust, or any person or group of persons that
gainfully employs at least one employee, and that either: a) maintains a
business facility within the geographic boundaries of the Village of Forest
View, or b) employs at least one employee who performs work for the employer
while physically present within the geographic boundaries of the Village of
Forest View.
FAIR LABOR STANDARDS ACT: The United States Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938,
29 USC section 201, et seq., in force on the effective date of this chapter and
as thereafter amended.
GRATUITIES: Gratuities shall have the meaning ascribed to that term in the
Illinois Minimum Wage Law.
MINIMUM WAGE LAW: The Illinois Minimum Wage Law, 820 Illinois Compiled Statutes
105/1, et seq., in force on the effective date of this chapter and as
thereafter amended.
TIPPED EMPLOYEE: Tipped employee shall have the meaning ascribed to that term
in the Fair Labor Standards Act.
WAGE: Compensation due an employee by reason of his/her employment. (Ord. 17-
10, 6-13-2017)
3-23-2: MINIMUM HOURLY WAGE:
Except as provided in section
3-23-3 of this chapter, every employer shall pay each employee for each hour of
work performed for that employer while physically present within the geographic
boundaries of the Village of Forest View a wage that is no less than the
greater of: a) the minimum hourly wage set by the Minimum Wage Law; or b) the
minimum hourly wage set by the Fair Labor Standards Act. (Ord. 17-10, 6-13-
2017)
3-23-3: OCCUPATIONS RECEIVING GRATUITIES:
Every employer of an employee engaged in an occupation in which gratuities have
customarily and usually constituted part of the remuneration shall pay each
employee for each hour of work performed for that employer while engaged in
such an occupation while physically present within the geographical boundaries
of the Village of Forest View, a wage that is not less than the greater of: a)
the minimum hourly wage set by the Fair Labor Standards Act for tipped
employees; or b) the minimum hourly wage set by the Minimum Wage Law for
workers who receive gratuities. (Ord. 17-10, 6-13-2017)
3-23-4: OVERTIME:
The wages set out in sections
3-23-2 and
3-23-3 of this chapter are subject to the overtime compensation provisions
contained in the Fair Labor Standards Act. (Ord. 17-10, 6-13-2017)
3-23-5: CONFLICT WITH COOK COUNTY MINIMUM WAGE ORDINANCE:
The terms and provisions of the Cook County Minimum Wage Ordinance shall not
apply within the geographic limits of the Village of Forest View, and shall be
superseded by the provisions of this chapter within the geographic limits of
the Village of Forest View. (Ord. 17-10, 6-13-2017)
CHAPTER 24
EARNED SICK LEAVE
SECTION:
3-24-1: Definitions
3-24-2: Earned Sick Leave Provisions
3-24-3: Conflict With Cook County Earned Sick Leave Ordinance
3-24-1: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, whenever any of the following words, terms or
definitions are used, they shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this
section:
CHILD BEREAVEMENT LEAVE ACT: The Illinois Child Bereavement Leave Act, 820
Illinois Compiled Statutes 154/1, et seq., in force on the effective date of
this chapter and as thereafter amended.
EMPLOYEE: An individual permitted to work by an employer in an occupation,
industry, business, trade or class of work in which employees are gainfully
employed.
EMPLOYEE SICK LEAVE ACT: The Illinois Employee Sick Leave Act, 820 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 191/1, et seq., in force on the effective date of this
chapter and as thereafter amended.
EMPLOYER: Any individual, partnership, association, corporation, limited
liability company, business trust, or any person or group of persons that
gainfully employs at least one employee, and that either: a) maintains a
business facility within the geographic boundaries of the Village of Forest
View; or b) employs at least one employee who performs work for the employer
while physically present within the geographic boundaries of the Village of
Forest View.
FAMILY AND MEDICAL LEAVE ACT: The Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993, 29 USC
section 201, et seq., in force on the effective date of this chapter and as
thereafter amended.
SICK LEAVE: Leave time, whether compensated or not, that is provided by an
employer to an employee pursuant to the Family and Medical Leave Act, the
Employee Sick Leave Act, the Victims' Economic Security and Safety Act, the
Child Bereavement Leave Act, any other provision of Federal or Illinois State
law, a collective bargaining agreement or an employee benefits plan, or plan
adopted by the employer for use in connection with personal illness or injury,
caregiving of a family member with an illness or injury, victims of domestic or
sexual violence, family bereavement, or for other personal or public health
conditions or emergencies.
VICTIMS' ECONOMIC SECURITY AND SAFETY ACT: The Illinois Victims' Economic
Security and Safety Act, 820 Illinois Compiled Statutes 180/1, et seq., in
force on the effective date of this chapter and as thereafter amended. (Ord.
17-10, 6-13-2017)
3-24-2: EARNED SICK LEAVE PROVISIONS:
   (A)   Every employer shall provide, and every employee shall be entitled to
accrue and use sick leave, as required by the Family and Medical Leave Act, the
Employee Sick Leave Act, the Victims' Economic Security and Safety Act, the
Child Bereavement Leave Act, any other provision of Federal or Illinois State
law, a collective bargaining agreement or an employee benefits plan, or plan
adopted by the employer for use in connection with personal illness or injury,
caregiving of a family member with an illness or injury, victims of domestic or
sexual violence, family bereavement, or for other personal or public health
conditions or emergencies.
   (B)   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to supersede any provision
of Federal or State law, a collective bargaining agreement, or an employee
benefits program or plan that secures sick leave benefits for employees within
the Village of Forest View.
   (C)   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to require employers to
provide sick leave benefits pursuant to the Cook County Earned Sick Leave
Ordinance. (Ord. 17-10, 6-13-2017)
3-24-3: CONFLICT WITH COOK COUNTY EARNED SICK LEAVE ORDINANCE:
The terms and provisions of the Cook County Earned Sick Leave Ordinance shall
not apply within the geographic limits of the Village of Forest View, and shall
be superseded by this chapter within the geographic limits of the Village of
Forest View. (Ord. 17-10, 6-13-2017)
CHAPTER 25
PROHIBITION OF RECREATIONAL CANNABIS BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENTS
SECTION:
3-25-1: Definitions
3-25-2: Recreational Cannabis Business Establishments Prohibited
3-25-3: Public Nuisance Declared
3-25-4: Violations
3-25-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this Chapter, the following terms, phrases and words and their
derivations, shall have the meanings given in this Section, unless otherwise
specifically provided in this Chapter:
                                        A cultivation center, craft grower,
ADULT-USE CANNABIS BUSINESS             processing organization, infuser
ESTABLISHMENT:                          organization, dispensing organization
                                        or transporting organization.
                                        A facility operated by an organization
                                        or business that is licensed by the
                                        Illinois Department of Agriculture to
                                        cultivate, dry, cure and package
                                        cannabis and perform other necessary
ADULT-USE CANNABIS CRAFT GROWER:        activities to make cannabis available
                                        for sale at a dispensing organization
                                        or use at a processing organization, as
                                        provided in the Cannabis Regulation and
                                        Tax Act (P.A. 101-0027), and as amended
                                        from time to time, and the rules and
                                        regulations promulgated thereunder.
                                        A facility operated by an organization
                                        or business that is licensed by the
                                        Illinois Department of Agriculture to
                                        cultivate, process, transport and
                                        perform necessary activities to provide
ADULT-USE CANNABIS CULTIVATION CENTER:  cannabis and cannabis-infused products
                                        to licensed cannabis business
                                        establishment, as provided in the
                                        Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act (P.A.
                                        101-0027), and as amended from time to
                                        time, and the rules and regulations
                                        promulgated thereunder.
                                        A facility operated by and organization
                                        or business that is licensed by the
                                        Illinois Department of Financial and
                                        Professional Regulation to acquire
                                        cannabis from licensed cannabis
                                        business establishments for the purpose
                                        of selling or dispensing cannabis,
ADULT-USE CANNABIS DISPENSING           cannabis-infused products, cannabis
ORGANIZATION:                           seeds, paraphernalia or related
                                        supplies to purchasers or to qualified
                                        registered medical cannabis patients
                                        and caregivers, as provided in the
                                        Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act (P.A.
                                        101-0027), and as amended from time to
                                        time, and the rules and regulations
                                        promulgated thereunder.
                                        A facility operated by an organization
                                        or business that is licensed by the
                                        Illinois Department of Agriculture to
                                        directly incorporate cannabis or
ADULT-USE CANNABIS INFUSER ORGANIZATION cannabis concentrate into a product
OR INFUSER:                             formulation to produce a cannabis-
                                        infused product, as provided in the
                                        Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act (P.A.
                                        101-0027), and as amended from time to
                                        time, and the rules and regulations
                                        promulgated thereunder.
                                        A facility operated by an organization
                                        or business that is licensed by the
                                        Illinois Department of Agriculture to
                                        either extract constituent chemicals or
                                        compounds to produce cannabis
ADULT-USE CANNABIS PROCESSING           concentrate or incorporate cannabis or
ORGANIZATION OR PROCESSOR:              cannabis concentrate into a product
                                        formulation to produce a cannabis
                                        product, as provided in the Cannabis
                                        Regulation and Tax Act (P.A. 101-0027),
                                        and as amended from time to time, and
                                        the rules and regulations promulgated
                                        thereunder.
                                        An organization or business that is
                                        licensed by the Department of
                                        Agriculture to transport cannabis on
                                        behalf of a cannabis business
                                        establishment or a community college
ADULT-USE CANNABIS TRANSPORTING         licensed under the Community College
ORGANIZATION OR TRANSPORTER:            Cannabis Vocational Training Pilot
                                        Program, as provided in the Cannabis
                                        Regulation and Tax Act (P.A. 101-0027),
                                        and as amended from time to time, and
                                        the rules and regulations promulgated
                                        thereunder.
                                        Any person, firm, corporation,
                                        association, club, society or other
PERSON:                                 organization, including any owner,
                                        manager, proprietor, employee,
                                        volunteer or agent. (Ord. 19-17, 10-8-
                                        2019)
 
3-25-2: RECREATIONAL CANNABIS BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENTS PROHIBITED:
The following Adult-Use Recreational Cannabis Business Establishments are
prohibited in the Village of Forest View. No person shall locate, operate, own,
suffer, allow to be operated or aid, abet or assist in the operation within the
Village of Forest View of any of the following businesses:
   (A)   Adult-Use Cannabis Craft Grower.
   (B)   Adult-Use Cannabis Cultivation Center.
   (C)   Adult-Use Cannabis Dispensing Organization.
   (D)   Adult-Use Cannabis Infuser Organization or Infuser.
   (E)   Adult-Use Cannabis Processing Organization of Processor.
   (F)   Adult-Use Cannabis Transporting Organization or Transporter. (Ord. 19-
17, 10-8-2019)
3-25-3: PUBLIC NUISANCE DECLARED:
Operation of any prohibited Recreational Cannabis Business Establishment within
the Village in violation of the provisions of this Chapter is hereby declared a
public nuisance and shall be abated pursuant to all available remedies. (Ord.
19-17, 10-8-2019)
3-25-4: VIOLATIONS:
Violations of this Chapter may be enforced in accordance with the provisions of
Title 1, Chapter 4, of the Village Code. (Ord. 19-17, 10-8-2019)
CHAPTER 26
SHORT TERM RENTALS PROHIBITED
SECTION:
3-26-1: Definition
3-26-2: Short-term Rentals Prohibited
3-26-1: DEFINITION:
 
                   A single-family dwelling, or a residential dwelling unit in
                   a multi-unit structure, condominium, cooperative, timeshare
                   or similar joint property ownership arrangement that is
                   rented for a fee for less than thirty (30) consecutive days.
                   "Short-term rental" includes vacation rentals. "Short-term
                   rental" does not include: (a) a dwelling that is used for
SHORT-TERM RENTAL: any non-residential purpose, including educational, health
                   care, retail, restaurant, banquet space, event center or
                   other similar uses; (b) a bed and breakfast establishment as
                   defined in Section 2 of the Bed and Breakfast Act; or (c)
                   transient accommodations, including hotels and motels that
                   are not classified as residential property for real property
                   taxation purposes. (Ord. 24-07, 6-25- 2024)
 
3-26-2: SHORT-TERM RENTALS PROHIBITED:
   (A)   Short-Term Rentals are prohibited in the Village of Forest View.
   (B)   The prohibition on short-term rental units shall not apply when the
immediately preceding owner of a property maintains possession of the dwelling
unit after closing on a real estate transaction for the sale thereof and leases
said property back from the successor owner for a period of time pursuant to a
written agreement. (Ord. 24-07, 6-25-2024)
CHAPTER 27
THC PRODUCTS
SECTION:
3-27-1: Definitions
3-27-2: Sales Prohibited
3-27-3: Possession By Minors Prohibited
 
3-27-4: Penalty
3-27-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this Chapter, the following words and phrases have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them:
 
ILLICIT THC Any product, material, compound, isomer, acid, salt, mixture, or preparation:
PRODUCTS:
           A.   Used or intended for human consumption;
            B.   That is not made, manufactured, sold, given away, bartered, exchanged,
            distributed, furnished, marketed, advertised, or otherwise held out for sale by
           cannabis business establishments duly licensed under the Compassionate Use of
            Medical Cannabis Program Act (410 ILCS 130/1, et seq.) or the Cannabis
            Regulation and Tax Act (410 ILCS 705/1-1, et seq.); and
            C.   That contains: (1) any amount of Synthesized Setrahydrocannabinol (THC) of
            any kind, inclusive of acid forms, regardless of name, and including but not
           limited to THC-O, Delta-8 THC, and Delta-10 THC, (2) a Total Delta-9 THC
            Content concentration level in excess of 0.3% on a dry weight basis, (3) a
            Total Delta-9 THC Content in excess of 0.5
            milligrams per labeled serving or individual unit or 2.5 milligrams per package
           regardless of the number of labeled servings or individual units therein, or
            (4) Kratom, as that term is defined in Section 5(a) of the Illinois Kratom
            Control Act, 720 ILCS 642/5(a), as may be amended.
SYNTHESIZED Tetrahydrocannabinol synthesized in a laboratory or by industry using directed
THC:        or biosynthetic chemistry rather than traditional food preparation techniques
            such as heating or extracting.
            The value determined after the process of decarboxylation, or the application
            of a conversion factor if the testing methodology does not include
            decarboxylation, that expressed the potential Total Delta-9 THC Content derived
TOTAL       from the sum of the THC and THCA content and reported on a dry weight basis, to
DELTA-9 THC be calculated either by using a chromatograph technique using heat, such as gas
CONTENT:    chromatography, through which THCA is converted from its acid form to its
            neutral form, or by using a liquid chromatograph technique, which keeps the
            THCA intact, and using the following conversion: [Total THC=(0.877 x THCA) +
            THC] which calculates the potential total THC in a given sample. (Ord. 25-05,
            3-11-2025)
 
3-27-2: SALES PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful to sell, deliver, or distribute any Illicit THC Product. (Ord.
25-05, 3-11-2025)
3-27-3: POSSESSION BY MINORS PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person under the age of 21 years to possess or use any
Illicit THC Product. (Ord. 25-05, 3-11-2025)
3-27-4: PENALTY:
Any person, firm, or corporation that violates any provision of this Chapter
will be fined in an amount of not less than $150.00 nor more than $1,000.00,
plus costs, for the first offense of this Chapter within a 12-month period, not
less than $250.00 nor more than $1,500.00, plus costs, for the second offense
within a 12- month period, and not less than $500 nor more than $2,500.00, plus
costs, for the third and each subsequent offense within a 12-month period.
(Ord. 25-05, 3-11-2025)
CHAPTER 28
MUNICIPAL GROCERY RETAILERS’ OCCUPATION TAX
SECTION:
3-28-1: Municipal Grocery Retailers’ Occupation Tax Imposed
3-28-2: Municipal Grocery Service Occupation Tax
3-28-3: Illinois Department Of Revenue To Administer Both Taxes
3-28-1: MUNICIPAL GROCERY RETAILERS’ OCCUPATION TAX IMPOSED:
A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of selling
groceries at retail in this municipality at the rate of 1% of the gross
receipts from such sales made in the course of such business while this
Ordinance is in effect. The imposition of this tax is in accordance with and
subject to the provisions of Section 8-11-24 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65
ILCS 5/8-11-24). (Ord. 25-06, 3-11-2025)
3-28-2: MUNICIPAL GROCERY SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX:
A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in this municipality in the
business of making sales of service, who, as an incident to making those sales
of service, transfer groceries as an incident to a sale of service. The rate of
this tax shall be the same rate identified in Section 2 above. The imposition
of this tax is in accordance with and subject to the provisions of Section 8-
11-24 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-24). (Ord. 25-06, 3-11-
2025)
3-28-3: ILLINOIS DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE TO ADMINISTER BOT TAXES:
The taxes hereby imposed, and all civil penalties that may be assessed as an
incident thereto, shall be collected and enforced by the Department of Revenue
of the State of Illinois. The Illinois Department of Revenue shall have full
power to administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 25-06, 3-
11-2025)
TITLE 4
BUILDING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
BUILDING CODE
SECTION:
4-1-1: Adoption Of Building Code
4-1-2: Permit Fees
4-1-3: Amendments
4-1-4: Bond
4-1-5: Permitted Hours Of Construction; Penalty
4-1-6: Trailers; Inspections, Fees
4-1-7: Regulation Of Number Of Kitchens In Single-Family Residences
4-1-8: Violations
4-1-1: ADOPTION OF BUILDING CODE:
A certain document, three (3) copies of which are on file in the office of the
village clerk of the village of Forest View, being marked and designated as the
international building code (IBC), 2015 edition, as published by the
International Code Council, be and hereby is adopted as the building code of
the village of Forest View, in the state of Illinois for regulating and
governing the conditions and maintenance of all property, buildings and
structures; by providing the standards for supplied utilities and facilities
and other physical things and conditions essential to ensure that structures
are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use; and the condemnation of
buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy and use and the demolition
of such structures; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of
fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties,
conditions and terms of said building code on file in the office of the village
of Forest View, by reference, as if fully set forth herein. (Ord. 16-01, 3-22-
2016)
4-1-2: PERMIT FEES:
Fees to be collected by the village clerk for building and demolition permits
shall be as follows:
   (A)   Residential Permits: Fees shall be charged per estimated construction
costs as follows:
Estimated Construction Cost Fee
Estimated Construction Cost Fee
Up to $500.00               $ 10.00
$501.00 to $1,000.00        20.00
$1,001.00 to $5,000.00      40.00
$5,001.00 to $30,000.00     80.00
$30,001.00 to $50,000.00    160.00
$50,001.00 to $100,000.00   380.00
$100,001.00 and up          $380.00 plus $100.00 per $10,000.00 above
                            $100,001.00
 
   (B)   Commercial, Industrial And All Other Occupancies Other Than
Residential: Fees shall be charged per estimated construction cost as follows:
 
Estimated Construction Cost Fee
$2,000.00 or less           $30.00
                            1.5% of the total cost of construction which shall
$2,000.01 and above         include but not be limited to materials, labor, and
                            profits.
 
   (C)   Demolition Permits: Fees shall be charged per estimated demolition
costs per subsections (A) and (B) of this section.
The actual cost of construction or demolition shall be submitted to the
building inspector at the completion of the job. If the actual cost exceeds the
estimated cost permit fee, an additional fee will be required. If the actual
cost is lower than the estimated permit fee then a refund will be issued. (Ord.
86-8, 6-10-1986)
No demolition permit shall be issued for any property until the owner thereof
submits to the Village evidence demonstrating that the premises has been
inspected for the presence of termites and similar insects, and that none are
present. In the event termites are present on any such property, no demolition
permit shall be issued until such time as the owner has submitted satisfactory
proof to the Building Commissioner that the termites have been eliminated from
the property and all other necessary corrective action has been taken to ensure
that no termites will spread to nearby properties. (Ord. 89-18, 12-26-1989)
   (D)   Ancillary Costs: In addition to all the above estimated construction
cost fees, the building permit fee shall also include any ancillary costs
incurred by the Village in the process of said fee. These are to include, but
not be limited to, electrical inspection fees, fire safety/sprinkler approval
fees, etc. (Ord. 15-06, 5-26-2015; amd. Ord. 22-23, 8-23-2022)
4-1-3: AMENDMENTS:
   (A)   The International Building Code (IBC), 2015 edition, as published by
the International Code Council, adopted by section
4-1-1 of this chapter is hereby amended as follows:
Section 101.1. Insert: the Village of Forest View.
Chapter 11 Accessibility, Sections 1101 through 1111.4.2, shall be deleted in
its entirety. The Village of Forest View shall follow all Accessibility
requirements as provided for in the Illinois Accessibility Code currently in
effect.
Section 1612.3. Insert: the Village of Forest View.
Section 1612.3. Insert: August 19, 2008.
Chapter 29 Plumbing Systems, Sections 2901 through 2902.6, shall be deleted in
its entirety. The Village of Forest View shall follow all Plumbing Systems
requirements as provided for in the Illinois Plumbing Code currently in effect.
(Ord. 17-03, 2-14-2017)
   (B)   If there are any specific provisions of this Code in conflict with the
terms of the International Building Code (IBC), 2015 edition, the provisions of
this Code shall control unless there is a contrary indication therein. (Ord.
16-01, 3-22-2016)
4-1-4: BOND:
Whenever application is made for a building permit for residential property,
the valuation of which proposed construction is in excess of two thousand five
hundred dollars ($2,500.00), the contractor performing that work shall file
with the Building Commissioner a bond in the penal sum of ten thousand dollars
($10,000.00) with good and sufficient sureties approved by the Building
Commissioner and conditioned upon such person's compliance with the regulations
of the Building Code.
The requirement for this bond may be waived by the Building Commissioner upon
the consent of the owner of the property in question. (Ord. 87-3, 3-24-1987)
4-1-5: PERMITTED HOURS OF CONSTRUCTION; PENALTY:
   (A)   No construction, for which a building permit is required of the
Village within any residential zone of the Village, shall commence before the
hour of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. nor shall any such construction continue past
the hour of eight o'clock (8:00) P.M. on any day during the week.
   (B)   Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction thereof, be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than
the maximum penalty provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code for each day of violation. In addition, violation of this
provision may be deemed cause for revocation of the building permit. (Ord. 90-
9, 6-26-1990; amd. Ord. 95-23, 10-10-1995)
4-1-6: TRAILERS; INSPECTIONS, FEES:
   (A)   For purposes of this section, "trailer" means a structure constructed
so as to permit the transport on wheels, permanently or temporarily attached to
its frame, from the place of its construction to the location or subsequent
locations at which it is intended to be utilized for purposes of any business
or occupation, and designed to permit the occupancy thereof as a place of
business or occupation for one or more persons.
   (B)   No person shall operate or maintain a trailer without first having
obtained a license for each such trailer as provided for in this section. Such
license shall be renewed annually. The building inspector is hereby authorized
and empowered to annually inspect all trailers located in the Village for the
purpose of ascertaining compliance with the Village Building, Electrical and
Plumbing Codes, as well as any other applicable State or local laws. All
trailers shall comply with all applicable provisions of the Village building,
electrical and plumbing ordinances. (Ord. 92-9, 6-23-1992)
   (C)   Every individual, firm or corporation owning a trailer within the
Village shall pay an annual (calendar year) license fee of seventy five dollars
($75.00). Said fees and any penalties shall be in accordance with general laws
and ordinances of the Village as they are changed from time to time. (Ord. 15-
17, 10-27-2015)
4-1-7: REGULATION OF NUMBER OF KITCHENS IN SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENCES:
   (A)   1.   All newly constructed single-family residences shall have no more
than one kitchen.
      2.   If an existing single-family residence (a) has more than one
kitchen, and (b) the owner proposes to alter the residence with an estimated
alteration cost in excess of $50,000.00, then one all but one of the existing
kitchens must be eliminated.
   (B)   The owner and/or developer of a single-family residence may request a
modification from this section in the form of a variance. The application for a
variance shall follow the procedures set forth in section
10-16-1 et seq., of this Code. The Village Board shall take action on any
variance requested from this section.
(Ord. 96-13, 5-28-1996; amd. Ord. 24-04, 4-9-2024)
4-1-8: VIOLATIONS:
   (A)   Unlawful Acts: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or
corporation to erect, construct, alter, extend, repair, move, remove, demolish
or occupy any building, structure or equipment regulated by any of the Building
Codes and regulations contained in this title, or cause same to be done, in
conflict with or in violation of any provision of any of the Building Codes and
regulations contained in this title.
   (B)   Notice Of Violation: The Building Commissioner is authorized to serve
a notice of violation or order on the person responsible for the erection,
construction, alteration, extension, repair, moving, removal, demolition or
occupancy of a building or structure in violation of the provisions of any of
the Building Codes and regulations contained in this title, or in violation of
a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of any of the Building
Codes and regulations contained in this title. Such order shall direct the
discontinuation of the illegal action or condition and the abatement of the
violation.
   (C)   Prosecution Of Violation: If the notice of violation is not complied
with promptly, the Building Commissioner is authorized to request the legal
counsel of the Village to institute the appropriate proceeding at law or in
equity to restrain, correct or abate such violation, or to require the removal
or termination of the unlawful occupancy of the building or structure in
violation of the provisions of any of the Building Codes and regulations
contained in this title or of the order or direction made pursuant thereto.
   (D)   Violation Penalties: Any person who violates a provision of any of the
Building Codes and regulations contained in this title or fails to comply with
any of the requirements thereof or who erects, constructs, alters or repairs a
building or structure in violation of the approved construction documents or
directive of the Building Commissioner, or of a permit or certificate issued
under the provisions of any of the Building Codes and regulations contained in
this title, shall be guilty of an ordinance violation punishable by a fine of
not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than the maximum penalty
provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a
separate offense. The determination and imposition of a violation penalty shall
be at the discretion of the Building Commissioner and Village Administrator.
   (E)   Failure To Obtain A Building Permit; Indebtedness To The Village:
      1.   Any person, owner or owner’s authorized agent who fail to make
application to the Building Commissioner and obtain the required building
permit shall be guilty of an ordinance violation punishable by a fine of not
less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) nor more than the maximum penalty
provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a
separate offense and the permit fees charged to any person, owner or owner’s
authorized agent contained in subsections
4-1-2(A) and (B) of this chapter shall be doubled.
      2.   No building permit shall be issued if the owner of the property for
which the permit is being sought is in arrears on any tax, charge, fee, or
other indebtedness to the Village.
   (F)   Appeals: An appeal of violation penalties, orders, decisions or
determinations of the Building Commissioner relative to the application and
interpretation of the Forest View Building Codes can be brought to the Village
President and Board of Trustees at the regular monthly meetings. The appeal
shall be based on a claim that the true intent of the Building Codes or the
rules legally adopted thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, the
provisions of the Building Codes do not fully apply or an equally good or
better form of construction is proposed. The Village President and Board of
Trustees shall not have authority to waive the requirements of the Building
Codes. (Ord. 16-12, 9-27-2016; amd. Ord. 24-13, 8-24-2024)
CHAPTER 2
PLUMBING CODE
SECTION:
4-2-1: Adoption Of Plumbing Code
4-2-2: Amendments
4-2-3: Adoption Of Sewer Permit/Manual
4-2-4: Combined Sewer Overflows
4-2-1: ADOPTION OF PLUMBING CODE:
The Illinois plumbing code, 77 Illinois administrative code 890 et seq., as
amended from time to time, is hereby adopted by reference in its current form
for the purpose of establishing rules and regulations for the materials,
construction, alteration and inspection of plumbing placed in or in connection
with any building within the village of Forest View.
The enforcement of the plumbing code is by the code enforcement officer as
provided in title 1, chapter 17 of this code. (Ord. 15-12, 8-25-2015)
4-2-2: AMENDMENTS:
Pursuant to 17 Illinois administrative code 3730-307(c)(4) and subject to the
Illinois plumbing code (77 Ill. adm. code 890) and the lawn irrigation
contractor and lawn sprinkler system registration code (77 Ill. adm. code 892),
the village of Forest View's plumbing code, is hereby amended by adding the
following:
82-111.1 Water Saving Plumbing Fixtures.
All new and replacement plumbing fixtures and irrigation controllers installed
after the effective date of this ordinance shall bear the WaterSense label (as
designated by the U.S. environmental protection agency WaterSense program),
when such labeled fixtures are available.
a. Public Lavatories. All new and replacement plumbing fixtures and irrigation
controllers installed after the effective date of this ordinance shall bear the
WaterSense label (as designated by the U.S. environmental protection agency
WaterSense program), when such labeled fixtures are available.
b. Car Wash Installations. In all new construction and replacement of fixtures,
car wash installations shall be equipped with a recycling system on the wash
water unit and the rise cycle unit.
(Ord. 15-12, 8-25-2015)
4-2-3: ADOPTION OF SEWER PERMIT/MANUAL:
See metropolitan water reclamation district sewage and waste control ordinance
adopted July 27, 1993, ordinance 93-12. (Ord. 93-12, 7-27-1993)
4-2-4: COMBINED SEWER OVERFLOWS:
   (A)   New Construction In Combined Sewer Areas: Any new construction
tributary to the combined sewer system shall be connected to a storm sewer,
within a reasonable period of time, when a storm sewer becomes available.
   (B)   Inflow Sources On Combined Sewer System: All inflow sources on the
combined sewer system shall be connected to a storm sewer, within a reasonable
period of time, when a storm sewer becomes available.
   (C)   New Sewer Connection Separations: Any new building domestic waste
connection shall be completely separate from the building storm sewer (inflow)
collection system, within the property line, to facilitate disconnection when a
storm sewer becomes available.
   (D)   Discharges And Maintenance Of Private Sewer Systems: Owners of all
nondomestic combined sewers that discharge into the village's sewerage
collection system must meet the effluent discharge restrictions outlined in
section
4-2-3 of this chapter and have specific procedures in place to ensure the same
objectives and mechanisms for operation of their sewers that are required of
the village in the operation of the public sewers. (Ord. 14-02, 3-11-2014)
CHAPTER 3
ELECTRICAL CODE
SECTION:
4-3-1: Adoption Of Electrical Code
4-3-2: Amendments
4-3-3: Generator Installations
4-3-1: ADOPTION OF ELECTRICAL CODE:
A certain document, three (3) copies of which are on file in the office of the
village clerk of the village of Forest View, being marked and designated as the
NFPA 70 national electrical code, 2014 edition, as published by the National
Fire Protection Association, be and hereby is adopted as the electrical code of
the village of Forest View, in the state of Illinois for regulating, governing
and the practical safeguarding of persons and property from the hazards arising
from the use of electricity by providing standards and conditions for the
design, construction, quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration,
repair, location, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of electrical
systems; to ensure that structures are safe and fit for occupation and use; and
the condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy and use
and the demolition of such structures; providing for the issuance of permits
and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations,
provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said electrical code on file in
the office of the village of Forest View, by reference, as if fully set forth
herein.
The enforcement of said electrical code is by the village administrator or his/
her designee. (Ord. 16-12, 9-27-2016)
4-3-2: AMENDMENTS:
   (A)   Informative annex H, Administration And Enforcement is hereby adopted
as part of the adoption of the NFPA 70 national electrical code, 2014 edition,
with the following amendments:
      1. Article 80.15 Electrical Board: Delete article entirely.
      2. Article 80.23 Notice Of Violations, Penalties: Delete article
entirely.
      3. Article 80.27 Inspector's Qualifications: Delete article entirely and
replace with:
"The electrical inspector for the village of Forest View shall be an
electrician licensed within the state of Illinois to the satisfaction of the
village of Forest View building commissioner and village administrator".
      4. Article 80.29 Liability For Damages: Insert "Village of Forest View".
      5. Article 80.35 Effective Date: Insert "30".
   (B)   Changes related to the use of metallic conduit.
      1.   The use of nonmetallic sheathed cable (types NM and NMC wire)
commonly referred to as "romex wire" shall not be permitted within the village
in any use group.
      2.   Wiring exposed in an unfinished basement shall be installed in
rigid, intermediate or thin wall metal conduit.
      3.   Above ground electrical services shall be galvanized rigid or
intermediate metal conduit and installed in accordance with the height and
location requirements set forth in the national electrical code.
      4.   Conduit installed underground shall be a minimum of three- fourths
inch (3/4") in size.
      5.   Type AC wire, commonly referred to as "BX wire" shall only be
permitted in new construction or remodeling no greater than six foot (6')
lengths in one- and two-family dwellings.
   (C)   If there are any specific provisions of this code in conflict with the
terms of the NFPA 70 national electrical code, 2014 edition, the provisions of
this code shall control unless there is a contrary indication therein. (Ord.
16-12, 9-27-2016)
4-3-3: GENERATOR INSTALLATIONS:
   (A)   Construction Requirements: All generators shall be installed in
accordance with all manufacturer installation requirements, comply with all
current village and building codes, and be within utility provider minimum
requirements for proper operation.
   (B)   Location of Generators: Generators may not be located in the required
setbacks established for the zoning district in which the property is located.
Year-round landscaping or other approved screening is required to screen
generators that are visible from the street. (Ord. 22-22, 9-13-2022)
CHAPTER 4
PRIVATE RESIDENTIAL SWIMMING POOL
SECTION:
4-4-1: Definition
4-4-2: Compliance Required
4-4-3: Permits
4-4-4: Location
4-4-5: General Requirements
4-4-6: Operation And Maintenance
4-4-7: Regulations
4-4-8: Inspections
4-4-9: Penalties
4-4-1: DEFINITION:
A private residential swimming pool (hereinafter referred to as pool), as
regulated by this Chapter, shall mean any private swimming pool or wading pool,
whether indoors or outdoors, and whether above or below the surface of the
ground or both, intended to contain water for swimming, having an inside wall
depth at any point of more than two feet (2'), or a surface area exceeding two
hundred fifty (250) square feet, located at a private residence, used and
intended to be used not by the public but solely by the owner or occupant and
his family and friends. (Ord. 77-9, 7-19-1977)
4-4-2: COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful to construct, install, alter, maintain or use any pool in
the Village except in compliance with the provisions of this Chapter. (Ord. 77-
9, 7-19-1977)
4-4-3: PERMITS:
   (A)   No person or organization of any kind shall construct, install or
alter any pool in the Village unless a construction permit therefor shall first
have been obtained from the Building Commissioner.
   (B)   The application for a construction permit shall be in writing in the
form prescribed by the Building Commissioner. Such application shall contain
information as shall be required by the Building Commissioner and the Health
Officer for a proper understanding of the proposed work.
   (C)   Clear and detailed drawings, plans and specifications for the
construction, installation or alteration of any pool and appurtenances shall be
presented to the Building Commissioner and the Health Officer for examination
and approval as to proper location, construction and use of any such pool and
appurtenance. All drawings shall be complete, showing the lot lines and
including information pertaining to fence construction, water supply system,
liquid capacity, drainage and water disposal system, and all equipment and
appurtenances to the pool.
   (D)   The permit fee for the construction of a pool shall consist of a ten
dollar ($10.00) fee for each two hundred (200) square feet or fraction thereof
of surface area to be contained within the proposed pool as determined by the
plans and specifications submitted with the application for a construction
permit, and other fees as required in the Building Ordinance. (Ord. 77-9, 7-19-
1977)
4-4-4: LOCATION:
A pool and its equipment and appurtenances shall comply with the minimum side
yard, rear yard and setback requirements of the Forest View Zoning Ordinance 1
. No portion of a pool or any of its equipment or appurtenances shall be
located at a distance of less than five feet (5') from any side or rear
property line. (Ord. 91-5, 5-14-1991)
 
Notes
1 1. See Title 10 of this Code.
4-4-5: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
   (A)   Compliance With Building, Plumbing And Electrical Codes 1 :
      1.   All pools as regulated by this Chapter shall also comply with the
Building, Plumbing and Electrical Codes of the Village.
      2.   No current carrying electrical conductors shall cross pools, either
overhead or underground, or be located so close thereto as to constitute a
hazard. All metal fences, enclosures or railings near or adjacent to said pools
which might become electrically charged as a result of contact with broken
overhead conductors, or from any other cause shall be effectively grounded.
      3.   All pools shall have an approved fail safe ground fault circuit
interrupter device which automatically deenergizes the current.
   (B)   Heaters: Gas fired pool heaters and pool boilers shall comply with all
applicable American standard approval requirements, including AGA and ASSE
standards. Oil burning equipment must be approved by UL or other nationally
recognized testing agency. All such equipment shall carry the corresponding
seal of approval by the appropriate agency.
   (C)   Materials: All pools shall be constructed of materials approved by the
building commissioner and shall have an impervious finish.
   (D)   Structural Design:
      1.   Inground pools shall be designed to withstand the water pressure
from within and to resist the pressure of the earth when the pool is empty.
Floor slope in the shallow end of the pool (up to 5 feet in depth) shall not
exceed one foot (1') vertical to seven feet (7') horizontal.
      2.   Aboveground pools shall be designed to withstand the water pressure
from within. If ground is sloped it must conform to regulations set forth
above.
      3.   Indoor pools shall comply with all requirements of outdoor pools and
shall have such structural materials, ventilation and lighting as may be
required by the building commissioner and the health officer to assure health
and safety.
   (E)   Fences:
      1.   Private inground pools shall be completely enclosed by a fence to
make the pool inaccessible to small children. All fence openings or points of
entry to the pool area enclosure shall be equipped with gates or doors having
self-closing and self-latching devices placed at the top of the gate or door or
otherwise made inaccessible to small children. The entire fence and gates or
doors shall be at least four feet (4') in height above the grade walk level and
shall be constructed of decay or corrosion resistant material approved by the
building commissioner. Furthermore, it must be constructed in such a manner as
to prevent small children from gaining entry.
      2.   Private aboveground pools shall be completely enclosed by a fence to
make the pool inaccessible to small children. All fence openings or points of
entry to the pool area enclosure shall be equipped with gates or doors having
self-closing and self-latching devices placed at the top of the gate or door or
otherwise made inaccessible to small children. The entire fence and gates or
doors shall be at least four feet (4') in height above the grade walk level and
shall be constructed of decay or corrosion resistant material approved by the
building commissioner.
      3.   Aboveground pools need not be enclosed by a fence of the type
described above if the pool has a deck and deck fence or fence extending from
the top of the pool side wall to a height of seven feet (7'). In this instance,
all openings or points of entry to deck or pool shall be equipped with gates or
doors having self-closing and self-latching devices placed at the top of the
gate or door or otherwise made inaccessible to small children. The structure
must be constructed of decay or corrosion-resistant material approved by the
building commissioner, and must be constructed in such a manner as to prevent
small children from gaining entry. In all instances, unless the pool is
attended by a responsible person, all ladders or steps of aboveground pools
shall be removed and all gates or doors securely locked. The final judgment as
to whether a fence is in compliance with this section shall be within the
discretionary powers of the health officer.
In all instances, a building or existing wall complying with the height
requirements hereinabove set forth, may be used as part of the enclosure with
approval of the building commissioner and the health officer if the resultant
enclosure is sufficient to make the pool inaccessible to small children. (Ord.
77-9, 7-19-1977)
   (F)   Water Supply: Water shall be secured either from the village
waterworks distribution system or any other sanitary source approved by the
health officer. Between May 15 and September 15 water from the village water
distribution system shall not be used on any day between the hours of eleven
o'clock (11:00) A.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. (local time) when
evapotranspiration is at its highest, nor shall water be used on the same
property on consecutive days, for the purpose of filling a swimming pool. Water
shall not be drawn to fill the pool from the waterworks system at any time that
the public works superintendent may determine that a water shortage exists.
(Ord. 15-11A, 10-13-2015)
   (G)   Recirculation System And Appurtenances:
      1.   Every pool shall be equipped with a recirculating system capable of
filtering the entire contents of the pool in twelve (12) hours or less and
shall conform to the requirements in the regulations of the National Swimming
Pool Institute, "Minimum Standards for Residential Swimming Pools", as adopted
in 1973, and as amended from time to time. Three (3) copies of the aforesaid
regulations, hereby incorporated by reference, shall be filed in the office of
the Village Clerk and shall be kept available for public use, inspection and
examination.
      2.   Filters shall be capable of maintaining the clarity of the water to
permit the ready identification, through an eight foot (8') depth of water, of
a disc two inches (2") in diameter, which is divided into four (4) quadrants in
alternate colors of red and white.
      3.   Sufficient surface area shall be provided in pressure type filters
(sand or diatomaceous earth) to filter pool contents in twelve (12) hours or
less at a maximum rate of five (5) gallons per square foot per minute. The
quality of the filters shall be such that under normal operating conditions,
backwashing for cleaning purposes shall not be necessary more frequently than
once every four (4) days for pressure sand filters and once every two (2) days
for pressure or vacuum diatomaceous earth filters.
      4.   All pressure filter systems shall be equipped with an air release at
the high point in the system.
      5.   The recirculating pump shall have a sufficient capacity to discharge
the volume of water required for the required turnover of the pool against the
maximum head in the recirculation system. The pump shall be capable of
backwashing pressure sand filters at the rate of ten (10) gallons per minute
per square foot of filter area.
      6.   Except on vacuum-type filters, a hair and lint strainer of the type
approved by the Health Officer shall be provided on the suction side of the
recirculating pump. The basket of the strainer shall be noncorrosive and have
the area of the strainer openings not less than five (5) times the cross-
sectional area of the inlet pipe.
      7.   The pool piping, fittings and valves shall be sized to permit the
rated flow for filtering and cleaning without exceeding the maximum head
available from the pump at that flow.
   (H)   Skimmers: In every pool, at least one skimming device shall be
provided for each eight hundred (800) square feet of surface area or fraction
thereof. Skimming devices shall be built into the pool wall, except for
portable type, aboveground pools, shall adequately remove floating oils and
waste, and shall meet the following general specifications:
      1.   Each skimmer shall be designed for a flow through rate of at least
thirty (30) gallons per minute, and a total capacity of all skimmers on any
pools shall be at least fifty percent (50%) of the required filter flow of the
recirculation system.
      2.   The mouth of the skimmer shall not be less than four inches (4") in
height.
      3.   An easily removable and cleanable basket or screen through which all
overflow water must pass shall be provided to trap large solids.
   (I)   Inlets:
      1.   The recirculation inlets shall be so located as to produce uniform
circulation of water throughout the pool.
      2.   Pools shall be equipped with suitable facilities for adding make-up
water as needed. There shall be no physical connection between the water supply
line and the pool system. If the make-up water is added directly to the pool,
the outlet shall be at least six inches (6") above the overflow rim of the
pool, and, if a discharge to a surge or balancing tank, the outlet shall be at
least six inches (6") above the overflow rim of the tank. If a hose connection
from a sill cock or other plumbing fixture is to be used for filling or
supplying make-up water, then an approved backsiphonage backflow preventor
shall be properly installed at the sill cock or fixture or be provided with an
approved air gap installation.
   (J)   Outlets: A main outlet, except for aboveground type pools, shall be
provided at the deepest point in every pool for recirculating and for emptying
the pool. All pool drain outlets shall be equipped with gratings having an area
of openings not less than four (4) times the cross-sectional area of the outlet
pipe. The gratings shall be installed so they cannot be readily removed by
bathers. There shall be no direct connection between the main drain or pool
piping and the sanitary sewer system of the Village.
   (K)   Steps Or Ladders: A means of egress by steps or ladders shall be
provided for all pools. At least one such means of egress shall be located at
the deep end and one at the shallow end of the pool. In circumstances where
depth, height or width may vary from the "normal situation", the Health Officer
shall determine the number of steps or ladders required.
   (L)   Diving Boards: Diving boards shall not be used in conjunction with
pools that do not have a water diving area of at least seven feet six inches
(7'6") in depth. The overhead clearance above the diving board to any
obstruction must be such that a diver cannot strike such obstruction at any
point of the dive.
   (M)   Walkways: Unobstructed walk areas not less than thirty six inches
(36") wide shall be provided to extend entirely around the pool. The walks
shall be sloped away from the pool at a pitch of at least one-fourth inch (1/
4") per foot. Aboveground or portable pools shall not be required to construct
a sloped walkway as aforesaid if the top of the pool is four inches (4") or
more above the natural ground surface and if there is no possibility of back-
drainage into the pool.
   (N)   Rescue Equipment: A responsible person shall be present at all times
that a pool is in use. Every pool having a water depth over four feet (4')
shall be equipped with one or more throwing ring buoys not more than fifteen
inches (15") in diameter with an attached three-sixteenths inch (3/16") manila
line to be no less than the longest dimension of the pool, and at least one or
more light, strong poles with blunted ends not less than twelve feet (12') in
length or two-thirds (2/3) of the diameter for circular pools for making reach
assists or rescues. (Ord. 77-9, 7-19-1977)
 
Notes
1 2. See Title 4, Chapters 1 through 3 of this Code.
4-4-6: OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE:
   (A)   Water Treatment: Pool water shall be disinfected by chlorine
disinfectant in a form of sodium or calcium hypochlorite which shall be applied
either by hand or by mechanical feeder as frequently as needed to assure at
least three tenths (0.3) of a part per million of free residual chlorine
throughout the pool volume while the pool is in use. Other equally effective
germicidal methods of disinfecting the pool water shall be permitted, providing
advance approval is obtained from the Health Officer.
   (B)   Acidity-Alkalinity pH: The water shall show a neutral or alkaline
reaction as indicated by a pH of 7.0 - 8.0 at all times while the pool is in
use.
   (C)   Test Kit: A test kit with permanent color standards shall be provided
at all pools and be used at frequent intervals to check on the adequacy of
disinfection and to determine the pH of the water.
   (D)   Equipment Maintenance: All equipment used in connection with the
operation of a pool shall be maintained in a satisfactory operating condition
during the periods the pool is in use.
   (E)   Sanitation Of Premises: All pool facilities, including buildings and
grounds shall be kept clean and in a sanitary condition and maintained free
from garbage, trash and other refuse.
   (F)   Wastewater: The disposal or discharge of pool wastewater must be
accomplished in such a way that nuisance or damage to other property is
avoided. Pools shall be drained to the storm sewer system of the Village
through hosing, when feasible; otherwise, pools shall be drained through hosing
to the gutter of the street fronting the property on which such pool is
located. Such hosing shall not be left unattended during the drainage process.
   (G)   Health Hazard Or Nuisance Prohibited: No pools shall be used, kept,
maintained or operated if such use, keeping, maintaining or operating shall
constitute or be the occasion of any nuisance of any kind, or shall be
dangerous to life or limb or detrimental to health in any way. (Ord. 77-9, 7-
19-1977)
4-4-7: REGULATIONS:
The Building Commissioner or the Health Officer may promulgate regulations for
the construction, alteration, operation and maintenance of pools to carry out
the provisions and purposes of this Chapter. The regulations may provide from
time to time for the use of materials, devices, structures and appurtenant
equipment substantially equivalent to that required herein, so long as the
degree of protection is not less than the protection provided herein. (Ord. 77-
9, 7-19-1977)
4-4-8: INSPECTIONS:
The Building Commissioner or the Health Officer and their representatives,
shall have the right and authority before or after any permit is issued, to
enter upon the real property of the applicant or permittee to inspect any pool
and check the operation thereof to assure compliance with all applicable laws,
ordinances and regulations. The owner, lessee, occupant and all persons
maintaining and using a pool shall cooperate fully with said inspections and
provide pertinent information as requested. (Ord. 77-9, 7-19-1977)
4-4-9: PENALTIES:
   (A)   Any person, firm, corporation or organization of any kind, violating
any of the provisions of this Ordinance, or any other ordinance or regulation
relating to pools, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and offenders shall be
punished by a fine as provided in Section
1-4-1 of this Code for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed upon each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
   (B)   If the Building Commissioner or Health Officer or their
representatives, shall find that the construction or operation of a pool does
not meet any of the requirements of the applicable laws, ordinances and
regulations, including the requirements of this Ordinance, said official may
direct that the pool be closed forthwith until the requirements have been duly
complied with. (Ord. 77-9, 7-19-1977; amd. Ord. 95-23, 10-10-1995)
CHAPTER 5
FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS
SECTION:
4-5-1: Purpose
4-5-2: Definitions
4-5-3: How To Use This Chapter
4-5-4: Duties Of The Building Commissioner
4-5-5: Base Flood Elevation
4-5-6: Occupation And Use Of Flood Fringe Areas
4-5-7: Occupation And Use Of Designated Floodways
4-5-7-1: Development Permit
4-5-7-2: Preventing Increased Damages And A List Of Appropriate Uses
4-5-8: Occupation And Use Of SFHA Areas Where Floodways Are Not Identified
4-5-9: Permitting Requirements Applicable To All Floodplain Areas And
Protection Of Buildings
4-5-10: Other Development Requirements
4-5-11: Variances
4-5-12: Disclaimer Of Liability
4-5-13: Penalty
4-5-14: Abrogation And Greater Restrictions
4-5-1: PURPOSE:
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the police powers granted to the village of
Forest View by 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-2-1, 5/11-12-12, 5/11-30-2, 5/
11-30-8, and 5/11-31-2. The purpose of this chapter is to maintain the village
of Forest View's eligibility in the national flood insurance program; to
minimize potential losses due to periodic flooding including loss of life, loss
of property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental
services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief,
and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public
health, safety and general welfare; and to preserve and enhance the quality of
surface waters, conserve economic and natural values and provide for the wise
utilization of water and related land resources. This chapter is adopted in
order to accomplish the following specific purposes:
   (A)   To meet the requirements of 615 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/18(g)
rivers, lakes and streams act;
   (B)   To assure that new development does not increase the flood or drainage
hazards to others, or creating unstable conditions susceptible to erosion;
   (C)   To protect new buildings and major improvements to buildings from
flood damage;
   (D)   To protect human life and health from the hazards of flooding;
   (E)   To lessen the burden on the taxpayer for flood control projects,
repairs to flood damaged public facilities and utilities, and flood rescue and
relief operations;
   (F)   To make federally subsidized flood insurance available for property in
the village by fulfilling the requirements of the national flood insurance
program;
   (G)   To comply with the rules and regulations of the national flood
insurance program codified as 44 CFR 59-79, as amended;
   (H)   To protect, conserve, and promote the orderly development of land and
water resources; and
   (I)   To preserve the natural characteristics and functions of watercourses
and floodplains in order to moderate flood and storm water impacts, improve
water quality, reduce soil erosion, protect aquatic and riparian habitat,
provide recreational opportunities, provide aesthetic benefits and enhance
community and economic development. (Ord. 08-07, 5-13-2008)
4-5-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions are adopted:
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE: A nonhabitable structure which is on the same parcel of
property as the principal structure to be insured and the use of which is
incidental to the use of the principal structure.
ACT: "An act in relation to the regulation of the rivers, lakes and streams of
the state of Illinois", 615 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/5 et seq.
APPLICANT: Any person, firm, corporation or agency which submits an
application.
APPROPRIATE USE: Only uses of the designated floodway that are permissible and
will be considered for permit issuance. The only uses that will be allowed are
as specified in section
4-5-7-2 of this chapter.
BASE FLOOD: The flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year. The base flood is also known as the 100-year
frequency flood event. Application of the base flood elevation at any location
is as defined in section
4-5-5 of this chapter.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE): The elevation in relation to mean sea level of the
crest of the base flood.
BASEMENT: That portion of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground
level) on all sides.
BUILDING: A walled and roofed structure, including gas or liquid storage tank,
that is principally aboveground, including manufactured homes, prefabricated
buildings, and gas or liquid storage tanks. The term also includes recreational
vehicles and travel trailers installed on a site for more than one hundred
eighty (180) days per year.
BUILDING COMMISSIONER: The person employed or retained by the village and whose
responsibilities include the administering of this chapter.
CHANNEL: Any river, stream, creek, brook, branch, natural or artificial
depression, ponded area, flowage, slough, ditch, conduit, culvert, gully,
ravine, wash, or natural or manmade drainageway, which has a definite bed and
banks or shoreline, in or into which surface or ground water flows, either
perennially or intermittently.
CHANNEL MODIFICATION: Alteration of a channel by changing the physical
dimensions or materials of its bed or banks. Channel modification includes
damming, riprapping (or other armoring), widening, deepening, straightening,
relocating, lining and significant removal of native vegetation from the bottom
or banks. Channel modification does not include the clearing of dead or dying
vegetation, debris, or trash from the channel. Channelization is a severe form
of channel modification involving a significant change in the channel cross
section and typically involving relocation of the existing channel (e.g.,
straightening).
COMPENSATORY STORAGE: An artificially excavated, hydraulically equivalent
volume of storage within the SFHA used to balance the loss of natural flood
storage capacity when artificial fill or structures are placed within the
floodplain. The uncompensated loss of natural floodplain storage can increase
off site floodwater elevations and flows.
CONDITIONAL APPROVAL OF A DESIGNATED FLOODWAY MAP CHANGE: Preconstruction
approval by IDNR/OWR and FEMA of a proposed change to the floodway map. This
preconstruction approval, pursuant to this chapter, gives assurances to the
property owner that once an appropriate use is constructed according to
permitted plans, the floodway map can be changed, as previously agreed, upon
review and acceptance of as built plans.
CONDITIONAL LETTER OF MAP REVISION (CLOMR): A letter which indicates that FEMA
will revise base flood elevations, flood insurance rate zones, flood boundaries
or floodways as shown on an effective flood hazard boundary map or flood
insurance rate map, once the as built plans are submitted and approved.
CONTROL STRUCTURE: A structure designed to control the rate of flow that passes
through the structure, given a specific upstream and downstream water surface
elevation.
CRITICAL FACILITY: Any facility which is critical to the health and welfare of
the population and, if flooded, would create an added dimension to the
disaster. Damage to these critical facilities can impact the delivery of vital
services, can cause greater damage to other sectors of the community, or can
put special populations at risk. Examples of critical facilities where flood
protection should be required include: emergency services facilities (such as
fire and police stations), schools, hospitals, retirement homes and senior care
facilities, major roads and bridges, critical utility sites (telephone
switching stations or electrical transformers), and hazardous material storage
facilities (chemicals, petrochemicals, hazardous or toxic substances). Examples
of critical facilities where flood protection is recommended include: sewage
treatment plants, water treatment plants, and pumping stations.
DAM: All obstructions, wall embankments or barriers, together with their
abutments and appurtenant works, if any, constructed for the purpose of storing
or diverting water or creating a pool. Dams may also include weirs, restrictive
culverts or impoundment structures. Underground water storage tanks are not
included.
DESIGNATED FLOODWAY: The channel, including on stream lakes, and that portion
of the floodplain adjacent to a stream or watercourse, generally depicted on
the FEMA FIRM map, which is needed to store and convey the existing 100-year
frequency flood discharge with no more than a 0.1 foot increase in stage due to
the loss of flood conveyance or storage, and no more than a ten percent (10%)
increase in velocities.
   (A)   The floodways are designated on the countywide flood insurance rate
map of Cook County prepared by FEMA and dated August 19, 2008. When two (2)
floodway maps exist for a waterway, the more restrictive floodway limit shall
prevail.
   (B)   The floodways for those parts of unincorporated Cook County that are
within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the village of Forest View that may
be annexed into the village are not designated as rivers or streams with
identified floodways on the countywide flood insurance rate map prepared by
FEMA and dated August 19, 2008.
   (C)   To locate the designated floodway boundary on any site, the designated
floodway boundary should be scaled off the designated floodway map and located
on a site plan, using reference marks common to both maps. Where interpretation
is needed to determine the exact location of the designated floodway boundary,
IDNR/OWR should be contacted for the interpretation.
DEVELOPMENT: Any manmade change to real estate, including:
   (A)   Construction, reconstruction, repair, or placement of a building or
any addition to a building.
   (B)   Installing a manufactured home on a site, preparing a site for a
manufactured home, or installing a travel trailer or recreational vehicle on a
site for more than one hundred eighty (180) days. If the travel trailer or
recreational vehicle is on site for more than one hundred eighty (180) days, it
must be fully licensed and ready for highway use.
   (C)   Drilling, mining, installing utilities, construction of roads,
bridges, or similar projects.
   (D)   Demolition of a structure or redevelopment of a site.
   (E)   Clearing of land as an adjunct of construction.
   (F)   Construction or erection of levees, walls, fences, dams, or culverts;
channel modification; filling, dredging, grading, excavating, paving, or other
nonagricultural alterations of the ground surface; storage of materials;
deposit of solid or liquid waste.
   (G)   Any other activity of man that might change the direction, height, or
velocity of flood or surface water, including extensive vegetation removal.
   (H)   Substantial improvement of an existing building.
Development does not include routine maintenance of existing buildings and
facilities such as reroofing or resurfacing of roads when there is no increase
in elevation, or gardening, plowing, and similar agricultural practices that do
not involve filling, grading, or construction of levees.
ELEVATION CERTIFICATES: A form published by FEMA that is used to certify the
elevation to which a building has been elevated.
EROSION: The general process whereby soils are moved by flowing water or wave
action.
EXEMPT ORGANIZATIONS: Organizations which are exempt from this chapter per
Illinois Compiled Statutes (ILCS) including state, federal or local units of
government.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) has been completed before April 1,
1990.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: The preparation
of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of
utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the
pouring of concrete pads).
FEMA: Federal emergency management agency and its regulations at 44 CFR 59-79,
as amended.
FLOOD: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of
normally dry land areas from overflow of inland or tidal waves, or the unusual
and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
FLOOD FREQUENCY: A period of years, based on a statistical analysis, during
which a flood of a stated magnitude may be expected to be equaled or exceeded.
FLOOD FRINGE: That portion of the floodplain outside of the designated
floodway. See definition of Designated Floodway.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM): A map prepared by FEMA that depicts the
special flood hazard area (SFHA) within a community. This map includes
insurance rate zones and floodplains and may or may not depict floodways.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY: An examination, evaluation and determination of flood
hazards and if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations.
FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION (FPE): The elevation of the base flood or 100-year
frequency floods plus one foot (1') of freeboard at any given location in the
SFHA.
FLOODPLAIN: That land typically adjacent to a body of water with ground surface
elevations at or below the base flood or the 100-year frequency flood
elevation.
Floodplains may also include detached special flood hazard areas, ponding
areas, etc. The floodplain is also known as the special flood hazard area
(SFHA).
   (A)   The floodplains are those lands within the jurisdiction of the village
of Forest View that are subject to inundation by the base flood or 100-year
frequency flood. The SFHAs of the village are generally identified as such on
panel numbers 17031C0484, 0491, and 0492 of the countywide flood insurance rate
map of the village prepared by the federal emergency management agency and
dated August 19, 2008.
   (B)   The SFHAs of those parts of unincorporated Cook County that are within
the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the village of Forest View or that may be
annexed into the village are generally identified as such on panel numbers
17031C0484, 0491, and 0492 of the countywide flood insurance rate map prepared
for Cook County by the federal emergency management agency and dated August 19,
2008.
FLOODPROOFING: Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions,
changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to
real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities,
structures and their contents.
FLOODPROOFING CERTIFICATE: A form published by FEMA that is used to certify
that a building has been designed and constructed to be structurally dry
floodproofed to the flood protection elevation.
FLOODWAY: See definition of Designated Floodway.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE: Any structure that is:
   (A)   Listed individually in the national register of historic places or
preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the national register;
   (B)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior
as contributing to the historic district or a district preliminarily determined
by the secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
   (C)   Individually listed on the state inventory of historic places by the
Illinois historic preservation agency;
   (D)   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places that has
been certified by the Illinois historic preservation agency.
HYDROLOGIC AND HYDRAULIC CALCULATIONS: Engineering analyses which determine
expected flood flows and flood elevations based on land characteristics and
rainfall events.
IDNR/OWR: Illinois department of natural resources, office of water resources.
LETTER OF MAP AMENDMENT (LOMA): Official determination by FEMA that a specific
structure is not in a 100-year floodplain; amends the FIRM.
LETTER OF MAP REVISION (LOMR): Letter that revises base flood or 100-year
frequency flood elevations, floodplains or floodways as shown on an effective
FIRM.
LOWEST FLOOR: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure usable solely for parking
of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a basement area
is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided that such enclosure is
not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable
nonelevation design requirements of this chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is
built on a permanent chassis and is designated for use with or without a
permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term
"manufactured home" also includes park trailers, travel trailers and other
similar vehicles placed on site for more than one hundred eighty (180)
consecutive days. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational
vehicle".
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land
divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
MITIGATION: Includes those measures necessary to minimize the negative effects
which floodplain development activities might have on the public health, safety
and welfare. Examples of mitigation include: excavation of compensatory
storage, soil erosion and sedimentation control, and channel restoration.
Mitigation may also include those activities taken to reduce a structure's
susceptibility to flooding.
NAVD 88: North American vertical datum of 1988. NAVD 88 supersedes the national
geodetic vertical datum of 1929 (NGVD).
NATURAL: When used in reference to channels means those channels formed by the
existing surface topography of the earth prior to changes made by man. A
natural stream tends to follow a meandering path; its floodplain is not
constrained by levees; the area near the bank has not been cleared, mowed or
cultivated; the stream flows over soil and geologic materials typical of the
area with no substantial alteration of the course or cross section of the
stream caused by filling or excavating. A modified channel may regain some
natural characteristics over time as the channel meanders and vegetation is
reestablished. Similarly, a modified channel may be restored to more natural
conditions by man through regrading and revegetation.
NEW CONSTRUCTION: Structures for which the start of construction commenced on
or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a
community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: Manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) has been completed on or after April
1, 1990.
ORDINARY HIGH WATER MARK (OHWM): The point on the bank or shore up to which the
presence and action of surface water is so continuous so as to leave a
distinctive mark such as by erosion, destruction or prevention of terrestrial
vegetation, predominance of aquatic vegetation or other easily recognized
characteristics.
PUBLIC BODIES OF WATER: All open public streams and lakes capable of being
navigated by watercraft, in whole or in part, for commercial uses and purposes,
and all lakes, rivers, and streams which in their natural condition were
capable of being improved and made navigable, or that are connected with or
discharge their waters into navigable lakes or rivers within, or upon the
borders of the state of Illinois, together with all bayous, sloughs,
backwaters, and submerged lands that are open to the main channel or body of
water directly accessible thereto.
PUBLIC FLOOD CONTROL PROJECT: A flood control project which will be operated
and maintained by a public agency to reduce flood damages to existing buildings
and structures, including a hydrologic and hydraulic study of the existing and
proposed conditions of the watershed. Nothing in this definition shall preclude
the design, engineering, construction or financing, in whole or in part, of a
flood control project by persons or parties who are not public agencies.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE OR TRAVEL TRAILER: A vehicle which is:
   (A)   Built on a single chassis;
   (B)   Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection;
   (C)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty
truck; and
   (D)   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
REGIONAL PERMITS: Offered for preapproved projects which are considered minor
projects that are permissible per IDNR/OWR part 3708 rules for northeastern
Illinois regulatory floodways. A complete listing of the terms and conditions
for specific project types can be obtained from the IDNR/OWR website.
REGISTERED LAND SURVEYOR: A land surveyor registered in the state of Illinois,
under the Illinois land surveyors act 1 .
REGISTERED OR LICENSED PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER: An engineer registered in the
state of Illinois, under the Illinois professional engineering practice act 2 .
REPAIR, REMODELING OR MAINTENANCE: Development activities which do not result
in any increases in the outside dimensions of a building or any changes to the
dimensions of a structure.
REPETITIVE LOSS: Flood related damages sustained by a structure on two (2)
separate occasions during a ten (10) year period for which the cost of repairs
at the time of each such flood event, on the average, equals or exceeds twenty
five percent (25%) of the market value of the structure before the damage
occurred.
RETENTION/DETENTION FACILITY: A retention facility stores stormwater runoff
without a gravity release. A detention facility provides for storage of
stormwater runoff and controlled release of this runoff during and after a
flood or storm.
RIVERINE SFHA: Any SFHA subject to flooding from a river, creek, intermittent
stream, ditch, on stream lake system or any other identified channel. This term
does not include areas subject to flooding from lakes, ponding areas, areas of
sheet flow, or other areas not subject to over bank flooding.
RUNOFF: The water derived from melting snow or rain falling on the land
surface, flowing over the surface of the ground or collected in channels or
conduits.
SEDIMENTATION: The processes that deposit soils, debris, and other materials
either on other ground surfaces or in bodies of water or watercourses.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA): See definition of Floodplain.
START OF CONSTRUCTION: Includes substantial improvement, and means the date the
building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair,
reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, or other improvement was
within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means
either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site,
such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the
construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or
placement of a manufactured home on a foundation.
STATEWIDE PERMITS: Offered for preapproved projects that are considered minor
projects which are permissible per the IDNR/OWR part 3700 rules. A complete
listing of the statewide permits and permit requirements can be obtained from
the IDNR/OWR website.
STRUCTURE: See definition of Building.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the
cumulative percentage of damage subsequent to the adoption of this chapter,
equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure
before the damage occurred regardless of actual repair work performed.
Volunteer labor and materials must be included in this determination. The term
includes repetitive loss buildings. See definition of Repetitive Loss.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or
improvement of a structure taking place subsequent to the adoption of this
chapter in which the cumulative percentage of improvements equals or exceeds
fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the improvement
or repair is started.
   (A)   "Substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the
building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external
dimensions of the building. This term includes structures which have incurred
repetitive loss or substantial damage, regardless of the actual work done.
   (B)   The term does not, however, include either:
      1.   Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing
state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely
necessary to assure safe living conditions, or
      2.   Any alteration of a "historic structure" listed on the national
register of historic places or the Illinois register of historic places,
provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued
designation as a historic structure.
TRANSITION SECTION: Reaches of the stream or floodway where water flows from a
narrow cross section to a wide cross section or vice versa.
VIOLATION: The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure
or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications,
or other evidence of compliance is presumed to be in violation until such time
as that documentation is provided. (Ord. 08-07, 5-13-2008)
 
Notes
1 1. 225 ILCS 330/1 et seq.
2 2. 225 ILCS 325/1 et seq.
4-5-3: HOW TO USE THIS CHAPTER:
   (A)   The building commissioner shall be responsible for fulfilling all of
the duties listed in section
4-5-4 of this chapter.
   (B)   To fulfill those duties, the building commissioner should first use
the criteria listed in section
4-5-5, "Base Flood Elevation", of this chapter to determine whether the
development site is located within a floodplain.
   (C)   Once it has been determined that a site is located within a
floodplain, the building commissioner must determine whether the development
site is within a flood fringe, a designated floodway, or within an SFHA or
floodplain for which no floodway has been identified.
      1.   If the site is within a flood fringe, the building commissioner
shall require that the minimum requirements of section
4-5-6 of this chapter be met.
      2.   If the site is within a floodway, the building commissioner shall
require that the minimum requirements of section
4-5-7 of this chapter be met.
      3.   If the site is located within an SFHA or floodplain for which no
detailed study has been completed and approved, the building commissioner shall
require that the minimum requirements of section
4-5-8 of this chapter be met.
   (D)   In addition, the general requirements of section
4-5-9 of this chapter shall be met for all developments meeting the
requirements of section
4-5-6,
4-5-7, or
4-5-8 of this chapter.
   (E)   The building commissioner shall assure that all subdivision proposals
shall meet the requirements of section
4-5-10 of this chapter.
   (F)   If a variance is to be granted for a proposal, the building
commissioner shall review the requirements of section
4-5-11 of this chapter to make sure they are met. In addition, the building
commissioner shall complete all notification requirements.
   (G)   In order to assure that property owners obtain permits as required in
this chapter, the building commissioner may take any and all actions as
outlined in section
4-5-13 of this chapter. (Ord. 08-07, 5-13-2008)
4-5-4: DUTIES OF THE BUILDING COMMISSIONER:
   (A)   Determining The Floodplain Designation:
      1.   Check all new development sites to determine whether they are in a
special flood hazard area (SFHA).
      2.   If they are in an SFHA, determine whether they are in a floodway,
flood fringe or in a floodplain for which a detailed study has not been
conducted and which drains more than one square mile.
      3.   Check whether the development is potentially within an extended SFHA
(with a drainage area less than 1 square mile), indicating that the development
would have adverse impacts regarding storage, conveyance, or inundation which
would be the basis for the applicant being required to delineate the floodplain
and floodway and be subject to the remaining sections of this chapter.
   (B)   Professional Engineer Review:
      1.   If the development site is within a floodway or in a floodplain for
which a detailed study has not been conducted and which drains more than one
square mile, the permit shall be referred to a licensed professional engineer
under the employ or contract of the village for review to ensure that the
development meets section
4-5-7 or
4-5-8 of this chapter.
      2.   In the case of an appropriate use, the PE shall state in writing
that the development meets the requirements of section
4-5-7 of this chapter.
   (C)   Dam Safety Requirements:
      1.   Dams are classified as to their size and their hazard/damage
potential in the event of failure.
      2.   The construction or major modification of all class I (high hazard)
and class II (moderate hazard) dams require an IDNR/OWR dam safety permit.
      3.   Some class III (low hazard) dams require an IDNR/OWR dam safety
permit, depending on the drainage area to the dam, the height of the dam and
the impounding capacity behind the dam. Most off channel detention basins that
have an embankment are nonjurisdictional class III dams. It is not required
that IDNR/OWR "sign off" on all nonjurisdictional class III dams.
      4.   A consulting engineer with dam safety knowledge can estimate a
hazard classification and determine if an IDNR/OWR dam safety permit is
required.
      5.   A permit application submittal must be made to IDNR/OWR for the
construction or major modification of jurisdictional dams.
      6.   Regulated dams may include weirs, restrictive culverts or
impoundment structures.
   (D)   Other Permit Requirements: Ensure any and all required federal, state
and local permits are received prior to the issuance of a floodplain
development permit.
   (E)   Plan Review And Permit Issuance:
      1.   Ensure that all development activities within the SFHAs of the
jurisdiction of the village meet the requirements of this chapter; and
      2.   Issue a floodplain development permit in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter and other regulations of this community when the
development meets the conditions of this chapter.
   (F)   Inspection Review:
      1.   Inspect all development projects before, during and after
construction to assure proper elevation of the structure and to ensure
compliance with the provisions of this chapter; and
      2.   Schedule on an annual basis an inspection of the floodplain and
document the results of the inspection.
   (G)   Damage Determinations: Make damage determinations of all damaged
buildings in the SFHA after a flood to determine substantially damaged
structures which must comply with subsection
4-5-9(C)3 of this chapter.
   (H)   Elevation And Floodproofing Certificates: Maintain permit files
including:
      1.   An elevation certificate certifying the elevation of the lowest
floor (including basement) of a residential or nonresidential building subject
to section
4-5-9 of this chapter; and/or
      2.   The elevation to which a nonresidential building has been
floodproofed, using a floodproofing certificate, for all buildings subject to
section
4-5-9 of this chapter.
   (I)   Records For Public Inspection: Maintain for public inspection and
furnish upon request base flood data, SFHA and designated floodway maps, copies
of federal or state permit documents, variance documentation, conditional
letter of map revision, letter of map revision, letter of map amendment and "as
built" elevation and floodproofing and/or elevation certificates for all
buildings constructed subject to this chapter.
   (J)   State Permits: Ensure that construction authorization has been granted
by IDNR/OWR, for all development projects subject to sections
4-5-7 and
4-5-8 of this chapter, unless enforcement responsibility has been delegated to
the village. However, the following review approvals are not delegated to the
village and shall require review or permits from IDNR/OWR:
      1.   Organizations which are exempt from this chapter, as per the
Illinois Compiled Statutes;
      2.   IDNR/OWR projects, dams or impoundment structures as defined in the
definition of "dam" in section
4-5-2 of this chapter and all other state, federal or local unit of government
projects, including projects of the village and county, except for those
projects meeting the requirements of subsection
4-5-7-2(A) of this chapter;
      3.   An engineer's determination that an existing bridge or culvert
crossing is not a source of flood damage and the analysis indicating the
proposed flood profile, per subsection
4-5-7-2(C)5 of this chapter;
      4.   An engineer's analysis of the flood profile due to subsection
4-5-7-2(C)4 of this chapter;
      5.   Alternative transition sections and hydraulically equivalent
compensatory storage as indicated in subsections
4-5-7-2(C)1, (C)2, and (C)8 of this chapter;
      6.   Permit issuance of structures within, under, or over publicly
navigable rivers, lakes and streams;
      7.   Any changes in the mapped floodway or published flood profiles.
   (K)   Cooperation With Other Agencies:
      1.   Cooperate with state and federal floodplain management agencies to
improve base flood or 100-year frequency flood and floodway data and to improve
the administration of this chapter;
      2.   Submit data to IDNR/OWR and FEMA for proposed revisions of a
regulatory map within six (6) months whenever a modification of the floodplain
may change the base flood elevation or result in a change to the floodplain
map;
      3.   Submit reports as required for the national flood insurance program;
and
      4.   Notify FEMA of any proposed amendments to this chapter.
   (L)   Promulgate Regulations: Promulgate rules and regulations as necessary
to administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter, subject however to
the review and approval of IDNR/OWR and FEMA for any chapter changes. (Ord. 08-
07, 5-13-2008)
4-5-5: BASE FLOOD ELEVATION:
This chapter's protection standard is based on the flood insurance study for
the village. If a base flood elevation or 100-year frequency flood elevation is
not available for a particular site, then the protection standard shall be
according to the best existing data available from federal, state or other
sources. When a party disagrees with the best available data, they shall submit
a detailed engineering study needed to replace existing data with better data
and submit it to IDNR/OWR and FEMA for review and consideration prior to any
development of the site.
   (A)   The base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for the SFHAs of
the sanitary and ship canal shall be as delineated on the 100-year flood
profiles in the flood insurance study of Cook County prepared by FEMA dated
August 19, 2008, and such amendments to such study and maps as may be prepared
from time to time.
   (B)   The base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for the SFHAs of
those parts of unincorporated Cook County that are within the extraterritorial
jurisdiction of the village of Forest View or that may be annexed into the
village shall be as delineated on the 100-year flood profiles in the flood
insurance study of Cook County prepared by FEMA and dated August 19, 2008, and
such amendments or revisions to such study and maps as may be prepared from
time to time.
   (C)   The base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for each SFHA
delineated as an "AH zone" or "AO zone" shall be that elevation (or depth)
delineated on the countywide flood insurance rate map of Cook County.
   (D)   The base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for each of the
remaining SFHAs delineated as an "A zone" on the countywide flood insurance
rate map of Cook County shall be according to the best existing data available
from federal, state or other sources. Should no other data exist, an
engineering study must be financed by the applicant to determine base flood
elevations.
      1.   When no base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation exists, the
base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for a riverine SFHA shall be
determined from a backwater model, such as HEC-II, HEC-RAS, or a dynamic model
such as HIP.
      2.   The flood flows used in the hydraulic models shall be obtained from
a hydrologic model, such as HEC-HMS, HEC-1, TR-20, or HIP, or by techniques
presented in various publications prepared by the United States geological
survey for estimating peak flood discharges.
      3.   For a nonriverine SFHA, the base flood elevation shall be the
historic flood of record plus three feet (3'), unless calculated by a detailed
engineering study.
      4.   For an unmapped extended SFHA (with a drainage area less than 1
square mile) which has been identified by the building commissioner pursuant to
subsection
4-5-4(A)3 of this chapter, the base flood elevation shall be determined by the
applicant utilizing a method as approved in this section. (Ord. 08-07, 5-13-
2008)
4-5-6: OCCUPATION AND USE OF FLOOD FRINGE AREAS:
Development in and/or filling of the flood fringe will be permitted if
protection is provided against the base flood or 100-year frequency flood by
proper elevation, and compensatory storage, and other applicable provisions of
this chapter. No use will be permitted which adversely affects the capacity of
drainage facilities or systems. Developments located within the flood fringe
shall meet the requirements of this section, along with the requirements of
section
4-5-9 of this chapter.
   (A)   Development Permit:
      1.   No person, firm, corporation, or governmental body not exempted by
law shall commence any development in the SFHA without first obtaining a
development permit from the building commissioner.
      2.   Application for a development permit shall be made on a form
provided by the building commissioner.
         (a)   The application shall be accompanied by drawings of the site,
drawn to scale, showing property line dimensions and legal description for the
property and sealed by a licensed engineer, architect or land surveyor;
existing grade elevations, using the North American vertical datum of 1988, and
all changes in grade resulting from excavation or filling; the location and
dimensions of all buildings and additions to buildings.
         (b)   For all proposed buildings, the elevation of the lowest floor
(including basement) and lowest adjacent grade shall be shown on the submitted
plans and the development will be subject to the requirements of section
4-5-9 of this chapter.
      3.   Upon receipt of a development permit application, the building
commissioner shall compare the elevation of the site to the base flood or 100-
year frequency flood elevation.
         (a)   Any development located on land that can be shown to be higher
than the base flood elevation of the current flood insurance rate map and which
has not been filled after the date of the site's first flood insurance rate map
without a permit as required by this chapter is not in the SFHA and, therefore,
not subject to the requirements of this chapter. Conversely, any development
located on land shown to be below the base flood elevation and hydraulically
connected, but shown on the current flood insurance rate map is subject to the
provisions of this chapter.
         (b)   The building commissioner shall maintain documentation of the
existing ground elevation at the development site and certification that this
ground elevation existed prior to the date of the site's first flood insurance
rate map identification.
      4.   A soil erosion and sediment control plan for disturbed areas shall
be submitted. This plan shall include a description of the sequence of grading
activities and the temporary sediment and erosion control measures to be
implemented to mitigate their effects. This plan shall also include a
description of final stabilization and revegetation measures, and the
identification of a responsible party to ensure postconstruction maintenance.
      5.   The building commissioner shall be responsible for obtaining from
the applicant copies of all other federal, state, and local permits, approvals
or waivers that may be required for this type of activity. The building
commissioner shall not issue a permit unless all other federal, state, and
local permits have been obtained.
   (B)   Preventing Increased Damages: No development in the flood fringe shall
create a threat to public health and safety.
      1.   Using Fill For Elevation: If fill is being used to elevate the site
above the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation, the applicant shall
submit sufficient data and obtain a letter of map revision (LOMR) from FEMA for
the purpose of removing the site from the floodplain.
      2.   Compensatory Storage:
         (a)   Whenever any portion of a floodplain is authorized for use, the
volume of space which will be occupied by the authorized fill or structure
below the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation shall be compensated
for and balanced by a hydraulically equivalent volume of excavation taken from
below the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation.
         (b)   The excavation volume shall be at least equal to 1.5 times the
volume of storage lost due to the fill or structure.
         (c)   In the case of streams and watercourses, such excavation shall
be made opposite or adjacent to the areas so filled or occupied.
         (d)   All floodplain storage lost below the existing 10-year flood
elevation shall be replaced below the proposed 10-year flood elevation. All
floodplain storage lost above the existing 10-year flood elevation shall be
replaced above the proposed 10-year flood elevation.
         (e)   All such excavations shall be constructed to drain freely and
openly to the watercourse.
   (C)   Construction Of The Lowest Floor Below The Base Flood Elevation (BFE):
A person who has obtained a letter of map revision based on fill that removes a
site in the flood fringe from the floodplain due to the use of fill to elevate
the site above the BFE, may apply for a permit from the village to construct
the lowest floor of a residential building below the BFE in the flood fringe.
The building commissioner shall not issue such a permit unless the applicant
has complied with all the criteria set forth in the following subsections:
      1.   Compensatory storage shall be provided per subsection (B)2 of this
section.
      2.   The elevation of the lowest opening in the basement wall (i.e.,
window wells, accessways) shall be at or above the flood protection elevation
(FPE).
      3.   The lowest adjacent grade to the foundation shall be at or above the
FPE, for a minimum distance of ten feet (10') beyond the outside face of the
structure. However, if site conditions are such that this requirement cannot be
met, the building commissioner may waive the ten foot (10') minimum setback if
an Illinois licensed professional engineer certifies that an alternative method
to protect the building from damage due to hydrostatic pressures has been met.
The certifications shall be in the form of a detailed soils and structural
design analysis, which shall be submitted to the building commissioner for
review. The building commissioner may require such additional documentation as
necessary to prove that the proposed shorter setback distance will keep the
structure reasonably safe. In no case shall the setback distance be less than
four feet (4').
      4.   The grade around the perimeter of the structure, measured at a
distance of twenty feet (20') from the structure, shall be above the BFE.
However, if site conditions are such that this requirement cannot be obtained,
the building commissioner may waive the twenty foot (20') minimum setback
distance if an Illinois licensed professional engineer certifies that an
alternative method to protect the building from damages due to hydrostatic
pressures has been met. A detailed soils analysis and structural design proving
that a shorter setback distance will keep the structure reasonably safe from
flooding, shall be submitted to the village for review. In no case shall the
setback distance be less than four feet (4').
      5.   The ground around the building shall be compacted fill that meets
all requirements of this subsection and is at least five feet (5') thick under
the basement floor slab. Nothing in this subsection shall be interpreted to
require the removal or replacement of fill that was placed as part of an LOMR-
F, if such fill consists of material, including soils of similar classification
and degree permeability, such as those classified as CH, CL, SC or ML according
to ASTM standard D-2487, classification of soils for engineering purposes.
      6.   The fill material must be homogeneous and isotropic; that is, the
soil must be all of one material, and the engineering priorities must be in the
same direction.
      7.   All fill material and compaction shall be designed, certified and
inspected by an Illinois licensed professional engineer, as warranted by the
site conditions.
      8.   The basement floor shall be at an elevation that is no more than
five feet (5') below the BFE.
      9.   There shall be a granular drainage layer beneath the floor slab, and
minimum of one-fourth (1/4) horsepower sump pump with a backup power supply
shall be provided to remove seepage flow. The pump shall be rated at four (4)
times the estimated seepage rate and shall discharge above the BFE and away
from the building in order to prevent flooding of the basement or uplift of the
floor under the effect of the seepage pressure.
      10.   The drainage system shall be equipped with a positive means of
preventing backflow.
      11.   All foundation elements shall be designed to withstand hydrostatic
pressure in accordance with accepted engineering practices.
      12.   If the applicant is unable to meet all of the requirements set
forth in the preceding paragraphs of this subsection, the building commissioner
may allow the construction of a basement below the BFE only if the applicant
demonstrates that the proposed fill and structure meet the guidelines and
requirements set forth in FEMA technical bulletin 10-01 and are reasonably safe
from flooding. In order to demonstrate that the proposed structure is
reasonably safe from flooding, the applicant shall submit a detailed
engineering analysis of the proposed fill and foundation wall. The engineered
basement study shall be completed in accordance with the latest edition of FEMA
technical bulletin 10-01, with the analysis of the fill being prepared by an
Illinois licensed professional engineer.
      13.   In order to provide the required compensatory storage on site, in
no case shall the depth of excavation in the front and side yards of the lot
exceed eighteen inches (18"), as measured from the previously existing natural
grade. The rear yard shall be permitted to have a greater depth of excavation,
if necessary. All such excavation shall be constructed to drain freely and
openly to the watercourse or storm sewer system. The use of mechanical means to
drain the compensatory storage area will not be permitted. (Ord. 08-07, 5-13-
2008)
4-5-7: OCCUPATION AND USE OF DESIGNATED FLOODWAYS:
This section applies to proposed development, redevelopment, site modification
or building modification within a designated floodway. The designated floodway
for the sanitary and ship canal shall be as delineated on the countywide flood
insurance rate map of Cook County and referenced in the definition of "flood
insurance rate map (FIRM)", in section
4-5-2 of this chapter. Only those uses and structures will be permitted which
meet the criteria in this section. All floodway modifications shall be the
minimum necessary to accomplish the purpose of the project. The development
shall also meet the requirements of section
4-5-9 of this chapter. (Ord. 08-07, 5-13-2008)
4-5-7-1: DEVELOPMENT PERMIT:
No person, firm, corporation or governmental body not exempted by state law
shall commence any development in a floodway without first obtaining a
development permit from the building commissioner and IDNR/OWR.
   (A)   Application for a development permit shall be made on a form provided
by the building commissioner. The application shall include the following
information:
      1.   Name and address of applicant;
      2.   Site location (including legal description) of the property, drawn
to scale, on the designated floodway map, indicating whether it is proposed to
be in an incorporated or unincorporated area;
      3.   Name of stream or body of water affected;
      4.   Description of proposed activity;
      5.   Statement of purpose of proposed activity;
      6.   Anticipated dates of initiation and completion of activity;
      7.   Name and mailing address of the owner of the subject property if
different from the applicant;
      8.   Signature of the applicant or the applicant's agent;
      9.   If the applicant is a corporation, the president or other authorized
officer shall sign the application form;
      10.   If the applicant is a partnership, each partner shall sign the
application form; and
      11.   If the applicant is a land trust, the trust officer shall sign the
name of the trustee by him (her) as trust officer. A disclosure affidavit shall
be filed with the application, identifying each beneficiary of the trust by
name and address and defining the respective interests therein.
      12.   Plans of the proposed activity shall be provided which include as a
minimum:
         (a)   A vicinity map showing the site of the activity, name of the
waterway, boundary lines, names of roads in the vicinity of the site, graphic
or numerical scale, and north arrow;
         (b)   A plan view of the project and engineering study reach showing
existing and proposed conditions including principal dimensions of the
structure or work, elevations, using the North American vertical datum of 1988,
adjacent property lines and ownership, drainage and flood control easements,
location of any channels and any existing or future access roads, distance
between proposed activity and navigation channel (when the proposed
construction is near a commercially navigable body of water), designated
floodway limit, floodplain limit, specifications and dimensions of any proposed
channel modifications, location and orientation of cross sections, north arrow,
and a graphic or numerical scale;
         (c)   Cross section views of the project and engineering study reach
showing existing and proposed conditions including principal dimensions of the
work as shown in plan view, existing and proposed elevations, normal water
elevation, 10-year frequency flood elevation, 100-year frequency flood
elevation, and graphic or numerical scales (horizontal and vertical);
         (d)   A soil erosion and sediment control plan for disturbed areas.
This plan shall include a description of the sequence of grading activities and
the temporary sediment and erosion control measures to be implemented to
mitigate their effects. This plan shall also include a description of final
stabilization and revegetation measures, and the identification of a
responsible party to ensure postconstruction maintenance;
         (e)   A copy of the designated floodway map, marked to reflect any
proposed change in the designated floodway location.
      13.   Any and all other federal, state, and local permits or approval
letters that may be required for this type of development.
      14.   Engineering calculations and supporting data shall be submitted
showing that the proposed work will meet the permit criteria of section
4-5-7-2 of this chapter.
      15.   If the designated floodway delineation, base flood or 100-year
frequency flood elevation will change due to the proposed project, the
application will not be considered complete until IDNR/OWR has indicated
conditional approval of the designated floodway map change. No structures may
be built until a letter of map revision has been approved by FEMA.
      16.   The application for a structure shall be accompanied by drawings of
the site, drawn to scale showing property line dimensions and existing ground
elevations and all changes in grade resulting from any proposed excavation or
filling, and floodplain and floodway limits; sealed by a licensed professional
engineer, licensed architect or licensed land surveyor; the location and
dimensions of all buildings and additions to buildings; and the elevation of
the lowest floor (including basement) of all proposed buildings subject to the
requirements of section
4-5-9 of this chapter.
      17.   If the proposed project involves a channel modification, the
applicant shall submit the following information:
         (a)   A discussion of the purpose of and need for the proposed work;
         (b)   A discussion of the feasibility of using alternative locations
or methods (see subsection
4-5-7-2(C)9 of this chapter) to accomplish the purpose of the proposed work;
         (c)   An analysis of the extent and permanence of the impacts each
feasible alternative identified in subsection
4-5-7-2(C)9 of this chapter would have on the physical and biological
conditions of the body of water affected; and
         (d)   An analysis of the impacts of the proposed project, considering
cumulative effects on the physical and biological conditions of the body of
water affected.
   (B)   The building commissioner shall be responsible for obtaining from the
applicant copies of all other federal, state, and local permits and approvals
that may be required for this type of activity.
      1.   The building commissioner shall not issue the development permit
unless all required federal and state permits have been obtained.
      2.   A licensed professional engineer, under the employ or contract of
the village shall review and approve applications reviewed under this section.
(Ord. 08-07, 5-13-2008)
4-5-7-2: PREVENTING INCREASED DAMAGES AND A LIST OF APPROPRIATE USES:
   (A)   Development In Floodway: The only development in a floodway which will
be allowed are appropriate uses, which will not cause a rise in the base flood
elevation, and which will not create a damaging or potentially damaging
increase in flood heights or velocity or be a threat to public health and
safety and welfare or impair the natural hydrologic and hydraulic functions of
the floodway or channel, or permanently impair existing water quality or
aquatic habitat. Construction impacts shall be minimized by appropriate
mitigation methods as called for in this chapter. Only those appropriate uses
listed in 17 Illinois administrative code part 3708 will be allowed. The
approved appropriate uses are as follows:
      1.   Flood control structures, dikes, dams and other public works or
private improvements relating to the control of drainage, flooding, erosion, or
water quality or habitat for fish and wildlife;
      2.   Structures or facilities relating to the use of, or requiring access
to, the water or shoreline, such as pumping and treatment facilities, and
facilities and improvements related to recreational boating, commercial
shipping and other functionally water dependent uses;
      3.   Storm and sanitary sewer relief outfalls;
      4.   Underground and overhead utilities;
      5.   Recreational facilities such as playing fields and trail systems,
including any related fencing (at least 50 percent open when viewed from any 1
direction) built parallel to the direction of flood flows, and including open
air pavilions and toilet facilities (4 stall maximum) that will not block flood
flows nor reduce floodway storage;
      6.   Detached garages, storage sheds, or other nonhabitable accessory
structures that will not block flood flows nor reduce floodway storage;
      7.   Bridges, culverts, roadways, sidewalks, railways, runways and
taxiways and any modification thereto;
      8.   Parking lots built at or below existing grade where either:
         (a)   The depth of flooding at the 100-year frequency flood event will
not exceed 1.0 foot; or
         (b)   The applicant of a short term recreational use facility parking
lot formally agrees to restrict access during over bank flooding events and
accepts liability for all damage caused by vehicular access during all over
bank flooding events;
      9.   Designated floodway regrading, without fill, to create a positive
nonerosive slope toward a watercourse;
      10.   Floodproofing activities to protect previously existing lawful
structures including the construction of watertight window wells, elevating
structures, or construction of floodwalls around residential, commercial or
industrial principal structures where the outside toe of the floodwall shall be
no more than ten feet (10') away from the exterior wall of the existing
structure, and, which are not considered substantial improvements to the
structure;
      11.   The replacement, reconstruction, or repair of a damaged building,
provided that the outside dimensions are not increased, and if the building was
damaged to fifty percent (50%) or more of the market value before the damage
occurred, the building will be protected from flooding to the flood protection
elevation;
      12.   Modifications to an existing building that would not increase the
enclosed floor area of the building below the 100-year frequency flood
elevation, and which will not block flood flows including, but not limited to,
fireplaces, bay windows, decks, patios, and second story additions. If the
building is improved to fifty percent (50%) or more of the market value before
the modification occurred (i.e., a substantial improvement), the building will
be protected from flooding to the flood protection elevation.
   (B)   Restrictions On Appropriate Uses: Appropriate uses do not include the
construction or placement of any new structures, fill, building additions,
buildings on stilts, excavation or channel modifications done to accommodate
otherwise nonappropriate uses in the floodway, fencing (including landscaping
or planting designed to act as a fence) and storage of materials except as
specifically defined above as an appropriate use.
   (C)   Criteria For Construction Of An Appropriate Use: Within the designated
floodway, the construction of an appropriate use, will be considered
permissible provided that the proposed project meets the following engineering
and mitigation criteria and is so stated in writing with supporting plans,
calculations and data by a licensed professional engineer and provided that any
structure meets the protection requirements of section
4-5-9 of this chapter:
      1.   Preservation Of Flood Conveyance, So As Not To Increase Flood Stages
Upstream: For appropriate uses other than bridge or culvert crossings, on
stream structures or dams, all effective designated floodway conveyance lost
due to the project will be replaced for all flood events up to and including
the 100-year frequency flood. In calculating effective designated floodway
conveyance, the following factors shall be taken into consideration:
         (a)   Designated floodway conveyance, "K" = (1.486/n)(AR2/3) where "n"
is Manning's roughness factor, "A" is the effective flow area of the cross
section, and "R" is the ratio of the area to the wetted perimeter. (See Ven Te
Chow, "Open Channel Hydraulics", [McGraw-Hill, New York 1959]).
         (b)   The same Manning's "n" value shall be used for both existing and
proposed conditions unless a recorded maintenance agreement with a federal,
state, or local unit of government can assure the proposed conditions will be
maintained or the land cover is changing from a vegetative to a nonvegetative
land cover.
         (c)   Transition sections shall be provided and used in calculations
of effective designated floodway conveyance. The following expansion and
contraction ratios shall be used unless an applicant's engineer can prove to
IDNR/OWR through engineering calculations or model tests that more abrupt
transitions may be used with the same efficiency:
(1) When water is flowing from a narrow section to a wider section, the water
should be assumed to expand no faster than at a rate of one foot (1')
horizontal for every four feet (4') of the flooded stream's length.
(2) When water is flowing from a wide section to a narrow section, the water
should be assumed to contract no faster than at a rate of one foot (1')
horizontal for every one foot (1') of the flooded stream's length.
(3) When expanding or contracting flows in a vertical direction, a minimum of
one foot (1') vertical transition for every ten feet (10') of stream length
shall be used.
(4) Transition sections shall be provided between cross sections with rapid
expansions and contractions and when meeting the designated floodway
delineation on adjacent properties.
(5) All cross sections used in the calculations shall be located perpendicular
to flood flows.
      2.   Preservation Of Floodway Storage So As Not To Increase Downstream
Flooding:
         (a)   Compensatory storage shall be provided for any designated
floodway storage lost due to the proposed work from the volume of fill or
structures placed and the impact of any related flood control projects.
         (b)   Compensatory storage for fill or structures shall be equal to at
least 1.5 times the volume of floodplain storage lost.
         (c)   Artificially created storage lost due to a reduction in head
loss behind a bridge shall not be required to be replaced.
         (d)   The compensatory designated floodway storage shall be placed
between the proposed normal water elevation and the proposed 100-year flood
elevation. All designated floodway storage lost below the existing 10-year
flood elevation shall be replaced below the proposed 10-year flood elevation.
All designated floodway storage lost above the existing 10-year flood elevation
shall be replaced above the proposed 10-year flood elevation. All such
excavations shall be constructed to drain freely and openly to the watercourse.
         (e)   If the compensatory storage will not be placed at the location
of the proposed construction, the applicant's engineer shall demonstrate
through a determination of flood discharges and water surface elevations that
the compensatory storage is hydraulically equivalent.
         (f)   There shall be no reduction in floodway surface area as a result
of a floodway modification, unless such modification is necessary to reduce
flooding at existing structure.
      3.   Preservation Of Floodway Velocities So As Not To Increase Stream
Erosion Or Flood Heights:
         (a)   For all appropriate uses, except bridges or culverts or on
stream structures, the proposed work will not result in an increase in the
average channel or designated floodway velocities or stage for all flood events
up to and including the 100-year frequency event.
         (b)   In the case of bridges or culverts or on stream structures built
for the purpose of backing up water in the stream during normal or flood flows,
velocities may be increased at the structure site if scour, erosion and
sedimentation will be avoided by the use of riprap or other design measures.
      4.   Construction Of New Bridges Or Culvert Crossings And Roadway
Approaches:
         (a)   The proposed structure shall not result in an increase of
upstream flood stages greater than 0.1 foot when compared to the existing
conditions for all flood events up to and including the 100-year frequency
event; or the upstream flood stage increases will be contained within the
channel banks (or within existing vertical extensions of the channel banks)
such as within the design protection grade of existing levees or floodwalls or
within recorded flood easements.
         (b)   If the proposed construction will increase upstream flood stages
greater than 0.1 feet, the developer must contact IDNR/OWR to obtain a permit
for a dam or waiver.
(1) The engineering analysis of upstream flood stages must be calculated using
the flood study flows, and corresponding flood elevations for tailwater
conditions for the flood study specified in section
4-5-5 of this chapter. Bridges and culverts must be analyzed using any commonly
accepted FEMA approved hydraulic models.
(2) Lost floodway storage must be compensated for per subsection (C)2 of this
section.
(3) Velocity increases must be mitigated per subsection (C)3 of this section.
(4) If the crossing is proposed over a public water that is used for
recreational or commercial navigation, an IDNR/OWR permit must be received.
(5) The hydraulic analysis for the backwater caused by the bridge showing the
existing condition and proposed regulatory profile must be submitted to IDNR/
OWR for concurrence that a CLOMR is not required by this section.
(6) All excavations for the construction of the crossing shall be designed per
subsection (C)8 of this section.
      5.   Reconstruction Or Modification Of Existing Bridges, Culverts, And
Approach Roads:
         (a)   The bridge or culvert and roadway approach reconstruction or
modification shall be constructed with no more than 0.1 foot increase in
backwater over the existing flood profile for all flood frequencies up to and
including the 100-year event, if the existing structure is not a source of
flood damage.
         (b)   If the existing bridge or culvert and roadway approach is a
source of flood damage to buildings or structures in the upstream floodplain,
the applicant's engineer shall evaluate the feasibility of redesigning the
structure to reduce the existing backwater, taking into consideration the
effects on flood stages on upstream and downstream properties.
         (c)   The determination as to whether or not the existing crossing is
a source of flood damage and should be redesigned must be prepared in
accordance with 17 Illinois administrative code part 3708 (floodway
construction in northeastern Illinois) and submitted to IDNR/OWR for review and
concurrence before a permit is issued.
      6.   On Stream Structures Built For The Purpose Of Backing Up Water:
         (a)   Any increase in upstream flood stages greater than 0.0 foot when
compared to the existing conditions, for all flood events up to and including
the 100-year frequency event shall be contained within the channel banks (or
within existing vertical extensions of the channel banks) such as within the
design protection grade of existing levees or floodwalls or within recorded
flood easements.
         (b)   A permit or letter indicating a permit is not required must be
obtained from IDNR/OWR for any structure built for the purpose of backing up
water in the stream during normal or flood flow.
         (c)   All dams and impoundment structures as defined in the definition
of "dam" in section
4-5-2 of this chapter shall meet the permitting requirements of 17 Illinois
administrative code part 3702 (construction and maintenance of dams). If the
proposed activity involves a modification of the channel or floodway to
accommodate an impoundment, it shall be demonstrated that:
(1) The impoundment is determined to be in the public interest by providing
flood control, public recreation, or regional stormwater detention;
(2) The impoundment will not prevent the migration of indigenous fish species,
which require access to upstream areas as part of their life cycle, such as for
spawning;
(3) The impoundment will not cause or contribute to degraded water quality or
habitat conditions. Impoundment design should include gradual bank slopes,
appropriate bank stabilization measures and a presedimentation basin;
(4) A nonpoint source control plan has been implemented in the upstream
watershed to control the effects of sediment runoff as well as minimize the
input of nutrients, oil and grease, metals, and other pollutants. If there is
more than one municipality in the upstream watershed, the municipality in which
the impoundment is constructed should coordinate with upstream municipalities
to ensure comprehensive watershed control;
(5) The project otherwise complies with the requirements of this section
4-5-7.
      7.   Floodproofing Of Existing Habitable, Residential And Commercial
Structures:
         (a)   If construction is required beyond the outside dimensions of the
existing building, the outside perimeter of the floodproofing construction
shall be placed no farther than ten feet (10') from the outside of the
building.
         (b)   Compensation of lost storage and conveyance will not be required
for floodproofing activities.
      8.   Excavation In The Floodway:
         (a)   When excavation is proposed in the design of bridges and culvert
openings, including the modifications to and replacement of existing bridge and
culvert structures, or to compensate for lost conveyance or other appropriate
uses, transition sections shall be provided for the excavation.
         (b)   The following expansion and contraction ratios shall be used
unless an applicant's engineer can prove to IDNR/OWR through engineering
calculations or model tests that more abrupt transitions may be used with the
same efficiency:
(1) When water is flowing from a narrow section to a wider section, the water
should be assumed to expand no faster than at a rate of one foot (1')
horizontal for every four feet (4') of the flooded stream's length; and
(2) When water is flowing from a wide section to a narrow section, the water
should be assumed to contract no faster than at a rate of one foot (1')
horizontal for every one foot (1') of the flooded stream's length; and
(3) When expanding or contracting flows in a vertical direction, a minimum of
one foot (1') vertical transition for every ten feet (10') of stream length
shall be used; and
(4) Erosion/scour protection shall be provided inland upstream and downstream
of the transition sections.
      9.   Channel Modification: If the proposed activity involves a channel
modification, it shall be demonstrated that:
         (a)   There are no practicable alternatives to the activity which
would accomplish its purpose with less impact to the natural conditions of the
body of water affected. Possible alternatives include levees, bank
stabilization, floodproofing of existing structures, removal of structures from
the floodplain, clearing the channel, high flow channel, or the establishment
of a stream side buffer strip or greenbelt. Channel modification is acceptable
if the purpose is to restore natural conditions and improve water quality and
fish and wildlife habitat;
         (b)   Water quality, habitat, and other natural functions would be
significantly improved by the modification and no significant habitat area may
be destroyed, or the impacts are offset by the replacement of an equivalent
degree of natural resource values;
         (c)   The activity has been planned and designed and will be
constructed in a way which will minimize its adverse impacts on the natural
conditions of the body of water affected, consistent with the following
criteria:
(1) The physical characteristics of the modified channel shall match as closely
as possible those of the existing channel in length, cross section, slope and
sinuosity. If the existing channel has been previously modified, restoration of
more natural physical conditions should be incorporated into channel
modification design, where practical.
(2) Hydraulically effective transitions shall be provided at both the upstream
and downstream ends of the project, designed such that they will prevent
erosion.
(3) One sided construction of a channel shall be used when feasible. Removal of
streamside (riparian) vegetation should be limited to one side of the channel,
where possible, to preserve the shading and stabilization effects of the
vegetation.
(4) Clearing of stabilizing vegetation shall be limited to that which is
essential for construction of the channel.
(5) Channel banks shall be constructed with a side slope no steeper than three
to one (3:1) horizontal to vertical, wherever practicable. Native vegetation
and gradual side slopes are the preferred methods for bank stabilization. Where
high velocities or sharp bends necessitate the use of alternative stabilization
measures, soil bioengineering techniques, natural rock or riprap are preferred
approaches. Artificial materials such as concrete, gabions, or construction
rubble should be avoided unless there are no practicable alternatives.
(6) All disturbed areas associated with the modification shall be seeded or
otherwise stabilized as soon as possible upon completion of construction.
Erosion blanket or an equivalent material shall be required to stabilize
disturbed channel banks prior to establishment of the vegetative cover.
(7) If the existing channel contains considerable bottom diversity such as deep
pools, riffles, and other similar features, such features shall be provided in
the new channel. Spawning and nesting areas and flow characteristics compatible
with fish habitat shall also be established, where appropriate.
(8) A sediment basin shall be installed at the downstream end of the
modification to reduce sedimentation and degradation of downstream water
quality.
(9) New or relocated channels should be built in the dry and all items of
construction, including vegetation, should be completed prior to diversion of
water into the new channel.
(10) There shall be no increases in stage or velocity as the channel enters or
leaves the project site for any frequency flood unless necessitated by a public
flood control project or unless such an increase is justified as part of a
habitat improvement or erosion control project.
(11) Unless the modification is for a public flood control project, there shall
be no reduction in the volume of floodwater storage outside the floodway as a
result of the modification; and
         (d)   The project otherwise complies with the requirements of this
section
4-5-7.
      10.   Seeding And Stabilization Plan: For all activities located in a
floodway, a seeding and stabilization plan shall be submitted by the applicant.
      11.   Soil Erosion And Sedimentation Measures: For all activities in the
floodway, including grading, filling, and excavation, in which there is
potential for erosion of exposed soil, soil erosion and sedimentation control
measures shall be employed consistent with the following criteria:
         (a)   The construction area shall be minimized to preserve the maximum
vegetation possible. Construction shall be scheduled to minimize the time soil
is exposed and unprotected. In no case shall the existing natural vegetation be
destroyed, removed, or disturbed more than fifteen (15) days prior to the
initiation of improvements.
         (b)   Temporary and/or permanent soil stabilization shall be applied
to denuded areas as soon as possible. As a minimum, soil stabilization shall be
provided within fifteen (15) days after final grade is reached on any portion
of the site, and within fifteen (15) days to denuded areas which may not be at
final grade but will remain undisturbed for longer than sixty (60) days.
         (c)   Sedimentation control measures shall be installed before any
significant grading or filling is initiated on the site to prevent the movement
of eroded sediments off site or into the channel. Potential sediment control
devices include filter fences, straw bale fences, check dams, diversion
ditches, and sediment traps and basins.
         (d)   A vegetated buffer strip of at least twenty five feet (25') in
width shall be preserved and/or reestablished, where possible, along existing
channels (see subsection (C)16 of this section). Construction vehicle use of
channels shall be minimized. Temporary stream crossings shall be constructed,
where necessary, to minimize erosion. Necessary construction in or along
channels shall be restabilized immediately.
         (e)   Soil erosion and sedimentation control measures shall be
designed and implemented consistent with "Procedures And Standards For Urban
Soil Erosion And Sedimentation Control In Illinois" (1988) also known as the
"Green Book" and the "Illinois Urban Manual" (NRCS, 1995).
      12.   Public Flood Control Projects: For public flood control projects,
the permitting requirements of this section will be considered met if the
applicant can demonstrate to IDNR/OWR through hydraulic and hydrologic
calculations that the proposed project will not singularly or cumulatively
result in increased flood heights outside the project right of way or easements
for all flood events up to and including the 100-year frequency event.
      13.   General Criteria For Analysis Of Flood Elevations:
         (a)   The flood profiles, flows and floodway data in the designated
floodway study, referenced in section
4-5-5 of this chapter, must be used for analysis of the base conditions. If the
study data appears to be in error or conditions have changed, IDNR/OWR shall be
contacted for approval and concurrence on the appropriate base conditions data
to use.
         (b)   If the 100-year designated floodway elevation at the site of the
proposed construction is affected by backwater from a downstream receiving
stream with a larger drainage area, the proposed construction shall be shown to
meet:
(1) The requirements of this section for the 100-year frequency flood
elevations of the designated floodway conditions; and
(2) Conditions with the receiving stream at normal water elevations.
         (c)   If the applicant learns from IDNR/OWR, local governments, or a
private owner that a downstream restrictive bridge or culvert is scheduled to
be removed, reconstructed, modified, or a regional flood control project is
scheduled to be built, removed, constructed or modified within the next five
(5) years, the proposed construction shall be analyzed and shown to meet the
requirements of this section for both the existing conditions and the expected
flood profile conditions when the bridge, culvert or flood control project is
built.
      14.   Conditional Letter Of Map Revision:
         (a)   If the appropriate use would result in a change in the
designated floodway location or the 100-year frequency flood elevation, the
applicant shall submit to IDNR/OWR and FEMA all information, calculations and
documents necessary to be issued a conditional designated floodway map revision
and receive from IDNR/OWR a conditional concurrence of the designated floodway
change before a permit is issued.
         (b)   The final designated floodway map will not be changed by FEMA
until as built plans or record drawings of initial filling, grading, dredging,
or excavating activities are submitted and accepted by FEMA and IDNR/OWR.
         (c)   In the case of nongovernment projects, the municipality in
incorporated areas and the county in unincorporated areas shall concur with the
proposed conditional designated floodway map revision before IDNR/OWR approval
can be given.
         (d)   No filling, grading, dredging or excavating shall take place
until a conditional approval is issued.
         (e)   After initial filling, grading, dredging or excavating, no
activities shall take place until a final letter of map revision (LOMR) is
issued by FEMA with concurrence from IDNR/OWR.
      15.   Professional Engineer's Supervision: All engineering analyses shall
be performed by or under the supervision of a licensed professional engineer.
      16.   Construction Within Twenty Five Feet Of Channel: For all activities
in the floodway involving construction within twenty five feet (25') of the
channel, the following criteria shall be met:
         (a)   A natural vegetation buffer strip shall be preserved within at
least twenty five feet (25') of the ordinary high water mark of the channel.
         (b)   Where it is impossible to protect this buffer strip during the
construction of an appropriate use, a vegetated buffer strip shall be
established upon completion of construction.
         (c)   After receipt of conditional approval of the designated floodway
change and issuance of a permit and a conditional letter of map revision,
construction as necessary to change the floodway designation may proceed but no
buildings or structures or other construction that is not an appropriate use
may be placed in that area until the designated floodway map is changed and a
final letter of map revision is received. The designated floodway map will be
revised upon acceptance and concurrence by IDNR/OWR and FEMA of the "as built"
plans.
   (D)   Development Activities In Delegated Communities Requiring State
Review: For those projects listed below located in a designated floodway, the
following criteria shall be submitted to IDNR/OWR for their review and
concurrence and/or permit prior to the issuance of a permit by a community or
county delegated state permitting authority in the floodway:
      1.   An engineer's analysis of the flood profile due to a proposed bridge
pursuant to subsection (C)4 of this section.
      2.   An engineer's determination that an existing bridge or culvert
crossing is not a source of flood damage and the analysis indicating the
proposed flood profile, pursuant to subsection (C)5 of this section.
      3.   Alternative transition sections and hydraulically equivalent storage
pursuant to subsections (C)1, (C)2, and (C)8 of this section.
      4.   The construction of any IDNR/OWR projects, dams (as defined in the
definition of "dam" in section
4-5-2 of this chapter) and all other federal, state, or local units of
government projects, including projects of the municipality or county.
      5.   An engineer's determination that a proposed bridge affected by
backwater from a downstream receiving stream may be built with a smaller
opening.
      6.   Projects which revise or establish the floodway and/or flood
profiles.
      7.   Projects in public bodies of water.
   (E)   Other Permits:
      1.   In addition to the other requirements of this chapter, a development
permit for a site located in a floodway shall not be issued unless the
applicant first obtains a permit or written documentation that a permit is not
required from IDNR/OWR, issued pursuant to 615 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/
5 et seq.
      2.   No correspondence from IDNR/OWR shall be required if the project
meets the requirements of regional permit 3.
      3.   No permit from IDNR/OWR shall be required if IDNR/OWR has delegated
this responsibility to the village.
   (F)   Permits For Dams:
      1.   Any work involving the construction, modification or removal of a
"dam" as defined in section
4-5-2 of this chapter per 17 Illinois administrative code part 3702 (rules for
construction of dams) shall obtain an IDNR/OWR permit prior to the start of
construction of a dam.
      2.   If the building commissioner finds a dam that does not have an IDNR/
OWR permit, the building commissioner shall immediately notify the IDNR/OWR
Bartlett office.
      3.   If the building commissioner finds a dam which is believed to be in
unsafe condition, the building commissioner shall immediately notify the owner
of the dam, the IDNR/OWR Bartlett office, and the Illinois emergency management
agency (IEMA).
   (G)   Activities That Do Not Require A Licensed Professional Engineer's
Review: The following activities may be permitted without a licensed
professional engineer's review. Such activities shall still meet the other
requirements of this chapter, including the mitigation requirements.
      1.   Regional permit 3 which authorizes, for example, underground and
overhead utilities, storm and sanitary sewer outfalls, sidewalks, patios,
athletic fields, playground equipment and stream bank protection activities.
(Ord. 08-07, 5-13-2008)
4-5-8: OCCUPATION AND USE OF SFHA AREAS WHERE FLOODWAYS ARE NOT IDENTIFIED:
In SFHA or floodplains (including AE, AH, AO and unnumbered A zones) where no
floodways have been identified and no base flood or 100-year frequency flood
elevations have been established by FEMA, and draining more than a square mile,
no development shall be permitted unless the cumulative effect of the
proposals, when combined with all other existing and anticipated uses and
structures, shall not significantly impede or increase the flow and passage of
the floodwaters nor significantly increase the base flood or 100-year frequency
flood elevation.
   (A)   Development Permit:
      1.   No person, firm, corporation, or governmental body, not exempted by
state law, shall commence any development in an SFHA or floodplain without
first obtaining a development permit from the building commissioner.
      2.   Application for a development permit shall be made on a form
provided by the building commissioner.
         (a)   The application shall be accompanied by drawings of the site,
drawn to scale showing property line dimensions; and existing grade elevations
and all changes in grade resulting from excavation or filling, sealed by a
licensed engineer, architect or surveyor; the location and dimensions of all
buildings and additions to buildings; and the elevations of the lowest floor
(including basement) of all proposed buildings subject to the requirements of
section
4-5-9 of this chapter.
         (b)   The application for a development permit shall also include the
following information:
(1) A detailed description of the proposed activity, its purpose, and intended
use;
(2) Site location (including legal description) of the property, drawn to
scale, on the designated floodway maps, indicating whether it is proposed to be
in an incorporated or unincorporated area;
(3) Anticipated dates of initiation and completion of activity;
(4) Plans of the proposed activity shall be provided which include as a
minimum:
   A. A vicinity map showing the site of the activity, name of the waterway,
boundary lines, names of roads in the vicinity of the site, graphic or
numerical scale, and north arrow;
   B. A plan view of the project and engineering study reach showing existing
and proposed conditions including principal dimensions of the structure or
work, elevations, using the North American vertical datum of 1988, adjacent
property lines and ownership, drainage and flood control easements, distance
between proposed activity and navigation channel (when the proposed
construction is in or near a commercially navigable body of water), floodplain
limit, location and orientation of cross sections, north arrow, and a graphical
or numerical scale;
   C. Cross section views of the project perpendicular to the flow of
floodwater and engineering study reach showing existing and proposed conditions
including principal dimensions of the work as shown in plan view, existing and
proposed elevations, normal water elevation, 10-year frequency flood elevation,
100-year frequency flood elevation, and graphical or numerical scales
(horizontal and vertical); and
   D. A soil erosion and sedimentation control plan for disturbed areas. This
plan shall include a description of the sequence of grading activities and the
temporary sediment and erosion control measures to be implemented to mitigate
their effects. This plan shall also include a description of final
stabilization and revegetation measures, and the identification of a
responsible party to ensure postconstruction maintenance.
         (c)   Engineering calculations and supporting data shall be submitted
showing that the proposed work will meet the criteria of subsection (B) of this
section.
         (d)   Any and all other federal, state, and local permits or approvals
that may be required for this type of development.
      3.   Based on the best available existing data according to federal,
state or other sources, the building commissioner shall compare the elevation
of the site to the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation.
         (a)   Should no elevation information exist for the site, the
developer's engineer shall calculate the elevation according to subsection
4-5-5(D) of this chapter.
         (b)   Any development located on land that can be shown to have been
higher than the base flood elevation of the current flood insurance rate map
identification is not in the SFHA and, therefore, not subject to the
requirements of this chapter.
         (c)   The building commissioner shall maintain documentation of the
existing ground elevation at the development site and certification that this
ground elevation existed prior to the date of the site's first flood insurance
rate map identification.
         (d)   The building commissioner shall be responsible for obtaining
from the applicant copies of all other federal, state, and local permits,
approvals or waivers that may be required for this type of activity. The
building commissioner shall not issue the development permit unless all
required federal, state, and local permits have been obtained.
   (B)   Preventing Increased Damages:
      1.   Development Creating Damaging Increase In Flood Heights: No
development in the SFHA where a floodway has not been determined shall create a
damaging or potentially damaging increase in flood heights or velocity or
threat to public health, safety and welfare or impair the natural hydrologic
and hydraulic functions of the floodway or channel, or impair existing water
quality or aquatic habitat. Construction impacts shall be minimized by
appropriate mitigation methods as called for in this chapter.
      2.   Standards Within Riverine SFHA: Within all riverine SFHAs where the
floodway has not been determined, the following standards shall apply:
         (a)   Engineering Requirements: The developer shall have a licensed
professional engineer state in writing and show through supporting plans,
calculations, and data that the project meets the engineering requirements of
subsections
4-5-7-2(C)1 through (C)9 of this chapter for the entire floodplain as
calculated under the provisions of subsection
4-5-5(D) of this chapter.
(1) As an alternative, the developer should have an engineering study performed
to determine a floodway and submit that engineering study to IDNR/OWR and FEMA
for acceptance as a designated floodway.
(2) Upon acceptance of the floodway by IDNR/OWR and FEMA, the developer shall
then demonstrate that the project meets the requirements of section
4-5-7 of this chapter for the designated floodway. The floodway shall be
defined according to the definition of "designated floodway" in section
4-5-2 of this chapter.
         (b)   INDR/OWR Permit: A development permit shall not be issued unless
the applicant first obtains an IDNR/OWR permit or a determination has been made
that an IDNR/OWR permit is not required.
         (c)   Permits For Dams:
(1) Any work involving the construction, modification or removal of a "dam" as
defined in section
4-5-2 of this chapter per 17 Illinois administrative code part 3702 (rules for
construction of dams) shall obtain an IDNR/OWR permit prior to the start of
construction of a dam.
(2) If the building commissioner finds a dam that does not have an IDNR/OWR
permit, the building commissioner shall immediately notify the IDNR/OWR
Bartlett office.
(3) If the building commissioner finds a dam which is believed to be in unsafe
condition, the building commissioner shall immediately notify the owner of the
dam, the IDNR/OWR Bartlett office, and the Illinois emergency management agency
(IEMA).
      3.   Activities Permitted: The following activities may be permitted
without a licensed professional engineer's review or calculation of base flood
elevation and designated floodway. Such activities shall still meet the other
requirements of this chapter.
         (a)   Bridge and culvert crossings of streams in rural areas meeting
conditions of IDNR/OWR statewide permit no. 2;
         (b)   Barge fleeting facilities meeting conditions of IDNR/OWR
statewide permit no. 3;
         (c)   Aerial utility crossings meeting conditions of IDNR/OWR
statewide permit no. 4;
         (d)   Minor boat docks meeting conditions of IDNR/OWR statewide permit
no. 5;
         (e)   Minor, nonobstructive activities meeting conditions of IDNR/OWR
statewide permit no. 6; activities (not involving fill or positive change in
grade) are covered by this permit;
         (f)   Outfall structures and drainage ditch outlets meeting conditions
of IDNR/OWR statewide permit no. 7;
         (g)   Underground pipeline and utility crossings meeting the
conditions of IDNR/OWR statewide permit no. 8;
         (h)   Bank stabilization projects meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR
statewide permit no. 9;
         (i)   Accessory structures and additions to existing residential
buildings meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR statewide permit no. 10;
         (j)   Minor maintenance dredging activities meeting conditions of
IDNR/OWR statewide permit no. 11;
         (k)   Bridge and culvert replacement structures and bridge widenings
meeting conditions of IDNR/OWR statewide permit no. 12;
         (l)   Temporary construction activities meeting conditions of IDNR/OWR
statewide permit no. 13;
         (m)   Special uses of public waters meeting conditions of IDNR/OWR
statewide permit no. 14; and
         (n)   Any development determined by IDNR/OWR to be located entirely
within a flood fringe area shall be exempt from state floodway permit
requirements.
      4.   Maintaining Watercourse: The flood carrying capacity of any altered
or relocated watercourse shall be maintained.
      5.   Compensatory Storage:
         (a)   Whenever any portion of a floodplain is authorized for use, the
volume of space which will be occupied by the authorized fill or structure
below the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation shall be compensated
for and balanced by a hydraulically equivalent volume of excavation taken from
below the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation.
         (b)   The excavation volume shall be at least equal to 1.5 times the
volume of storage lost due to the fill or structure.
         (c)   In the case of streams and watercourses, such excavation shall
be made opposite or adjacent to the areas so filled or occupied.
         (d)   All floodplain storage lost below the existing 10-year flood
elevation shall be replaced below the proposed 10-year flood elevation. All
floodplain storage lost above the existing 10-year flood elevation shall be
replaced above the proposed 10-year flood elevation. All such excavations shall
be constructed to drain freely and openly to the watercourse. (Ord. 08-07, 5-
13-2008)
4-5-9: PERMITTING REQUIREMENTS APPLICABLE TO ALL FLOODPLAIN AREAS AND
PROTECTION OF BUILDINGS:
In addition to the requirements found in sections
4-5-6,
4-5-7, and
4-5-8 of this chapter for development in flood fringes, designated floodways,
and SFHA or floodplains where no floodways have been identified, the following
requirements shall be met:
   (A)   Public Health Standards:
      1.   No developments in the SFHA shall include locating or storing
chemicals, explosives, buoyant materials, animal wastes, fertilizers, flammable
liquids, pollutants, or other hazardous or toxic materials below the flood
protection elevation (FPE) unless such materials are stored in a floodproofed
and anchored storage tank and certified by a professional engineer or
floodproofed building constructed according to the requirements of subsection
(C) of this section.
      2.   Public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas and electric
shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage.
      3.   Public sanitary sewer systems and water supply systems shall be
located and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters
into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters.
      4.   New and replacement water supply systems, wells, sanitary sewer
lines and on site waste disposal systems may be permitted providing all
manholes or other aboveground openings located below the FPE are watertight.
      5.   All other activities defined as development shall be designed so as
not to alter flood flows or increase potential flood damages.
   (B)   Carrying Capacity And Notification:
      1.   For all projects involving channel modification, fill, or stream
maintenance (including levees), the flood carrying capacity of the watercourse
shall be maintained.
      2.   In addition, the village shall notify adjacent communities in
writing thirty (30) days prior to the issuance of a permit for the alteration
or relocation of the watercourse.
   (C)   Protecting Buildings:
      1.   All buildings located within a 100-year floodplain, also known as an
SFHA, shall be protected from flood damage below the flood protection
elevation. This building protection criteria applies to the following
situations:
         (a)   Construction or placement of a new building or alteration or
addition to an existing building valued at more than one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) or seventy (70) square feet.
         (b)   Substantial improvements or structural alterations made to an
existing building that increase the floor area by more than twenty percent
(20%) or equal or exceed the market value by fifty percent (50%). Alteration
shall be figured cumulatively subsequent to the adoption of this chapter. If
substantially improved, the existing structure and the addition must meet the
flood protection standards of this section.
         (c)   Repairs made to a substantially damaged building. These repairs
shall be figured cumulatively subsequent to the adoption of this chapter. If
substantially damaged the entire structure must meet the flood protection
standards of this section.
         (d)   Installing a manufactured home on a new site or a new
manufactured home on an existing site (the building protection requirements do
not apply to returning a manufactured home to the same site it lawfully
occupied before it was removed to avoid flood damage).
         (e)   Installing a travel trailer or recreational vehicle on a site
for more than one hundred eighty (180) days per year; and
         (f)   "Repetitive loss" to an existing building as defined in section
4-5-2 of this chapter. This building protection requirement may be met by one
of the following methods.
      2.   A residential or nonresidential building, when allowed, may be
constructed on permanent land fill in accordance with the following:
         (a)   Lowest Floor Elevation: The lowest floor (including basement)
shall be at or above the flood protection elevation; and
         (b)   Fill Requirements:
(1) The fill shall be placed in layers no greater than six inches (6") deep
before compaction and should extend at least ten feet (10') beyond the
foundation of the building before sloping below the flood protection elevation;
and
(2) The top of the fill shall be above the flood protection elevation. However,
the ten foot (10') minimum may be waived if a structural engineer certifies an
alternative method to protect the building from damages due to hydrostatic
pressures; and
(3) The fill shall be protected against erosion and scour during flooding by
vegetative cover, riprap or other structural measure; and
(4) The fill shall be composed of rock or soil and not incorporate debris or
refuse materials; and
(5) The fill shall not adversely affect the flow or surface drainage from or
onto neighboring properties, and when necessary, stormwater management
techniques such as swales or basins shall be incorporated.
      3.   A residential or nonresidential building may be elevated in
accordance with the following:
         (a)   The building or improvements shall be elevated on crawl space,
stilts, piles, walls, or other foundation that is permanently open to
floodwaters and not subject to damage by hydrostatic pressures of the base
flood or 100-year frequency flood. Designs must either be certified by a
licensed professional engineer or architect or the permanent openings, one on
each wall, shall be no more than one foot (1') above existing grade, and
consists of a minimum of two (2) openings. The openings must have a total net
area of not less than one square inch for every one square foot of enclosed
area subject to flooding below the base flood elevation; and
         (b)   The foundation and supporting members shall be anchored and
aligned in relation to flood flows and adjoining structures so as to minimize
exposure to known hydrodynamic forces such as current, waves, ice and floating
debris; and
         (c)   All areas below the flood protection elevation shall be
constructed of materials resistant to flood damage; and
(1) The lowest floor (including basement) and all electrical, heating,
ventilating, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and utility meters shall
be located at or above the flood protection elevation; and
(2) Water and sewer pipes, electrical and telephone lines, submersible pumps,
and other waterproofed service facilities may be located below the flood
protection elevation provided they are waterproofed; and
         (d)   The areas below the flood protection elevation may only be used
for the parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement and not later modified or occupied as habitable space; and
         (e)   In lieu of the above criteria, the design methods to comply with
these requirements may be certified by a licensed professional engineer or
architect.
         (f)   Manufactured homes, and travel trailers to be installed on a
site for more than one hundred eighty (180) days, shall be elevated to or above
the flood protection elevation; and, shall be anchored to resist flotation,
collapse, or lateral movement by being tied down in accordance with the rules
and regulations for the Illinois mobile home tiedown act issued pursuant to 77
Illinois administrative code part 870. In addition, all manufactured homes
shall meet the following elevation requirements:
(1) In the case of manufactured homes placed or substantially improved: a)
outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision, b) in a new manufactured
home park or subdivision, c) in an expansion to an existing manufactured home
park or subdivision, or d) in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision
on which a manufactured home has incurred substantial damage from a flood, the
top of the lowest floor shall be elevated to or above the flood protection
elevation.
(2) In the case of manufactured homes placed or substantially improved in an
existing manufactured home park or subdivision, the manufactured home shall be
elevated so that either the top of the lowest floor is above the base flood
elevation or the chassis is at least thirty six inches (36") in height above
grade and supported by reinforced piers or other foundations of equivalent
strength, whichever is less.
         (g)   Recreational vehicles or travel trailers shall be required to
meet the elevation and anchoring requirements of subsection (C) of this section
unless:
(1) They are on site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days;
and
(2) They are fully licensed, ready for highway use, and used only for
recreation, camping, travel or seasonal use rather than as a permanent
dwelling. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its
wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type
utility and service devices, and has no permanently attached additions.
         (h)   Only a nonresidential building may be structurally dry
floodproofed (in lieu of elevation) provided that:
(1) A licensed professional engineer or architect shall certify that the
building has been structurally dry floodproofed below the flood protection
elevation, the structure and attendant utility facilities are watertight and
capable of resisting the effects of the base flood or 100-year frequency flood.
(2) The building design shall take into account flood velocities, duration,
rate of rise, hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces, the effects of buoyancy, and
impacts from debris or ice.
(3) Floodproofing measures shall be operable without human intervention and
without an outside source of electricity (levees, berms, floodwalls and similar
works are not considered floodproofing for the purpose of this subsection).
         (i)   A building may be constructed with a crawl space located below
the flood protection elevation provided that the following conditions are met:
(1) The building must be designed and adequately anchored to resist flotation,
collapse, and lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and
hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy; and
(2) Any enclosed area below the flood protection elevation shall have openings
that equalize hydrostatic pressures by allowing for the automatic entry and
exit of floodwaters. A minimum of one opening on each wall having a total net
area of not less than one square inch per one square foot of enclosed area. The
openings shall be no more than one foot (1') above grade; and
(3) The interior grade of the crawl space below the flood protection elevation
must not be more than two feet (2') below the lowest adjacent exterior grade;
and
(4) The interior height of the crawl space measured from the interior grade of
the crawl space to the top of the foundation wall must not exceed four feet
(4') at any point; and
(5) An adequate drainage system must be installed to remove floodwaters from
the interior area of the crawl space within a reasonable period of time after a
flood event; and
(6) Portions of the building below the flood protection elevation must be
constructed with materials resistant to flood damage; and
(7) Utility systems within the crawl space must be elevated above the flood
protection elevation.
         (j)   Construction of new or substantially improved critical
facilities shall be located outside the limits of the floodplain. Construction
of new critical facilities shall be permissible within the floodplain if no
feasible alternative site is available. Critical facilities constructed within
the SFHA shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated or
structurally dry floodproofed to the 500-year flood frequency elevation or
three feet (3') above the level of the 100-year flood frequency elevation
whichever is greater. Floodproofing and sealing measures must be taken to
ensure that toxic substances will not be displaced by or released into
floodwaters. Access routes elevated to or above the level of the base flood
elevation shall be provided to all critical facilities.
         (k)   Toolsheds, detached garages, and other minor accessory
structures on an existing single-family platted lot, may be constructed with
the lowest floor below the flood protection elevation in accordance with the
following:
(1) The building is not used for human habitation; and
(2) All areas below the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation shall
be constructed with waterproof material. Structures located in a designated
floodway shall be constructed and placed on a building site so as not to block
the flow of floodwaters and shall also meet the appropriate use criteria of
section
4-5-7 of this chapter. In addition, all other requirements of sections
4-5-6,
4-5-7, and
4-5-8 of this chapter must be met; and
(3) The structure shall be anchored to prevent flotation; and
(4) Service facilities such as electrical and heating equipment shall be
elevated or floodproofed to the flood protection elevation; and
(5) The building shall be valued at less than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00)
and be less than five hundred (500) square feet in floor size; and
(6) The building shall be used only for the storage of vehicles or tools and
may not contain other rooms, workshops, greenhouses or similar uses and cannot
be modified later into another use; and
(7) The building shall meet the permanent opening criteria of subsection (C)3
(a) of this section; and
(8) All flammable or toxic materials (gasoline, paint, insecticides,
fertilizers, etc.) shall be stored above the flood protection elevation; and
(9) The lowest floor elevation should be documented and the owner advised of
the flood insurance implications.
         (l)   Existing buildings located within a designated floodway shall
also meet the more restrictive appropriate use standards included in section
4-5-7 of this chapter. Nonconforming structures located in a designated
floodway may remain in use and may only be enlarged, replaced or structurally
altered in accordance with section
4-5-7-2 of this chapter. A nonconforming structure damaged by flood, fire, wind
or other natural or manmade disaster may be restored unless the damage exceeds
fifty percent (50%) of its market value before it was damaged, in which case it
shall conform to this chapter. (Ord. 08-07, 5-13-2008)
4-5-10: OTHER DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS:
The village of Forest View shall take into account flood hazards, to the extent
that they are known in all official actions related to land management, use and
development.
   (A)   New subdivisions, manufactured home parks, annexation agreements, and
planned unit developments (PUDs) within the SFHA shall be reviewed to assure
that the proposed developments are consistent with sections
4-5-6,
4-5-7,
4-5-8, and
4-5-9 of this chapter and the need to minimize flood damage. Plats or plans for
new subdivisions, mobile home parks and planned unit developments (PUDs) shall
include a signed statement by a licensed professional engineer that the plat or
plans account for changes in the drainage of surface waters in accordance with
the plat act 1 .
   (B)   Proposals for new subdivisions, manufactured home parks, travel
trailer parks, planned unit developments (PUDs) and additions to manufactured
home parks and additions to subdivisions shall include base flood or 100-year
frequency flood elevation data and floodway delineations.
      1.   Where this information is not available from an existing adopted
study, the applicant's engineer shall be responsible for calculating the base
flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation per subsection
4-5-5(D) of this chapter and the floodway delineation per the definition of
"designated floodway" in section
4-5-2 of this chapter.
   (C)   Streets, blocks, lots, parks and other public grounds shall be located
and laid out in such a manner as to preserve and utilize natural streams and
channels. Wherever possible, the floodplains shall be included within parks or
other public grounds.
   (D)   The village of Forest View shall not approve any planned unit
development (PUD) or plat of subdivision located outside the corporate limits
unless such agreement or plat is in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter.
   (E)   All other activities defined as development shall be designed so as
not to alter flood flows or increase potential flood damages. (Ord. 08-07, 5-
13-2008)
 
Notes
1 1. 765 ILCS 205/2.
4-5-11: VARIANCES:
   (A)   No variances shall be granted to any development located in a
"designated floodway" as defined in section
4-5-2 of this chapter.
      1.   Whenever the standards of this chapter place undue hardship on a
specific development proposal, the applicant may apply to the village of Forest
View for a variance.
      2.   The building commissioner shall review the applicant's request for a
variance and shall submit its recommendation to the president and board of
trustees. The village may attach such conditions to granting of a variance as
it deems necessary to further the flood protection intent of this chapter.
   (B)   No variance shall be granted unless the applicant demonstrates that
all of the following conditions are met:
      1.   The development activity cannot be located outside the SFHA; and
      2.   An exceptional hardship would result if the variance were not
granted; and
      3.   The relief requested is the minimum necessary; and
      4.   There will be no additional threat to public health, safety,
beneficial stream uses and functions, especially aquatic habitat, or creation
of a nuisance; and
      5.   There will be no additional public expense for flood protection,
lost environmental stream uses and functions, rescue or relief operations,
policing, or repairs to stream beds and banks, roads, utilities, or other
public facilities; and
      6.   The provisions of subsections
4-5-6(B) and
4-5-8(B) of this chapter shall still be met; and
      7.   The activity is not in a designated floodway; and
      8.   The applicant's circumstances are unique and do not establish a
pattern inconsistent with the intent of the NFIP; and
      9.   The granting of the variance will not alter the essential character
of the area involved including existing stream uses; and
      10.   All other required state and federal permits or waivers have been
obtained.
   (C)   The building commissioner shall notify an applicant in writing that a
variance from the requirements of section
4-5-9 of this chapter that would lessen the degree of protection to a building
will:
      1.   Result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts
as high as twenty five dollars ($25.00) per one hundred dollars ($100.00) of
insurance coverage; and
      2.   Increase the risks to life and property; and
      3.   Require that the applicant proceed with knowledge of these risks and
that the applicant will acknowledge in writing the assumption of the risk and
liability.
   (D)   Variances requested in connection with restoration of a historic site
or "historic structure" as defined in section
4-5-2 of this chapter may be granted using criteria more permissive than the
requirements of subsections (A) and (B) of this section, subject to the
conditions that:
      1.   The repair or rehabilitation is the minimum necessary to preserve
the historic character and design of the structure; and
      2.   The repair or rehabilitation will not result in the structure being
removed as a certified historic structure. (Ord. 08-07, 5-13-2008)
4-5-12: DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY:
   (A)   The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on available information
derived from engineering and scientific methods of study.
   (B)   Larger floods may occur or flood heights may be increased by manmade
or natural causes.
   (C)   This chapter does not imply that development, either inside or outside
of the SFHA, will be free from flooding or damage.
   (D)   This chapter does not create liability on the part of the village of
Forest View or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damage that
results from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision made
lawfully thereunder. (Ord. 08-07, 5-13-2008)
4-5-13: PENALTY:
   (A)   If such owner fails after ten (10) days' notice to correct the
violation:
      1.   The village may make application to the circuit court for an
injunction requiring conformance with this chapter or make such other order as
the court deems necessary to secure compliance with this chapter.
      2.   Any person who violates this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof,
be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) or more than one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) for each offense.
      3.   A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or
on which a violation occurs or continues.
      4.   The village shall record a notice of violation on the title to the
property.
   (B)   The building commissioner shall inform the owner that any such
violation is considered a wilful act to increase flood damages and, therefore,
may cause coverage by a standard flood insurance policy to be suspended.
      1.   The building commissioner is authorized to issue an order requiring
the suspension of the subject development. The stop work order shall be in
writing, shall indicate the reason for the issuance, and shall order the
action, if necessary, to resolve the circumstances requiring the stop work
order. The stop work order constitutes a suspension of the permit.
      2.   No site development permit shall be permanently suspended or revoked
until a hearing is held by the president and board of trustees. Written notice
of such hearing shall be served on the permittee and shall state: a) the
grounds for complaint or reasons for suspension or revocation; and b) the time
and place of the hearing. At such hearing, the permittee shall be given an
opportunity to present evidence on his/her behalf. At the conclusion of the
hearing, the president and board of trustees shall determine whether the permit
shall be suspended or revoked.
   (C)   Nothing herein shall prevent the village from taking such other lawful
action to prevent or remedy any violations. All costs connected therewith shall
accrue to the person or persons responsible. (Ord. 08-07, 5-13-2008)
4-5-14: ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS:
   (A)   This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any
existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions.
   (B)   Where this chapter and other ordinance, easements, covenants, or deed
restrictions conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent
restrictions shall prevail.
   (C)   This chapter is intended to repeal the original ordinance or
resolution which was adopted to meet the national flood insurance program
regulations, but is not intended to repeal the resolution which the village
passed in order to establish initial eligibility for the program. (Ord. 08-07,
5-13-2008)
CHAPTER 6
SIGNS
SECTION:
4-6-1: Permit Required
4-6-2: Definitions
4-6-3: Prohibited Signs
4-6-4: Application For Erection Permit
4-6-5: Review By Building Commissioner; Issuance Of Erection Permit
4-6-6: Permit Fee
4-6-7: Annual Inspection Fee
4-6-8: Permits And Licenses Revocable
4-6-9: Violations; Unsafe Signs; Revocation Of Permits
4-6-10: Change Of Ownership Or User Of Sign; Transfer Of Permit
4-6-11: Information Required To Be On Signs
4-6-12: Painting And Cleaning Of Signs Required
4-6-13: Design And Construction Standards
4-6-14: Removal Of Signs Which Advertise A Business Which Is No Longer Operated
Or A Product Which Is No Longer Sold
4-6-15: Signs Not Subject To This Chapter
4-6-16: Bond
4-6-17: Location And Language Restrictions; Automobile Service Station Signage
4-6-18: Signs Adjacent To Or Near Public Rights Of Way
4-6-19: Reflectors
4-6-20: Attachment Of Letters And Figures, Etc.
4-6-21: Ground Signs
4-6-22: Pole Signs
4-6-23: Restriction On Number And Location Of Pole And Ground Signs
4-6-24: Wall Signs
4-6-25: Changing Signs
4-6-26: Temporary Signs
4-6-27: Awnings
4-6-28: Roof Signs
4-6-29: Signs Using Electricity
4-6-30: Multiple Message Signs
4-6-31: Nonconforming Signs
4-6-32: Penalty
4-6-1: PERMIT REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, repair, alter, relocate or
maintain within the village, any "sign" or "other advertising structure" as
defined in this chapter, without first obtaining an erection permit from the
village board and making payment of the fee required thereof. All illuminated
signs shall, in addition, be subject to the provisions of the building code.
(Ord. 81-7, 8-4-1981)
4-6-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise indicates:
AWNING: Any structure made of cloth or metal with a metal frame attached to a
building and projecting over a thoroughfare, when the same is so erected as to
permit its being raised to a position flat against the building when not in
use.
CANOPY: Any structure, other than an awning, made of cloth or metal with metal
frames attached to a building, projecting from the wall of a building above an
entrance and extending over a thoroughfare.
CHANGING SIGNS: Outdoor clocks, outdoor barometers, outdoor electric message
centers, outdoor signs and any other sign whose advertisement or message is
changed mechanically.
FACING OR SURFACE: The surface of the sign upon, against, or through which the
message is displayed or illustrated.
GROUND SIGN: Any sign supported by uprights or braces placed upon the ground
and not attached to any building.
ILLUMINATED SIGNS: Any sign which has characters, letters, figures, designs or
outline illuminated by electric lights or luminous tubes as a part of the sign
proper.
INCOMBUSTIBLE MATERIAL: Any material which will not ignite at or below a
temperature of one thousand two hundred degrees Fahrenheit (1,200°F) and will
not continue to burn or glow at that temperature.
MARQUEE: Any hood or awning of permanent construction projecting from the wall
of a building above an entrance and extending over a thoroughfare.
MULTIPLE MESSAGE SIGN: An outdoor advertising sign that displays a series of
message changes, or is capable of showing a series of different messages, in a
predetermined sequence, regardless of the technology used.
OTHER ADVERTISING STRUCTURE: Any "marquee", "canopy" or "awning" as further
defined herein.
PERSON: Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or
organization of any kind.
POLE SIGNS: Any and all freestanding signs located atop a pole or other similar
standard.
PROJECTING SIGN: Any sign which is attached to a building or other structure
and extends more than ten inches (10") beyond the building line established for
said premises by the zoning ordinances or other ordinances or deed restrictions
governing the premises upon which said sign is located.
ROOF SIGN: Any sign erected, constructed and maintained wholly upon or over the
roof of any building with the principal support on the roof structure.
SIGN: Every sign, billboard, ground sign, wall sign, roof sign, illuminated
sign, projecting sign, pole sign, changing sign, marquee, awning and canopy and
shall include any announcement, declaration, demonstration, display
illustration or insignia used to advertise or promote the interests of any
person when the same is placed out of doors in view of the general public.
TEMPORARY SIGN: Any sign, banner, pennant, valance or advertising display
constructed of cloth, canvas, light fabric, cardboard, wallboard or other light
materials, with or without frames, intended to be displayed for a short period
of time only.
WALL SIGN: All flat signs of solid face construction which are placed against a
building or other structure and attached to the exterior front, rear or side
wall of any building or other structure. (Ord. 81-7, 8-4-1981; amd. Ord. 08-04,
2-12-2008)
4-6-3: PROHIBITED SIGNS:
All signs not expressly permitted under the provisions of this chapter shall be
prohibited; provided, however, if the village board determines that a proposed
sign is substantially similar and is not more objectionable to a type of sign
which is permitted, the village board may issue a permit to allow the proposed
sign to be erected. Said sign shall be subject to all provisions of this
chapter which pertain to the type of sign to which it is substantially similar.
(Ord. 81-7, 8-4-1981)
4-6-4: APPLICATION FOR ERECTION PERMIT:
Application for erection permits shall be made upon blanks provided by the
village clerk, and shall contain or have attached thereto, the following
information:
   (A)   Name, address and telephone number of the applicant.
   (B)   Location of building structure, or lot to which or upon which the sign
or other advertising structure is to be attached or erected.
   (C)   Position of the sign or other advertising structure in relation to
nearby buildings or structures.
   (D)   Two (2) blueprints or ink drawings of the plans and specifications and
method of construction and attachment to the building or in the ground.
   (E)   Copy of stress sheets and calculations showing the structure is
designed for dead load and wind pressure in any direction in the amount
required by this chapter and all other laws and ordinances of the village.
   (F)   Name of persons erecting structure.
   (G)   Written consent of the owner of the building, structure or land to
which or on which the structure is to be erected.
   (H)   Any electrical permit required and issued for said sign.
   (I)   Insurance policy or bond as required by section
4-6-16 of this chapter.
   (J)   Such other information as the village board may determine is required
to show full compliance with this chapter and all other laws and ordinances of
the village. (Ord. 81-7, 8-4-1981)
4-6-5: REVIEW BY BUILDING COMMISSIONER; ISSUANCE OF ERECTION PERMIT:
It shall be the duty of the building commissioner, after the filing of an
application for a permit to erect a sign or other advertising structure, to
examine the plans and specifications and other data relating to the proposed
sign or advertising structure and the premises upon which it is proposed to
erect the sign or other advertising structure, and to report to the village
board on whether the proposed sign or advertising structure will comply with
the requirements of this chapter and all other laws and ordinances of the
village. The village board, after reviewing the building inspector's report,
and, if required, the electrical inspector's report, shall determine whether an
erection permit shall be issued. If the work authorized under an erection
permit has not been completed within six (6) months after the date of issuance,
the said permit shall become null and void. (Ord. 81-7, 8-4-1981)
4-6-6: PERMIT FEE:
Every applicant, before granted a permit hereunder, shall pay to the village
clerk, the following permit fee for each such sign or other advertising
structure regulated by this chapter: (Ord. 81-7, 8-4-1981)
 
(A) Signs advertising a business operated on the property where the sign
exists:
1. Illuminated signs      $0.40 per square foot of facing
2. Nonilluminated signs   $0.20 per square foot of facing
3. Canopies               $10.00
4. Multiple message signs $30.00 plus $0.80 per square foot of facing
 
(Ord. 81-7, 8-4-1981; amd. Ord. 08-04, 2-12-2008)
 
(B) Signs not advertising a business existing on the property:
1. Illuminated signs    $15.00 plus $0.20 per square foot of facing
2. Nonilluminated signs $10.00 plus $0.10 per square foot of facing
3. Temporary signs      $5.00 plus $0.05 per square foot of facing
 
   (C)   If a sign for which a permit has been issued is altered, the owner or
user shall pay a new permit fee equal to fifty percent (50%) of the fee imposed
by subsection (A) or (B) of this section, whichever is applicable. If a sign
for which a permit has been issued is relocated, the owner or user shall be
required to pay the full fee permit imposed by subsection (A) or (B) of this
section, whichever is applicable. (Ord. 81-7, 8-4-1981)
4-6-7: ANNUAL INSPECTION FEE:
For each sign not advertising a business existing on the property, the owner
thereof shall pay to the village an annual inspection fee as follows: (Ord. 81-
7, 8-4-1981)
 
(A) Illuminated signs      $15.00 plus $0.20 per square foot of facing
(B) Nonilluminated signs   $10.00 plus $0.10 per square foot of facing
(C) Temporary signs        $5.00 plus $0.05 per square foot of facing
(D) Multiple message signs $30.00 plus $0.80 per square foot of facing
 
   (E)   No inspection fee shall be charged in the same year a permit fee is
paid. (Ord. 81-7, 8-4-1981; amd. Ord. 08-04, 2-12-2008)
4-6-8: PERMITS AND LICENSES REVOCABLE:
All rights and privileges acquired under the provisions of this chapter are
mere licenses revocable at any time by the village board, and all such permits
shall contain this provision. In the event that by action of the village board
any permit or license is revoked, it shall be unlawful to thereafter allow such
sign to continue to remain on the premises and it shall be the duty of the
owner, agent or person in possession of said premises and each of them to
remove the same forthwith. (Ord. 81-7, 8-4-1981)
Any permittee who fails to pay his permit renewal fee by the date due, shall
pay a penalty of ten percent (10%) of the permit fee for each month or fraction
thereof during which the permit fee is overdue. The minimum late penalty shall
be ten dollars ($10.00) per month. (Ord. 92-3, 5-28-1992)
4-6-9: VIOLATIONS; UNSAFE SIGNS; REVOCATION OF PERMITS:
If the building commissioner shall find that any sign or other advertising
structure regulated herein is unsafe or insecure, or is a menace to the public,
or has been constructed or erected or is being maintained in violation of the
provisions of this chapter, he shall give written notice to the permittee
thereof. If the permittee fails to remove or alter the structure so as to
comply with the standards herein set forth within ten (10) days after such
notice, such sign or other advertising structure may be removed or altered to
comply by the building commissioner at the expense of the permittee or owner of
the property upon which it is located. The building commissioner shall
recommend to the village board the revocation of the permit covering said sign
or other structure regulated herein, and thereupon said permit may be revoked
by order of the village board. The building commissioner may cause any sign or
other advertising structure which is an immediate peril to persons or property
to be removed summarily and without notice. (Ord. 81-7, 8-4-1981)
4-6-10: CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP OR USER OF SIGN; TRANSFER OF PERMIT:
Whenever there is a change in the ownership or use of a sign, the new sign user
or owner shall forthwith notify the building commissioner and the village board
in writing of the change. An existing permit for a sign shall be transferred to
the new owner of the sign unless the sign is altered or relocated. (Ord. 81-7,
8-4-1981)
4-6-11: INFORMATION REQUIRED TO BE ON SIGNS:
Every sign or other advertising structure shall have painted in a conspicuous
place thereon, in letters not less than one inch (1") in height, the date of
erection, the permit number and the voltage of any electrical apparatus used in
connection therewith. In addition, all illuminated signs and any other signs
which use electricity shall be labeled as conforming to the standards of the
United States bureau of standards and as having been approved by Underwriters
Laboratories, Inc. (Ord. 81-7, 8-4-1981)
4-6-12: PAINTING AND CLEANING OF SIGNS REQUIRED:
The owner of any "sign" as defined and regulated by this chapter shall be
required to have properly painted at least once every two (2) years, the facing
and all parts and supports of said sign, unless the same are constructed of
noncorrosive material, in which event they shall be cleaned at least every two
(2) years. (Ord. 81-7, 8-4-1981)
4-6-13: DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS:
All signs and other advertising structures shall be designed and constructed to
withstand a wind pressure of not less than forty (40) pounds per square foot of
area; and shall be constructed to receive dead loads as required in the
building code or other ordinances of the village. (Ord. 81-7, 8-4-1981)
4-6-14: REMOVAL OF SIGNS WHICH ADVERTISE A BUSINESS WHICH IS NO LONGER OPERATED
OR A PRODUCT WHICH IS NO LONGER SOLD:
Any sign now or hereafter existing which no longer advertises a bona fide
business conducted, or a product sold, shall be taken down and removed by the
owner, agent or person having the use of the building or structure upon which
such sign may be found, within ten (10) days after written notification from
the building commissioner, and upon failure to comply with such notice within
the time specified in such order, the building commissioner is hereby
authorized to cause removal of such sign, and any expense incident thereto
shall be paid by the owner of the building or structure to which such sign is
attached. (Ord. 81-7, 8-4-1981)
4-6-15: SIGNS NOT SUBJECT TO THIS CHAPTER:
The provisions and regulations of this chapter shall not apply to the following
signs:
   (A)   Nonilluminated real estate signs not exceeding eight (8) square feet
in area which advertise the sale, rental or lease of the premises upon which
said signs are located only.
   (B)   Nonilluminated professional nameplates not exceeding one square foot
in area.
   (C)   Memorial signs or tablets, names of buildings and date of erection
when cut into any masonry surface or when constructed of bronze or other
incombustible materials.
   (D)   Traffic or other municipal signs, legal notices, railroad crossing
signs, danger and such temporary, emergency or nonadvertising signs as may be
approved by the village board.
   (E)   Signs which advertise garage sales on the premises upon which the sign
is located.
   (F)   Lettering and pictures on trucks, automobiles, or semitractor trailers
which identify only the owner or operator of the vehicle or a product sold by
the owner or operator of the vehicle.
   (G)   Signs located on the interior or the exterior of buses. (Ord. 81-7, 8-
4-1981)
4-6-16: BOND:
Every applicant for a permit referred to herein for the erection of a sign to
be erected within ten feet (10') of any public way shall, before the permit is
granted, file with the village clerk a continuing bond in the penal sum of not
less than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), executed by the applicant and a
surety company to be approved by the village attorney and conditioned for the
faithful observance of the provisions of this chapter and all amendments
thereto, and of all laws and ordinances relating to signs and other advertising
structures, and which shall indemnify and save harmless the village from any
and all damages, judgments, costs or expenses which the said village may incur
or suffer by reason of the granting of said permit. Any person lawfully
maintaining a sign or other advertising structure regulated by this chapter at
the time of the enactment of this chapter shall, within thirty (30) days after
said enactment, comply with all the provisions set forth in this section. A
liability insurance policy issued by an insurance company authorized to do
business in the state conforming to this section may be permitted in lieu of a
bond. (Ord. 81-7, 8-4-1981)
4-6-17: LOCATION AND LANGUAGE RESTRICTIONS; AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION SIGNAGE:
   (A)   No sign shall be erected, relocated or maintained as to prevent free
ingress to or egress from any door, window or fire escape. No sign of any kind
shall be attached to a standpipe or fire escape.
   (B)   No sign or other advertising structure as regulated by this chapter
shall be erected at the intersection of any streets in such a manner as to
obstruct free and clear vision or at any location where, by reason of the
position, shape or color, it may interfere with, obstruct the view of, or be
confused with any authorized traffic sign, signal or device; or which makes use
of the words "stop", "look", "drive-in", "danger" or any other word, phrase,
symbol or character in such manner as to interfere with, mislead or confuse
traffic. (Ord. 81-7, 8-4-1981; amd. Ord. 08-03, 2-12-2008; Ord. 18-02, 3-27-
2018)
4-6-18: SIGNS ADJACENT TO OR NEAR PUBLIC RIGHTS OF WAY:
All signs or other advertising structures which are constructed adjacent, or
within five feet (5') of a public right of way, shall have a smooth surface and
no nails, tacks or wires shall be permitted to protrude therefrom, except
electrical reflectors and devices which may extend over the top and in front of
the advertising structures. (Ord. 81-7, 8-4-1981)
4-6-19: REFLECTORS:
Gooseneck reflectors and lights shall be permitted on ground signs and wall
signs; provided that any lights be installed only in such manner that the
direct rays of such lights be concentrated on the sign and be prevented from
causing a glare on, or striking, the street or nearby property, or reflectors
shall be provided with proper glass lenses concentrating the illumination upon
the area of the sign so as to prevent glare upon the street or nearby property.
(Ord. 81-7, 8-4-1981)
4-6-20: ATTACHMENT OF LETTERS AND FIGURES, ETC.:
All letters, figures, characters or representations in cutout or irregular
form, maintained in conjunction with, attached to or superimposed upon any sign
shall be safely and securely built or attached to the sign structure. (Ord. 81-
7, 8-4-1981)
4-6-21: GROUND SIGNS:
   (A)   All ground signs for which a permit is required under this chapter
shall have a surface or facing of incombustible material; provided, however,
that combustible structural trim may be used thereon.
   (B)   All ground signs for which a permit is required in the B-1 and B-
2 Zoning Districts under this chapter shall have a surface or facing less than
thirty (30) square feet in area. All ground signs for which a permit is
required in hte M-1-1 and M2 Zoning Districts under this chapter shall have a
surface or facing less the sixty (60) square feet in area.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful to erect any ground sign whose total height is
greater than six feet (6') above the level of the street upon which the sign
faces, or above the adjoining ground level, if such ground level is above the
street level.
   (D)   Ground signs shall have an open space not less than two feet (2')
between the baseline of said sign and the ground level. This open space may be
filled in with a platform or decorative latticework which does not close off
more than one-half (1/2) of any square foot of such open space. No ground sign
shall be nearer than two feet (2') to any other sign, building or structure.
   (E)   No ground sign shall be nearer the street than the building line
established by law.
   (F)   All ground signs shall be securely built, constructed and erected upon
posts and standards sunk at least three feet (3') below the natural surface of
the ground, and shall be supported and braced by timbers or metal rods in the
rear thereof, extending from the top thereof, to a point in the ground at least
a distance equal to one-half (1/2) of the height of such sign, measured along
the ground, from the posts or standards upon which the same is erected.
   (G)   All posts, anchors and bracing of wood shall be treated to protect
them from moisture by creosoting or other approved methods when they rest upon
or enter into the ground.
   (H)   All ground signs and the premises surrounding the same shall be
maintained by the owner thereof in a clean, sanitary and inoffensive condition,
and free and clear of all obnoxious substances, rubbish and weeds. (Ord. 81-7,
8-4-1981; amd. Ord. 18-07, 6-26-2018)
4-6-22: POLE SIGNS:
   (A)   The total area of the facing of a pole sign shall not exceed two
hundred (200) square feet.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to erect any pole sign whose total height is
greater than thirty feet (30') above the level of the street which the sign
faces or above ground level, if the level of the ground upon which the sign is
erected is above street level.
   (C)   All pole signs and the premises surrounding the same shall be
maintained by the owner thereof in a clean, sanitary and inoffensive condition
and free and clear of all obnoxious substances, rubbish and weeds. (Ord. 81-7,
8-4-1981; amd. Ord. 18-04, 4-24-2018)
4-6-23: RESTRICTION ON NUMBER AND LOCATION OF POLE AND GROUND SIGNS:
Not more than one ground or pole sign shall be permitted per lot or record,
provided that where a lot fronts on more than one public right of way, more
than one ground or pole sign may be located on the lot if each sign faces a
different public right of way and is not within two hundred seventy five feet
(275') of another pole or ground sign located on the same lot. (Ord. 81-7, 8-4-
1981)
4-6-24: WALL SIGNS:
   (A)   All wall signs for which a permit is required under this Chapter shall
have a surface or facing of incombustible, noncorrosive material; provided,
however, that combustible structural trim may be used thereon. Every wall sign,
including the frames, braces and supports thereof, shall be designed by a
structural engineer or manufacturer, and shall be approved by the Village Board
as in compliance with the Building Code of the Village.
   (B)   No wall sign shall cover wholly or partially any wall opening, nor
project beyond the ends or top of the wall to which it is attached, and no wall
sign shall exceed an area of one hundred fifty (150) square feet.
   (C)   The front facing of a wall sign shall not be permitted to extend more
than ten inches (10") beyond the surface of the building to which it is
attached, and shall not be attached to a wall at a height of less than ten feet
(10') above the sidewalk or ground.
   (D)   No wall sign shall be erected, relocated or maintained so as to
prevent free ingress to or egress from any door, window or fire escape.
   (E)   All wall signs shall be safely and securely attached to the building
wall by means of noncorrosive metal, anchors, bolts or expansion screws of not
less than three-eighths inch (3/8") in diameter embedded in said wall at least
five inches (5"); provided, however that such signs may rest in, or be bolted
to strong, noncorrosive heavy metal brackets or saddles set not over six feet
(6') apart, each of which shall be securely fixed to the wall as hereinbefore
provided. In no case shall any wall sign be secured with wire, strips of wood
or nails.
   (F)   No more than one wall sign shall be mounted, attached or painted upon
any building. (Ord. 81-7, 8-4-1981)
4-6-25: CHANGING SIGNS:
   (A)   Changing signs must comply with all applicable provisions of this
Chapter and all applicable ordinances and codes, including the Building Code
and Electrical Code of the Village.
   (B)   No new permit shall be required for alteration of a changing sign
because of painting, repainting, cleaning, maintenance or repair of the sign
which does not involve a structural change. No new permit shall be required for
replacement or repair of the plastic face of a changing sign due to breakage or
deterioration.
   (C)   A new permit shall be required if the advertisement or message of a
changing sign is altered. (Ord. 81-7, 8-4-1981)
4-6-26: TEMPORARY SIGNS:
   (A)   No temporary sign of combustible material shall exceed four feet (4')
in one of its dimensions or one hundred (100) square feet in area, and provided
such signs in excess of sixty (60) square feet shall be made of rigid
materials, that is, of wallboard or other light materials with frames.
   (B)   Every temporary sign weighing in excess of fifty (50) pounds must be
approved by the Building Commissioner as conforming to the safety requirements
of the Building Code of the Village.
   (C)   No temporary sign shall extend over or into any street, alley,
sidewalk or other public thoroughfare a distance greater than four inches (4')
from the wall upon which it is erected, and shall not be placed or project over
any wall opening.
   (D)   No temporary sign shall be erected so as to prevent free ingress to or
egress from any door, window or fire escape, nor shall such sign be attached to
any stand pipe or fire escape.
   (E)   Every temporary wall sign shall be attached to the wall with wire or
steel cables, and no strings, ropes or wood slats for anchorage or support
purposes shall be permitted.
   (F)   Permits for temporary signs shall authorize the erection of said signs
and their maintenance for a period not exceeding thirty (30) days.
   (G)   The advertisement contained on any temporary sign shall pertain only
to the business, industry or pursuit conducted on or within the premises on
which such sign is erected or maintained. This provision shall not apply to
signs of a civic, political or religious nature. (Ord. 81-7, 8-4-1981)
4-6-27: AWNINGS:
   (A)   Awnings may be constructed of fire-resistant cloth or metal; provided,
however, that all frames and supports shall be of metal.
   (B)   All awnings shall be constructed and erected so that the lowest
portion thereof shall be not less than eight feet (8') above the level of the
sidewalk or public thoroughfare.
   (C)   No awning shall be permitted to extend beyond a point twelve inches
(12") inside the curb line.
   (D)   An awning shall be no larger than is necessary to protect and cover
the window or the entrance over which it is erected.
   (E)   Every awning shall be securely attached to and supported by the
building. Posts or columns beyond the building line shall not be permitted for
awnings. No awning shall be attached to the wood jambs, frames or other wood
members of a building (frame buildings excepted), when such building is less
than ten feet (10') from public property.
   (F)   No advertising shall be placed on any awning, except that the name of
the owner and the business, industry or pursuit conducted within the premises
may be painted or otherwise permanently placed in a space not exceeding eight
inches (8") in height on the front and side portions thereof. (Ord. 81-7, 8-4-
1981)
4-6-28: ROOF SIGNS:
   (A)   All roof signs shall be installed or erected in such a manner that no
angle iron structural iron support, braces, grip wires or secondary supports
shall be visible from any public place.
   (B)   Roof signs may not rotate.
   (C)   The facing of a roof sign shall not exceed one hundred (100) square
feet in area and cannot extend more than ten feet (10') above the flat roof or
above the highest point of a gabled roof. (Ord. 81-7, 8-4-1981)
4-6-29: SIGNS USING ELECTRICITY:
   (A)   All signs which use electricity must conform to the standards of the
United States bureau of standards and may be approved by Underwriters
Laboratories, Inc.
   (B)   All illuminating elements in signs which use electricity shall be kept
in satisfactory working condition or immediately repaired or replaced.
   (C)   All signs using electricity shall have a disconnecting switch which is
located in accordance with the requirements of the village's building and
electrical codes. (Ord. 81-7, 8-4-1981)
4-6-30: MULTIPLE MESSAGE SIGNS:
   (A)   Length Of Cycle: The total length of the information cycle of a
multiple message sign shall be no less than ten (10) seconds in length with a
transition time between message changes of three (3) seconds or less. Items of
information may not be repeated at intervals that are short enough to cause the
multiple message sign to have the effect of a flashing light.
   (B)   Malfunction: A multiple message sign shall contain a default that will
freeze the message in one position if a malfunction occurs.
   (C)   Brightness/Illumination:
      1.   Limitation: In no instance shall the lighting intensity of a
multiple message sign, whether resulting from internal illumination or external
illumination, exceed:
         (a)   Seventy five (75) foot-candles measured perpendicular to the
face of the sign from a distance equal to the narrowest dimension of the sign;
or
         (b)   One foot-candle on adjoining residential property, measured
three feet (3') above the surface of the ground.
      2.   Brightness Adjustment: Multiple message signs shall be equipped with
photosensitive equipment which automatically adjusts the brightness and
contrast of the sign in direct relation to the ambient outdoor illumination.
      3.   Glare: All artificial illumination shall be so designed, located,
shielded, and directed so as to prevent the casting of glare or direct light
upon adjacent public rights of way or surrounding property.
   (D)   Included Area: The illuminated or message displaying areas of a
multiple message sign shall be included within the maximum aggregate sign
surface for the premises.
   (E)   Compliance With This Code: Multiple message signs shall comply with
all applicable provisions of this chapter, including, but not limited to,
sections
4-6-11,
4-6-23 and
4-6-29 of this chapter, and all applicable ordinances and codes, including the
building code and electrical code of the village.
   (F)   Maintenance: Multiple message signs must be maintained so as to be
able to display messages in a complete and legible manner. No new permit shall
be required for alteration of a multiple message sign because of painting,
repainting, cleaning, maintenance or repair of the sign which does not involve
a structural change. (Ord. 08-04, 2-12-2008)
4-6-31: NONCONFORMING SIGNS:
Every sign or other advertising structure lawfully in existence on the adoption
of this chapter shall not be altered or moved unless it be made to comply with
the provisions of this chapter. The provisions of this section shall not exempt
the owner of any nonconforming signs from the requirements of section
4-6-16 of this chapter pertaining to bond or liability insurance. (Ord. 81-7,
8-4-1981; amd. Ord. 08-04, 2-12-2008)
4-6-32: PENALTY:
Any person who violates a provision of this chapter shall be subject to a fine
of not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) or more than the maximum penalty
provided in section
1-4-1 of this code for each offense. Each day that any violation of this
chapter shall exist or occur shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 81-7,
8-4-1981; amd. Ord. 95-23, 10-10-1995; Ord. 08-04, 2-12-2008)
CHAPTER 7
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
SECTION:
4-7-1: Code Adopted
4-7-2: Amendments
4-7-3: Window Maintenance
4-7-1: CODE ADOPTED:
A certain document, three (3) copies of which are on file in the office of the
village clerk of the village of Forest View, being marked and designated as the
international property maintenance code (IPMC), 2015 edition, as published by
the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the property
maintenance code of the village of Forest View, in the state of Illinois for
regulating and governing the conditions and maintenance of all property,
buildings and structures; by providing the standards for supplied utilities and
facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to ensure that
structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use; and the
condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy and use, and
the demolition of such existing structures as herein provided; providing for
the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of
the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said property
maintenance code on file in the office of the village of Forest View, by
reference, as if fully set forth herein. (Ord. 16-12, 9-27-2016)
4-7-2: AMENDMENTS:
The international property maintenance code (IPMC), 2015 edition, adopted by
section
4-7-1 of this chapter is hereby amended as follows:
   (A)   Section 101.1. Insert: the village of Forest View.
Section 103.5. Fees. The fees for activities and services performed by the
department in carrying out its responsibilities under this code shall be as
indicated in the following schedule defined in section
4-1-2 of the Forest View village code.
Section 112.4. Insert: $100.00 dollars or more than the maximum penalty
provided in section
1-4-1 of the Forest View village code. Each day that a violation continues
shall be deemed a separate offense.dollars.
Section 302.4. Insert: five inches (5").
Section 304.14. Insert: April 1st to November 1st.
Section 602.3. Insert: October 1st to May 1st.
Section 602.4. Insert: October 1st to May 1st.
(B) If there are any specific provisions of this code in conflict with the
terms of the international property maintenance code (IPMC), 2015 edition, the
provisions of this code shall control unless there is a contrary indication
therein. (Ord. 16-12, 9-27-2016)
4-7-3: WINDOW MAINTENANCE:
(A) All structures within the village must have exterior glazing area (windows)
which are in good repair. Every window, door and frame shall be kept in sound
condition, good repair and weathertight.
(B) In the event of sizable damage to a window, the damage must be boarded up
or replaced within twenty four (24) hours of breakage. When the damage is
boarded up on a temporary basis, permanent repair must be made within thirty
(30) days.
(C) During construction, any opening without a window or door must be boarded
up. Such temporary board up must be replaced with permanent windows or doors
within sixty (60) days. (Ord. 95-21, 9-26-1995)
CHAPTER 8
MECHANICAL CODE
SECTION:
4-8-1: Adoption Of Mechanical Code
4-8-2: Amendments
4-8-1: ADOPTION OF MECHANICAL CODE:
A certain document, three (3) copies of which are on file in the Office of the
Village Clerk of the Village of Forest View, being marked and designated as the
International Mechanical Code (IMC), 2015 edition, as published by the
International Code Council, be and hereby is adopted as the Mechanical Code of
the Village of Forest View, in the State of Illinois for regulating and
governing the design, construction, quality of materials, erection,
installation, alteration, repair, location, replacement, addition to, use or
maintenance of mechanical systems; providing for the issuance of permits and
collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions,
penalties, conditions and terms of said Mechanical Code on file in the Office
of the Village of Forest View, by reference, as if fully set forth herein.
(Ord. 16-01, 3-22-2016)
4-8-2: AMENDMENTS:
   (A)   The International Mechanical Code (IMC), 2015 edition, as published by
the International Code Council, adopted by section
4-8-1 of this chapter is hereby amended as follows:
Section 101.1. Insert: the Village of Forest View.
Section 106.5.2. Fee Schedule. The fees for mechanical work shall be as
indicated in the following schedule defined in Section
4-1-2 of the Forest View Village Code.
Section 106.5.3. Fee Refunds. 2. Shall be deleted in its entirety.
Section 106.5.3. Fee Refunds. 3. Shall be deleted in its entirety.
Section 108.4. Insert: a an Unlawful Act, punishable by a fine of not more than
$750.00 dollars. or by imprisonment not exceeding ____ days or both such fine
and imprisonment.
Section 108.5. Insert: $100.00 dollars or more than the maximum penalty
provided in Section
1-4-1 of the Forest View Village Code. Each day that a violation continues
shall be deemed a separate offense. dollars.
(B) If there are any specific provisions of this Code in conflict with the
terms of the International Mechanical Code (IMC), 2015 edition, the provisions
of this Code shall control unless there is a contrary indication therein. (Ord.
17-03, 2-14-2017)
CHAPTER 9
EXISTING BUILDING CODE
SECTION:
4-9-1: Adoption Of Existing Building Code
4-9-2: Amendments
4-9-1: ADOPTION OF EXISTING BUILDING CODE:
A certain document, three (3) copies of which are on file in the Office of the
Village Clerk of the Village of Forest View, being marked and designated as the
International Existing Building Code (IEBC), 2015 edition, as published by the
International Code Council, be and hereby is adopted as the Existing Building
Code of the Village of Forest View, in the State of Illinois for regulating and
governing the repair, alteration, change of occupancy, addition and relocation
of existing buildings, including historic buildings; providing for the issuance
of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the
regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Existing
Building Code on file in the Office of the Village of Forest View, by
reference, as if fully set forth herein. (Ord. 16-01, 3-22-2016)
4-9-2: AMENDMENTS:
   (A)   The International Existing Building Code (IEBC), 2015 edition, as
published by the International Code Council, adopted by section
4-9-1 of this chapter is hereby amended as follows:
Section 101.1. Insert: the Village of Forest View.
Section 1401.2. Applicability. Structures existing prior to March 22, 2016, in
which there is work involving additions, alterations or changes of occupancy
shall be made to conform to the requirements of this chapter or the provisions
of Chapters 5 through 13. The provisions of Sections 1401.2.1 through 1401.2.5
shall apply to existing occupancies that will continue to be, or are proposed
to be, in Groups A, B, E, F, I-2, M, R and S. These provisions shall not apply
to buildings with occupancies in Group H or I-1, I-3 or I-4.
(B) If there are any specific provisions of this Code in conflict with the
terms of the International Existing Building Code (IEBC), 2015 edition, the
provisions of this Code shall control unless there is a contrary indication
therein. (Ord. 17-03, 2-14-2017)
CHAPTER 10
FUEL GAS CODE
SECTION:
4-10-1: Adoption Of Fuel Gas Code
4-10-2: Amendments
4-10-1: ADOPTION OF FUEL GAS CODE:
A certain document, three (3) copies of which are on file in the Office of the
Village Clerk of the Village of Forest View, being marked and designated as the
International Fuel Gas Code (IFGC), 2015 edition, as published by the
International Code Council, be and hereby is adopted as the Fuel Gas Code of
the Village of Forest View, in the State of Illinois for regulating and
governing fuel gas systems and gas fired appliances; providing for the issuance
of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the
regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Fuel Gas Code
on file in the Office of the Village of Forest View, by reference, as if fully
set forth herein. (Ord. 16-01, 3-22-2016)
4-10-2: AMENDMENTS:
   (A)   The International Fuel Gas Code (IFGC), 2015 edition, as published by
the International Code Council, adopted by section
4-10-1 of this chapter is hereby amended as follows:
Section 101.1. Insert: the Village of Forest View.
Section 106.6.2. Fee Schedule. The fees for work shall be as indicated in the
following schedule defined in Section
4-1-2 of the Forest View Village Code.
Section 106.6.3. Fee Refunds. 2. Shall be deleted in its entirety.
Section 106.6.3. Fee Refunds. 3. Shall be deleted in its entirety.
Section 108.4. Insert: a an Unlawful Act, punishable by a fine of not more than
$750.00 dollars. or by imprisonment not exceeding ____ days or both such fine
and imprisonment.
Section 108.5. Insert: $100.00 dollars or more than the maximum penalty
provided in Section
1-4-1 of the Forest View Village Code. Each day that a violation continues
shall be deemed a separate offense. dollars.
(B) If there are any specific provisions of this Code in conflict with the
terms of the International Fuel Gas Code (IFGC), 2015 edition, the provisions
of this Code shall control unless there is a contrary indication therein. (Ord.
17-03, 2-14-2017)
CHAPTER 11
RESIDENTIAL CODE
SECTION:
4-11-1: Adoption Of Residential Code
4-11-2: Amendments
4-11-1: ADOPTION OF RESIDENTIAL CODE:
A certain document, three (3) copies of which are on file in the office of the
village clerk of the village of Forest View, being marked and designated as the
international residential code (IRC), 2015 edition, as published by the
International Code Council, be and hereby is adopted as the residential code of
the village of Forest View, in the state of Illinois for regulating and
governing the construction, alteration, movement, enlargement, replacement,
repair, equipment, location, removal and demolition of detached one- and two-
family dwellings and multiple single-family dwellings (townhouses) not more
than three (3) stories in height with separate means of egress as herein
provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees
therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties,
conditions and terms of said residential code on file in the office of the
village of Forest View, by reference, as if fully set forth herein. (Ord. 16-
12, 9-27-2016)
4-11-2: AMENDMENTS:
   (A)   Section R101.1 Insert: the village of Forest View.
Table R301.2 (1) Climatic And Geographic Design Criteria:
Ground Snow Load: 25.
Wind Design Speed (mph): 90.
Wind Design Topographic Effects: No.
Wind Design Special Wind Region: No.
Wind Design Wind-Borne Debris Zone: No.
Seismic Design Category: A.
Subject To Damage From Weathering: Severe.
Subject To Damage From Frost Line Depth: 42".
Subject To Damage From Termite: n/a.
Winter Design Temp: 0.
Ice Barrier Underlayment Required: Yes.
Flood Hazards: Entered the national flood insurance program on June 11, 1968.
Flood Hazards: Current flood plain map is dated August 19, 2008, panels
17031C0491J and 17031C492J.
Air Freezing Index: 1300.
Mean Annual Temp: 50.6.
Section P2603.5.1 Sewer Depth. Building sewers that connect to private sewage
disposal systems shall be not less than as required by the Illinois plumbing
code inches (mm) below finished grade at the point of septic tank connection.
Building sewers shall be not less than as required by the Illinois plumbing
code inches (mm) below grade.
Section P2601.1 Scope: Delete existing language and insert:
The requirements for all plumbing systems shall be in accordance with the
current edition of the Illinois plumbing code. Where the Illinois plumbing code
does not address a specific issue, the requirements of chapter 26 shall apply.
   (B)   All existing homes in the village of Forest View shall be exempt from
the requirements contained in section R313 Automatic Fire Sprinkler Systems and
section P2904 Dwelling Unit Fire Sprinkler Systems as it relates to residential
fire sprinkler systems. All brand new home construction or homes that are
completely destroyed by fire or a natural disaster, such as a tornado,
flooding, etc., that must be completely rebuilt, shall be required to adhere to
the residential fire sprinkler system requirements contained in sections R313
and P2904.
   (C)   If there are any specific provisions of this code in conflict with the
terms of the international residential code (IRC), 2015 edition, the provisions
of this code shall control unless there is a contrary indication therein. (Ord.
16-12, 9-27-2016)
CHAPTER 12
INSPECTION OF RESIDENTIAL REAL PROPERTY
SECTION:
4-12-1: Purpose
4-12-2: Occupancy Inspections Required
4-12-3: Certificate Of Occupancy Required
4-12-4: Application For Certificate Of Occupancy
4-12-5: Inspections
4-12-6: Issuance Or Denial Of Certificate Of Occupancy
4-12-7: Expiration Of Certificates Of Occupancy
4-12-8: Right To Appeal
4-12-9: Liability
4-12-10: Additional Remedies; Severability
4-12-11: Definition
4-12-1: PURPOSE:
This chapter is enacted to:
   (A)   Prevent the deterioration of all existing residential structures
within the corporate limits of the Village;
   (B)   Protect the general public from possible endangerment to its health,
safety and welfare when occupying structures; and
   (C)   Preserve the integrity of the Village's neighborhoods and the
consequent burden on the taxpayers due to tax revenue loss caused by
neighborhood blight. (Ord. 22-28, 10-11-2022)
4-12-2: OCCUPANCY INSPECTIONS REQUIRED:
No owner, agent or person in charge of any existing dwelling unit or units
shall sell or allow any other person to occupy the same as an owner or lessee
unless said existing dwelling unit or units shall have been inspected and
approved for occupancy by the local building official hereinafter called the
“inspector.” (Ord. 22-28, 10-11-2022)
4-12-3: CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY REQUIRED:
No owner, agent or person in charge of an existing single-family or multifamily
dwelling unit or units shall sell, rent or allow any person to occupy the same
as an owner, occupant or lessee unless such person has been issued a
certificate of occupancy by the inspector certifying that the dwelling unit or
units has been inspected and found to be in reasonable compliance with all
provisions of the Forest View Village Code, as well as all other health,
building and zoning laws in force at the time the structure was built, provided
there are no violations to be found that threaten the health, safety and
welfare of the occupants. (Ord. 22-28, 10-11-2022)
4-12-4: APPLICATION FOR CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY:
The owner, agent or person in charge of an existing single-family or multi-
family dwelling unit shall file an application with the Village for a
certificate of occupancy no less than fourteen working days prior to the
transfer of occupancy resulting from the sale or rental of said dwelling unit.
Application shall be made in writing. The application shall state the address
of said dwelling unit and the name, current mailing address and telephone
number of the owner, agent or person in charge of said dwelling unit, and
include the fee for single-family homes of twenty-five dollars ($25.00). For
each additional apartment/dwelling, add twenty-five dollars ($25.00), and such
other information as may be required by the inspector, including the
authorization given to the inspector to enter the premises at a specified time
mutually agreed upon for the purpose of performing the required inspection to
determine if there exists structural defects or serious violations of such a
nature as would impair the livability, habitability or occupancy of the
premises by the new occupant, in accordance with an inspection checklist to be
provided by the Village. The application shall be signed by the owner, agent or
person in charge of the said dwelling unit. (Ord. 22-28, 10-11-2022)
4-12-5: INSPECTIONS:
Within five working days of the filling of the application, the inspector will
contact the owner, agent or person in charge of the dwelling unit and schedule
an inspection. Inspections shall be conducted during regularly scheduled
working hours of the inspector, or at any other reasonable and convenient time
mutually agreed upon by the applicant and the inspector. Inspections are valid
for a six-month period. (Ord. 22-28, 10-11-2022)
4-12-6: ISSUANCE OR DENIAL OF CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY:
The inspector shall, within three working days of the inspection or sooner,
deny or grant a certificate of occupancy in the following manner:
   (A)   Issuance. Upon the determination by the inspector that the premises in
question substantially comply with all applicable provisions of the Forest View
Village Code, then such inspector shall issue the certificate of occupancy to
the applicant within three working days, or sooner, from the date of such
inspection.
   (B)   Pending Application. If the premises is determined to be in violation
of any of the provisions of such Code, the inspector shall order the violations
to be corrected within ajninimum of seven days prior to closing. A reinspection
shall then be made and if the premises are in compliance, a certificate of
occupancy shall be issued forthwith.
   (C)   Elimination of Code Violations. Any and all violations stated in the
report of the inspector must be eliminated or corrected prior to the issuance
of a certificate of occupancy. The owner may eliminate and/or correct any and
all violations prior to the transfer of property or may elect to transfer the
responsibility of repairs of said property to the purchaser/buyer (See 4-12-
6 e.).
   (D)   Exception. In the event that the closing of the sale of a-premises
would be jeopardized if violations are unable to be corrected prior to the
transfer of property, a certificate of occupancy may be issued by the inspector
if violations are not corrected, provided that all of the following are true.
      1.   The new owner, states in writing that he or she expressly undertakes
and assumes responsibility for the corrections within a time frame not to
exceed four months, weather permitting. The new owner shall also authorize the
inspector to enter the dwelling within five working days after the required
date of compliance. (Ord. 22-28, 10-11-2022)
4-12-7: EXPIRATION OF CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY:
If at any time a certificate of occupancy is issued and the sale or lease
agreement is not consummated or is terminated so that the new owner, occupant
or tenant would not thereupon occupy such premises in question, then the issued
certificate of occupancy shall expire after six months from the date of
issuance. Upon the expiration of this certificate of occupancy, it may be
renewed in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter. If renewed, there
will be no fee for the renewal inspection, and the renewed certificate of
occupancy shall expire six months from the date of its renewal unless the sale
or rental of the dwelling unit is consummated before the expiration period
(Ord. 22-28, 10-11-2022)
4-12-8: RIGHT TO APPEAL:
Any person affected by any notice which has been issued in connection with the
enforcement of the provisions of this chapter may appeal that determination to
the Village Administrator. (Ord. 22-28, 10-11-2022)
4-12-9: LIABILITY:
Any certificate of occupancy issued by the inspector shall not be construed in
any way to be a warranty, guarantee or insurance against any violation of the
provisions of this Chapter. (Ord. 22-28, 10-11-2022)
4-12-10: ADDITIONAL REMEDIES; SEVERABILITY:
   (A)   This chapter shall not prevent the Village or any other person from
exercising any right or seeking any remedy to which that person might otherwise
be entitled, or from filing any complaint with any other agency or court of law
or equity.
   (B)   If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge any section,
subsection or provision of this chapter to be unconstitutional, void or
ineffective, such judgment shall not affect any other section, subsection or
provision of this chapter not specifically included in said judgment. If any
court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge the application of any section,
subsection or provision of this chapter to any person or circumstance to be
unconstitutional, void or ineffective, such judgment shall not affect the
application of said section, subsection or provision to any other person or
circumstance not specifically included in said judgment. (Ord. 22-28, 10-11-
2022)
4-12-11: DEFINITION:
For purposes of this Chapter, "landlord" means any residential property owner,
administrator, manager, or person in control of the operation of any rental
unit. (Ord. 22-28, 10-11-2022)
TITLE 5
FIRE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
FIRE DEPARTMENT PERSONNEL
SECTION:
5-1-1: Creation
5-1-2: Fire Chief
5-1-3: Deputy Fire Chief
5-1-4: Appointments
5-1-5: Duties Of Chief
5-1-6: Firefighters
5-1-7: Fire Protection Training Act
5-1-8: Volunteer Firefighters
5-1-9: Rules And Regulations
5-1-1: CREATION:
There is hereby created a fire department for the village which shall consist
of one fire chief, and such number of part time and volunteer firefighters as
the president and board of trustees may from time to time designate. (Ord. 15-
02, 4-14-2015)
5-1-2: FIRE CHIEF:
The fire chief shall be the head of the fire department under the direction of
the village administrator. He/she shall be appointed by the village president
and confirmed by the board of trustees. He/she shall enter into a bond in favor
of the village in such amount as may be required by the president and the board
of trustees. (Ord. 15-02, 4-14-2015)
5-1-3: DEPUTY FIRE CHIEF:
There is hereby created the position of deputy fire chief in the village. The
deputy fire chief shall act as fire chief when the fire chief is not on duty.
The deputy fire chief shall be compensated at a sum to be set by the president
and board of trustees and shall be exempt from overtime pay. He/she shall enter
into a bond in favor of the village in such amount as may be required by the
president and the board of trustees. (Ord. 15-02, 4-14-2015)
5-1-4: APPOINTMENTS:
The fire chief and deputy fire chief will be appointed by the village president
and confirmed by the board of trustees.
The village president is hereby authorized to appoint part time firefighters as
employees, and volunteer firefighters subject to the advice and consent of the
board of trustees. Prior to appointment, all part time firefighters shall be
subject to a background check which shall include being fingerprinted and their
fingerprints shall be checked with the federal bureau of identification,
Washington, D.C., and the Illinois state police, bureau of identification, for
any possible criminal record. No person shall be appointed as a part time
firefighter if he/she has been convicted of a felony or other crime involving
moral turpitude. The chief shall supervise all part time firefighters and
volunteer firefighters. Following him in rank shall be the deputy fire chief,
then part time on call firefighters in an order determined by the fire chief.
(Ord. 15-02, 4-14-2015)
5-1-5: DUTIES OF CHIEF:
The fire chief shall keep the records and make such reports concerning the
activities of the fire department as shall be necessary for the effective
operation and management thereof, and as may be required by statute or
ordinance or by direction of the corporate authorities. The fire chief shall
devote full time to said position. The fire chief shall be the superior officer
in charge of day to day fire department and emergency medical services
operations. (Ord. 15-02, 4-14-2015)
5-1-6: FIREFIGHTERS:
   (A)   Part Time Firefighters:
      1.   Duties: It shall be the duty of part time firefighters to conduct
themselves in a proper and law abiding manner. Each member of the department
shall obey the orders and directions of his/her superior. It shall be the duty
of each part time/paid on call firefighter to protect life and property. A part
time firefighter shall be responsible to the fire chief, and the part time call
shift commander on duty. Said part time call shift commander shall also serve
as incident commander unless relieved by the fire chief.
      2.   Hours: A part time firefighter shall not work more than twenty nine
(29) hours a week.
      3.   Maintain Rating: Any part time firefighter shall keep his/her
emergency medical technician license current at all times. A part time
firefighter is subject to termination from village employment if his/her
license is not valid. (Ord. 15-02, 4-14-2015)
5-1-7: FIRE PROTECTION TRAINING ACT:
   (A)   Participation In State Programs: The village hereby elects to
participate in the programs provided for in the Illinois fire protection
training act 1 .
   (B)   Training Programs: The fire chief is hereby authorized and directed to
take all reasonable steps to establish training programs necessary in order for
the part time firefighters to meet emergency medical technician ambulance
recertification requirements as prescribed by the Illinois department of public
health. (Ord. 15-02, 4-14-2015)
 
Notes
1 1. 50 ILCS 740/1 et seq.
5-1-8: VOLUNTEER FIREFIGHTERS:
The volunteer firefighter program is hereby authorized by this section. The
volunteer program provides for an enhancement of the fire protection and
emergency response capabilities of the paid staff. The volunteer program shall
consist of hired, noncredentialed individuals to serve in an apprentice type
capacity. Volunteers are encouraged to earn firefighter/EMT credentials which
are to be done on their own time and at their own expense.
   (A)   Salary: Volunteer firefighters shall not receive compensation and
shall not count as staffing for the fire department.
   (B)   Assignments: Volunteer firefighters shall work directly with paid
staff members in the fire station and on apparatus assignments. Volunteer
firefighters shall receive assignments based on their level of training and
certification. A volunteer firefighter may be assigned to respond to emergency
calls up to his/her level of certification. Volunteer firefighters shall not be
used to provide or achieve minimum staffing levels.
   (C)   Selection Criteria: Applicants for the volunteer firefighter program
shall:
      1.   Be at least eighteen (18) years of age.
      2.   Possess a high school diploma or GED certificate.
      3.   Shall be subject to an interview, physical agility testing and
background investigation.
   (D)   Conduct And Relationship With Village: It shall be the duty of
volunteer firefighters to conduct themselves in a professional and law abiding
manner. Each volunteer shall obey the orders and directions of his/her
superior. Volunteers can expect good leadership and fair supervision from the
village. Volunteering as a firefighter for the village is based on mutual
consent. Both the volunteer and the village have the right to terminate that
relationship at will, with or without cause. (Ord. 15-02, 4-14-2015)
5-1-9: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The fire chief may make or prescribe such rules and regulations as he/she shall
deem advisable for the better efficiency of the fire department. Such rules,
when approved by the board of trustees, shall be binding on all members of the
fire department, including the part time firefighters and the volunteer
firefighters. (Ord. 15-02, 4-14-2015)
CHAPTER 2
FIRE CODE
SECTION:
5-2-1: Adoption Of Fire Code
5-2-2: Enforcement
5-2-3: Hazardous Materials
5-2-4: Amendments
5-2-1: ADOPTION OF FIRE CODE:
A certain document, three (3) copies of which are on file in the Office of the
Village Clerk of the Village of Forest View, being marked and designated as the
International Fire Code (IFC), 2015 edition, as published by the International
Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the Fire Code of the Village of
Forest View, in the State of Illinois for regulating and governing the
safeguarding of life and property from fire and explosion hazards arising from
the storage, handling and use of hazardous substances, materials and devices,
and from conditions hazardous to life or property in the occupancy of buildings
and premises; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees
therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties,
conditions and terms of said Fire Code on file in the Office of the Village of
Forest View, by reference, as if fully set forth herein. (Ord. 16-01, 3-22-
2016)
5-2-2: ENFORCEMENT:
Any person who violates any provision of the Fire Code shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be subject to the imposition of a penalty of not less
than twenty five dollars ($25.00), nor more than the maximum penalty provided
in section
1-4-1 of this Code. A separate offense shall be deemed to be committed on each
day that a violation occurs or is permitted to continue. The institution of an
action seeking the imposition of a penalty hereunder shall not be deemed to
limit any other remedies available to the Village, nor in any way impinge on
the summary abatement power of the Village to remedy conditions which threaten
the public health, safety or welfare. (Ord. 78-4, 3-7-1978; amd. Ord. 95-23,
10-10-1995)
5-2-3: HAZARDOUS MATERIALS:
   (A)   Definitions:
    COSTS/EXPENSES: All costs and expenses of the Village incurred in the
cleanup, abatement or removal of hazardous materials, including "special
wastes" such as antifreeze, oil, and/or battery acid, or any remedial action
taken by the Village, or the extinguishing of a fire involving hazardous
materials, shall include, but not be limited to, the following: actual labor
costs of Village personnel involved in the cleanup, abatement, removal or
remedial action of the discharge(s), including workers' compensation benefits,
fringe benefits, attorney fees and administrative overhead or any other medical
expenses, immediate or long term, of personnel exposed to the hazardous
material; cost of equipment operation, damage or loss as published and updated
by the Village; costs of materials ordered directly by the Village; the cost of
any labor and material(s) expended through the retention of other parties to
assist in cleanup, abatement, removal or remedial action and the repair of the
property in the area of the incident.
   FACILITY: Any building, structure, installation, equipment, pipe or
pipeline, including, but not limited to, any pipe into a sewer or publicly
owned treatment works, well, pond, lagoon, impoundment, ditch, landfill,
storage container, tank, motor vehicle, truck trailer, rolling stock or
aircraft. Also, any site or area where a hazardous material has been deposited,
stored, disposed of, abandoned, placed, or otherwise come to be located.
   HAZARDOUS MATERIAL(S): The leakage, release, seepage, or emission of any
substance or material which, due to its quantity, form, concentration, location
or other characteristics, is determined by the Chief of Police or his
authorized representative, based upon a reasonable degree of scientific
certainty, to pose an unreasonable and inordinate risk to the life, health or
safety of persons or property or to the ecological balance of the environment,
including, but not limited to, explosives, compressed gases, asbestos,
flammable and combustible liquids, flammable and water reactive solids,
oxidizers and peroxides, poisons, radioactive materials, corrosives or other
regulated materials, or any substance determined to be hazardous or toxic under
any Federal or State law, statute or regulation.
   MUTUAL AID: Any action taken by the Forest View Fire Department or any other
public agency pursuant to an intergovernmental agreement.
   PERSON: Any individual, business, firm, partnership, corporation,
association, trust, estate, joint venture or other legal entity, or their legal
representative, agent or assign.
   RELEASE: Any spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting, escaping,
emptying, discharging, injecting, leaching, dumping or disposing of a hazardous
material into or on any land, air, water, well, stream, sewer or pipe so that
such hazardous material or any constituent thereof may enter the environment.
   REMEDIAL ACTION: Any action consistent with permanent, remedy taken instead
of, or in addition to, removal actions in the event of a release or threatened
release of a hazardous material into the environment, to prevent or minimize
the release of hazardous materials so that they do not migrate to cause a
substantial present or potential hazard to human health, property or the
environment. The term includes, but is not limited to, such actions at the
location of the release as storage, confinement, perimeter protection using
dikes, trenches, or ditches, clay cover, neutralization, cleanup of released
hazardous materials or contaminated materials, recycling or reuse, diversion,
destruction, segregation of reactive wastes, repair or replacement of leaking
containers, collection of leachate and runoff, on-site treatment of
incineration, provision of alternate water supplies, and any monitoring
reasonably required to assure that such actions protect the public health and
welfare and the environment.
   REMOVAL: The cleanup or removal of released hazardous materials from the
environment, such actions as may be necessary or appropriate to monitor,
assess, and evaluate the release or threat of release of hazardous materials,
the disposal of removed material, or the taking of such action as may be
necessary to prevent, minimize, or mitigate damage to the public health or
welfare of the environment. The term includes, but is not limited to, security
fencing, provision of alternative water supplies, and temporary evacuation of
threatened individuals.
   RESPONSE: Any removal or remedial action. (Ord. 97-1, 1-14-1997; amd. Ord.
17-07, 4-11-2017)
   (B)   Prohibited Acts: It shall be unlawful, whether intentional or
unintentional, for any person to cause, threaten or allow the release of
hazardous materials into the environment unless the release is in accordance
with an appropriate permit granted by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency,
the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, or other Federal or State agency
having primary jurisdiction over the release and such release is in such place
and manner as will not create a substantial present or potential hazard to
human health, property or the environment. (Ord. 97-1, 1-14-1997)
   (C)   Response Authority:
      1.   The Chief of Police or his authorized representative shall have
authority to respond to any release or threatened release of hazardous
materials within the corporate boundaries of the Village or affecting the
public water supply, wells or sewage treatment works located within the
corporate boundaries of the Village or pursuant to any lawful intergovernmental
agreement of which the Forest View Fire Department is a party. This authority
includes, but is not limited to, remedial action and removal.
      2.   The Chief of Police shall have primary authority to respond to any
release or threatened release of hazardous materials as described above. The
Chief of Police shall report any release or threatened release of hazardous
materials to all appropriate Federal, State and local public health, safety and
emergency agencies within twenty four (24) hours of any substantial release of
hazardous materials. The Chief of Police shall relinquish his response
authority at such time, if any, as the Federal, State or local public health,
safety or emergency agency having primary jurisdiction over the release or
threatened release has assumed responsibility for response to the release or
threatened release.
      3.   The Chief of Police, during such time as response authority is
vested in him, shall be authorized to utilize all Village personnel and
equipment, and may, in his sole discretion, take such remedial or removal
action as he may deem necessary or appropriate to respond to the release or
threatened release of hazardous material.
      4.   All responding personnel shall cooperate with and operate under the
direction of the Chief of Police or other person then exercising authority
under this section until such time as the person exercising such response
authority has determined that the response is complete or responsibility for
response is assumed by the Federal, State or local public health, safety or
emergency agency having primary jurisdiction over the release or threatened
release. (Ord. 97-1, 1-14-1997; amd. Ord. 17-07, 4-11-2017)
      5.   The person exercising response authority under this section shall
coordinate and/or cooperate with other Federal, State or local public health,
safety or emergency agencies involved in response to the release or threatened
release of hazardous materials.
   (D)   Liability For Costs: The person or companies in immediate control or
possession of the hazardous material(s) at a hazardous materials incident, to
which the Forest View Fire Department has responded, shall be responsible for
reimbursement to the Village for all expenses incurred by the Village related
to the response, the handling or the cleanup of the material(s). There shall be
joint and several liability for reimbursement including, but not limited to,
the following parties:
      1.   The owner and operator of a facility or vessel from which there is a
release or substantial threat of release of a hazardous material.
      2.   Any person who, at the time of disposal, transport, storage or
treatment of a hazardous material, owned or operated the facility or vessel
used for such disposal, transport, treatment or storage from which there was a
release or substantial threat of a release of any such hazardous material.
      3.   Any person who by contract, agreement, or otherwise has arranged
with another party or entity for transport, storage, disposal or treatment of
hazardous materials owned, controlled or possessed by such person at a facility
owned or operated by another party or entity from which facility there is a
release or substantial threat of a release of such hazardous materials.
      4.   Any person who accepts or accepted any hazardous materials for
transport to disposal, storage or treatment facilities from which there is a
release or a substantial threat of release of such hazardous substances.
      5.   Third parties having caused or contributed to the cause of the
release or a substantial threat of release of the hazardous materials.
   (E)   Fault Not To Be Considered: The person in immediate control or
possession of the hazardous materials at a hazardous materials incident shall
be liable for any other costs, fees or expenses of whatever kind or nature
which are incurred by the Village or its agents in abatement, cleanup or
repair. The fault of the entity in immediate control or possession shall not be
an issue in the attachment of this liability. For the purposes of this section,
repair shall mean, without exception, the return of the property to the
condition that existed immediately prior to the release or substantial threat
of release of hazardous materials.
   (F)   Costs And Penalties:
      1.   Any person who is liable for the release or threatened release of a
hazardous material who fails without sufficient cause to pay for or provide
removal or remedial action, upon or in accordance with a written notice and
request from the Village or in accordance with any order of any court having
jurisdiction over the matter, shall be liable to the Village for any costs
incurred by the Village as a result of such failure to provide or take such
removal or remedial action, together with the cost of any removal or remedial
action taken by the Forest View Fire Department in accordance with this
section, and all attorney fees and related legal costs incurred in connection
therewith.
      2.   Any person who violates any provisions of this section, shall, upon
conviction thereof, be fined not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) nor
more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) plus all costs, expenses and
attorney fees and legal costs involved in litigation for each offense. A
separate offense shall be deemed committed for each day on which a violation
occurs or continues. In addition, such person shall be liable in a civil suit
for the reimbursement to the Village for the expenses to the Village.
   (G)   Distribution Of Reimbursed Costs; Replacement Of Materials And/Or
Other Expenses: The reimbursement funds may be used to replenish the supplies
used by the Village at the scene of the release or substantial threat of
release of hazardous materials. Such supplies may include, but shall not be
limited to: protective clothing, absorbents, neutralizing chemicals, detection
monitoring equipment, firefighting foams and chemicals, overtime personnel
expenses, laboratory analysis, medical treatment (immediate and long-term) of
exposed or injured personnel, or equipment or supplies damaged or destroyed by
exposure to the hazardous materials.
   (H)   Regulation Or Remedies: Nothing in this section shall be deemed to
relieve any party from any other obligation or responsibilities that it might
otherwise have under law to any other agency or party. (Ord. 97-1, 1-14-1997)
5-2-4: AMENDMENTS:
   (A)   The International Fire Code (IFC), 2015 edition, as published by the
International Code Council, adopted by section
5-2-1 of this chapter is hereby amended as follows:
Section 101.1. Insert: the Village of Forest View.
Section 109.4. Insert: a an Unlawful Act, punishable by a fine of not more than
$750.00 dollars. or by imprisonment not exceeding ____ days or both such fine
and imprisonment.
Section 111.4. Insert: $200.00 dollars or more than the maximum penalty
provided in Section
1-4-1 of the Forest View Village Code. Each day that a violation continues
shall be deemed a separate offense. dollars.
(B) If there are any specific provisions of this Code in conflict with the
terms of the International Fire Code (IFC), 2015 edition, the provisions of
this Code shall control unless there is a contrary indication therein. (Ord.
17-03, 2-14-2017)
CHAPTER 3
STORAGE TANKS AND LINES TEST
SECTION:
5-3-1: Pressure Tests Required
5-3-1: PRESSURE TESTS REQUIRED:
A pressure test shall be made for all tanks and lines used for the storage of
inflammable liquids at the time of installation of said tanks and lines, and
whenever there is reasonable cause to believe that any storage tank and its
connected piping may be leaking. Such tests shall be made by a person or
company who, in the opinion of the Fire Chief of the Village, is qualified to
make such tests. Such tests shall be made under the supervision of said Fire
Chief, The results of said tests shall be sent to the Fire Department of the
Village. No person engaging in any business licensed by the Village having such
tanks or lines shall be issued a license unless the results of the tests
indicating satisfactory levels of safety and performance are supplied to the
Fire Department of the Village. (Ord. 70-224, 7-28-1970)
CHAPTER 4
STORAGE TANKS
SECTION:
5-4-1: License Required
5-4-2: Applications For License
5-4-3: Fees
5-4-4: Investigations
5-4-5: Inspections
5-4-6: Applicability To Fire Regulations
5-4-7: Annual Pressure Tests Required
5-4-8: Exemption
5-4-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall keep any tank or similar storage device that exceeds four
hundred ninety nine (499) gallons without obtaining a license. (Ord. 84-1, 1-
10-1984)
5-4-2: APPLICATIONS FOR LICENSE:
   (A)   All applications for license shall be made in writing to the clerk on
a form provided for that purpose.
   (B)   Every application for license shall contain the name, address and
phone number of the applicant and shall state the size of the tank, tank number
and location. (Ord. 84-1, 1-10-1984)
5-4-3: FEES:
The annual fee for tank licenses issued pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter shall be as follows:
Capacity Fee
Capacity                       Fee
500 to 2,000 gallons           $ 60.00
2,001 to 12,000 gallons        80.00
12,001 to 50,000 gallons       95.00
50,001 to 100,000 gallons      115.00
100,001 to 450,000 gallons     175.00
450,001 to 1,000,000 gallons   230.00
1,000,001 to 2,000,000 gallons 290.00
2,000,001 to 3,000,000 gallons 350.00
3,000,001 or more gallons      500.00
 
(Ord. 15-17, 10-27-2015)
5-4-4: INVESTIGATIONS:
Prior to the issuance of any license, the chief of the fire department shall
make or cause to be made such investigations as he deems necessary to determine
whether the applicant's place of business and methods, equipment and procedures
are in compliance with the provisions of this code, particularly those relating
to the fire prevention code. No license shall be issued to an applicant whose
place of business does not comply with the provisions of this code. Said
village officials shall indicate on the application for a license, the results
of their investigation and their approval or disapproval of said application.
(Ord. 84-1, 1-10-1984)
5-4-5: INSPECTIONS:
The chief of the fire department shall inspect or cause to be inspected as
often as he deems necessary, all premises, containers and tanks, either above
or below ground or in a building, to determine whether all applicable
provisions of this chapter are being complied with. (Ord. 84-1, 1-10-1984)
5-4-6: APPLICABILITY TO FIRE REGULATIONS:
Any person licensed under this chapter shall be subject to all applicable fire
regulations of the village and to all penalties for violation thereof. Nothing
in this chapter shall be construed as limiting any of the fire prevention
regulations of the provisions of this code. (Ord. 84-1, 1-10-1984)
5-4-7: ANNUAL PRESSURE TESTS REQUIRED:
   (A)   An annual pressure test shall be required for all underground tanks.
No person engaging in any business licensed by the Village having such tanks
shall be issued a license unless the results of the tests indicating
satisfactory levels of safety and performance are supplied to the Fire
Department of the Village.
   (B)   All such tests shall be made under the supervision of said Fire Chief
or Fire Prevention Bureau. (Ord. 84-1, 1-10-1984)
5-4-8: EXEMPTION:
This Chapter shall not apply to any public utility licensed by the State. (Ord.
84-1, 1-10-84)
CHAPTER 5
FALSE ALARMS
SECTION:
5-5-1: Limitation
5-5-2: Definitions
5-5-3: False Alarms
5-5-4: False Alarm Charges
5-5-1: LIMITATION:
   The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to all properties other than
single family residential properties in the Village of Forest View.
(Ord. 24-05, 5-14-2024)
5-5-2: DEFINITIONS:
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
   ALARM AGENT: Any person who is employed by an alarm business, either
directly or indirectly, whose duties include altering, installing, maintaining,
moving, repairing, replacing, selling, serving, responding to or causing others
to respond to an alarm device or activation.
   ALARM SYSTEM: Shall have the same meaning as “automatic protection device.”
   ALARM USER: Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation or other
organization of any kind in control of any building, structure or facility
where an alarm system or automatic protection device is maintained, monitored
or activated within the Village, except for alarms on motor vehicles. Also
included are those local alarms which employ an audible signal, emit sounds
and/or flashlights designed to alert or signal persons outside of the premises
of an alarm activation.
   AUTOMATIC PROTECTION DEVICE: An electrically or battery-operated instrument
composed of sensory apparatus and related hardware that automatically sends by
direct connection, radio signal or otherwise, an alarm signal or pre-recorded
voice alarm on receipt of a stimulus from the sensory apparatus that is has
detected a physical force or condition inherently characteristic of an
unauthorized intrusion, hazard or other emergency and to which the Police
Department is expected to respond. Also included are devices which are
stimulated by direct or indirect action by the alarm user or employees which
initiate an alarm.
   EMERGENCY 9-1-1 LINE: A telephone line leading directly into the
communication center of the Police Department communications room that is used
only to report emergency messages and signals on a person-to-person basis.
   FALSE ALARM: Any notice transmitted verbally, electronically or by any other
means from an alarm system or automatic protection device installed upon
premises within the jurisdiction of responsibility for the Police Department,
which results in a response by their personnel, and for which no emergency
exists. The Police Department shall be deemed to have responded, for the
purposes of this definition, if any equipment leaves its present location bound
for the premises from which the false alarm has been transmitted, or if any
personnel receive a dispatch from the communication center or leave their
present locations bound for such premises, even if such response shall be
terminated or limited in any way before arrival at the premises.
   LOCAL ALARM: A signaling system which, when activated, causes an audible
and/or visual signaling device to be activated on or in the premises within
which the system is installed.
   PERSON: any individual, corporation, partnership, association or society,
but such term does not include the Village.
   POLICE CHIEF: The Chief of the Police Department of the Village or his or
her authorized representative.
   PRIMARY TRUNK LINE: A telephone line or lines leading into the communication
center of the Police Department for the purpose of handling emergency and
administrative calls on a person-to-person basis.
(Ord. 24-05, 5-14-2024)
5-5-3: FALSE ALARMS:
   (A)   When two or more false alarms are received by the Village within a
calendar year commencing January 1, 2025, the Police Chief or his or her
representatives shall cause a written warning to be sent via personal delivery
or e-mail to the alarm user notifying him or her of the number and dates of the
false alarms. If further false alarms are received by the Department, after the
initial two false alarms, a charge shall be imposed upon the system user of the
premises from which any false alarm has been transmitted in accordance with the
schedule contained in Section
5-5-4.
   (B)   No person shall test or demonstrate an alarm system designed to
transmit emergency messages directly to the Police Department without first
obtaining permission to do so from the Department. Permission is not required
to test or demonstrate alarm devices not transmitting emergency messages
directly to the Department, unless the messages are to be relayed to it.
   (C)   The charges provided for in Section
5-5-4 shall not be applicable until the expiration of thirty days from and
after the date of initial installation of any such alarm system. Where there is
a positive indication, satisfactory to the Police Chief, that a false alarm was
caused by off-site transmission line problems under the jurisdiction of the
telephone company, or was caused by an uncontrollable, extraordinary
circumstances, including an act of God, there shall be no charge, and such
false alarm shall not be counted.
   (D)   An alarm user may appeal to the Police Chief, or his or her delegate,
for reconsideration of a designated false alarm if that alarm user presents
written documentation to the Chief, or his or her delegate, that he or she had
undertaken reasonable action to discover and eliminate the cause or causes of
any false alarm. The appeal must be made within seven days after the false
alarm in question. If, however, the alarm user, by reason of absence from the
Village or any other reasonable basis, requests an extension of time to file
his or her written report, the Chief, or his or her delegate, shall extend the
seven-day period for a reasonable period. If the alarm user fails to submit a
written report within seven days or within any extended period or submits such
a report and is denied a reconsideration, the false alarm determination shall
stand.
(Ord. 24-05, 5-14-2024)
5-5-4: FALSE ALARM CHARGES:
   (A)   To cover the costs of responding to false alarms, the alarm user shall
pay to the Village, for each false alarm in excess of two in any calendar year,
transmitted by any automatic protection device, alarm system or local alarm,
the following amounts:
 
Third false alarm                    $ 50.00
Fourth false alarm                   $100.00
Fifth and any subsequent false alarm $200.00
 
   (B)   Each such charge shall be due and payable not later than thirty days
after mailing or delivery of an invoice therefor.
(Ord. 24-05, 5-14-2024)
CHAPTER 6
FIRES OUTSIDE VILLAGE LIMITS
SECTION:
5-6-1: Authority Outside Limits
5-6-2: Rates
5-6-3: Written Authority Required
5-6-4: Warrant
5-6-5: Owner Designated
5-6-1: AUTHORITY OUTSIDE LIMITS:
The Fire Chief or any member of the Fire Department acting in that capacity,
shall have the authority to send fire apparatus and firemen outside the
corporate limits of the Village whenever requested to do so by the officers or
authorities of any municipality, industrial district or owner of property lying
within a radius of seven (7) miles of the Village; provided, that apparatus and
employees can be spared from service at the time the request is made. (Ord. 80-
4, 5-13-1980)
5-6-2: RATES:
The rates for service rendered by the Fire Department outside of the corporate
limits of the Village for a property owner shall be as follows:
For each engine, truck or other piece of fire apparatus, other than the
vehicular equipment of a supervising unit, three hundred dollars ($300.00) for
the first hour or fraction thereof, and one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per
hour or fraction thereof for all time after the first hour.
The time for which such charge is to be made shall be computed from the time
each piece of fire apparatus leave its quarters to the time of its official
return thereto. (Ord. 80-4, 5-13-1980)
5-6-3: WRITTEN AUTHORITY REQUIRED:
Before any such service shall be rendered, every property owner shall by
written instrument, filed with the Village Clerk, undertake to pay all charges
for services so rendered, at rates set forth in this Ordinance, and to
indemnify, keep and save harmless the Village against any claim, judgment or
liability of any kind which the Village may suffer, or which may accrue
against, be charged to, or be recovered from the Village, or any of its
officials, from or by reason of or on account of injuries to persons and
property during the performance of said service between the time said fire
apparatus or vehicular equipment and members of the Fire Department leave their
quarters to the time of their official return thereto. Any agreement entered
into pursuant to this Chapter shall be for a term of one calendar year from
January 1 through December 31. Any agreement entered into during the course of
any calendar year shall run to and including December 31 of that calendar year.
(Ord. 80-4, 5-13-1980; amd. Ord. 81-1, 1-20-1981, eff. 12-1-1980)
5-6-4: WARRANT:
The Fire Chief shall, within five (5) days after rendering service outside the
Village, draw a warrant for collection on the individual to which such service
was rendered for the amount due the Village and transmit this warrant to the
Village Clerk for collection. (Ord. 80-4, 5-13-1980)
5-6-5: OWNER DESIGNATED:
The property owner or owner of property for the purposes of this Ordinance
shall be deemed to be any person or entity which may occupy property or control
same although not the legal owner thereof in fact. (Ord. 80-4, 5-13-1980)
CHAPTER 7
EXPLOSIVES AND FIREWORKS
SECTION:
   Article EXPLOSIVES
5-7-1: License Required
5-7-2: Application
5-7-3: License Fee
5-7-4: Bonds
5-7-5: Certificate Of Fitness
5-7-6: Inspection
5-7-7: Sales To Other Than Licensees
5-7-8: Weekly Report Of Sales
5-7-9: Analysis Of Explosives
5-7-10: Submission Of Samples For Analysis
5-7-11: Transportation Of Explosives On Public Ways
5-7-12: Explosives In Public Conveyances
5-7-13: Transportation To Or From Vessels Or Railroad Cars
5-7-14: Labeling Of Packages
5-7-15: Explosive Cartridges
5-7-16: Magazines
5-7-17: Thawing Of Explosives
5-7-18: Supervision Of Magazines
5-7-19: Permit For Blasting
5-7-20: Blasting Operations
5-7-21: Storage Of Explosives
5-7-22: Prohibited Explosives
5-7-23: Restrictions On Explosives
5-7-24: Manufacture Of Explosives In Village
5-7-25: Sales To Minors
5-7-26: Seizure Of Explosives Kept Unlawfully
   Article FIREWORKS
5-7-27: Definition
5-7-28: Prohibitions
5-7-28.1: Advertising
5-7-29: Display In Public Places
5-7-30: Displays On Private Property
5-7-31: Permit Fee
5-7-32: Exemption
   Article VIOLATION OF CHAPTER PROVISIONS
5-7-33: Penalty
   EXPLOSIVES
5-7-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall engage in blasting operations or in any other activity using
explosives, or shall have, keep, sell, use, or give away any black powder in
excess of five (5) pounds, guncotton, blasting powder, giant powder, dynamite,
nitroglycerine, fulminate of mercury, or any other explosives, or any
substances, compound, mixture, or article having properties of such a character
that alone, or in combination or contiguity with other substances or compounds,
may decompose suddenly and generate sufficient heat, gas, or pressure, or all
of them, to produce rapid flaming combustion or administer a destructive blow
to persons or property; nor shall any person keep, sell, give away, offer for
sale, or transport, any loaded paper shells, metallic shot, loaded cartridges,
blank cartridges, percussion caps, primers, or detonators, nor keep or store
flashlight powder in excess of five (5) pounds within the corporate limits of
the Village except in the manner and upon the conditions hereinafter provided
and without first obtaining a license therefor. (Ord. 77-12, 9-6-1977)
5-7-2: APPLICATION:
A written application for a license under this Chapter shall be made to the
Fire Chief and otherwise in conformity with the general requirements of this
Code relating to applications for licenses. In addition, the applicant shall
set forth the location at which it is desired or intended to keep such
explosives, or any other substance mentioned in the preceding Section, the
maximum amount of such explosives, or any of them intended to be kept on hand
at any one time at such place, and shall state whether such explosives are to
be kept in bulk or in barrels, canisters, or other containers, and the number
of loaded shells, loaded cartridges, blank cartridges, percussion caps,
primers, or detonators, or the number of pounds of flashlight powder, intended
to be kept on hand at any one time in such place. Any applicant engaging in
blasting operations or in any other activity using explosives shall further
state in his application the nature of the work to be performed, the site of
the proposed work, the location of the magazine in which it is intended to keep
such explosives, and the quantity and kind of explosives to be kept therein.
Upon receipt of such application, the Fire Chief shall make, or cause to be
made, an investigation for the purpose of ascertaining whether the place at
which it is desired or intended to keep, sell, offer for sale, use, or give
away such explosives or other aforementioned substances is so situated that a
license to keep such loaded paper shells, metallic shot, loaded cartridges,
blank cartridges, percussion caps, primers, detonators, or flashlight powder in
the quantity desired would not be so dangerous as to constitute a nuisance or
be a menace to the safety of the public or of adjoining property, and also
whether the conditions under which such explosives, cartridges, percussion
caps, flashlight powder, or any of them, are to be kept or handled shall be
such as to provide the maximum of safety. (Ord. 77-12, 9-6-1977)
5-7-3: LICENSE FEE:
The annual license fee for each license issued pursuant to the provisions of
this Chapter shall be the sum of two hundred twenty five dollars ($225.00);
provided, that if the applicant shall desire a license for the sole purpose of
keeping, selling, or giving away within the Village loaded paper shells,
metallic shot, loaded cartridges, or blank cartridges designed or intended to
be used in shotguns, pistols, rifles, or other firearms, and shall not desire
to have on hand at any time a greater quantity of such shells or cartridges in
the aggregate than twenty five thousand (25,000), the annual license fee shall
be the sum of one hundred dollars ($100.00). (Ord. 77-12, 9-6-1977)
5-7-4: BONDS:
Each applicant for a license under this Chapter shall furnish and file with the
Fire Chief a bond with good and sufficient surety, conditioned for the payment
of any loss, damage, or injury resulting to persons or property by reason of
the use, sale, or keeping of such explosives, and for the strict observance of
the provisions of this Code relating to explosives and substances referred to
in Section
5-7-1 of this Chapter. Said bond shall be subject to the approval of the
Village Clerk and shall be filed in the office of the Village Clerk. Said bonds
shall be in amounts as follows:
For manufacturers, agents, and all others who desire to bring to, or sell
within, the corporate limits of the Village such explosives as are designated
in Section
5-7-1 of this Chapter, a bond in the penal sum of five hundred thousand dollars
($500,000.00), and in case of delivery being made by vehicles, an additional
sum of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) for each and every vehicle in excess
of one vehicle engaged within the Village in the delivery of such explosives.
Provided, however, no bond shall be required from any person receiving a
license for the sole purpose of keeping, selling, or giving away, within the
Village, loaded paper shells, metallic shot, loaded cartridges, or blank
cartridges designed or intended to be used in shotguns, pistols, rifles, or
firearms, as specified in Section
5-7-1 of this Chapter, where the total amount of such loaded paper shells,
metallic shot, loaded cartridges, or blank cartridges does not exceed twenty
five thousand (25,000).
For all contractors or others now engaged in, or purporting hereafter to engage
in, any activity involving explosives or blasting operations, a bond in one of
the following classes shall be required:
   (A)   For the right to use or have on hand in any one day explosives not
exceeding fifty (50) pounds, a bond in the sum of one hundred thousand dollars
($100,000.00).
   (B)   For the right to use or have on hand in any one day explosives in
excess of fifty (50) pounds but not exceeding one hundred (100) pounds, a bond
of one hundred fifty thousand dollars ($150,000.00).
   (C)   For the right to use or have on hand in any one day explosives in
excess of one hundred (100) pounds but not exceeding two hundred (200) pounds,
a bond of two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00).
   (D)   For the right to use or have on hand in any one day explosives in
excess of two hundred (200) pounds and not exceeding four hundred (400) pounds,
a bond of two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00).
   (E)   For the right to use or have on hand in any one day explosives in
excess of four hundred (400) pounds, a bond of five hundred thousand dollars
($500,000.00); provided, however, that where the material used or kept on hand
in any one day shall consist only of nitrocellulose wet down with alcohol and
scrap film used in the manufacture of imitation leather, the amount of the bond
shall be two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00).
Provided, however, that in lieu of any such bond or bonds the licensee may
furnish the Village, subject to the approval of the Village Engineer and
Village Attorney, public liability and property damage insurance coverage in
like amount, by a policy of insurance issued therefor running to the Village or
by rider attached to any existing policy running to the Village, conditioned
upon the payment of any loss, damage or injury resulting to persons or property
by reason of the use, keeping, sale or transporting of such explosives, a
certified copy of such policy of insurance or such rider to be furnished the
Village Clerk.
All contractors or others engaging in blasting operations shall reimburse the
Village for the services of professional consultants employed by the Village to
regulate blasting operations. Such contractors and others engaging in blasting
operations shall deposit two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) with the
Village Clerk as security for the payment of the cost of such services. All
funds so deposited with the Village Clerk which are not required by the Village
to pay the cost of such services shall be returned after all such professional
consultants' fees have been paid by the Village. (Ord. 77-12, 9-6-1977)
5-7-5: CERTIFICATE OF FITNESS:
Before any operation shall begin under a license for the transportation of any
explosives, or for the use of explosives in any manner, or for blasting, the
licensee shall file with the Fire Chief, in writing, the name or names of the
person or persons designated by him to handle said explosives or to load holes
or discharge explosives, to prepare charges and load the holes, to transport
any vehicle or otherwise, or to have the care of magazines.
Any such person, before being permitted to exercise any of such functions,
shall file a written application, with the Fire Chief for a "certificate of
fitness", and before the issuance of any such certificate the Fire Chief shall
examine such applicant as to his qualifications to fill such position or
positions, under the conditions herein prescribed. No person shall be permitted
to have the actual care and handling of such explosives without first having
obtained a certificate of fitness as herein provided. Such certificate of
fitness shall be subject to inspection by any member of the Fire or Police
Department at all times. The annual fee for such certificate of fitness shall
be fifteen dollars ($15.00) to be paid to the Village Clerk.
To receive a certificate of fitness the person must:
   (A)   Be at least twenty one (21) years of age;
   (B)   Be able to understand and speak the English language;
   (C)   Be of temperate habits;
   (D)   Have letters of recommendation from his last two (2) employers (if
any), and, if he has not been in the service of his last employer for at least
three (3) years, a letter testifying to his good character and capacity from
his last employer;
   (E)   Be familiar with the laws and the provisions of this Code governing
the transportation, storage, and use of explosives, particularly that part
relating to the service to be performed by the applicant; and
   (F)   Be familiar with the risks incident to the service to be performed by
him, and capable of taking all necessary precautions.
Nothing herein contained shall prevent a licensee from applying for and
obtaining a certificate of fitness if entitled to the same under the provisions
of this Section. The actual work done must at all times be conducted by a
person holding a certificate of fitness. (Ord. 77-12, 9-6-1977)
5-7-6: INSPECTION:
No person shall engage in blasting operations without giving the Fire Chief not
less than twenty four (24) hours' notice in advance of each incidence of
blasting. The Fire Chief shall appoint an inspector whose duty it shall be to
make frequent inspection of all premises and work of all licensees. Said
inspection shall include detailed and exact examination of the manner in which
licensees are complying with the provisions of this Chapter, and whether all
due and reasonable precautions to avoid accidents are being taken, and shall
include a verification that all employees who are performing work for which a
certificate of fitness is required are in possession of such certificate. The
inspector shall make a report in writing to the Fire Chief at the close of each
day's inspection, stating conditions observed, and such reports shall be kept
on file by the Fire Chief. The Fire Chief may employ professional consultants
to aid in the regulation of blasting operations. (Ord. 77-12, 9-6-1977)
5-7-7: SALES TO OTHER THAN LICENSEES:
It shall be unlawful for any person, or his agent or employee, to sell, offer
for sale, or give to any person for purposes of sale any of the substances or
explosives mentioned in Section
5-7-1 of this Chapter, unless such person receiving such substances shall have
procured and be in possession of a license as required by this Chapter;
provided, however, that the provisions of this Section shall not apply to
flashlight powder or black powder where the amount involved is less than five
(5) pounds. (Ord. 77-12, 9-6-1977)
5-7-8: WEEKLY REPORT OF SALES:
Any person selling, offering for sale, or giving away any of the aforementioned
substances or explosives to any person within the Village shall file a weekly
statement of such sales or deliveries to the Fire Chief. Such statement shall
be verified as to its correctness by an affidavit and shall specify the
deliveries for the preceding week for use within the Village and in detail as
follows:
   (A)   Date of delivery,
   (B)   Name of buyer,
   (C)   Point of delivery,
   (D)   Number of pounds, and name, character, kind and strength of
explosives.
Such statements shall be on forms provided by the Fire Chief and must be
delivered by mail or messenger not later than the second business day in each
week. (Ord. 77-12, 9-6-1977)
5-7-9: ANALYSIS OF EXPLOSIVES:
The Fire Chief shall designate a chemist whose duty it shall be to analyze and
test such explosives as are brought or submitted to him by applicants for
licenses or certificates.
All dynamite containing nitroglycerin shall be tested by the chemist according
to the potassium iodide starch heat test, otherwise known as the British heat
test. (Ord. 77-12, 9-6-1977)
5-7-10: SUBMISSION OF SAMPLES FOR ANALYSIS:
No license shall be granted to any person engaged in the use or sale of
dynamite or other explosive until such dealer, contractor, or other person
heretofore referred to, shall first submit to the chemist for analysis a sample
of such dynamite or any other explosive sought to be used or sold, and whenever
such chemist shall certify that such sample is of standard purity and quality,
a license shall be issued, if all other requirements heretofore prescribed are
complied with.
It shall be the duty of the inspector from time to time to bring a sample of
dynamite or other explosives sold or used by licensees, and to submit such
sample to the chemist, who shall analyze and test same, and if it shall be
found that such sample is not of standard purity and quality, the license of
such licensee shall be revoked by the Village President. (Ord. 77-12, 9-6-1977)
5-7-11: TRANSPORTATION OF EXPLOSIVES ON PUBLIC WAYS:
   (A)   No explosives shall be transported in any vehicles through the public
ways of the Village unless such vehicle is in charge of two (2) competent
persons each holding a certificate of fitness for such purpose. Said
certificate of fitness shall be issued only to employees of a person duly
licensed to transport or sell explosives in the Village.
   (B)   Any mechanically propelled vehicle used for the transportation of
explosives shall be in good condition for service, and shall have an enclosed
body completely fire protected on the outside. The motor, fuel tank,
carburetor, electric wiring and exhaust, shall be separate from the body of the
vehicle. Internal combustion engines shall be separated not less than two feet
(2') from the outer wall of the body in which explosives are to be carried. All
such vehicles must be constructed and maintained in accordance with
specifications of, and subject to the approval, of the Fire Chief, who shall
inspect or cause to be inspected all such vehicles at least once every six (6)
months.
   (C)   No metal tools or other pieces of metal shall be carried within a
vehicle carrying explosives, except in a separate tool box.
   (D)   No blasting caps or electric blasting caps or other combustible
material shall be transported in the same vehicles with other explosives.
   (E)   A vehicle carrying explosives shall have power amply able to draw the
load, and it shall avoid stoppages other than to load and unload, and no
unnecessary stops or stands shall be made.
   (F)   Vehicles carrying explosives must not be left standing unless
absolutely necessary, and then only when brakes are set and motors stopped.
   (G)   No explosives shall be left in a vehicle unless such vehicle is in
charge of an employee with a certificate of fitness, and no vehicle loaded with
explosives shall be left unattended.
   (H)   Every vehicle carrying more than five (5) pounds of explosive
substances referred to in Section
5-7-1 of this Chapter, shall display the words "EXPLOSIVES" painted on the rear
end and each side of such vehicle in letters at least ten inches (10") in
height.
   (I)   A vehicle carrying explosives shall avoid, whenever possible, those
public ways on which there are large numbers of persons.
   (J)   No intoxicated person shall be permitted on a vehicle carrying
explosives.
   (K)   No smoking within ten feet (10') of a vehicle loaded with explosives
shall be permitted.
   (L)   No person shall carry or transport in or upon such vehicle any
explosives in excess of two thousand (2,000) pounds.
   (M)   No person in charge of a vehicle carrying explosives shall deliver
them except in original and unbroken packages, nor at any place other than a
duly authorized magazine and to the person in charge thereof.
   (N)   Each vehicle shall carry an approved liquid chemical fire extinguisher
thereon of not less than two and one-half (21/2) gallons' capacity. (Ord. 77-
12, 9-6-1977)
5-7-12: EXPLOSIVES IN PUBLIC CONVEYANCES:
No person shall carry or transport on any public conveyance or on any railroad
car running from point to point in the Village, any black powder, guncotton,
giant powder, dynamite, nitroglycerine, fulminate of mercury, or any other
explosive. (Ord. 77-12, 9-6-1977)
5-7-13: TRANSPORTATION TO OR FROM VESSELS OR RAILROAD CARS:
Explosives received at any railway or freight stations within the Village
limits, for reshipment to points beyond the Village limits, shall be promptly
transferred; provided, however, that no explosives received for shipment shall
remain at any railway or freight station for a period exceeding forty eight
(48) hours. Every railroad car containing explosives within the Village limits
must be placarded on sides and ends with standard explosive placards as
prescribed by the Interstate Commerce Commission regulations for explosives and
other dangerous articles. (Ord. 77-12, 9-6-1977)
5-7-14: LABELING OF PACKAGES:
Each package containing an explosive must have the name and brand of the
manufacturer marked thereon, and must be marked conspicuously as prescribed by
the Interstate Commerce Commission for explosives and other dangerous articles.
(Ord. 77-12, 9-6-1977)
5-7-15: EXPLOSIVE CARTRIDGES:
All boxes in which explosive cartridges containing nitroglycerine are packed
must be lined with a suitable material that is impervious to liquid
nitroglycerine. Cardboard cartons closed at the bottom and made of strong and
flexible material that is impervious to nitroglycerine may be used as a lining.
At least one-fourth inch (1/4") of dry sawdust or wood pulp or similar material
must be spread over the bottom of the box before inserting the cartridges, and
all the vacant space in the top must be filled with this material. The
cartridges must be so arranged in the boxes that when they are transported with
the boxes top side up all cartridges will be on their sides and never on their
ends.
No explosive cartridge sold shall be larger than four inches (4") in diameter
and eight inches (8") long. Packages of explosives shall not contain more than
fifty (50) pounds. (Ord. 77-12, 9-6-1977)
5-7-16: MAGAZINES:
No explosives shall be stored in any building other than a magazine.
Magazines for the storage of explosives shall be constructed as required under
the provisions of the National Fire Codes, 1973-74 Edition, Code for the
Manufacture, Transportation, Storage and Use of Explosives Material. (Ord. 77-
12, 9-6-1977)
5-7-17: THAWING OF EXPLOSIVES:
All thawing of frozen dynamite or other explosives by means of artificial heat
from any source, is prohibited within the Village. (Ord. 77-12, 9-6-1977)
5-7-18: SUPERVISION OF MAGAZINES:
All magazines shall at all times be in the care of a competent employee whose
duty it shall be to see that no unauthorized person has access to them. Said
employee shall have no other duty that will interfere with his careful
supervision of such magazine or thaw house, and shall have a certificate of
fitness as a magazine keeper.
All magazines shall be painted bright red with the words "MAGAZINE - DANGER"
painted thereon in white letters on a black background. Such letters shall be
at least six inches (6") high.
Only persons who hold certificates of fitness, or other authorized persons,
shall be permitted to have access to magazines, which shall be kept securely
locked when not open for the introduction or removal of explosives or for
inspection by duly authorized officers of the Village. (Ord. 77-12, 9-6-1977)
5-7-19: PERMIT FOR BLASTING:
Every person engaged in, as a principal, or connected with, any activity
involving explosives or blasting operations, shall make an application to the
Fire Chief for a permit to keep and use explosives, giving at the time, in
writing, the name of the licensee, location of the office or place of business,
the nature of the work, the description of any Village property located in the
blasting area, the proposed location of the magazine, together with plans and
descriptions of the construction of such magazine, the quantity and kind of
explosives proposed to be kept therein, and the names of the employees required
to have certificates of fitness, and designating structures located within the
sphere of blasting influence which will be photographed by the licensee.
The Fire Chief shall review said application to determine whether the proposed
location of the magazine, the description of the Village property and the
designation of structures to be photographed by the licensee are satisfactory.
If the Fire Chief approves such application, he shall transmit the same with
his approval thereon to the Village Clerk, who shall, upon payment by such
applicant to the Village Clerk of a permit fee of fifteen dollars ($15.00)
issue to such application a permit to locate the magazine at the location given
in such application.
It shall be unlawful for any licensee to move or cause to be moved any
magazine, after having received a permit for the use of same, until such
licensee shall make a new application to the Fire Chief for permission so to do
and shall have secured a permit for such purpose, and every application for
such permit shall specify the place at which it is desired to locate the
magazine proposed to be moved.
The Fire Chief shall recommend the revocation of any permit issued to blast
rock or any other substance for noncompliance with any of the provisions of
this Section. (Ord. 78-19, 5-16-1978)
5-7-20: BLASTING OPERATIONS:
   (A)   No blasting operations shall commence until all structures designated
by the Fire Chief within the sphere of blasting influence have been
photographed by the permittee to document their current condition.
   (B)   The permittee shall agree to make immediate repairs at the sole
expense of the permittee to any Village property designated by the Fire Chief
which is located within one thousand five hundred (1,500) yards of any blasting
site and which suffers damage within fourteen (14) days after any incidence of
blasting at such a site.
   (C)   In blasting, it shall be unlawful to use a quantity of explosive
exceeding in disruptive force the equivalent of one pound in weight of forty
percent (40%) dynamite for each two feet (2') depth of hole that is above or
less than ten feet (10') below the curb; and the equivalent of one pound in
weight of sixty percent (60%) dynamite, for each two feet (2') depth of hole
that is more than ten feet (10') below the curb.
   (D)   Frozen or partly frozen explosives shall not be placed in drill holes.
Frozen cartridges, if not capped, must be returned to the thawing apparatus to
be thawed. The removal of a primer from a frozen cartridge is hereby
prohibited.
   (E)   In tamping drill holes, wooden rammers only shall be employed. Tamping
by strokes is forbidden, and only direct application of pressure permitted.
   (F)   Blasts, except as hereinafter provided, shall be fired by the
application of some form of electrical current only. In blasting in stone
quarries, it shall be permissible to fire blasts by the application of time
fuses.
   (G)   In case of an explosion not carrying away the entire drill hole, but
leaving the lower part intact, it is prohibited to begin drilling from the
bottom of the old drill hole.
   (H)   In order to ensure the safety of surrounding property and persons, no
larger charge shall be used than is necessary to properly start the object it
is intended to wreck or blast, and excavating contiguous to any structure shall
be so carried on as not to cause damage to such structure. Weak walls or other
supports of such structure must be shored up. The blasting of decomposed or
soft rock is hereby prohibited.
   (I)   Before any blast shall be fired, except in tunnels, the rock to be
blasted shall be covered on the top and sides with timber and covered with
stout metal matting or some other equally serviceable material to prevent the
debris from flying.
   (J)   When necessary, competent man carrying red flags shall be placed at a
reasonable distance from the blasts on all sides to give warning at least three
(3) minutes in advance.
   (K)   No blasting shall proceed on any day, unless the Fire Chief has been
given not less than twenty four (24) hours' notice that one or more blasts are
to be fired on such day. (Ord. 78-19, 5-16-1978)
5-7-21: STORAGE OF EXPLOSIVES:
Fixed ammunition stored above the ground floor in a building used for any other
purpose shall be enclosed by wire netting, having no larger than one-fourth
inch (1/4") mesh, supported by iron or heavy wooden uprights. (Ord. 77-12, 9-6-
1977)
5-7-22: PROHIBITED EXPLOSIVES:
The sale, transportation, or use of the following explosives are hereby
prohibited:
   (A)   Liquid nitroglycerine, except for medicinal purposes.
   (B)   Explosives containing chlorate of potash, perchlorate of potash, and
picric acid, except as used in blasting caps; provided, however, that any
explosive containing chlorate of potash may be sold if it first conforms to the
following test: such mixture must be able to withstand a glancing blow
inflicted with a rawhide mallet on soft wood without in any manner exploding,
and also such mixture must be made so as not to reduce the chlorate;
   (C)   Nitroglycerine cynamite containing over sixty percent (60%) of
nitroglycerine, or gelatine dynamite equal in strength to over seventy five
percent (75%) of nitroglycerine dynamite;
   (D)   Blasting caps containing less than nine and one-half (91/2) grains of
explosive mixture, at least eighty percent (80%) fulminate of mercury and
twenty percent (20%) chlorate of potash, or its equivalent detonating strength;
   (E)   Any fulminate of mercury in a dry condition;
   (F)   Any fulminate or other metals in any condition except as a component
of articles not otherwise prohibited;
   (G)   Any fireworks which combine an explosive and a detonator. (Ord. 77-12,
9-6-1977)
5-7-23: RESTRICTIONS ON EXPLOSIVES:
   (A)   No person shall have more than one thousand (1,000) electrical
detonators in stock at any time.
   (B)   Chlorides calculated as potassium chloride must not exceed one-fourth
of one percent (0.25%).
   (C)   Any explosive mixture containing chlorate of potash offered for sale
must contain no free acid or substance liable to produce free acid.
   (D)   All explosives containing chlorate of potash or nitro compounds shall
be subject to the British heat test.
   (E)   It shall be unlawful to sell, transport, or use leaky dynamite
(leaking nitroglycerine).
   (F)   The keeping or storing of nitro-cellulose in a dry condition in
quantities greater than ten (10) pounds in one place is hereby prohibited.
   (G)   The use of frozen or partly frozen cartridges and the breaking or
cutting of them or drilling them for caps is hereby prohibited.
   (H)   Blasting powder, black powder, sporting powder, rifle powder, all
military smokeless powder, and low blasting explosives shall be packed in metal
cases containing not more than twenty five (25) pounds. (Ord. 77-12, 9-6-1977)
5-7-24: MANUFACTURE OF EXPLOSIVES IN VILLAGE:
No person shall manufacture, assemble, or mix anywhere within the Village any
black powder, guncotton, giant powder, dynamite, nitroglycerine, fulminate of
mercury, or other explosives of similar nature. Any person violating this
Section shall be fined not less than seventy five dollars ($75.00) nor more
than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense, and a separate and
distinct offense shall be considered as having been committed every day upon
which any such explosives are manufactured in the Village in violation of the
provisions of this Chapter. (Ord. 77-12, 9-6-1977)
5-7-25: SALES TO MINORS:
It is hereby declared to be unlawful for any person to sell, deliver or give to
any person under eighteen (18) years of age any black powder, dynamite,
nitroglycerine, guncotton or other explosive. (Ord. 77-12, 9-6-1977)
5-7-26: SEIZURE OF EXPLOSIVES KEPT UNLAWFULLY:
If it shall be found that any of the explosives mentioned in Section
5-7-1 of this Chapter, are being kept in any building, structure or premises,
or in any vehicle within the Village in violation of any of the provisions of
this Chapter, any such explosives so kept shall be immediately seized and
removed to such place as the Fire Chief may direct.
It is hereby made the duty of the members of the Police Department to assist in
making such seizure when requested so to do by said Fire Chief, and to assist
in the removal of such explosives to such place as may be designated by him.
(Ord. 77-12, 9-6-1977)
ARTICLE FIREWORKS
5-7-27: DEFINITION:
The term "fireworks" shall mean and include any explosive composition, or any
substance or combination of substances, or article prepared for the purpose of
producing a visible or audible effect of a temporary exhibitional nature by
explosion, combustion, deflagration or detonation, and shall include blank
cartridges, toy cannons, in which explosives are used, the type of balloons
which require fire underneath to propel the same, firecrackers, torpedoes,
skyrockets, roman candles, sparklers, bombs or other fireworks of like
construction and any fireworks containing any explosive compound, or any
tablets or other device containing any explosive substances producing visual
effects; provided, however, that the term "fireworks" shall not include toy
pistols, toy canes, toy guns, or other devices in which paper caps containing
twenty five one-hundredths (0.25) grains or less of explosive compound are
used, providing they are so constructed that the hand cannot come in contact
with the cap when in place for the explosion, and toy pistol paper caps which
contain less than twenty one-hundredths (0.20) grains of explosive mixtures.
(Ord. 77-12, 9-6-1977)
5-7-28: PROHIBITIONS:
No person shall have, keep, store, use, manufacture, assemble, mix, sell,
handle or transport any fireworks; provided, however, that nothing in this
Chapter shall be held to apply to the possession or use of signaling devices
for current daily consumption by railroads, vessels and others requiring them
or to the possession, sale or use of normal stocks of flashlight compositions
by photographers or dealers in photographic supplies; and provided further that
the Fire Chief may issue permits for the display of fireworks as hereinafter
provided. (Ord. 77-12, 9-6-1977)
5-7-28.1: ADVERTISING:
No person shall advertise, print, publish, or cause to be advertised, printed,
or published in any newspaper or other publication having a general circulation
in the Village, or which is sold or offered for sale within the Village, or by
means of any handbills, circular, or poster, any advertisement or notice of
sale or delivery within the Village of any fireworks, except to a person to
whom a permit has been issued as provided herein. (Ord. 77-12, 9-6-1977)
5-7-29: DISPLAY IN PUBLIC PLACES:
The Fire Chief may, upon due application, issue a permit to a properly
qualified person for giving a display of fireworks in the public parks or other
public open places. Such permits shall impose such restrictions as in the
opinion of the Fire Chief may be necessary to safeguard life and property in
each case.
Every person conducting or in charge of any public display of fireworks as
herein provided for shall be in possession of a certificate of fitness, as
provided for in Section
5-7-5 of this Chapter.
Every applicant shall also file an indemnity bond running to the Village in the
sum of five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) to indemnify the Village
against any and all claims arising through or because of such display. Such
bond shall be subject to the approval of the Village Attorney and shall be
filed in the office of the Village Clerk. (Ord. 77-12, 9-6-1977)
5-7-30: DISPLAYS ON PRIVATE PROPERTY:
The Fire Chief may, upon due application, issue a permit to a properly
qualified person for giving a display of fireworks on privately owned property;
provided, however, that the written consent of the owner of such property shall
be filed with the Fire Chief with said application; and provided further that
no display of fireworks shall be permitted between the hours of eleven o'clock
(11:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. (Ord. 77-12, 9-6-1977)
5-7-31: PERMIT FEE:
The permit fee for each display on private property shall be two hundred fifty
dollars ($250.00). (Ord. 77-12, 9-6-1977)
5-7-32: EXEMPTION:
Nothing contained in this part of this Chapter dealing with fireworks shall be
construed as applying to the transportation of any article or thing shipped in
conformity with the regulations prescribed by the Interstate Commerce
Commission, nor as applying to the military or naval forces of the United
States. (Ord. 77-12, 9-6-1977)
ARTICLE VIOLATION OF CHAPTER PROVISIONS
5-7-33: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be fined not
less than seventy five dollars ($75.00) nor more than the maximum penalty
provided in Section
1-4-1 of this Code for each offense, except where otherwise provided; and a
separate and distinct offense shall be considered as having been committed for
each and every day any person shall violate any of the said provisions of this
Chapter. (Ord. 77-12, 9-6-1977; amd. Ord. 95-23, 10-10-1995)
CHAPTER 8
AUTOMATIC SUPERVISED FIRE SUPPRESSION SYSTEM
SECTION:
5-8-1: Definitions
5-8-2: Regulations
5-8-1: DEFINITIONS:
AUTOMATIC SUPERVISED FIRE ALARM SYSTEM(S): Any automatic or manual fire alarm
system with detection and manual pull stations, installed in a structure to
detect the presence of fire or its byproducts, to alert the building's
occupants by visual and audible means of the presence of a fire, and transmit
the presence of an alarm condition directly to the authorized fire department
alarm board as designated by the deputy fire chief or his/her designee.
AUTOMATIC SUPERVISED FIRE SUPPRESSION SYSTEM(S): Any approved automatic or
manual fire suppression system(s), installed within a structure to extinguish
fire(s) within said structure in the earliest possible stage(s) of a fire.
LICENSED FIRE PROTECTION COMPANY: A private company certified or licensed by
the office of the Illinois state fire marshal, the state of Illinois, and/or
another authority having jurisdiction, to design, install, service, test, and
certify fire protection systems including, but not limited to, sprinkler,
standpipe, or other fire protection systems as required by this chapter. (Ord.
08-01, 1-8-2008)
5-8-2: REGULATIONS:
   (A)   All new construction that is equal or greater than the "total building
area" criteria established in table 8.1 of this section shall be fully
protected with an approved automatic supervised fire suppression system
complying with NFPA-13, 1999 edition, with no exceptions. Where any part of the
structure has a use group or occupancy type meeting the criteria listed in
table 8.1 of this section, and the use group classification or occupancy type
is in only a portion of the building, the entire building shall be fully
protected by the approved automatic supervised fire suppression system
complying with NFPA-13, 1999 edition.
   (B)   Any modifications to any existing structure, whereby the use group
classification or occupancy within a structure or portion thereof changes and
subsequently meets or exceeds the criteria established in table 8.1 of this
section, shall result in the requirement that the entire structure be fully
protected by an approved automatic supervised fire suppression system complying
with NFPA-13, 1999 edition.
   (C)   Any modifications to any existing structure constructed prior to the
effective date of this chapter, whereby the total building area is increased by
fifty percent (50%) or more over a period of five (5) consecutive years, shall
result in the requirement that the entire structure be fully protected by an
approved automatic supervised fire suppression system complying with NFPA-13,
1999 edition.
   (D)   Any modifications to any existing structure constructed after the
effective date of this chapter, whereby the total building area is increased by
fifty percent (50%) or more, and/or subsequently meets or exceeds the criteria
established in table 8.1 of this section, shall result in the requirement that
the entire structure be fully protected by an approved automatic supervised
fire suppression system complying with NFPA-13, 1999 edition.
   (E)   Buildings required in whole or part, to be protected by an approved
automatic supervised fire suppression system and any building having an
automatic sprinkler system shall be equipped with an approved automatic
supervised fire alarm system panel. All required automatic supervised fire
alarm systems shall automatically transmit the presence of water flow alarm or
valve tamper alarm conditions directly to the fire department alarm board as
designated by the deputy fire chief or his/her designee.
   (F)   All required approved automatic supervised fire suppression systems
shall comply with all codes and standards set forth in this chapter, as well as
meet minimum standards of professional installation specifications as set forth
by the manufacturer of the equipment being installed. In locations where a fire
pump is installed, installation shall comply with NFPA-20.
   (G)   Where approved automatic supervised fire suppression systems are
required in table 8.1 of this section, the sprinkler riser valve and fire pump
rooms shall be equipped with exterior and interior access doors. If it seems
impracticable or impossible, this room may have only one door if approved by
the deputy fire chief or his/her designee. In locations where a fire pump is
installed, installation shall comply with NFPA-20.
   (H)   All required approved automatic supervised fire suppression systems
shall be equipped with water flow alarm detection devices or water flow switch
alarms, which shall be located in easily accessible areas. Any multiple-story
building having a required automatic supervised fire suppression system shall
be equipped with floor control valves with water flow switches for each floor.
Water flow detection devices and water flow switch alarms shall be properly
installed so that an activation of one or more sprinkler heads causes the flow
switch alarm to actuate. Upon activation of a water flow switch alarm, the fire
alarm control panel shall activate and cause audible and visual warning devices
to activate. Visual and audible warning devices shall be provided, seen and
heard in all areas of every building. Devices shall be installed so as to
provide proper and required audible and visual warning of fire from any
location within the structure. Upon activation of a water flow switch alarm,
the fire alarm control panel shall automatically transmit the presence of the
water flow alarm condition directly to the fire department alarm board as
designated by the deputy fire chief or his/her designee. Notwithstanding the
foregoing one- and two-family construction may utilize an approved listed
central station or other approved monitoring agency.
   (I)   All sprinkler system control valves installed on required approved
automatic supervised fire suppression systems shall be supervised by water
valve tamper switch alarms. Water valve tamper switch alarms shall be located
in easily accessible areas and properly installed so that the closing of any
sprinkler system control valve causes a water valve tamper switch alarm to
actuate. Upon actuation of a water valve tamper switch alarm, the fire alarm
control panel shall activate and automatically transmit a trouble alarm
condition directly to the fire department alarm board as designated by the
deputy fire chief or his/her designee. All sprinkler system control valves
including, but not limited to, shutoff valves and inspectors' test valves shall
be properly labeled for quick identification. Labels shall consist of an
approved permanent sign having lettering red in color with a white background.
Signs shall have letters which state the name and/or description of the valve,
i.e., "SPRINKLER SHUT OFF VALVE", or "INSPECTORS TEST VALVE". All signs shall
be installed prior to final acceptance of any installed fire suppression
equipment. All signage shall comply with NFPA standards 13, 14, and 20.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, one- and two-family construction may utilize an
approved listed central station or other approved monitoring agency.
   (J)   All required approved automatic supervised fire suppression systems
shall be equipped with an outside audio/visual indicating device over the fire
department connection. Audible indicating devices shall consist of an approved
outdoor rated "water gong" type bell. If required and used, visual devices
shall consist of a strobe light indicator rated for outdoor use. All audio/
visual indicators used outdoors, shall operate on fire alarm system control
panel voltage. Fire alarm control panel battery calculations shall take all
indicating devices into consideration when calculations are made.
   (K)   Minimum water supply pipes for fire suppression systems shall be no
less than six inches (6") in diameter. All underground piping installed in
conjunction with required automatic fire suppression systems shall comply with
all locally adopted codes, standards and ordinances.
   (L)   Backflow prevention devices shall be installed on all automatic fire
suppression systems and standpipe systems. A certified double detector check
valve or other device approved by the water superintendent or his/her designee
shall be installed on all systems which are directly connected to the municipal
water source. Locations of backflow prevention devices shall be reviewed and
approved by the water superintendent or his/her designee. In systems which are
served by a fire pump, every effort shall be made to ensure the device is
installed on the discharge/output side of the fire pump. All backflow
prevention devices used in conjunction with required automatic fire suppression
systems and standpipe systems, shall be certified as often as required by
state, county and local plumbing codes, however the minimum period of time
shall not exceed at a minimum of at least once annually. Copies of the
certification documents shall be provided to the deputy fire chief or his/her
designee annually.
   (M)   Any persons wishing installation of an approved automatic supervised
fire suppression system or a required approved automatic supervised fire
suppression system within a multiple-family residential or commercial building
shall obtain a permit issued by the building commissioner or his/her designee.
Permit applications can be obtained from the village office during normal
business hours.
   (N)   By application for permit to install an approved automatic supervised
fire suppression system, the applicant shall agree to follow all requirements
set forth in this chapter. The minimum requirements as directed by the deputy
fire chief or his/her designee shall be followed for all installations.
Applications shall be accompanied by all required submittal material as
directed by the building commissioner or his/her designee.
   (O)   Installations of all required automatic supervised fire suppression
systems shall be performed by licensed fire protection companies.
   (P)   All automatic supervised fire suppression systems, and modifications
to existing systems, shall be submitted to the village's building department
for review and approval by the deputy fire chief or his/her designee prior to
any installation or modification.
   (Q)   Prior to any new or required approved automatic supervised fire
suppression system being placed into service, it shall be inspected by and
tested in the presence of the deputy fire chief or his/her designee. All said
required alarm systems shall be connected directly to the fire department alarm
board as designated by the deputy fire chief or his/her designee, prior to any
and all required inspections and testing. A minimum of forty eight (48) hours'
notice shall be provided prior to any required inspections and testing.
   (R)   The key(s) required for access to any sprinkler system valve rooms, or
locks securing valves shall be provided to the deputy fire chief or his/her
designee upon installation of any sprinkler system or at the time of updating
of said keys. Any submitted key(s) shall remain in the Knox box key vault
mounted at the property. Keys for this purpose shall not be provided to
residents or other persons except personnel responsible for operation and
maintenance of the alarm system. Doors leading directly into sprinkler system
valve rooms shall be properly labeled. Labels shall consist of lettering red in
color with a white background. Letters shall be at least two inches (2") in
height in capital lettering and shall state: "SPRINKLER CONTROL VALVE ROOM".
Notwithstanding the foregoing, individual letters may be used to properly label
doors without a label background color when letter size and color complies with
this subsection.
   (S)   Each person or entity having an approved automatic supervised fire
suppression system shall be responsible for any false alarms transmitted by the
system which he/she operates or maintains. Any failures of fire suppression
systems shall be corrected and the system placed back into full operable
service within eight (8) hours of the time it was disabled or shut down.
   (T)   Inspection, testing, and maintenance frequency shall be performed by a
licensed fire protection contractor according to NFPA-25. Documentation of all
inspection(s) shall be filed with the village's fire department within thirty
(30) days of the inspection(s). If a system malfunctions or otherwise requires
repair, the building owner and/or occupant shall be responsible for contacting
the proper contractor to complete the job within eight (8) hours of discovery.
   TABLE 8.1
   Occupancies requiring approved automatic supervised fire suppression system,
which shall comply with NFPA-13,1999 edition.
          (Indicated By Total Building Area)
          1A-1B/2A- 2C        3A        3B        4         5A        5B
Use Group 2B        (Sq. Ft.) (Sq. Ft.) (Sq. Ft.) (Sq. Ft.) (Sq. Ft.) (Sq. Ft.)
          (Sq. Ft.)
              (Indicated By Total Building Area)
              1A-1B/   2C       3A       3B
Use Group     2A-2B    (Sq.     (Sq.     (Sq.     4         5A        5B
              (Sq.     Ft.)     Ft.)     Ft.)     (Sq. Ft.) (Sq. Ft.) (Sq. Ft.)
              Ft.)
A-1 Assembly, 2,500    2,500    2,500    2,500    2,500     2,500     2,500
theaters
A-2 Assembly,
nightclubs    2,500    2,500    2,500    2,500    2,500     2,500     2,500
and similar
A-3 Assembly,
lecture
halls,
recreation    2,500    2,500    2,500    2,500    2,500     2,500     2,500
centers,
restaurants,
not
nightclubs
A-4 Assembly, 2,500    2,500    2,500    2,500    2,500     2,500     2,500
churches
B Business    2,500    2,500    2,500    2,500    2,500     2,500     2,500
E Educational 2,500    2,500    2,500    2,500    2,500     2,500     2,500
F-1 Factory
and           2,500    2,500    2,500    2,500    2,500     2,500     2,500
industrial
moderate
F-2 Factory
and           2,500    2,500    2,500    2,500    2,500     2,500     2,500
industrial
low
H High hazard Required Required Required Required Required  Required  N/P
              in all   in all   in all   in all   in all    in all
I-
1
Institutional 2,500    2,500    2,500    2,500    2,500     2,500     2,500
residential
care
I-
2             2,500    2,500    2,500    2,500    N/P       2,500     N/P
Institutional
incapacitated
I-
3             2,500    2,500    2,500    2,500    2,500     2,500     N/P
Institutional
restrained
I-
4
Institutional 2,500    2,500    2,500    2,500    2,500     2,500     2,500
daycare
facilities
M Mercantile  2,500    2,500    2,500    2,500    2,500     2,500     2,500
S-1 Storage   2,500    2,500    2,500    2,500    2,500     2,500     2,500
moderate
S-2 Storage   2,500    2,500    2,500    2,500    2,500     2,500     2,500
low
U Utility,    2,500    2,500    2,500    2,500    2,500     2,500     2,500
miscellaneous
 
N/P indicates that this type of construction shall not be permitted for and/or
under the indicated type of occupancy.
(Ord. 08-01, 1-8-2008)
CHAPTER 9
RAPID ENTRY SYSTEM
SECTION:
5-9-1: Definitions
5-9-2: Regulations
5-9-1: DEFINITIONS:
"Rapid entry system" shall be defined as approved supra key box(r) key vaults/
boxes manufactured by Supra Corporation, that meet the specifications of the
village's fire department. These key vaults/boxes are for the exclusive use of
the village's fire and police departments for official and emergency purposes
only. (Ord. 08-01, 1-8-2008)
5-9-2: REGULATIONS:
All buildings having required approved automatic fire alarm systems, approved
automatic supervised fire suppression systems, approved automatic or manual
supervised commercial kitchen fire suppression systems shall have a rapid entry
system by which to allow emergency personnel immediate access to the building.
This system shall consist of an approved model Knox box key vault, securely
mounted to the exterior of the building in a location approved by the deputy
fire chief or his/her designee, containing the following keys:
   (A)   All exterior entry doors leading into the building;
   (B)   Fire alarm control panel (FACP);
   (C)   Fire protection/sprinkler rooms;
   (D)   All utility/electrical rooms; and
   (E)   All boiler/furnace rooms.
The building owner(s)/occupant(s) shall be responsible for the purchase and
installation of the Knox box as well as contacting the deputy fire chief or
his/her designee to secure the building keys. It shall be the building owner's
and building occupant's responsibility to provide the fire department with
properly labeled and updated keys as needed. Application forms for obtaining
the Knox box can be obtained from the fire department during normal business
hours. (Ord. 08-01, 1-8-2008)
CHAPTER 10
STANDPIPE SYSTEMS
SECTION:
5-10-1: Definitions
5-10-2: Regulations
5-10-1: DEFINITIONS:
"Standpipe system" shall be defined as a fire suppression system consisting of
an arrangement of piping, valves, hose outlets and allied equipment installed
in a building or structure which, when required, shall be properly supervised.
(Ord. 08-01, 1-8-2008)
5-10-2: REGULATIONS:
   (A)   Supervised automatic standpipe systems shall be installed in
accordance with NFPA-14, "Standard For The Installation Of Standpipe And Hose
Systems", 1996 edition, as well as all provisions within this chapter,
throughout all buildings in which the floor level of the highest story is
located more than twenty feet (20') above the lowest level of the fire
department vehicle access or in which the floor level of the lowest story is
located more than twenty feet (20') below the highest level of fire department
vehicle access.
   (B)   Supervised automatic standpipe systems shall be installed in
accordance with NFPA-14, "Standard For The Installation Of Standpipe And Hose
Systems", 1996 edition, as well as all provisions within this chapter,
throughout all buildings where any portion of the building floor area is
greater than two hundred feet (200') of travel from the nearest point of fire
department access. All required standpipe systems shall be installed in a
location determined by the deputy fire chief or his/her designee prior to any
installation.
   (C)   Any persons wishing installation of a required standpipe system or a
required approved automatic supervised fire suppression system within any
building, shall obtain a permit issued by the building commissioner or his/her
designee. Permit applications can be obtained from the village office during
normal business hours.
   (D)   Doors leading directly into standpipe system valve rooms shall be
properly labeled. Labels shall consist of lettering red in color with a white
background. Letters shall be at least two inches (2") in height in capital
lettering and shall state: "STANDPIPE CONTROL VALVE ROOM". Notwithstanding the
foregoing, individual letters may be used to properly label doors without a
label background color when letter size and color complies with this
subsection.
   (E)   Standpipe cabinets shall be properly labeled. Standpipe cabinets shall
have labels which identify the cabinet as: "FIRE DEPARTMENT STANDPIPE
CONNECTION". Labels and lettering shall comply with subsection (D) of this
section.
   (F)   All standpipe system control valves including, but not limited to,
shutoff valves shall be properly labeled for quick identification. Labels shall
consist of an approved permanent sign having lettering red in color with a
white background. Signs shall have letters which state the name and/or
description of the valve, i.e., "STANDPIPE SHUT OFF VALVE". All signs shall be
installed prior to final acceptance of any installed fire suppression
equipment. All signage shall comply with NFPA standards 13, 14 and 20. (Ord.
08-01, 1-8-2008)
TITLE 6
POLICE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
POLICE DEPARTMENT
SECTION:
6-1-1: Creation
6-1-2: Chief Of Police; Deputy Police Chief
6-1-3: Rank
6-1-4: Duties Of Chief
6-1-5: Duties Of Members
6-1-6: Service Of Process
6-1-7: Court Appearances; Witness Fees
6-1-8: Rules And Regulations
6-1-9: Juvenile Officer
6-1-10: Community Service Officers
6-1-1: CREATION:
There is hereby created a police department for the village which shall consist
of one chief of police, one deputy chief, and such number of sergeant(s),
patrolmen, and such full and part time community service officers as the
president and board of trustees may from time to time designate. (Ord. 24-11,
7-23-2024)
6-1-2: CHIEF OF POLICE; DEPUTY POLICE CHIEF:
   (A)   There is hereby created the position of chief of police in the
village. The chief of police shall serve under the direction of the village
administrator, supervise all work and employees connected with or assigned to
the police department. He shall be responsible for management, administration
and direction of personnel, equipment, facilities and operation of the police
department. He shall exercise sole control and command and possess complete
authority regarding internal organization, structure and discipline. The chief
of police shall be a member of the police department. The chief of police shall
devote his full time to said position and shall be compensated at a sum to be
set from time to time by the president of the board of trustees, and shall
enter into a bond in favor of the village in such amount as may be required by
the president and board of trustees.
   (B)   There is hereby created the position of deputy chief in the village.
The deputy chief shall be appointed by the president, based on the
recommendation of the village administrator and chief of police, subject to the
approval of the board of trustees. The deputy chief shall perform such duties
as shall be assigned by the chief of police and shall serve as the acting chief
of police in the absence of the chief of police. (Ord. 16-11, 9-13-2016)
6-1-3: RANK:
The chief of police shall be the head of the police department and shall
supervise all officers and members thereof. Following him in rank shall be the
deputy chief, sergeant(s), and patrolmen in the order of seniority within each
group. (Ord. 16-11, 9-13-2016)
6-1-4: DUTIES OF CHIEF:
The chief of police shall keep such records and make such reports concerning
the activities of the police department as shall be necessary and proper for
the effective operation and management thereof, and as may be required by
statute or ordinance, or by direction of the corporate authorities. Further,
the chief of police shall be custodian of all lost, abandoned or stolen
property. (Ord. 73-296, 5-22-1973; amd. Ord. 76-12, 3-16-1976, eff. 5-1-1976)
6-1-5: DUTIES OF MEMBERS:
It shall be the duty of members of the police department to see to the
enforcement of all ordinances of the village and all statutes applicable
therein, and to preserve order and prevent infractions of the law and arrest
violators thereof. Further, it shall be the duty of each member of the police
department to conduct himself in a proper and law abiding manner, and to avoid
the use of unnecessary force. Each member of the department shall obey the
orders and directions of his superior. (Ord. 73-296, 5-22-1973)
6-1-6: SERVICE OF PROCESS:
The chief of police shall be authorized to serve writs, summonses, and other
legal process, but no member of the police department shall serve any such
process except by order of the chief of police. (Ord. 79-27, 11-20-1979)
6-1-7: COURT APPEARANCES; WITNESS FEES:
Every member of the police department shall appear as a witness whenever this
is necessary in a prosecution for a violation of an ordinance or any state or
federal law, but no such member shall receive or retain any witness fee for
service as a witness in any action or suit to which the village is a party. All
fees due for such services, if paid, shall be turned over to the chief of
police, who shall deposit the same with the village treasurer. The foregoing
provisions do not relate to the payment of compensation by the village for
court appearances made on behalf of the village. (Ord. 80-3, 5-13-1980)
6-1-8: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The chief of police may make or prescribe such rules and regulations as he
shall deem advisable for the better efficiency of the police department. Such
rules, when approved by the board of trustees, shall be binding on all members.
(Ord. 73-296, 5-22-1973; amd. Ord. 76-12, 3-16-1976, eff. 5-1-1976)
6-1-9: JUVENILE OFFICER:
   (A)   There is hereby established the position of village juvenile officer,
to be appointed by the village president, subject to the advice and consent of
the board of trustees.
   (B)   The juvenile officer shall process all offenders under the age of
seventeen (17) who shall be arrested within the village limits; further, he
shall supervise such offenders and accompany them to the juvenile court
facilities when necessary, and he shall attend all court hearings in connection
with such offenders. The juvenile officer shall perform such other duties,
including recordkeeping, as the chief of police or board of trustees shall
prescribe.
   (C)   The juvenile officer shall be paid straight time wages for performance
of his duties as juvenile officer. Said straight time wages shall be calculated
and paid based on the individual officer's hourly salary structure. The
juvenile officer shall accurately log and record all time spent actually
performing duties as the juvenile officer and shall submit such records to the
chief of police. The chief of police shall approve all such compensation for
the juvenile officer. (Ord. 80-3, 5-13-1980)
6-1-10: COMMUNITY SERVICE OFFICERS:
   (A)   The Village President, by and with the advice and consent of the Board
of Trustees, may appoint civilian Community Service Officers (CSOs) to assist
sworn police officers in efficiently performing their duties. Such CSOs shall,
at all times during the performance of their duties, be subject to the
direction and control of the Chief of Police or the Chief's designee. Any
employment relationship between the village and the CSOs shall be at will
employment, and are subject to suspension and termination by the Chief of
Police.
   (B)   Prior to appointment, all prospective CSOs shall complete an
application form as prescribed by the Village President. Prior to appointment,
all prospective CSOs shall be fingerprinted and have a criminal background
check completed. No person shall be appointed as a CSO if he has been convicted
of a felony.
   (C)   CSOs shall not be issued or permitted to carry a firearm.
   (D)   CSO duties may include, but are not limited to, traffic control, desk
duty, assisting motorists locked out of vehicles, animal complaints and
control, village ordinance and parking enforcement, taking of noncriminal
reports, conducting station tours, fingerprinting for non-criminal purposes,
coordination of village administration hearings and assistance with ticket
management programs.
   (E)   CSOs shall be under the command of the Chief of Police. The Chief of
Police shall assign a regular police commander, sergeant or officer to act as
liaison to CSOs.
   (F)   The Chief of Police shall establish rules and regulations to implement
this section. (Ord. 24-11, 7-23-2024)
CHAPTER 2
PART-TIME POLICE OFFICERS
SECTION:
6-2-1: Appointments
6-2-2: Hiring Standards
6-2-3: Powers And Duties
6-2-4: Firearms
6-2-5: Training Requirements
6-2-6: Compensation
6-2-7: Covered By Workmen's Compensation
6-2-1: APPOINTMENTS:
   (A)   The Village President is hereby authorized to appoint part- time
police officers as employees, subject to the advice and consent of the Board of
Trustees. Prior to appointment, all part- time police officers shall be subject
to a background check which shall include being fingerprinted and their
fingerprints shall be checked with the Federal Bureau of Identification,
Washington, D.C., and the Illinois State Police, Bureau of Identification for
any possible criminal record. No person shall be appointed as a part-time
police officer if he has been convicted of a felony or other crime involving
moral turpitude.
   (B)   A person hired as a part-time police officer must obtain from the
Illinois Law Enforcement Training and Standards Board, hereinafter known as the
Board, a certification:
      1.   Attesting to his or her successful completion of the part-time
police officer training course.
      2.   Attesting to his or her satisfactory completion of a training
program of similar content and number of hours that has been found acceptable
by the Board under provisions of P.A. 89-170 or attesting to the Board's
determination that the part-time police training course is unnecessary because
of the person's extensive law enforcement experience.
   (C)   A person hired on or after January 1, 1996, must obtain this
certificate within eighteen (18) months after the date of hire. A person hired
before January 1, 1996, must obtain this certificate within twenty four (24)
months after the effective date of this mandatory Act of P.A. 89-170 effective
January 1, 1996. (Ord. 96-4, 2-13-1996)
6-2-2: HIRING STANDARDS:
   (A)   Education And Experience: Any person appointed as a part-time police
officer in the Village must possess a diploma from an accredited high school or
a GED;
   (B)   Minimum Age: Any person appointed as a part-time police officer in the
Village must be twenty one (21) years of age or older at time of application;
and
   (C)   Other Requirements: Any person appointed as a part-time police officer
in the Village must:
Possess a valid Class D Illinois driver's license;
Be a United States citizen;
Have no felony convictions or disqualifying criminal histories;
Have 20/100 vision correctable to 20/20;
Be able to pass a background investigation and any other examinations the
Village may require;
Possess State certification as a police officer or successfully obtain from the
Illinois Law Enforcement Training and Standards Board a waiver of such
certification due to his or her successful completion of the part-time police
officer training course or his or her satisfactorily completion of a training
program of similar content and number of hours that has been found acceptable
by the Board under provision of P.A. 89-170. (Ord. 97-14, 7-8-1997)
6-2-3: POWERS AND DUTIES:
   (A)   Part time police officers when assigned by the chief of police shall
be primarily responsible for prevention or detection of crime and enforcement
of the criminal code, traffic, or highway laws of this state and applicable
village codes. It shall be the duty of each member of the police department to
conduct himself or herself in a proper and law abiding manner, and to avoid the
use of unnecessary force. Each member of the department shall obey the orders
and directions of his or her superior. The number of hours a part time officer
may work within a calendar year is restricted. (Ord. 12-4, 5-8-2012)
   (B)   Part time police officers shall at all times during the performance of
their duties be subject to the direction and control of the chief of police.
Such part time police officers are also subject to discipline and discharge
from the department. (Ord. 96-4, 2-13-1996)
6-2-4: FIREARMS:
Part time police officers shall not carry firearms except with the permission
of the chief of police of the village and then only when in uniform and in the
performance of their duties. (Ord. 96-4, 2-13-1996)
6-2-5: TRAINING REQUIREMENTS:
Part time police officers shall be trained under the intergovernmental law
enforcement officer's in-service training act in accordance with the procedures
for part time police officers established by the Illinois law enforcement
training and standards board. Such part time police officers shall, prior to
entering upon any of their duties, receive a course of training within the
police department to include, but not be limited to, police procedures, laws of
arrest, search and seizure, deadly force, traffic law, criminal code and any
other pertinent training issues covering rules and regulations, directives and
policies and procedures. Such course of training shall not be less than forty
(40) hours in duration. (Ord. 96-4, 2-13-1996)
6-2-6: COMPENSATION:
Part time police officers shall be paid an hourly wage for each hour of service
performed, provided such service is performed at the direction of the chief of
police. (Ord. 96-4, 2-13-1996)
6-2-7: COVERED BY WORKMEN'S COMPENSATION:
Such part time police officers shall be considered employees of the village and
as such shall be covered by workmen's compensation. (Ord. 96-4, 2-13-1996)
CHAPTER 3
DOGS
SECTION:
6-3-1: Definitions
6-3-2: Prohibitions
6-3-3: Authorizations
6-3-4: Registration
6-3-5: Penalties
6-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
COMPETENT PERSON: A competent person who is physically and mentally capable of
managing and controlling a dog which is in his responsibility while off the
premises of the owner or keeper thereof.
HOUSED FOR OBSERVATION: When the animal control officer receives information
that any person has been bitten by a dog or other animal, the animal control
officer or his authorized representative shall have such dog or other animal
confined under the observation of a licensed veterinarian for a period of ten
(10) days. The animal control officer may by regulation permit such confinement
to be reduced to a period of less than ten (10) days. Such veterinarian shall
report the clinical condition of the dog or other animal immediately, with
confirmation in writing to the animal control officer within twenty four (24)
hours after the dog or animal is presented for examination, giving the owner's
name, address, the date of confinement, the breed, description, age and sex of
such dog or other animal on appropriate forms. The animal control officer shall
notify the attending physician or responsible health agency. At the end of
confinement period, the veterinarian shall submit a written report to the
animal control officer advising him of the final disposition of such dog or
other animal on appropriate forms. When sufficient evidence is presented that
such dog or other animal was inoculated against rabies within the time
prescribed by law, it may be confined in the house of its owner, or in a manner
which will prohibit it from biting any person for a period of ten (10) days, if
the animal control officer, or other licensed veterinarian adjudges such
confinement satisfactory. The animal control officer may by regulation permit
such confinement to be reduced to a period of less than ten (10) days. At the
end of the confinement period such dog or other animal shall be examined by the
animal control officer or another licensed veterinarian. Such confinement shall
be at the expense of the owner.
RESTRICTED AREA: Any sidewalk, street, parkway, right-of-way, park, playground
or private lawn other than that of the owner.
RUNNING AT LARGE: Any dog shall be deemed to be running at large when it is off
the premises of its owner or keeper and not under adequate restraint of a
competent person. A dog is under adequate restraint within the meaning of this
chapter if it is on its owner's or keeper's premises and the dog has not
strayed off of such premises; or on a stout leash, not more than six feet (6')
in length; or at heel within seven feet (7') of a competent person and obedient
to that person's commands. (Ord. 77-55, 6-21-1977; amd. Ord. 17-12, 8-8-2017)
6-3-2: PROHIBITIONS:
   (A)   1. Not more than three (3) dogs shall be housed, kept or maintained in
or around any premises within a residential district of the Village.
      2.   Any individual housing more than three (3) dogs as of August 8, 2017
shall not be subject to the restrictions set forth in this section. However:
         (a)   Such individuals may not add to the number of dogs currently
residing in their homes; and
         (b)   All such individuals must register with the Village on or before
September 15, 2017 identifying the number of dogs currently in the residence.
(Ord. 17-12, 8-8-2017)
   (B)   No person shall allow any dog which he owns, houses, keeps or
maintains to run at large within the Village.
   (C)   Any person who owns, houses, keeps or maintains a dog which defecates
within or upon a restricted area shall be responsible for removing such
defecation.
   (D)   Any person who owns, houses, keeps or maintains a dog which has bitten
a person, shall house such dog for observation for a period of ten (10) days at
the order of a police officer or the animal control officer.
   (E)   No person shall house, keep or maintain any dog six (6) months of age
or older that does not have a current, valid Cook County rabies control
identification tag and license.
   (F)   No person or persons shall harbor or keep any animal which disturbs
the peace by loud noises at any time of the day or night. (Ord. 77-5, 6-21-
1977)
6-3-3: AUTHORIZATIONS:
   (A)   The Chief of Police, any officer of the Police Department or employee,
officer or independent contractor of the Village hired for that purpose is
authorized to use a chemical-type capture gun or other necessary devices to
effect the apprehension of a dog running at large.
   (B)   The Chief of Police, any officer of the Police Department or employee,
officer or independent contractor of the Village hired for that purpose is
authorized to humanely destroy any dog found running at large that presents a
real and immediate hazard to persons.
   (C)   The Chief of Police, any officer of the Police Department or employee,
officer or independent contractor of the Village hired for that purpose is
authorized to incarcerate or cause to be incarcerated at any veterinary
hospital any dog found running at large if the owner is unknown. Owner of such
dog, when found, shall pay all expenses incurred.
   (D)   The Chief of Police and/or the animal control officer is authorized to
direct any veterinarian at a veterinary hospital housing a dog secured by the
Police Department under this chapter, to humanely destroy such animal housed if
the owner cannot be located within a period of ten (10) days from the date of
incarceration. (Ord. 77-5, 6-21-1977)
6-3-4: REGISTRATION:
   (A)   On or before January 1 of each succeeding year, it shall be the duty
of any person owning, keeping, maintaining or harboring a dog in the Village to
register said dog with the Clerk of the Village.
   (B)   The Clerk shall receive a fee of one dollar ($1.00) for each dog
registered, and upon the payment of said fee the Clerk shall issue, in triplet,
a certificate of registration, one copy thereof to be delivered to the person
registering said dog, one copy to be retained by the Police Department and one
copy to be retained by the Clerk. Said certificate shall show a general
description of the dog, the owner's name and address, and rabies vaccination
tag number and expiration date.
   (C)   Prior to registering any dog as herein required, the person
registering said dog must present to the Clerk a certificate of current
vaccination against rabies as herein required. (Ord. 77-5, 6-21-1977; amd. Ord.
19-08, 3-12-2019)
6-3-5: PENALTIES:
Any person who shall violate any provision of this Ordinance shall be fined
seventy five dollars ($75.00) for a first offense, one hundred fifty dollars
($150.00) for a second offense, three hundred dollars ($300.00) for a third
offense, five hundred dollars ($500.00) for a fourth offense and seven hundred
fifty dollars ($750.00) for a fifth and subsequent offenses. (Ord. 77-5, 6-21-
1977; amd. Ord. 95-23, 10-10-1995; Ord. 18-08, 7-24-2018; Ord. 22-31, 11-8-
2022)
CHAPTER 4
ANIMALS
SECTION:
6-4-1: Disposal Center Authorized
6-4-2: Impounding Strays
6-4-3: Request Disposal
6-4-4: Village Not Responsible
6-4-1: DISPOSAL CENTER AUTHORIZED:
The Village officials are hereby authorized to maintain a disposal center for
the destruction of stray animals that may be impounded, which shall conform
with the laws of the State and shall meet the recommendations of the various
humane societies located in the State. (3-9-1953)
6-4-2: IMPOUNDING STRAYS:
All stray dogs and animals found running at large shall be impounded. (3-9-
1953; amd. Ord. 77-5, 6-21-1977)
6-4-3: REQUEST DISPOSAL:
All litters of puppies will be destroyed by request of the owner, but no bounty
will be paid for said litter and no such litter shall be accepted from minors.
No dog shall be accepted for disposal from minors, and each person bringing a
dog or dogs for disposal shall sign a proper statement to the effect that to
the best of his knowledge and belief the dog or dogs are strays and that he
captured said dog or dogs within the boundaries of the Village. (3-9-1953)
6-4-4: VILLAGE NOT RESPONSIBLE:
The Village assumes no responsibility regarding the said stray dogs other than
to see that they are humanely disposed of after a ten (10) day confinement
period. (3-9-1953; amd. Ord. 77-5, 6-21-1977)
CHAPTER 5
MISDEMEANORS
SECTION:
6-5-1: Assault
6-5-2: Battery
6-5-3: Billposting; Advertising
6-5-4: Breach Of The Peace
6-5-5: Burglar's Tools, Possession
6-5-6: Burning Prohibited
6-5-7: Concealing Identity
6-5-8: Disorderly Conduct
6-5-9: Possession, Drinking In Public
6-5-10: False Fire Alarm
6-5-11: Fighting
6-5-12: Firearms; Discharging
6-5-13: Gambling
6-5-14: Fire Hydrants; Unauthorized Use
6-5-15: House Of Ill Fame
6-5-16: Impersonating, Interfering With Village Officers
6-5-17: Indecent Exhibitions
6-5-18: Injuring Village Property
6-5-19: Liquor In Vehicles
6-5-20: Prostitution
6-5-21: Public Indecency
6-5-22: Slugs; Coin Operated Machines
6-5-23: Soliciting For A Prostitute
6-5-24: Trespass
6-5-25: Unlawful Appurtenances
6-5-26: Weapons, Carrying Concealed
6-5-27: Driving On Sidewalks
6-5-28: Driving Under Influence Of Intoxicating Liquor Or Narcotic Drugs
6-5-29: Reckless Driving
6-5-30: Drag Racing
6-5-31: Negligent Driving
6-5-32: Vandalism Of Property
6-5-33: Unauthorized Scavengers Prohibited
6-5-34: Certain Activities And/Or Items Prohibited In Village Park
6-5-35: Cannabis Regulations
6-5-36: Drug Paraphernalia
6-5-37:    Retail Theft
6-5-38:    Purchase, Possession, And Consumption Of Alcoholic Liquor by Minors
Prohibited
6-5-39:    Purchase, Possession, And Consumption Of Tobacco Products By Minors
Prohibited
6-5-1: ASSAULT:
A person commits an assault when, without lawful authority, he engages in
conduct which places another in reasonable apprehension of receiving a battery.
A person convicted of assault shall be fined as in this code provided. (Ord.
64-97, 6-9-1964)
6-5-2: BATTERY:
A person commits battery if he intentionally or knowingly without legal
justification and by any means: a) causes bodily harm to an individual or b)
makes physical contact of an insulting or provoking nature with an individual.
A person convicted of battery shall be fined as in this code provided. (Ord.
64-97, 6-9-1964)
6-5-3: BILLPOSTING; ADVERTISING:
No person shall post, stick, stamp, tack, paint or otherwise fix, or cause the
same to be done by any person, any notice, placard, bill card, poster,
advertisement or other device calculated to attract the attention of the
public, to or upon any sidewalk, crosswalk, curb or curbstone, or any other
portion or part of any parkway, park, public way, lamppost, electric light,
telegraph or telephone pole, hydrant or shade tree or property of the village
except such as may be required by the laws of the state and the provisions of
this code. (Ord. 61-33, 4-25-1961)
6-5-4: BREACH OF THE PEACE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to provoke a breach of the peace or to use
any violent, threatening, profane or indecent language to the disturbance of
any person, or to use any threatening, reproaching or abusive language to or
concerning any person tending to provoke a breach of the peace. (Ord. 64-97, 6-
9-1964)
6-5-5: BURGLAR'S TOOLS, POSSESSION:
It shall be unlawful for any person to have in his possession any nippers of
the description known as burglar's nippers, picklock, skeleton key, key to be
used with a bit, jimmy or other burglar's instrument or tool of whatsoever kind
or description, unless it be shown that such possession is innocent or for
lawful purpose. (1940 Code Sec. 5-11)
6-5-6: BURNING PROHIBITED:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to make or cause a fire to be made
for burning any combustible waste material in any public way or public space or
upon any private property within the village, except in a suitable metal or
wire burner so constructed as to prevent the escape of burning material or
sparks which might endanger surrounding property.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to make or cause a fire to be made
for burning any waste materials, with or without the protection required by
subsection (A) of this section in any location within a radius of two hundred
feet (200') of any tank containing flammable liquids or any flammable liquids,
nor closer than fifty feet (50') to any wood frame building or stock, store or
accumulation of lumber, or other combustible material. (1940 Code Sec. 5-10)
6-5-7: CONCEALING IDENTITY:
It shall be unlawful for any person within the village to appear in public in
any mask, cap, cowl, hood or other thing concealing the identity of the wearer;
provided, that the provisions of this action shall not apply to persons
attending or taking part in carnivals, mask balls, public shows,
entertainments, or celebrations in the village, or under permission of the
proper authorities of the village, nor to any person holding a written permit
issued by proper authorities of the village. (1940 Code Sec. 5-11)
6-5-8: DISORDERLY CONDUCT:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to commit the offense of
disorderly conduct within the Village of Forest View. A person commits
disorderly conduct when he knowingly:
      1.   Does any act in such unreasonable manner as to alarm or disturb
another and to provoke a breach of the peace;
      2.   Enters upon the property of another and for a lewd or unlawful
purpose deliberately looks into a dwelling on the property through any window
or other opening in it;
      3.   Does or makes any unreasonable or offensive act, utterance, gesture
or display which, under the circumstances, creates a clear and present danger
of a breach of peace or imminent threat of violence;
      4.   Refuses or fails to cease and desist any peaceful conduct or
activity likely to produce a breach of peace where there is an imminent threat
of violence, and where the police have made all reasonable efforts to protect
the otherwise peaceful conduct and activity and have requested that such
conduct and activity be stopped and explained the request if there is time;
      5.   Resists or obstructs the performance by one known to the person to
be a police officer or any authorized act within his official capacity;
      6.   Assembles with two or more persons for the purpose of using force or
violence to disturb the public peace;
      7.   Fails to obey a lawful order of dispersal by a person known by him
to be a police officer, where three or more persons are committing acts of
disorderly conduct in the immediate vicinity, which acts are likely to cause
substantial harm or serious inconvenience, annoyance or alarm;
      8.   Resists his own arrest by using or threatening the use of violence
or physical force or by fleeing from the officer; or interferes with the arrest
of another person by using or threatening the use of violence, physical force,
or physical interference;
      9.   Appears in any public place manifestly under the influence of
alcohol, narcotics or other drugs, not therapeutically administered, to the
degree that he may endanger himself or other persons or property, or annoy
persons in his vicinity;
      10.   Carries in a threatening or menacing manner, without authority of
law, any pistol, revolver, dagger, razor, dangerous knife, stiletto, knuckles,
slingshot, an object containing noxious or deleterious liquid, gas or substance
or other dangerous weapons, or conceals such weapon on or about his person or
vehicle;
      11.   While acting as a collection agency as defined in the Collection
Agency Act (225 ILCS 425/1 et seq.) or as an employee of such collection
agency, and while attempting to collect an alleged debt, makes a telephone call
to the alleged debtor which is designed to harass, annoy or intimidate the
alleged debtor;
      12.   Transmits or causes to be transmitted in any manner to another a
false alarm to the effect that a bomb or other explosive of any nature or a
container holding poisonous gas, a deadly biological or chemical contaminant,
or radioactive substance is concealed in such place that its explosion or
release would endanger human life, knowing at the time of such transmission
that there is no reasonable ground for believing that such bomb, explosive or a
container holding poisonous gas, a deadly biological or chemical contaminant,
or radioactive substance is concealed in such place;
      13.   Obtains or exerts control over property in the custody of any law
enforcement agency which is explicitly represented to him by any law
enforcement officer or any individual acting in behalf of a law enforcement
agency as being stolen; and:
         a.   Intends to deprive the owner permanently of the use or benefit of
the property; or
         b.   Knowingly uses, conceals or abandons the property in such manner
as to deprive the owner permanently of such use or benefit; or
         c.   Uses, conceals, or abandons the property knowing such use,
concealment or abandonment probably will deprive the owner permanently of such
use or benefit.
         d.   The provisions of this section shall apply to any item of
tangible personal property with a value of $500.00 or less.
   (B)   Penalty. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be
subject to a fine of not less than $250.00, nor more than $750.00.
(Ord. 25-21, 8-26-2025)
6-5-9: POSSESSION, DRINKING IN PUBLIC:
   (A)   Definitions: For the purposes of this section, the following
definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning:
    PUBLIC PLACE: Any street, sidewalk, highway, public thoroughfare, or
parking area available to the public, or any street, sidewalk, alley or parking
area located on private property for which the owner(s) of said property has
entered into a contract with the village for enforcement of traffic
regulations, and village owned property, public grounds, recreation areas,
parks, and schools.
   (B)   Consumption And Possession Of Alcohol: It shall be unlawful for any
person to consume any alcoholic beverage or carry on his/her person any open
containers of alcoholic beverages upon any public place within the corporate
limits of the village.
   (C)   Intoxication Creating A Disturbance: It shall be unlawful for any
person to be drunk or to be in a state of intoxication in any public place or
in any private house or place within the corporate limits of the village to the
disturbance of any person. (Ord. 09-07, 8-25-2009)
6-5-10: FALSE FIRE ALARM:
It shall be unlawful for any person, without reasonable cause, by outcry or
otherwise, to make or circulate, or cause to be made or circulated any false
alarm of fire. (1940 Code Sec. 5-10)
6-5-11: FIGHTING:
It shall be unlawful for any person to instigate, cause or procure any public
or private fighting. (Ord. 64-97, 6-9-1964)
6-5-12: FIREARMS; DISCHARGING:
It shall be unlawful for any person, except a member of the police department,
when on duty, or any officer of any court whose duty it may be to serve
warrants or make arrests, to fire or discharge any gun, pistol or other
firearm, within the corporate limits of the village. (Ord. 64-97, 6-9-1964)
6-5-13: GAMBLING:
Except as allowed pursuant to section
3-3-22, "Video Gaming", of this code:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in gambling for money or
other valuable thing whether by means of a device, scheme, game of chance,
hazard or skill, either as bookmaker, dealer, keeper, player or otherwise, nor
shall any person aid, assist, abet in any manner or be a party to any of the
foregoing offenses or the betting on the outcome of any particular event,
including horse races.
   (B)   Every structure, room, or premises kept or used for the purpose of
permitting persons to gamble by the means of devices, games, chance or
otherwise, or aid and abet in the same is hereby declared to be a common
nuisance, and no person who is the owner, lessor, agent or caretaker of said
room or structure shall permit therein gambling of any sort.
   (C)   No person shall frequent or be found in any room or structure where
devices of gambling are kept or sheer gambling of any kind is engaged in, nor
shall any person have in his possession articles of any kind commonly used in
carrying on or promoting any game of chance or any type of gambling. (Ord. 13-
09, 11-26-2013)
6-5-14: FIRE HYDRANTS; UNAUTHORIZED USE:
It shall be unlawful for any person, other than members of the fire department
or employees of any department of the village to use water from any fire
hydrant being a part of the village water system except for extinguishing fires
or unless specifically authorized by the Superintendent of Public Works. (Ord.
62-63, 2-13-1962)
6-5-15: HOUSE OF ILL-FAME:
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain a house of ill-fame or
assignation or place for the practice of prostitution or lewdness. No person
shall patronize or be an inmate of the same nor let, own or be interested in
any house, room or other premises for any such purpose or shall keep a common,
ill-governed, disorderly house to the encouragement of idleness, gaming,
drinking, fornication or other misbehavior. (Ord. 64-97, 6-9-1964)
6-5-16: IMPERSONATING, INTERFERING WITH VILLAGE OFFICERS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to falsely represent himself to be an
officer of the Village or to, without being duly authorized, exercise or
attempt to exercise any of the duties, functions or powers of a Village officer
or shall hinder, obstruct, resist or otherwise interfere with any Village
officer in the discharge of his official duties. (Ord. 64-97, 6-9-1964)
6-5-17: INDECENT EXHIBITIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit any indecent, lewd, or filthy act
in any public place in the Village; to utter any lewd or filthy words, sing any
song the words of which are suggestive of indecency or immorality, or use any
threatening or abusive language in the hearing of other persons; to make any
overture of lewdness, tending to pervert the morals of any person, upon or in
the public ways or other public places or in any public conveyance in the
Village.
It shall be unlawful for any person to exhibit, sell, offer to sell, circulate,
or distribute any indecent or lewd book, picture, or other thing of any immoral
or scandalous nature, or exhibit in any place where the same can be seen from
the public way, or in a public place frequented by children, any picture
representing a person in a nude state which is not connected with any art or
education exhibition, or perform any indecent, immoral, or lewd play or other
representation, or exhibit himself in a public place in a state of nudity,
indecency or lewdness. And it shall be unlawful for any person to offer or
exhibit for sale, or offer to give away any book or other printed matter
purporting on its cover or otherwise to be lewd, salacious or obscene. (1940
Code Sec. 5-4)
6-5-18: INJURING VILLAGE PROPERTY:
It shall be unlawful for any person to negligently or wilfully injure, destroy
or deface any bridge, crossings, sidewalks, lamp, lamppost or other property of
the Village. (Ord. 64-97, 6-9-1964)
6-5-19: LIQUOR IN VEHICLES:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to drink any alcoholic liquor as
defined by law on any public way or in or about any motor vehicle upon a public
way in the Village.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to transport, carry, possess or
have any alcoholic liquor in or upon or about any motor vehicle upon any public
way in the Village except in the original package and with the seal unbroken.
(Ord. 64-97, 6-9-1964)
6-5-20: PROSTITUTION:
It shall be unlawful for any person to perform, offer or agree to perform any
of the following acts for money:
   (A)   Any act of sexual intercourse; or
   (B)   Any act of deviate sexual conduct. (Ord. 64-97, 6-9-1964)
6-5-21: PUBLIC INDECENCY:
   (A)   Any person of the age of seventeen (17) years or older who performs
any of the following acts in a public place commits a public indecency:
      1.   An act of sexual intercourse; or
      2.   An act of deviate sexual conduct; or
      3.   A lewd exposure of the body done with intent to arouse or to satisfy
the sexual desire of the person; or
      4.   A lewd fondling or caress of the body of another person of either
sex.
   (B)   "Public place" for purposes of this Section means any place where the
conduct may reasonably be expected to be viewed by others. (Ord. 64-97, 6-9-
1964)
6-5-22: SLUGS; COIN-OPERATED MACHINES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to insert, or to attempt to insert, into
the coin box or money receptacle of any telephone, any slug, button, or other
substance, or to manipulate or operate, or to attempt to manipulate or operate,
in any manner whatever, any telephone instrument or any mechanism or device
connected or commonly used therewith, with the intent to obtain telephone
service without paying therefor.
It shall be unlawful for any reason to insert, or to attempt to insert, into
the coin box or money receptacle of any telephone, slug, button, wire, hook, or
other implements or substances with the intent to obtain from such coin box or
money receptacle a legal tender coin of the United States. (1940 Code Sec. 5-6)
6-5-23: SOLICITING FOR A PROSTITUTE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to perform any of the following acts
described as soliciting for a prostitute:
   (A)   Solicit another for the purpose of prostitution; or
   (B)   Arrange or offer to arrange a meeting of persons for the purpose of
prostitution; or
   (C)   Direct another to a place knowing such direction is for the purpose of
prostitution. (Ord. 64-97, 6-9-1964)
6-5-24: TRESPASS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to enter into or upon any lot, block or
tract of ground in the Village which is under cultivation, unless such person
is an owner, lessee, or person entitled to so enter, or the duly authorized
agent thereof, and any person found by the police in and upon any such premises
shall be treated as a trespasser unless he can produce satisfactory evidence of
ownership or right to be in and upon any such premises. (1940 Code Sec. 5-14)
6-5-25: UNLAWFUL APPURTENANCES:
It shall be unlawful for any owner, lessee, or person in possession of any
building in the Village to erect, maintain, or permit to be erected or
maintained on or about the stairway in, or the entrance to, such building, or
in or about its exterior building, any railing, fence, guard, or protection of
any kind, upon which there shall be affixed or in any manner attached so as to
protrude therefrom any spike, nail, or other pointed instrument of any kind or
description. (1940 Code Sec. 5-12)
6-5-26: WEAPONS, CARRYING CONCEALED:
It shall be unlawful for an person within the corporate limits of the Village
to carry or wear, under his clothes or concealed about his person, any pistol,
revolver or sling shot, cross knuckles or buckles of lead, brass or other metal
or bowie knife, dirk knife or dirk or dagger or any other dangerous or deadly
weapon.
This prohibition shall not apply to members of the Police Department of the
Village when on duty nor to any officer of any court whose duty it may be to
serve warrants or to make arrests.
Any such weapon duly adjudged by any proper officer or to have been worn or
carried by any person in violation of this Section, shall be forfeited or
confiscated to the Village. (Ord. 64-97, 6-9-1964)
6-5-27: DRIVING ON SIDEWALKS:
The driver of a vehicle shall not drive within or upon any sidewalk area except
at a permanent or temporary driveway. (Ord. 64-97, 6-9-1964)
6-5-28: DRIVING UNDER INFLUENCE OF INTOXICATING LIQUOR OR NARCOTIC DRUGS:
It shall be unlawful for any person who is a habitual user of narcotic drugs or
any person who is under the influence of intoxicating liquor or narcotic drugs
to drive any vehicle within the Village. (Ord. 64-97, 6-9-1964)
6-5-29: RECKLESS DRIVING:
Any person who drives any vehicle with a wilful or a wanton disregard for the
safety of persons or property is guilty of reckless driving. (Ord. 64-97, 6-9-
1964)
6-5-30: DRAG RACING:
Any person, who, as an operator of a motor vehicle, is a participant in drag
racing shall be fined as provided in Section
1-4-1 of this Code.
For the purpose of this Section "drag racing" means the act of two (2) or more
individuals competing or racing on any street or highway in this Village in a
situation in which one of the motor vehicles is beside or to the rear of a
motor vehicle operated by a competing driver and the one driver attempts to
prevent the competing driver from passing or overtaking him. (Ord. 64-97, 6-9-
1964; amd. Ord. 95-23, 10-10-1995)
6-5-31: NEGLIGENT DRIVING:
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any vehicle upon any public way
negligently, heedlessly and without due caution in a manner so as to endanger
or be likely to endanger any person or property. (Ord. 64-97, 6-9-1964)
6-5-32: VANDALISM OF PROPERTY:
   (A)   Definitions: For the purposes of this Ordinance, the following
definitions shall apply:
      1.   "Person" shall include any individual, firm, partnership,
association, corporation, company or organization of any kind, the State of
Illinois, or any political subdivision.
      2.   "Property" shall include any real estate including improvements
thereon, and tangible personalty.
      3.   "Legal guardian" shall include a person appointed guardian, or given
custody, of a minor by a Circuit Court of this State, but does not include a
person appointed guardian, or given custody of a minor under the Illinois
Juvenile Court Act.
      4.   "Minor" shall be a person who has attained eleven (11) years of age
but who has not yet reached eighteen (18) years of age.
   (B)   Offenses:
      1.   Within the Village of Forest View no person shall:
         (a)   Knowingly or recklessly damage or cause to be damaged any
property of another person without his consent; or
         (b)   Knowingly and without authority enter into or obtain control
over any motor vehicle, bicycle, aircraft or watercraft or any part thereof of
another person without his consent.
      2.   It shall be unlawful for any parent or guardian of any minor living
with his parents or guardian to neglect to restrain such minor from committing
any act prohibited by subsection (B)1 of this Section.
Option 1:
The commission of any act prohibited by subsection (B)1 of this Section by a
minor who is living with his parents or guardian shall be conclusive proof that
the parent or guardian has neglected to restrain such minor from committing
such act.
Option 2:
The commission of any act prohibited by subsection (B)1 of this Section by a
minor who is living with his parents or guardian shall raise the presumption
that the parent or guardian has neglected to restrain such minor from
committing such act. It shall be an affirmative defense for the parent or
guardian to prove that such parent or guardian exercised his duty to restrain
the minor from committing the act prohibited by subsection (B)1 of this Section
complained of in the pending action, but that such action on the part of the
parent or guardian to attempt to restrain said minor, although exercised with
due care, was unsuccessful.
   (C)   Penalty:
      1.   Every person found guilty of an offense under subsection (B)1 of
this Section shall be subject to either or both of the following penalties:
         (a)   A fine not in excess of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00);
         (b)   A period of conditional discharge not to exceed one year.
(1) The conditions of a conditional discharge shall include that the defendant:
   A. Did not violate any criminal statute or ordinance of any jurisdiction;
and
   B. Did report to and appear in person before such person or agency as
directed by the court.
(2) The conditions of conditional discharge may, in addition require that the
defendant:
   A. Work or pursue a course of study or vocational training;
   B. Undergo medical or psychiatric treatment, or treatment for drug addiction
or alcoholism;
   C. Make restitution or reparation in an amount not to exceed actual loss or
damage to property and pecuniary loss or one thousand dollars ($1,000.00)
whichever is less; and
   D. If a minor, reside with his parent or in a foster home; attend school;
attend a nonresidential program for youth, or contribute to his own support at
home or in a foster home.
(3) When a court orders restitution or reparation as a condition for a
conditional discharge, the court shall determine the amount and conditions of
payment. When the conditions of payment have not been satisfied, the court, at
any time prior to the expiration of termination of the period of conditional
discharge may impose an additional period of not more than two (2) years. Only
the conditions of payment shall continue to apply during such additional
period. The court shall retain all of the incidents of the original sentence,
including the authority to modify or enlarge the original conditions and to
revoke the penalty of conditional discharge if the conditions of payment are
violated during such additional period.
(4) When the petition is filed charging a violation of a condition imposed for
conditional discharge, the court:
   A. May order a summons to the offender to appear; or order a warrant for the
offender's arrest where there is danger of his fleeing the jurisdiction or
causing serious harm to others or when the offender fails to answer a summons.
The issuance of such warrant or summons shall stay the sentence of conditional
discharge until the final determination of the charge, and the term of
conditional discharge shall not run so long as the offender has not answered
the summons or warrant.
   B. Shall conduct a hearing of the alleged violation. The court may admit the
offender to bail pending the hearing.
   C. Shall receive evidence in open court with the right of confrontation,
cross-examination and representation by counsel. The Village has the burden of
going forward with the evidence and proving the violation by the preponderance
of the evidence.
   D. Shall not revoke a conditional discharge for failure to comply with
conditions of a sentence which imposes financial obligations upon the offender
unless such failure is due to his wilful refusal to pay.
   E. May modify the conditions of a conditional discharge on motion of the
Village or on its own motion or at the request of the offender after notice to
all parties and a hearing.
(5) If the court finds that the offender has violated a condition at any time
prior to the expiration or termination of the period, it may continue the
offender on the existing period, with or without modifying or enlarging the
conditions, or may impose any other penalty that was available at the time of
the initial penalty.
(6) A judgment revoking a sentence of conditional discharge is a final
appealable order.
      2.   Every person found guilty of an offense under subsection (B)2 of
this Section shall pay a fine not in excess of one thousand dollars
($1,000.00).
   (D)   Liability Of Parent Or Legal Guardian Of Minor Offender: The parent or
legal guardian of a minor defendant who resides with such parent or legal
guardian shall be liable for any fine or condition or restitution or reparation
imposed by a court upon a minor for violation of this Ordinance, provided that
said minor has not paid said fine or made restitution or reparation within the
time ordered by the court, and further provided that said parent or legal
guardian has been served with summons or notice to appear in the original cause
against such minor and all proceedings thereafter. (Ord. 76-26, 11-16-1976)
6-5-33: UNAUTHORIZED SCAVENGERS PROHIBITED:
No person other than an authorized representative of a scavenger licensed by
the village may remove or disturb any waste containers or recycling containers
or the contents thereof after the containers are placed in the public right of
way by the property owner. (Ord. 08-17, 9-9-2008)
6-5-34: CERTAIN ACTIVITIES AND/OR ITEMS PROHIBITED IN VILLAGE PARK:
   (A)   The following activities and/or items are prohibited in the village
park except when such activities are conducted in conjunction with an event
sponsored by the village of Forest View or the Forest View park district:
      1.   Bicycles.
      2.   Skateboards.
      3.   Rollerblades.
      4.   Food.
      5.   Pets.
      6.   Smoking.
      7.   Electric Bicycles.
      8.   Electric Scooters.
   (B)   A violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine not
exceeding seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). (Ord. 08-15, 9-9-2008; amd.
Ord. 25-27, 12-9-2025)
6-5-35: CANNABIS REGULATIONS:
   (A)   Cannabis Defined: Cannabis includes marijuana, hashish and other
substances which are identified as including any parts of the plant Cannabis
sativa, whether growing or not; the seeds thereof, the resin extracted from any
part of such plant; and any compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture,
or preparation of such plant, its seeds, or resin, including
tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) and all other cannabinol derivatives, including its
naturally occurring or synthetically produced ingredients, whether produced
directly or indirectly by extraction, or independently by means of chemical
syntheses or by a combination of extraction and chemical syntheses; but shall
not include the mature stalks of such plant, fiber produced from such stalks,
oil or cake made from the seeds of such plant, any other compound, manufacture,
salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of such mature stalks (except the
resin extracted therefrom), fiber, oil, cake, or the sterilized seed of such
plant which is incapable of germination.
   (B)   Violation: It shall be a violation of this section for any person
knowingly to possess any quantity of any substance containing cannabis, except
that the effect of this section shall be limited to persons knowingly
possessing thirty grams (30 g) or less of any substance containing cannabis.
   (C)   Citation: A law enforcement officer may, in lieu of filing a complaint
or arresting a violator, issue to the violator a citation ("notice to appear"
or "P" ticket) allowing the violator to settle and compromise the violation
claim by paying to the village the amount set forth below, not more than ten
(10) days after the time such citation was issued:
 
2 grams or less                               $150.00
More than 2 grams and not more than 10 grams  250.00
More than 10 grams and not more than 20 grams 400.00
More than 20 grams and not more than 30 grams 500.00
 
If the person to whom a citation was issued fails to settle within ten (10)
days, the amount of settlement prior to a court appearance shall be double the
amount enumerated in this subsection.
   (D)   Penalty: If the person to whom the citation was issued fails to settle
and pay such violation claim, proceedings shall be instituted in the Cook
County circuit court against the violator. If a fine is imposed by the court,
such fine shall not be less than the amount set forth in subsection (C) of this
section, as the settlement amount, but not more than seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00) for each offense. (Ord. 10-10, 9-28-2010)
6-5-36: DRUG PARAPHERNALIA:
   (A)   Definitions: For the purposes of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning:
    CANNABIS: Shall have the meaning ascribed to it in section 3 of the
"cannabis control act" 1 , as if that definition were incorporated herein.
   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE: Shall have the meaning ascribed to it in section 102
of the "Illinois controlled substances act" 2 , as if that definition were
incorporated herein.
   DRUG PARAPHERNALIA: All equipment, products and materials of any kind which
are peculiar to or adapted for use in planting, growing, harvesting,
manufacturing, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging,
storing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing
into the human body cannabis or a controlled substance in violation of the
cannabis control act, the Illinois controlled substances act, section
6-5-35 of this chapter, or similar law or local ordinance.
Drug paraphernalia shall include, but not be limited to: water, ice, air driven
or electric pipes; miniature cocaine spoons or vials; smoking or carburetion
pipes, tubes, masks or other devices; bongs; roach clips; or any item whose
purpose, as announced or described by the possessor, or whose actual use as
determined by the presence of a controlled substance on, in or near the item,
is for use in violating the cannabis control act, the Illinois controlled
substances act, section
6-5-35 of this chapter, or similar law or local ordinance.
   (B)   Possession Of Drug Paraphernalia: No person shall knowingly possess an
item of drug paraphernalia with the intent to use it in ingesting, inhaling, or
otherwise introducing cannabis or a controlled substance into the human body,
or in preparing cannabis or a controlled substance for that use.
In determining use or intent under this section, the trier of fact can take
into consideration the general, usual, customary and historical use to which
the item involved has been put, and/or the proximity of the cannabis or
controlled substance to the drug paraphernalia or the presence of cannabis or
controlled substance on the drug paraphernalia.
   (C)   Citation: A law enforcement officer, may, in lieu of filing a
complaint or arresting a violator, issue to the violator a citation ("notice to
appear" or "P" ticket) allowing the violator to settle and compromise the
violation claim by paying to the village the amount of thirty five dollars
($35.00), not more than ten (10) days after the time such citation was issued.
If the person to whom a citation was issued fails to settle within ten (10)
days, the amount of settlement prior to a court appearance shall be doubled the
amount enumerated in this subsection.
   (D)   Penalty: Any person found guilty by a court of competent jurisdiction
of having violated subsection (B) of this section, shall be fined not less than
one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00).
(Ord. 10-10, 9-28-2010)
 
Notes
1 1. 720 ILCS 550/3.
2 1. 720 ILCS 570/102.
6-5-37: RETAIL THEFT:
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
   CONCEAL: To CONCEAL merchandise means that, although there may be some
notice of its presence, the merchandise is not visible through ordinary
observation.
   FULL RETAIL VALUE: The merchant’s stated or advertised price of the
merchandise.
   MERCHANDISE: Any item of tangible personal property.
   MERCHANT: An owner or operator of any retail mercantile establishment or any
agent, employee, lessee, consignee, officer, director, franchisee or
independent contractor of the owner or operator.
   PREMISES OF A RETAIL MERCANTILE ESTABLISHMENT: Includes, but is not limited
to, the retail mercantile establishment, any common use areas in shopping
centers and all parking areas set aside by a merchant or on behalf of a
merchant for the parking of vehicles for the convenience of the patrons of the
retail mercantile establishment.
   RETAIL MERCANTILE ESTABLISHMENT: Any place where merchandise is displayed,
held, stored or offered for sale to the public.
   SHOPPING CART: Those push carts of the type or types which are commonly
provided by grocery stores, drugstores or other retail mercantile
establishments for the use of the public in transporting commodities in stores
and markets and, incidentally, from the stores to a place outside the store.
   UNDER-RING: To cause the cash register or other sales-recording device to
reflect less than the full retail value of the merchandise.
   (B)   Retail theft prohibited. No person shall commit retail theft. A person
commits the offense of retail theft when he or she knowingly:
      1.   Takes possession of, carries away, transfers or causes to be carried
away or transferred any merchandise displayed, held, stored or offered for sale
in a retail mercantile establishment with the intention of retaining the
merchandise or with the intention of depriving the merchant permanently of the
possession, use or benefit of such merchandise without paying the full retail
value of the merchandise;
      2.   Alters, transfers or removes any label, price tag, marking, indicia
of value or any other markings which aid in determining value affixed to any
merchandise displayed, held, stored or offered for sale, in a retail mercantile
establishment and attempts to purchase the merchandise personally or in consort
with another at less than the full retail value with the intention of depriving
the merchant of the full retail value of such merchandise;
      3.   Transfers any merchandise displayed, held, stored or offered for
sale, in a retail mercantile establishment from the container in or on which
the merchandise is displayed to any other container with the intention of
depriving the merchant of the full retail value of the merchandise;
      4.   Under-rings with the intention of depriving the merchant of the full
retail value of the merchandise;
      5.   Removes a shopping cart from the premises of a retail mercantile
establishment without the consent of the merchant given at the time of the
removal with the intention of depriving the merchant permanently of the
possession, use or benefit of the cart;
      6.   Represents to a merchant that he, she or another is the lawful owner
of property, knowing that the representation is false, and conveys or attempts
to convey that property to a merchant who is the owner of the property in
exchange for money, merchandise credit or other property of the merchant; or
      7.   Uses or possesses any theft detection shielding device or theft
detection device remover with the intention of using the device to deprive the
merchant permanently of the possession, use or benefit of any merchandise
displayed, held, stored or offered for sale in the retail mercantile
establishment without paying the full retail value of the merchandise.
      8.   Obtains or exerts unauthorized control over property of the owner
and thereby intends to deprive the owner permanently of the use or benefit of
the property when a lessee of the personal property of another fails to return
it to the owner, or if the lessee fails to pay the full retail value of such
property to the lessor in satisfaction of any contractual provision requiring
such, within 10 days after written demand from the owner for its return. A
notice in writing, given after the expiration of the leasing agreement, by
registered mail, to the lessee at the address given by the lessee and shown on
the leasing agreement shall constitute proper demand.
   (C)   Attempted retail theft prohibited. No person shall commit attempted
retail theft. A person commits attempted retail theft when, with the intent to
commit a theft, he or she does any act which constitutes a substantial step
toward the commission of that offense.
   (D)   If any person:
      1.   Conceals upon his or her person or among his or her belongings,
unpurchased merchandise displayed, held, stored or offered for sale in a retail
mercantile establishment; and
      2.   Removes that merchandise beyond the last known station for receiving
payments for the merchandise in that retail mercantile establishment;
      That person shall be presumed to have possessed, carried away or
transferred the merchandise with the intention of retaining it or with the
intention of depriving the merchant permanently of the possession, use or
benefit of the merchandise.
   (E)   Any person violating this section may be subject to certain fines and
penalties, including but not limited to a maximum fine of $750.
(Ord. 25-23, 8-26-2025)
6-5-38: PURCHASE, POSSESSION, AND CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR BY MINORS
PROHIBITED:
   (A)   For purposes of this Section, “alcoholic liquor” means and includes
alcohol, alcohol-infused products, spirits, wine and beer, and every liquid or
solid, patented or not, containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer, and capable
of being consumed as a beverage by a human being, as defined under section 1-
3.05 of the Illinois Liquor Control Act of 1934 (235 ILCS 5/1-3.05).
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person under twenty-one (21) years of age
to purchase, solicit another person to procure, possess or consume alcoholic
liquor.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any parent or guardian to permit any minor
child of which he or she be parent or guardian to violate this Section.
   (D)   Exceptions. The exceptions set forth under subsections (g), (h), and
(i) of Section 6-20 of the Illinois Liquor Control Act of 1934 (235 ILCS 5/6-
20) shall apply to this Section.
   (E)   Any person violating this section may be subject to certain fines and
penalties, including but not limited to a maximum fine of $750.
(Ord. 25-20, 8-26-2025)
6-5-39: PURCHASE, POSSESSION, AND CONSUMPTION OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS BY MINORS
PROHIBITED:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of twenty one (21)
years to purchase, possess, or consume any tobacco products, alternative
nicotine products, or any product intended for human consumption that contains,
is made, or derived from tobacco or nicotine, regardless of the source of the
nicotine, including e-cigarettes and other vapor products that deliver nicotine
or other substances through inhalation of vaporized liquid.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any parent or guardian to permit any minor
child of which he or she be parent or guardian to violate this Section.
   (C)   Any person violating this section may be subject to certain fines and
penalties, including but not limited to a maximum fine of $750.
(Ord. 25-24, 8-26-2025)
CHAPTER 6
VILLAGE CURFEW
SECTION:
6-6-1: Curfew Hours
6-6-2: Affirmative Defenses
6-6-3: Enforcement
6-6-4: Parents' Responsibility
6-6-1: CURFEW HOURS:
   (A)   No person under the age of seventeen (17) years shall be upon any
public street, alley, or public way within the village at the following times:
      1.   Between ten thirty o'clock (10:30) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M.
Sundays through Thursdays.
      2.   Between eleven thirty o'clock (11:30) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00)
A.M. Fridays and Saturdays.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to be present in or upon any
portion of the village park between the hours of nine thirty o'clock (9:30)
P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. (Ord. 04-02, 3-9-2004)
6-6-2: AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSES:
It is a defense to a violation under section
6-6-1 of this chapter that the child engaged in the prohibited conduct while:
   (A)   Accompanied by the child's parent, legal guardian, or legal custodian;
   (B)   Accompanied by an adult at least eighteen (18) years of age and
specified by the child's parent, legal guardian, or legal custodian;
   (C)   Participating in, going to, or returning from:
      1.   Lawful employment;
      2.   A school sanctioned activity;
      3.   A religious event;
      4.   An emergency involving the protection of a person or property from
an imminent threat of serious bodily injury or substantial damage;
      5.   An activity involving the exercise of the child's rights protected
under the first amendment to the United States constitution such as freedom of
speech and the right of assembly; or
      6.   An activity conducted by a nonprofit or governmental entity that
provides recreation, education, training, or other care under the supervision
of one or more adults. (Ord. 04-02, 3-9-2004)
6-6-3: ENFORCEMENT:
It shall be the duty of the police department to escort any minor child under
the age of seventeen (17) years, found upon the streets, alleys or public ways
of the village during the prohibited hours, to the village police department
and thereupon contact the parents or legal guardians of said child and request
said parents or legal guardians to come to the village police department and
escort said minor to his or her home. The police department will cause written
notice to be serviced upon the parent or legal guardian setting forth the
manner in which this chapter has been violated. Prior to detaining or escorting
any minor, the officer shall make an affirmative inquiry of the minor as to
whether any of the affirmative defenses set forth in section
6-6-2 of this chapter applies. (Ord. 04-02, 3-9-2004)
6-6-4: PARENTS' RESPONSIBILITY:
No person having the legal care and custody of a child under seventeen (17)
years of age shall allow or permit such child to go or be upon any public
street, alley or other place in the village during the hours set forth in this
chapter, exceptions herein outlined. Any parent, legal guardian or person in
charge of such child who shall knowingly allow or permit such child to violate
the provisions of this chapter after receiving notice of the first violation
shall be fined as in this code provided. (Ord. 04-02, 3-9-2004)
CHAPTER 7
WEEDS
SECTION:
6-7-1: Growth Restriction
6-7-2: Failure To Destroy
6-7-3: Lien For Costs
6-7-4: Duty Of Director Of Public Works
6-7-5: Fee For Cutting Of Weeds
6-7-6: Definition
6-7-1: GROWTH RESTRICTION:
It shall be unlawful for any owner or lessee of any real estate in the village
to refuse or neglect to cut weeds, when such weeds shall have reached a height
in excess of five inches (5"). (Ord. 96-15, 7-9-1996)
6-7-2: FAILURE TO DESTROY:
Every owner or lessee of real estate within the village shall cut the weeds on
his property at all such times as may be necessary so that such weeds shall not
exceed five inches (5") in height, and if such owner neglects or refuses to cut
such weeds which exceed five inches (5") in height, the village may cut the
weeds or authorize some person to cut the same on behalf of the village. Prior
to cutting such weeds, the village shall provide three (3) days' written notice
and demand that the owner cut the weeds. (Ord. 01-08, 10-9-2001)
6-7-3: LIEN FOR COSTS:
If the village cuts or authorizes the cutting of weeds on its behalf, the
village shall be entitled to a lien against the real estate in an amount of
money covering the cost and expense incurred or payable for the performance of
the service rendered in cutting such weeds. The property owner shall be liable
for all costs incurred by the village or its agent in placing or removing said
lien. (Ord. 99-1, 3-9-1999)
6-7-4: DUTY OF DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS:
It shall be the duty of the director of public works to remove from and keep
the streets, alleys, parks and public places in the village free and clean of
any growth of noxious weeds. (Ord. 70-222, 6-9-1970)
6-7-5: FEE FOR CUTTING OF WEEDS:
The director of public works shall keep a record of all lands upon which the
village has been required to cut or authorize the cutting of weeds and shall
submit a list of such land to the village clerk. The village clerk shall bill
the owner and lessee of all such real estate for the cutting of weeds at a rate
of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for each five thousand four hundred
(5,400) square feet of lot area or fraction thereof for the initial cutting of
weeds during any one calendar year. Each additional cutting shall be billed at
a rate of three hundred twenty five dollars ($325.00) for each five thousand
four hundred (5,400) square feet of lot area or fraction thereof during the
same calendar year. The owner and occupant of such lands shall be jointly and
severally liable for the cost of the service rendered in cutting such weeds.
(Ord. 01-08, 10-9-2001)
6-7-6: DEFINITION:
For the purposes of this chapter the term "weeds" means weeds, grass, or any
similar natural growth foliage on or about any private property within the
village. (Ord. 96-15, 7-9-1996)
CHAPTER 8
NOISES
SECTION:
6-8-1: Declaration Of Policy
6-8-2: Definitions
6-8-3: Unlawful Noise
6-8-4: Specific Limitations
6-8-5: Amplified Sound; Motor Vehicles
6-8-6: Emergency Signaling Devices
6-8-7: Mufflers
6-8-8: Exemptions
6-8-9: Authorized Complainants
6-8-10: Violation; Penalty
6-8-1: DECLARATION OF POLICY:
   It is hereby declared that the making, creation or maintenance of excessive,
loud, raucous or unnecessary noise within the village affects and endangers the
public health, comfort, convenience, safety, and welfare of the people of the
village. The provisions and prohibitions hereinafter contained are enacted for
the purpose of securing and promoting the public health, safety, and welfare of
the village and its residents.
(Ord. 24-06, 5-28-2024)
6-8-2: DEFINITIONS:
   Certain words and terms used in this chapter are hereby defined as follows:
   EMERGENCY: An occurrence of a set of circumstances involving actual or
imminent physical trauma or property damage demanding immediate attention.
   EMERGENCY WORK: Any work performed for the purpose of preventing or
alleviating physical trauma or property damage, whether actual or threatened by
an emergency, or work by public or private utilities when restoring utility
service.
   EXCESSIVE, LOUD, RAUCOUS OR UNNECESSARY NOISE Any noise which unreasonably
disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace, or safety of
reasonable persons of ordinary sensitivity; or any noise which is so harsh,
prolonged, unnatural, or unusual in time or place as to occasion unreasonable
discomfort to any person.
   PLAINLY AUDIBLE: Any sound that can be detected by a person using his or her
hearing faculties, unaided by any mechanical device such as a hearing aid. For
a sound to be plainly audible, it is not required that particular words or
phrases are determinable or that the name, artist or type of instrument
producing the sound can be determined. The detection of any rhythmic bass or
reverberating type of sound is sufficient to constitute a plainly audible
sound.
   PROPERTY LINE: The boundary line of a parcel of real estate.
   RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY: Any real property which contains a building
constructed for a residential purpose or in which one or more persons reside,
provided that the building is properly zoned or is legally nonconforming for
residential use within the village.
   SOUND AMPLIFICATION DEVICE: Any loudspeaker, amplifier, stereo, radio,
television, tape recorder, compact disk player, DVD player, portable media
player, or any other device or system by which sounds may be enhanced or
magnified.
(Ord. 24-06, 5-28-2024)
6-8-3: UNLAWFUL NOISE:
   It is unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for any person within the
village to make, continue, or cause to be made or continued, any excessive,
loud or raucous noise within the limits of the village.
(Ord. 24-06, 5-28-2024)
6-8-4: SPECIFIC LIMITATIONS:
   For the purposes of this chapter, acts declared to be excessive, loud,
raucous or unnecessary noises include, but are not limited to, the following:
   (A)   Instruments And Sound Amplification Devices: The playing, using,
operating or permitting to be played, used or operated of any musical
instrument or sound amplification device, or combination thereof, played or
operated in such a manner as to disturb the peace, quiet, comfort and repose of
the neighboring inhabitants or at more volume than is necessary for the
convenient hearing for the person or persons who are in the room, chamber,
vehicle or outdoor area, within the village limits, in which or where such
instrument or sound amplification device is played, used or operated and who
are voluntary listeners thereto. The playing, use or operation of any such
instrument or sound amplification device between the hours of nine-thirty (9:
30) P.M. and eight o’clock (8:00) A.M. Sunday through Thursday and ten-thirty
(10:30) P.M. and eight o’clock (8:00) A.M. on Friday and Saturday in such
manner as to be plainly audible for a continuous period of one minute or more
at a distance of fifty feet (50') from the location of such instrument or sound
amplification device shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this
section.
   (B)   Yelling, Shouting, And Similar Activities: Yelling, shouting, hooting,
whistling or singing in the public parks, parkways and streets of the village,
particularly between the hours of nine-thirty (9:30) P.M. and eight o’clock (8:
00) A.M. Sunday through Thursday and ten-thirty (10:30) P.M. and eight o’clock
(8:00) A.M. on Friday and Saturday, or at any other time or place so as to
annoy or disturb the peace, quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any office,
business establishment, dwelling or residence or of any person in the vicinity
within the limits of the village.
   (C)   Advertising Noise Or Attention: The playing, using, operating or
permitting to be played, used or operated of any instrument or sound
amplification device which is cast upon the public streets, parks and parkways
of the village for the purpose of commercial advertising or of attracting the
attention of the public to any building or structure, except when a license has
first been procured from the proper village authorities.
   (D)   Animals: The keeping of any animal within any yard, house, enclosure,
garage or other place within the village, which by frequent or long continued
barking, howling, crying, singing or other noise shall disturb the peace,
quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any neighboring dwelling or residence or
of persons in the vicinity within the limits of the village.
   (E)   Construction Or Landscaping: The conduct of any outside construction
or landscaping activities such as construction tools or power equipment, or
engage in any building or construction activities requiring the use of any
equipment that creates a loud and disturbing noise, or use gasoline-powered
landscape maintenance equipment, including, without limitation, leaf blowers,
lawn mowers, chain saws, trimmers, edgers, mechanical tree or brush grinding
equipment, or other mechanical landscape maintenance devices except between the
hours of eight o’clock (8:00) A.M. and eight o’clock (8:00) P.M.
   (F)   Exhausts: The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam
engine, stationary internal combustion engine, motorboat or motor vehicle
except through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or
explosive noises therefrom.
   (G)   Blowers And Generators: The use or operation of any noise creating
blower, power fan, or internal combustion generator within twenty five feet
(25') of any residential property between the hours of eight o’clock (8:00)
P.M. and eight o’clock (8:00) A.M.
   (H)   Defect In Vehicle Or Load: The use of any automobile, truck, cart,
trailer, motorcycle or other vehicle, so out of repair or loaded in such a
manner or with material of such nature so as to create loud, excessive or
unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling or other noises.
   (I)   Loading/Unloading: Causing, allowing or permitting the loading,
unloading, opening or handling of boxes, crates, containers, garbage cans or
recyclable containers between the hours of eight o’clock (8:00) P.M. and eight
o’clock (8:00) A.M. daily when such operations are conducted on a property
within the village located within one hundred feet (100') of any residential
property within the village, measured from the property line of the residential
property.
   (J)   Drums: The use of any drum or similar instrument or device for the
purpose of attracting attention, by the creation of noise, to any place of
business, entertainment or public assembly.
   (K)   Horns And Signaling Devices: The use or operation of any horn or
signaling device on any motor vehicle within the village, except as a danger
warning or in an emergency. No person shall use or operate any horn or
signaling device operated by an engine exhaust or for the purpose of attempting
to increase traffic flow or move traffic in any manner.
   (L)   Utility Equipment In Rights Of Way: Utility equipment located in the
public right-of-way and in residentially zoned districts shall be operated in
such a manner so as to minimize any possible disruption to residents and
occupants of nearby buildings caused by noise. Backup generators, if needed,
shall only be operated during periods of power outages, and for no more than
one weekly testing period not to exceed fifteen (15) minutes, and shall not be
tested on weekends or holidays, or between the hours of 5:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
Except during periods of construction, power outages, or during authorized
backup testing conforming to the time limitations in this subsection, at no
time shall any utility facility, or group of ground or pole-mounted utility
facilities, in a residentially zoned area be permitted to exceed 45 dBA at a
ground level distance of twenty feet (20') as measured from the pole base or
ground-mounted equipment, as applicable, or exceed any other applicable noise
levels imposed by codes adopted by the Village.
(Ord. 24-06, 5-28-2024)
6-8-5: AMPLIFIED SOUND; MOTOR VEHICLES:
   No person shall cause, allow or permit the operation of any sound
amplification device from any motor vehicle which is plainly audible outside
the vehicle at a distance of seventy-five feet (75') or more. This provision
shall not apply to any sound amplification device being operated by an
authorized emergency vehicle.
(Ord. 24-06, 5-28-2024)
6-8-6: EMERGENCY SIGNALING DEVICES:
   No person shall sound, allow or permit the sounding outdoors of any
emergency signaling device, including fire, burglar, civil defense alarm,
siren, whistle, or similar emergency signaling device except in an emergency or
as a permitted test as specified herein. Permitted testing of an emergency
signaling device may only occur between the hours of nine o’clock (9:00) A.M.
and seven o’clock (7:00) P.M. Any testing shall use only the minimum cycle test
time for the emergency signaling device, but in no event shall the test time
exceed five (5) minutes.
(Ord. 24-06, 5-28-2024)
6-8-7: MUFFLERS:
   No person shall operate a motor vehicle within the village that is not
equipped with an adequate muffler or exhaust system in constant operation and
properly maintained to prevent any excessive or unusual noise. No person shall
operate a motor vehicle with a muffler or exhaust system modified with a
cutout, bypass or similar device.
(Ord. 24-06, 5-28-2024)
6-8-8: EXEMPTIONS:
   Sounds caused by the following are exempt from the prohibitions contained in
this chapter:
   (A)   Utility Repairs: Repairs of utility structures that pose a clear and
immediate danger to life or safety.
   (B)   Emergency Vehicles: Sirens, whistles or bells lawfully used by
emergency vehicles.
   (C)   Emergency Signals: The emission of sound for the purpose of alerting
persons to the existence of an emergency or in the performance of emergency
work.
   (D)   Repairs: Repairs or excavations of bridges, streets or highways by or
on behalf of the village, Cook County, the State of Illinois or the United
States government between the hours of eight o’clock (8:00) P.M. and seven
o’clock (7:00) A.M., when the public welfare and convenience renders it
impractical to perform the work during hours otherwise allowed by ordinance.
   (E)   Outdoor Gatherings And Public Events: Outdoor gatherings and public
events, provided that such events are village sponsored or a permit has been
obtained from the appropriate permitting authority.
   (F)   Power Outages: Internal combustion engines when used during power
outages to generate electricity, prevent freezing or to prevent flooding.
   (G)   The restrictions of this section shall not be applicable to situations
requiring emergency repairs related to health or safety of persons or property.
Once the emergency has been remedied, the property owner shall comply with this
section.
(Ord. 24-06, 5-28-2024)
6-8-9: AUTHORIZED COMPLAINANTS:
   Any person witnessing a violation of the provisions of this chapter,
including a police officer, is authorized to be a complainant on any complaint,
citation or other notice of violation issued under this chapter.
(Ord. 24-06, 5-28-2024)
6-8-10: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
   Any person, firm or corporation violating or being liable under any of the
provisions of this chapter shall be fined not less than seventy five dollars
($75.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for a first
violation within the past twelve (12) months, not less than one hundred fifty
dollars ($150.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for a
second violation within the past twelve (12) months, and not less than three
hundred dollars ($300.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00)
for a third or subsequent offense within the past twelve (12) months. A
separate offense shall be deemed committed with each recurrence of a violation
of the noise disturbance provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 24-06, 5-28-2024)
CHAPTER 9
PARADES AND PUBLIC ASSEMBLIES
SECTION:
6-9-1: In General
6-9-2: Parade Or Public Assembly Permit, Procedure
6-9-3: Permit Fees
6-9-4: Penalty
6-9-1: IN GENERAL:
No person, firm, corporation, partnership, voluntary association, public body
or other organization shall engage in, participate in, form or organize any
parade, public assembly, musical program or festival, or similar activity or
event on any street or in any park within the corporate limits of the Village
unless a permit allowing such activity has been obtained from the Chief of
Police as provided in Section
6-9-2 below. (Ord. 78-26, 12-5-1978)
6-9-2: PARADE OR PUBLIC ASSEMBLY PERMIT, PROCEDURE:
   (A)   Any person, firm, corporation, partnership, voluntary association,
public body or other organization seeking to obtain a parade or public assembly
permit shall file an application with the Chief of Police not more than one
year and not less than thirty (30) days before the date for which the parade,
public assembly or similar activity or event is proposed.
   (B)   The application for a parade or public assembly permit shall be sworn
under oath and shall contain the following information:
      1.   The name, address and phone number of the person signing the
application;
      2.   The name, address and phone number of the person or organization
wishing to conduct such activity;
      3.   The name, address and phone number of the authorized and responsible
leaders of the organization conducting the parade or public assembly;
      4.   The date of the proposed parade or public assembly and the hours
that it will commence and terminate, the specific location of the assembly
area, and if a parade or similar event, the time when the parade will begin to
assemble;
      5.   The estimated or anticipated attendance at the activity, and, if a
parade, the number of persons participating; if a parade, the route along which
the parade will proceed and the lanes of traffic it intends to occupy;
      6.   A detailed description of the activity proposed.
   (C)   The Chief of Police, where good and compelling cause is shown
therefor, may consider any application hereunder which is filed less than
thirty (30) days before the date such event is proposed to be conducted.
   (D)   The Chief of Police shall investigate the facts set out in the
application and shall issue a permit if:
      1.   The activity does not conflict with a previously-approved activity
at the date and time set forth in the application;
      2.   The conduct of such activity will not substantially interrupt the
safe and orderly movement of traffic;
      3.   The conduct of such activity will not require the diversion of so
great a number of Village police officers or other employees to properly police
and control such activity and the areas contiguous thereto, as to prevent
normal police protection for the Village;
      4.   The conduct of such activity is not reasonably likely to cause
injury to persons or property, incite violence, crime or disorderly conduct;
and
      5.   The event is not being conducted for an unlawful purpose.
   (E)   The Chief of Police shall act upon the application for a parade or
public assembly permit within five (5) days after the filing thereof. If the
Chief of Police disapproves the application, he shall mail to the applicant
within five (5) days after the date upon which the application was filed a
notice of his action, stating the facts and conclusions which are the basis for
his denial of the permit. Any applicant who believes that his application is
wrongfully disapproved may appeal to the Village Board. Upon the filing of such
appeal, the Village Board may cause a hearing to be held, and, based upon the
evidence contained in the record of such hearing, either affirm or reverse the
decision of the Chief of Police. In the event the Chief of Police fails to act
within five (5) days after the date upon which the application was filed, said
application for permit shall be deemed approved and the permit deemed granted
in conformance with the application.
   (F)   The Chief of Police, in denying an application for a parade or public
assembly permit, shall be empowered to authorize the conduct of a parade or
public assembly on a date, at a time, at a location or over a route different
from that named by the applicant. An applicant desiring to accept an alternate
parade or public assembly permit shall, within three (3) days after notice of
the action by the Chief of Police, file a written notice of acceptance with the
Chief of Police. An alternate parade or public assembly permit shall conform to
the requirements of and shall have the effect of a parade or public assembly
permit. (Ord. 78-26, 12-5-1978)
6-9-3: PERMIT FEES:
Permit fees shall be based upon the actual costs incurred by the Village in
connection with any given event. At the time that a parade or public assembly
permit application is filed, the Chief of Police shall estimate the likely
manpower and other expenses which will be necessarily incurred by the Village
for the control of traffic, for the enforcement of laws in connection
therewith, and for other purposes, and shall advise each applicant of the
estimated permit fee, which fee shall equal the Village's estimated costs. No
permit shall be issued under this Section until such time as the applicant has
paid the estimated permit fee as ascertained by the Chief of Police hereunder.
Within fourteen (14) days following any event for which a permit was issued
under this Chapter, the Village shall determine the actual costs incurred by
the Village in conjunction therewith, and either refund or additionally charge
the applicant the difference between the estimated permit fee which was paid
and the actual costs incurred by the Village in conjunction with the permitted
activity. (Ord. 78-26, 12-5-1978)
6-9-4: PENALTY:
Any person, firm, corporation, partnership, voluntary association, public body
or other organization found in violation of any of the terms of this Chapter
shall be fined not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than the maximum
penalty provided in Section
1-4-1 of this Code. The Village may avail itself of any other administrative or
judicial remedy to prevent a violation of this Chapter. (Ord. 78-26, 12-5-1978;
amd. Ord. 95-23, 10-10-1995)
CHAPTER 10
SMOKING IN VILLAGE-OWNED BUILDINGS PROHIBITED
SECTION:
6-10-1: Possession Of Lighted Smoking Materials Prohibited
6-10-2: Signs Posted
6-10-3: Enforcement
6-10-4: Violation; Penalty
6-10-1: POSSESSION OF LIGHTED SMOKING MATERIALS PROHIBITED:
Effective May 1, 1995, the Village prohibits any person to possess lighted
smoking materials in any form including, but not limited to, the possession of
lighted cigarettes, cigars, pipes, or other tobacco products within all
Village-owned buildings. (Ord. 95-7, 4-25-1995)
6-10-2: SIGNS POSTED:
Prominently post "NO SMOKING" signs, with letters of not less than one inch
(1") in height, or the international "NO SMOKING" symbol consisting of a
pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a
bar across it shall be conspicuously displayed throughout Village-owned
buildings. (Ord. 95-7, 4-25-1995)
6-10-3: ENFORCEMENT:
All employees of the Village share in the responsibility for adhering to and
enforcing this policy. (Ord. 95-7, 4-25-1995)
6-10-4: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision of this Chapter.
Any employee or nonemployee after receiving an oral request to cease smoking of
the cigarette or tobacco material from personnel of any department, authority,
or commission shall be subject to action by the Municipality. (Ord. 95-7, 4-25-
1995)
CHAPTER 11
ELECTRIC BICYCLES AND ELECTRIC SCOOTERS
SECTION:
6-11-1: Definitions
6-11-2: Age Restrictions
6-11-3: Equipment Requirements
6-11-4: Permitted Areas Of Operation
6-11-5: Parking
6-11-6: Prohibited Conduct
6-11-7: Enforcement And Penalties
6-11-1: DEFINITIONS:
   (A)   Electric Bicycle shall mean a bicycle equipped with fully operable
pedals and an electric motor of less than 750 watts, falling into Class 1,
Class 2, or Class 3, as defined under 625 ILCS 5/1-140.10.
   (B)   Electric Scooter shall mean a low-speed electric scooter as defined
under 625 ILCS 5/1-140.12, operated by both electric motor and human power,
with a maximum speed of 20 miles per hour. (Ord. 25-26, 12-9-2025)
6-11-2: AGE RESTRICTIONS:
   (A)   Operators of electric scooters must be at least 18 years of age.
   (B)   Operators of Class 3 electric bicycles must be at least 16 years of
age. (Ord. 25-26, 12-9-2025)
6-11-3: EQUIPMENT REQUIREMENTS:
   (A)   Front-facing white light visible from at least 500 feet during
darkness.
   (B)   Rear red reflector or red light visible from at least 100 to 600 feet.
   (C)   A working brake capable of making a braked wheel skid on dry, level
pavement.
   (D)   Manufacturer’s classification label (for e-bikes) indicating class,
motor wattage, and top assisted speed.
   (E)   No sirens or whistles shall be installed or used. (Ord. 25-26, 12-9-
2025)
6-11-4: PERMITTED AREAS OF OPERATION:
Electric bicycles and electric scooters may operate only on Village streets
with a posted speed limit of 20 miles per hour or less. (Ord. 25-26, 12-9-2025)
6-11-5: PARKING:
Electric bicycles and electric scooters may be parked in areas where
traditional bicycles are permitted to park, provided they do not:
   (A)   Block pedestrian walkways or curb ramps.
   (B)   Obstruct driveways, public building entrances, or fire hydrants.
   (C)   Interfere with accessible path-of-travel under the Americans With
Disabilities Act. (Ord. 25-26, 12-9-2025)
6-11-6: PROHIBITED CONDUCT:
   (A)   No person shall operate an electric bicycle or electric scooter under
the influence of alcohol or drugs.
   (B)   No operator shall carry additional passengers, unless the vehicle is
designed or such operation.
   (C)   Operators must maintain at least one hand on the handlebars at all
times.
   (D)   No person shall tow, pull, or push any person or object while
operating. (Ord. 25-26, 12-9-2025)
6-11-7: ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES:
   (A)   A violation of this ordinance shall be subject to fines in the
following amounts:
      $100.00 for a first offense.
      $250.00 for a second offense.
      $500.00 for subsequent offenses.
   (B)   Devices may be impounded upon repeat violations or when operated
dangerously. (Ord. 25-26, 12-9-2025)
TITLE 7
HEALTH AND SANITATION
CHAPTER 1
NUISANCES
SECTION:
7-1-1: Notice And Summary Abatement
7-1-2: Unhealthful Business Or Structure
7-1-3: Nuisances Brought Into Village
7-1-4: Offensive Premises
7-1-5: Carboniferous Odors; Refuse
7-1-6: Spreading Of Vermin Poison
7-1-7: Littering
7-1-8: Graffiti Prohibited
7-1-9: Removal Of Graffiti; Notice
7-1-10: Keeping Or Feeding Certain Animals Prohibited
7-1-1: NOTICE AND SUMMARY ABATEMENT:
It shall be the duty of the building commissioner to serve notice, in writing,
upon the owner, occupant, agent or person in possession or control of any lot,
building or premises in or upon which any nuisance may be found, or who may be
the owner or cause of any such nuisance, requiring him to abate the same in
such manner as it shall prescribe, within a reasonable time. It shall not be
necessary in any case for the building commissioner to specify in his notice
the manner in which any nuisance shall be abated unless he shall deem it
advisable so to do. Such notice may be given or served by any officer who is so
directed or deputed. If the person so notified shall neglect or refuse to
comply with the requirements of such order by abating such nuisance within the
time specified, such person shall be fined as in this code provided.
It shall be the duty of the building commissioner to proceed at once upon the
expiration of the time specified in said notice to cause such nuisance to be
abated; provided, however, that whenever the owner, occupant, agent or person
in possession or control of any premises, in or upon which any nuisance may be
found, is unknown or cannot be found, the building commissioner shall proceed
to abate such nuisance without notice. In either case the expense of such
abatement shall be collected from the person who may have created, continued,
or suffered such nuisance to exist, in addition to any penalty or fine.
Whenever any nuisance shall be found on any premises within the village, the
building commissioner is hereby authorized in his discretion to cause the same
to be summarily abated in such manner as he may direct.
In all cases where no provision is herein made defining what are nuisances and
how the same may be removed, abated or prevented, in addition to what may be
declared such herein, those offenses which are known to the common law of the
land and the statutes of Illinois as nuisances may, in case the same exist
within the village limits or within one mile thereof, be treated as such, and
proceeded against as is provided in this code, or in accordance with any other
provision of law. (1940 Code Sec. 10-1)
7-1-2: UNHEALTHFUL BUSINESS OR STRUCTURE:
   (A)   No building, vehicle, structure, receptacle, yard, lot, premises or
part thereof shall be made, used, kept, maintained or operated in the village
if such use, keeping, maintaining or operating shall be dangerous or
detrimental to health.
   (B)   No substance, matter or thing of any kind whatever, which shall be
dangerous or detrimental to health, shall be allowed to exist in connection
with any business, or be used therein, or be used in any work or labor
performed in the village and no nuisance shall be permitted to exist in
connection with any business or in connection with any such work or labor.
(1940 Code Sec. 10-2)
   (C)   Except for properties located in residentially zoned areas, whenever
the village determines that presence of garbage, waste materials, construction
debris, trash or other items disposed on vacant property may interfere with the
public health, safety and welfare, the village shall require the owner thereof
to erect a six foot (6') high fence constructed of chainlink or similarly
suitable material around the entire perimeter of the vacant lot or so much
thereof as is necessary to prevent the continued dumping or depositing of such
waste materials thereon. It shall be unlawful for an owner of such vacant lot
to fail to enclose his property as required herein for more than thirty (30)
days after notice thereof from the village. The penalty provisions of section
1-4-1 of this code shall apply to violations hereof. In addition, the village
may seek appropriate injunctive relief to enforce the requirements of this
section. (Ord. 93-4, 3-23-1993)
7-1-3: NUISANCES BROUGHT INTO VILLAGE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to bring into the village, or keep therein
for sale or otherwise, either for food or for any other purpose, any dead or
live animal, nor any matter, substance or thing which shall be a nuisance or
which shall occasion a nuisance in the village, or which may or shall be
dangerous or detrimental to health. (1940 Code Sec. 10-3)
7-1-4: OFFENSIVE PREMISES:
Any factory, yard, building or structure of any kind or any tallow chandler's
shop, soap factory, tannery, distillery, livery stable, cattle yard or shed,
barn, packing house, slaughterhouse or rendering establishment which shall
become nauseous, foul or offensive is hereby declared a nuisance; and the
person owning, maintaining or in possession or control of any such factory,
shop, yard, house, building or structure aforesaid shall be fined as in this
code provided. (1940 Code Sec. 10-4)
7-1-5: CARBONIFEROUS ODORS; REFUSE:
It shall be unlawful for any person manufacturing gas or distilling, rectifying
or storing volatile combustibles to throw or deposit or permit to be thrown or
deposited into any public way any gas, tar or any other refuse matter from said
gas house, manufactory, distillery or place of storage, nor shall any such
person allow any substance or odor to escape therefrom or be formed in the
process distillation or other process which shall be offensive or dangerous or
prejudicial to life or health. All reasonable means for preventing the escape
of offensive odors shall be utilized by said person. (1940 Code Sec. 10-5)
7-1-6: SPREADING OF VERMIN POISON:
It shall be unlawful for any person to spread, or to cause or permit any agent
or employee to spread, any poison for the purpose of killing rats, mice,
insects or other vermin in any public way or public place in the village. It
shall further be unlawful for any person to spread, or to cause or permit any
agent or employee to spread any poison for such purpose in any yard, court,
passageway or other open place on private premises, or on the outside of any
building or structure, or in any place within a building which is open to the
general public, or where pet dogs, cats or other domestic animals or fowls have
access without placing the same in a receptacle of such kind or character that
it can be reached only by the kind of vermin which the poison is intended to
kill, or without placing a wire or other guard about same in such way that no
child or domestic animal, domestic fowl or other harmless creature can reach
the same. (1940 Code Sec. 10-7)
7-1-7: LITTERING:
   A.   Littering: No person shall place or cause to be placed upon any street,
alley, park, or other public or private property, any litter unless the litter
is placed into a receptacle intended for the deposit of litter.
   B.   Penalty: The penalties provided in Section
1-4-1 of the Village Code shall apply to violations of this Section. (1940 Code
Sec. 10-8; amd. Ord. 22-13, 5-10-2022)
7-1-8: GRAFFITI PROHIBITED:
It is hereby declared a nuisance to inscribe, draw or otherwise place upon the
surface of any structure or wall that is privately or publicly owned, any word,
phrase, diagram, symbol, sketch or letters where the contents thereof are
visible to the general public and contain references to sexual activity, to any
portion of the human anatomy, to gang or criminal activities, to personal
relationships or to defamatory or offensive material about public or private
persons, said inscriptions commonly referred to as "graffiti". (Ord. 93-3, 1-
26-1993)
7-1-9: REMOVAL OF GRAFFITI; NOTICE:
It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of any premises upon which
graffiti (as defined in section
7-1-8 of this chapter) has been placed, to allow such graffiti to remain in
place for more than ten (10) days after receiving notice to remove such
graffiti from the village. For good cause shown, the village may extend the
time period by which such graffiti shall be removed. (Ord. 93-3, 1-26-1993)
7-1-10: KEEPING OR FEEDING CERTAIN ANIMALS PROHIBITED:
   (A)   No person shall feed or otherwise deposit upon his property any
household food, garbage or other edible products, in the open, in such manner
as to attract any stray dog or cat not owned by said person or any other
domestic animal, rodent, bird or other wild animal at or upon the property of
said person within the village. Simple, casual feeding of birds with birdseed,
corn, bread, nuts or similar types of natural products is permitted if not
excessive and does not cause a public nuisance.
   (B)   It is permissible for a birdfeeder, birdhouse and/or birdbath to be
placed on the property of the resident, however, said item must be at least
three feet (3') from the ground. (Ord. 10-12, 11-23-2010)
CHAPTER 2
REFUSE
SECTION:
7-2-1: Definitions
7-2-2: Refuse Containers, Yard Waste Containers/Paper Bags, And Recycling Bins
7-2-3: Removal Of Containers And Contents
7-2-4: Disposal Of Ashes
7-2-5: Commercial Garbage
7-2-6: Unlawful Disposal Of Garbage
7-2-7: Vending Decayed Food
7-2-8: Manure
7-2-9: Animal Bedding And Straw
7-2-10: Refuse In Vacated Buildings
7-2-11: Transportation Of Refuse
7-2-12: Industrial Refuse
7-2-13: Decaying Animal Matter
7-2-14: Dumping Refuse; Permit
7-2-15: Opening Offensive Ground
7-2-16: Substances Scattered By Wind
7-2-17: Refuse On Roof; Areaways
7-2-18: Roofers
7-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter the following words shall have the meanings
ascribed to them:
ASHES: All ashes of wood, coal and coke, the residue resulting from the
combustion of any material or substance, soot, cinders, slag or charcoal.
GARBAGE: Any rejected or waste household food, offal, swill or carrier.
MANURE: The excrement of all domestic animals and fowls, stable bedding or all
hay, straw, shavings, grass, weeds or leaves which have been used for stable
bedding.
MISCELLANEOUS WASTE: Dust and all refuse except excrement, dead animals and
parts thereof, and articles and substances herein included under "garbage",
"ashes" and "manure". (1940 Code Sec. 10-9)
7-2-2: REFUSE CONTAINERS, YARD WASTE CONTAINERS/PAPER BAGS, AND RECYCLING BINS:
   (A)   The owner or occupant of every building where persons live shall
provide for such building, and at all times maintain in good order and repair,
one or more receptacles for garbage, waste, yard waste, and refuse of an
aggregate capacity to contain the accumulation from said premises for at least
seven (7) days. The village shall provide suitable recycling bins for on-site
collection of recyclable items.
   (B)   1. Receptacles for garbage, waste, and refuse shall be watertight and
made of metal or plastic with close fitting metal or plastic covers. Each
garbage, waste, and refuse receptacle shall have a capacity of not less than
ten (10) gallons nor more than thirty five (35) gallons, with handles suitable
for lifting by one person.
      2.   Receptacles for yard waste shall include:
         (a)   Watertight, rigid containers with close fitting lids, made of
metal or plastic, with not less than ten (10) nor more than thirty five (35)
gallons capacity, with handles suitable for lifting by one person, with
"Compost Only" stickers affixed to the lid; or
         (b)   Biodegradable kraft paper refuse bags, minimum 2-ply, fifty (50)
pound wet strength, approximately thirty (30) gallons capacity or other
biodegradable paper bags of comparable size and quality.
   (C)   The refuse containers, yard waste containers/paper bags and recycling
bins shall be placed in the following manner:
      1.   Curb Collections: At the curb lines not earlier than five o'clock
(5:00) P.M. preceding the designated day of collection, and removed not later
than eight o'clock (8:00) P.M. the day of collection.
      2.   Alley Collections: At the alley line to be readily accessible for
refuse, yard waste and recyclable item collection vehicles.
At all other times, except as above provided, such refuse receptacles, yard
waste receptacles/paper bags and recycling bins, if placed out of doors, shall
be placed to the rear of the principal building on said premises; provided
however, that the same shall in no event be so placed or maintained as to
constitute a nuisance or annoyance to adjacent property or the occupants
thereof.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any person to cast, place, sweep or deposit
anywhere within the village any garbage, waste, yard waste, recyclables, or
refuse of any kind in such a manner that it or any part thereof may be carried
or deposited by the action of sun, wind, rain or snow into or upon any street,
sidewalk, alley, sewer, parkway or other public place or upon any private
premises. (Ord. 00-1, 1-11-2000)
7-2-3: REMOVAL OF CONTAINERS AND CONTENTS:
It shall be unlawful for any person other than a scavenger employed by or
licensed by the Village or the owner, occupant, tenant or person in possession
of the premises for which a container for garbage and a container for ashes and
miscellaneous waste, or any of them, has been provided, or his agent and
employees to deposit any article or thing in such container, or to remove,
displace, injure, deface, destroy, uncover or in any manner disturb such
container or any portion of its contents. (1940 Code Sec. 10-11)
7-2-4: DISPOSAL OF ASHES:
Every person occupying, operating or controlling any building or portion
thereof in the Village which is heated by steam, hot air or hot water, or in or
about which combustibles are used or ashes are produced, shall keep in or about
such building all ashes, cinders and other waste arising from combustion and
produced therein, and shall remove the same or cause the same to be removed
from the said premises at his own expense at such times and in such manner as
the Commissioner of Public Works may direct. It shall be unlawful to use in
connection with said building or portion thereof any container for ashes and
miscellaneous waste which is provided for domestic use.
This Section shall not apply where a container for ashes is required by the
provisions of this Chapter, nor to any building where less than two (2)
containers of ashes or miscellaneous waste are collected each week.
Ashes stored inside of any non-fireproof building shall be stored only in
masonry bins, approved metal ash cans, or steel truck tanks. All ash containers
shall be kept at least five feet (5') from combustible material. Ashes shall
not be stored inside or outside of any building in wooden receptacles, or
dumped in contact with or in close proximity to any combustible material.
Cans used for dumping ashes into conveyances shall be constructed equivalent to
the following: body of No. 18 U.S. gauge corrugated galvanized iron with bonds
of No. 14 U.S. gauge iron at least six inches (6") wide, located at the top,
center, and bottom; the lower edge of lower bond being three inches (3") below
the bottom of the can. If the middle band is omitted, then reinforcement shall
be substituted consisting of vertical guards of No. 14 U.S. gauge iron spaced
six inches (6") on center around the can. These guards shall extend from the
top to the bottom bands, shall be formed in channel-shape or M-shape and shall
be not less than one and one-half inches (11/2") in depth. All parts shall be
securely riveted. Heavy iron handles shall be riveted or bolted to the middle
or top bands. (1940 Code Sec. 10-12)
7-2-5: COMMERCIAL GARBAGE:
Every person occupying, operating or controlling any building or portion
thereof where persons do not reside, board or lodge shall provide therefor and
maintain upon the premises, a separate container for garbage, which shall be
plainly marked in a conspicuous place "Not for Domestic Use", sufficient to
carry out the purpose of this Chapter and not to use for or in connection with
the said building, or portion thereof, any container for garbage provided for
domestic use. Such person shall remove, or cause to be removed, the contents of
the container so provided from said premises at his own expense at such time
and in such manner as the Commissioner of Public Works may direct.
Every person owning or controlling any hotel, restaurant, cafe or other
premises where more than twenty (20) guests or boarders are fed daily, shall
cause all garbage to be placed in proper metallic containers which shall be
practically air and watertight, and shall cause all substances deposited in
such containers to be removed daily from his premises and to be disposed of
either by burning in a properly constructed incinerator which shall have been
approved by the Board of Health, or by dumping the same at any dumping ground
or place where garbage is dumped or disposed of by the Village. The removal and
disposition of such substances shall be done by such person at his own expense
and in accordance with the provisions of this Code and the rules or regulations
of the Board of Health relating to the disposition and removal of such
substances. Any person occupying a building located in a district where there
is regular collection of garbage by the Village shall be entitled to have one
container of garbage removed per week without expense to the said person. (1940
Code Sec. 10-13)
7-2-6: UNLAWFUL DISPOSAL OF GARBAGE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to throw into or deposit in any vault,
sink, privy, catch basin or cesspool any garbage or other substance, except
that of which any such place is the appropriate receptacle; nor shall any slops
or kitchen waste be permitted to run into any privy.
Incinerators and ash chutes shall be constructed in conformity with the
building provisions of this Code. (1940 Code Sec. 10-14)
7-2-7: VENDING DECAYED FOOD:
It shall be unlawful for any person to vend or attempt to vend in the Village
any fruit, vegetable or other article of food that may be decayed or partially
rotten, or that may have been taken from any barrel, box or other receptacle
for the same, in any public way of the Village. (1940 Code Sec. 10-15)
7-2-8: MANURE:
It shall be unlawful to construct, maintain or use in any public way or public
place any box, receptacle or vault for the accumulation or storage of manure.
Every person occupying or controlling any lot, barn, stable, shed, buildings or
place where any horses, mules, cattle or swine are kept or fed, shall provide
and maintain within said lot, barn, stable, shed, building or place, above the
level of the ground upon said premises, either a box, receptacle or vault
constructed as hereinafter prescribed; or in lieu of said box, receptacle or
vault there may be provided and maintained within any barn, stable, shed or
building where any horses, mules, cattle or swine are kept or fed, but not
elsewhere, a bin with a floor of impervious cement and walls of the same
material not less than four feet (4') high above the level of the floor. Said
person shall place or cause to be placed in said bin, box, receptacle or vault
all the manure produced upon the said premises and shall remove or cause to be
removed from the said premises at his own expense the contents of said bin,
box, receptacle or vault at least once in seventy two (72) hours.
Every wooden box for the storage of manure shall be strongly framed and built,
shall have the bottom and inner surface of walls covered with sheet metal,
shall have a tightly fitting wooden cover so constructed as to be fly proof,
and shall be of a capacity to hold all the manure produced on the premises in
seventy two (72) hours.
Every metal receptacle for the storage of manure shall be a heavy metal
receptacle of sufficient thickness of metal and so made and brazed as to
maintain its form under heavy usage, shall be closed with a tight fitting cover
so as to be fly proof, and shall be of a capacity to hold all the manure
produced on the premises in seventy two (72) hours.
Every vault for the storage of manure shall be a strong masonry vault, the
walls and floor of which shall be at least six inches (6") thick, its surfaces,
outside and inside, smoothly finished, and its exterior corners rounded so far
as practicable, and said vault shall be provided with a fly proof cover or door
and shall be of a capacity to hold all the manure produced on the premises in
seventy two (72) hours.
Every bin, box, receptacle, or vault intended for the reception or storage of
manure shall be constructed under a permit issued by the Board of Health, for
which permit a fee of one dollar ($1.00) shall be collected by said Building
Commissioner.
It shall be unlawful to accumulate or store manure in an open yard or lot or in
any wagon, car or vehicle, except while transporting manure from one place to
another.
Every bin, box, receptacle, vault, wagon or vehicle for the storage and
transportation of manure shall be maintained in good repair, dry and in clean
condition as to all its parts and surroundings. (1940 Code Sec. 10-16)
7-2-9: ANIMAL BEDDING AND STRAW:
It shall be unlawful for any person to place or cause to be placed upon any
public way, or upon the roof of any building, or upon the surface of any lot or
parcel of ground, any straw, hay, shavings or other substance which has been
used as bedding for animals, for the purpose of drying such substance or
storing the same. It shall further be unlawful for any person to burn or cause
to be burned any such straw, hay, shavings or other substance which has been
used as bedding for animals, in any place other than a properly constructed
incinerator, and then only upon a permit issued in writing by the Building
Commissioner for that purpose. (1940 Code Sec. 10-17)
7-2-10: REFUSE IN VACATED BUILDINGS:
It shall be the duty of every person occupying or controlling any lot, building
or structure, or any portion thereof to remove or cause to be removed
therefrom, before vacating the same, all garbage, ashes, miscellaneous waste
and manure. (1940 Code Sec. 10-18)
7-2-11: TRANSPORTATION OF REFUSE:
All manure, garbage or other offensive or nauseous substance may be loaded upon
railroad cars for immediate transportation from the Village to such place or
places only as shall be designated by the Building Commissioner, but no place
or places so designated shall be a nearer distance to any building occupied as
a dwelling than two hundred feet (200'). No person shall use or occupy any
place for the receipt, loading or dumping of manure, offal, garbage or any
other offensive or nauseous substance for immediate transportation without
first obtaining a written permit for such purpose from the Building
Commissioner. Any person that violates any provision of this Section shall,
upon conviction, be subject to a fine as in this Code provided.
No person owning or controlling any vehicle used for the carrying or
transporting of any garbage, ashes, miscellaneous waste or manure shall cause
or permit such vehicle when in use for such purpose to stand or remain before
or near any building, structure or premises occupied by any person; nor shall
any person using any such vehicle cause or permit the use of an unreasonable or
unnecessary length of time in and about the loading or unloading of any such
vehicle when in use for such purposes, or cause or permit an unreasonable or
unnecessary length of time to be used in passing along any public way; nor
shall any person cause or permit any such cart or vehicle to be in a condition
needlessly or unnecessarily filthy or offensive.
Any person owning or controlling any refuse vehicle shall cause all such
vehicles, and all implements used in connection with the loading or unloading
thereof, when not in use, to be stored and kept in such place and in such
manner as not to create a nuisance, and shall cause all such vehicles and
implements to be thoroughly disinfected and put in an inoffensive condition
when so stored or not in use. Such vehicles and implements shall be thoroughly
disinfected at least once a week, whether in use or not, unless the same shall
not have been used since the last disinfection thereof.
No person owning or controlling any refuse vehicle shall cause or permit any
such vehicle to be so loaded, to be in such defective condition, so out of
repair, of such faulty construction or so improperly driven or managed that any
garbage, ashes, miscellaneous waste, or manure with which such vehicle is
loaded, shall drop or fall on any public way or other place. Such vehicle and
any box, can or other receptacle carried thereon or therein, and in which any
of the substances described in this Section shall be carried, shall be so
constructed as to be strong and practically air and water tight, so as to
prevent the same from emitting any odor and so as to prevent any part of the
contents or load thereof from falling, leaking or spilling therefrom.
It shall be the duty of every person in possession or control of any such
vehicle to replace at once on such vehicle any part of the contents thereof
which shall or may have fallen, dropped or spilled from such vehicle, or from
any box or receptacle conveyed thereon, upon any public way or other place.
(1940 Code Sec. 10-19)
7-2-12: INDUSTRIAL REFUSE:
The owner, lessee, occupant or manager of every chemical factory, paint
factory, blacksmith or other shop, forge, coal yard, brick yard, foundry or
manufactory where like business is done, premises where tar or any compound
thereof is handled, manufactured or used or premises where oils or other
volatile combustibles are handled, manufactured or used shall cause all
rubbish, dirt and refuse to be removed to some proper place so that the same
shall not accumulate at any of the abovementioned premises or appurtenances
thereof and become filthy, hazardous and offensive, nor shall he permit the
accumulation of such industrial refuse from other locations upon the
aforementioned premises in the aforementioned manner; nor shall any such person
cause or allow any smoke, dirt, cinders, gas or offensive odor to escape from
any such building, structure, place, or premises which shall be offensive or
prejudicial to the health or dangerous to the life and property of any person
not being therein nor thereupon engaged, nor shall such person allow industrial
refuse of any sort to accumulate in such a manner as to constitute a fire
hazard. It is hereby declared to be a nuisance to permit any ashes, cinders,
rubbish, dirt or refuse to accumulate on any of the abovementioned premises, or
appurtenances thereof, and become filthy or offensive, or to cause or allow any
dense smoke, cinders, dirt, gas or offensive odor to escape from said premises
or allow or cause to allow industrial refuse of any sort to accumulate in such
fashion as to constitute a fire hazard. The Building Commissioner may summarily
abate said nuisance, and, in specific exception to Section
7-1-1 of this Code, abatement may be had or the general penalties of this Code
invoked without prior notice to said person or his employees. (1940 Code Sec.
10-20)
7-2-13: DECAYING ANIMAL MATTER:
It shall be unlawful for any person having the ownership or control of any
animal matter within the Village which is in process of decay so as to be
offensive or dangerous to the public health to permit the same to remain within
the Village or within one mile of the limits thereof, while in such condition
more than twelve (12) hours after such animal matter shall have come into such
offensive or dangerous condition, whether it be at an establishment for the
rendering or changing the character thereof or not. Any person violating any
provision of this Section shall be fined as in this Code provided. (1940 Code
Sec. 10-21)
7-2-14: DUMPING REFUSE; PERMIT:
The dumping or depositing anywhere within Village limits of garbage, ash,
miscellaneous waste, manure or other substance that may tend to create an
unsightly or dilapidated appearance, that may endanger the life and property of
residents, that may constitute a hazard, that may encroach upon the property of
another, that may be a source of the spread of disease, that may be scattered
by the wind, or that may decompose, or that may be filthy, noxious or of
unhealthful nature is hereby declared to be a nuisance. It shall be unlawful
for any person to dump or deposit or permit the dumping or depositing of refuse
of any kind whether it be industrial refuse or otherwise anywhere within the
Village limits and, in specific exception to Section
7-1-1 of this Title, the nuisance may be abated or the general penalties
provided for in this Code invoked without any further notice to such person.
Where, however, application has been made to the Building Commissioner for a
dumping permit accompanied by the consent of the owner of the property in
question and the Building Commissioner finds that the dumping will not in fact
be above the street grade and will not in fact constitute a nuisance within the
purport of the foregoing prior to the issuance of said permit the applicant
shall file a bond in the penal sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) with
good and sufficient sureties, approved by the Building Commissioner and
conditioned upon such person's complying with the regulations of this Chapter
pertaining to dumping. (1940 Code Sec. 10-22)
7-2-15: OPENING OFFENSIVE GROUND:
No ground or material filled with offensive matter or substance that will emit
or allow to arise through or from the same any offensive smell or deleterious
exhalation shall be opened or turned up, or the surface thereof removed,
between May 1 and October 1 of any year, except according to permit first
therefor obtained from the Building Commissioner. (1940 Code Sec. 10-23)
7-2-16: SUBSTANCES SCATTERED BY WIND:
No lime, ashes, coal, dry sand, hair, feathers or other substances that may be
scattered by the wind shall be sifted through a sieve, agitated or exposed. No
mat, carpet or cloth shall be shaken or beaten, nor any cloth, yarn, garment,
material or substance be scoured, cleaned or hung, nor shall any business be
conducted over or in any public way, or where particles set in motion therefrom
will pass into any public way, or into any occupied premises. No usual or
reasonable precaution shall be omitted by any person to prevent fragments or
other substances from failing, or dust and light material from falling, into
any public way or into any place or building from any building or structure
while the same is being altered, repaired or demolished. (1940 Code Sec. 10-24)
7-2-17: REFUSE ON ROOF; AREAWAYS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, throw, deposit or cause to be
placed, thrown or deposited, any substance, papers, refuse or other article, or
any material, on the roof of any building, or in any light or air shaft, court,
or areaway that will cause the dissemination of dust or odors, or be productive
of a nuisance or a menace to the health, comfort or safety of any person or of
the community. No person in possession or control of any building shall permit
or allow the depositor accumulation on the roof of said building or in any
light or air shaft, court or areaway, of any waste material, refuse or other
object or thing that will cause a nuisance or be injurious to the health,
comfort or safety of any person or of the community.
It shall be the duty of the Building Commissioner or his authorized
representative to make the inspections at least twice each year of the roofs,
light and air shafts, courts and areaways of all buildings where it has reason
to believe a nuisance exists or any of the regulations of this Code are being
violated. It shall be the duty of the person in possession or control of any
such building to allow the Building Commissioner or its authorized
representative entrance or access, at all reasonable times, to such building
for the purpose of inspection or for the making of such records as may be
necessary. (1940 Code Sec. 10-25)
7-2-18: ROOFERS:
It shall be unlawful for any person engaged in or conducting in the Village the
business of roofing of buildings, to throw dirt or roofing refuse from the roof
of any building upon any public way or upon adjoining property while repairing
or renewing roofs.
Every person engaged in or conducting in the Village the business of roofing of
buildings shall remove the dirt and roofing refuse from the roofs by lowering
it in buckets or containers or with ropes, pulleys, or other mechanical devices
while repairing or renewing roofs. (1940 Code Sec. 10-26)
CHAPTER 3
PRIVIES; CATCH BASINS
SECTION:
7-3-1: Construction; Location; Removal
7-3-2: New Construction
7-3-1: CONSTRUCTION; LOCATION; REMOVAL:
   (A)   No vault, privy, catch basin, cistern or cesspool shall be constructed
or rebuilt in the Village except in accordance with this Code and the
regulations of the Building Commissioner. The general privy accommodations of
any place of human habitation shall not be permitted within any such place of
habitation or under any sidewalk adjacent thereto. All cesspools shall be
watertight.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain any privy vault or
allow the same to remain upon any premises abutting upon any public way or
public place in which is located a public sewer.
   (C)   It shall constitute and is hereby declared a nuisance for any person
to erect or maintain any privy as near as forty feet (40') to any public way,
dwelling, shop, school, factory, church or public hall or within one hundred
feet (100') of any well, unless the privy be furnished with a substantial vault
six feet (6') deep and made tight so that the contents cannot escape therefrom
and sufficiently secured and enclosed. Any person owning, erecting or
maintaining any privy in violation of this Section shall be subject to a fine
as in this Code provided.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for the owner, agent, occupant or person in
control of any lot, building, structure, premises or place within the Village
to permit or allow the contents of any tub or of any receptacle, cesspool,
privy, catch basin, vault, sink, water closet, cistern or anything in any room,
excavation, vat, building, premises or place to become a nuisance or offensive
so as to be dangerous or prejudicial to health.
   (E)   All privies or catch basins, any part of the contents of which are
above the surface, or within two feet (2') of the surface of the earth, and all
other privies or catch basins that are foul or emit smells and odors
prejudicial to the public health, are hereby declared nuisances, and the
Building Commissioner shall have power to abate the same.
   (F)   All putrid or offensive matter, and all night soil and the contents of
privies, catch basins, vaults and cesspools, and all obnoxious substances in
the Village shall be removed in accordance with the provisions of this Code.
All such privies, catch basins, vaults and cesspools, when cleaned, shall be
disinfected with freshly burned lime, and the work of such disinfection shall
be done by the person removing such contents.
   (G)   The owner, tenant or occupant of any building or premises in the
Village shall not employ, cause or permit any part of the contents of any
vault, privy, catch basin or cesspool (being thereon, and of which he has
control) to be removed, unless according to a permit or the regulations of the
Department of Public Works. No privy or other erection mentioned in this
Section shall be filled with or covered with dirt until the offensive contents
shall be removed.
   (H)   No person shall draw off or allow to run off into any ground, public
way or place of the Village, the contents or any part thereof, of any vault,
privy, cistern, cesspool or catch basin; nor shall any owner, tenant or
occupant of any building to which any vault, catch basin, privy or cesspool
shall appertain or be attached, permit the contents or any part thereof to flow
therefrom or to rise within two feet (2') of any part of the top, or allow such
contents to become offensive.
   (I)   No part of the contents of any privy, vault, sink or cesspool (except
substances other than excrements insoluble in water), or accumulation of any
offensive fluid, or any liquid or semi-liquid substances or material, being in
any excavation, cellar or place within the Village, shall be removed therefrom,
nor shall the same be transported through any public way of the Village unless
the same shall be removed and transported under a permit from the Building
Commissioner by means of an air tight iron wagon of a capacity of not less than
seventy (70) cubic feet, in such a manner as shall entirely prevent the escape
of noxious or offensive odors therefrom. All tools, pails and tubs used by the
scavengers shall be made from galvanized iron or other metal and shall be free
from all wood to prevent saturation of the night soil into them. (1940 Code
Sec. 10-27)
7-3-2: NEW CONSTRUCTION:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to begin the construction,
alterations or repair of any building or of any public or private works without
having provided proper and sufficient toilet facilities, consisting of water
closets, chemical closets, privies, or incinerators of a type to be approved by
the Building Commissioner for the use of employees engaged in the construction,
alteration or repair of such building or of such public or private works.
   (B)   There shall be at least one such water closet, chemical closet, privy
or incinerator for every thirty (30) employees or fraction thereof. Such toilet
facilities in due proportion shall be provided on at least every fifth floor of
a building.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful to install such water closets, chemical closet,
privy or incinerators without first having obtained a permit therefor from the
Building Commissioner and the same shall be installed and maintained in
accordance with the provisions and specifications of such permit. (1940 Code
Sec. 10-28)
CHAPTER 4
FUEL BURNING DEVICES
SECTION:
7-4-1: Application For Permit
7-4-2: Certificate From Commissioner
7-4-3: Annual Inspection
7-4-4: Chimney Repair
7-4-5: Fees
7-4-6: Smoke
7-4-7: Prosecutions
7-4-1: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT:
It shall be unlawful for any person to install, erect, reconstruct or maintain
any fuel burning plant, refuse burning plant or any chimney connected with any
fuel burning plant until the plans and specifications of the same have been
filed with and approved by the Building Commissioner and a permit issued by him
for such installation, erection, reconstruction or maintenance.
   (A)   The said plans shall show the type of installation and the amount of
work or heating to be done by such fuel burning plant, all appurtenances
thereto, and all provisions made to obtain complete combustion of the fuel and
to prevent smoke. Said plans and specifications shall contain a statement of
the amount and kind of fuel proposed to be used and shall show that the room or
premises in which the fuel burning plant shall be located is provided with
doors, windows, air shafts, fans and other means of ventilation sufficient to
prevent the temperature of such room, basement or other portion of a building
wherein such fuel burning apparatus is to be used, from rising to a point
higher than one hundred twenty degrees Fahrenheit (120°F), and sufficient to
provide that the atmosphere of any such room, basement or other part of the
building wherein such fuel burning apparatus may be located, may be changed
every ten (10) minutes. Such plans shall further show the dimensions of the
room in which such fuel burning apparatus is to be located and the location and
dimensions of all chimneys and smoke stacks used in connection with or as part
of said fuel burning plant. Upon the inspection and approval of such plans and
specifications, a duplicate set of said plans shall be left on file in the
office of the said Deputy Smoke Inspector in charge.
   (B)   The fees hereinafter provided shall be paid to the Building
Commissioner prior to the approval of the plans for installation. If such plans
and specifications shall show that proper provisions for the purpose of
securing complete combustion of the fuel to be used and for the purpose of
preventing and abating smoke have been made, a permit shall be issued for the
installation or for the construction, erection, reconstruction or maintenance
of such fuel burning plant upon payment of the permit fee.
   (C)   It shall be the duty of the Board of Trustees having charge of the
inspection of the premises wherein said fuel burning apparatus is located to
cooperate with the Building Commissioner in seeing that the execution of the
work covered by the said permit shall be done in conformity with the plans and
specifications submitted and approved, and the standards, rules and regulations
fixed by the Smoke Inspection and Abatement Commission. (1940 Code Sec. 10-31)
7-4-2: CERTIFICATE FROM COMMISSIONER:
It shall be unlawful for any person to use any new or reconstructed plant for
the production and generation of heat or power until he shall have first
procured a certificate from the Building Commissioner.
Such certificate shall state that the plant is so constructed that it will do
the work required and that it can be so managed that no dense smoke shall be
emitted, in violation of the provisions of this Code, from the chimney
connected with the furnace or firebox. (1940 Code Sec. 10-32)
7-4-3: ANNUAL INSPECTION:
An annual inspection shall be made of fuel burning equipment for which
certificates allowing use of the plant have been issued to determine that such
equipment will do the work required and can be so managed that no dense smoke
shall be emitted from the chimney connected with the furnace or firebox in
violation of the provisions of this Code. If, at the time of the annual
inspection or of any inspection subsequent to the issuance by the Department of
the certificate allowing use of the plant, it is found that the fuel burning
equipment is in such condition that it cannot do the work required or cannot be
so managed that no dense smoke will be emitted, in violation of the provisions
of this Code, from the chimney connected to the furnace or firebox, the Deputy
Smoke Inspector in charge of such equipment and of the defects found shall make
an order to correct, repair or replace the defective equipment. If, within ten
(10) days from the date of said notice, said order has not been complied with,
the Building Commissioner in charge may revoke the certificate allowing use of
the plant. (1940 Code Sec. 10-33)
7-4-4: CHIMNEY REPAIR:
No owner shall install, alter or repair any chimney or any furnace or device
which alteration, change or installation will affect the method or efficiency
of preventing and abating smoke, or alter or repair any brick work on or about
any high pressure boiler without first submitting the plans and specifications
to the Building Commissioner and securing a permit therefor. (1940 Code Sec.
10-34)
7-4-5: FEES:
Fees for the inspection of plans and issuing permits for the inspection of
furnaces or other fuel burning apparatus or devices, whether for initial
installation, repair or alteration, and for issuing certificates shall be
fifteen dollars ($15.00).
This Section shall not apply to furnaces or other fuel burning apparatus
devices installed or used to heat private residences, tenement or buildings
consisting of two (2) apartments or less.
The fee for the examination or inspection shall include the issuing of
certificate for operation, in case such certificate for operation is granted,
and shall be paid at the time the permit is secured.
Fees for annual inspection shall be ten dollars ($10.00) for low pressure
boilers and fifteen dollars ($15.00) for high pressure boilers, whether the
boiler is one type or another shall be determined in accordance with the rules
of the Heating, Piping and Air Conditioning Contractor's National Association
Code.
Where furnaces are other than boiler furnaces the fee shall be ten dollars
($10.00). (1940 Code Sec. 10-35)
7-4-6: SMOKE:
It shall be unlawful for any person owning or in charge of any smoke stack of
any locomotive, tar kettle, steam machine or contrivance, or of any open fire,
smoke stack or chimney of any building or premises to allow the emission of
dense smoke except for a period of or periods aggregating six (6) minutes in
any one hour at the time when the firebox is being cleaned out or a new fire
being built therein. Such emission of smoke is hereby declared to be a nuisance
and may be summarily abated by the Building Commissioner or by anyone whom he
may duly authorize for such purpose. Such abatement may be in addition to the
fine as in this Code provided.
No person shall cause or allow the escape from any smoke stack or chimney into
the open air of such quantities of ash dust, soot, cinders, acid or other
fumes, dirt or other material, or noxious gases in such place or manner as to
cause injury detriment, nuisance or annoyance to any person or to the public or
to endanger the comfort, repose, health or safety of any such person or the
public or in such a manner as to cause or have a natural tendency to cause
injury or damage to business or property.
All persons participating in any violation of this provision either as owners,
proprietors, lessees, agents, tenants, managers, superintendents, captains,
engineers, firemen, janitors or otherwise shall be severally liable therefor.
(1940 Code Sec. 10-36)
7-4-7: PROSECUTIONS:
Prosecutions for violations of this Chapter shall be instituted by the Building
Commissioner and shall be prosecuted in the name of the Village.
The issuance and delivery by the Building Commissioner of any permit or
certificate for the construction, alteration or repair of any plant or chimney
connected with a plant shall not be held to exempt any person to whom any such
permit has been issued or delivered, or who is in possession of any such
permit, from prosecution on account of the emission or issuance of dense smoke
caused or permitted by any such person. (1940 Code Sec. 10-37)
CHAPTER 5
AMBULANCE/VEHICLE FIRE SERVICE
SECTION:
7-5-1: Ambulance Outside Village Limits
7-5-2: Rates For Ambulance/Vehicle Fire Service
7-5-3: Written Authority
7-5-4: Owner Designated
7-5-5: Reimbursement For Emergency Response Services
7-5-1: AMBULANCE OUTSIDE VILLAGE LIMITS:
The fire chief, or any member of the fire department acting in that capacity,
shall have the authority to send the village ambulance upon request within the
corporate limits of the village, or outside of the corporate limits of the
village pursuant to an agreement of such service entered into between the
village and the owner of property lying outside of the village, provided that
the ambulance and attendants thereto can be spared from service at the time the
request is made. (Ord. 16-07, 5-10-2016)
7-5-2: RATES FOR AMBULANCE/VEHICLE FIRE SERVICE:
   (A)   Nonresident Ambulance Fees: Whenever ambulance services are provided
by the Forest View fire department to individuals who are not residents of the
village of Forest View, or provided with ambulance service by the village or
any entity which provides emergency medical services to the village pursuant to
an agreement entered into by the village or mutual aid agreement with the
village, such nonresidents shall be charged the fees as follows:
 
BLS transport          $1,750.00
ALS transport          $1,750.00
ALS2 transport         $1,750.00
Treatment/no transport $250.00
 
These charges shall not apply:
      1.   When such service is provided pursuant to a contract between the
village and a private entity located outside the village limits; or
      2.   When the nonresident requires such service while a guest at the home
of a Forest View resident.
   (B)   Nonresident Fire Response Rates: The rate for responding to vehicle
fires to nonresidents of the village of Forest View shall be computed at the
maximum rate specified in 70 Illinois Compiled Statutes 705/11f(c) and charged
to the owner of the vehicle.
   (C)   Hospital Transport: The fire department shall transport persons from
Forest View to only one of the following hospitals:
      1.   Advocate Christ Medical Center, Oak Lawn, Illinois.
      2.   Hines VA, Hines, Illinois.
      3.   Hinsdale Hospital, Hinsdale, Illinois.
      4.   Mt. Sinai Hospital, Chicago, Illinois.
      5.   LaGrange Community Memorial General Hospital, La Grange, Illinois.
      6.   Loyola University Medical Center, Maywood, Illinois.
      7.   MacNeal Memorial Hospital, Berwyn, Illinois.
Provided, however, that in exceptional circumstances, the fire chief or medical
control may authorize the transportation of persons to other hospitals that
have specialist physicians or special equipment and facilities not available at
the abovementioned hospitals. Further, this restriction shall not apply
pursuant to a contract or mutual aid agreement outside the village limits.
   (D)   Right To Waive Fee: The Village Administrator or his designee reserves
the right to waive the ambulance services fee or any portion thereof. (Ord. 16-
07, 5-10-2016; amd. Ord. 22-33, 11-22-2022)
7-5-3: WRITTEN AUTHORITY:
Before any such ambulance/vehicle fire service shall be rendered, every
property owner shall by written instrument, filed with the village clerk,
undertake to pay all charges for services so rendered at the rate set forth
above and shall indemnify, keep and save harmless the village against any
claim, judgment or liability of any kind which the village may suffer or which
may accrue against, be charged to or be recovered from the village or any of
its officials from or by reason or on account of injuries to persons or
property during the performance of said ambulance/vehicle fire service between
the time said ambulance/fire apparatus and its attendants leave its quarters to
the time of its official return thereto. (Ord. 06-18, 11-14-2006)
7-5-4: OWNER DESIGNATED:
The property owner or owner of property for the purposes of this chapter shall
be deemed to be any person or entity which may occupy property or control same
although not the legal owner thereof in fact. (Ord. 80-4, 5-13-1980)
7-5-5: REIMBURSEMENT FOR EMERGENCY RESPONSE SERVICES:
   (A)   Definitions. As used in this Section, the following terms are hereby
given the meanings set forth below:
      1.   Advanced Life Support Services (ALS). An advanced level of pre-
hospital and inter-hospital emergency care and non-emergency medical services.
      2.   Basic Life Support Services. A basic level of pre-hospital and
inter-hospital emergency care and non-emergency medical services that includes
airway management, cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR), control of shock and
bleeding and splinting of fractures.
      3.   Emergency Medical Service Provider. The Fire Department providing
emergency medical services pursuant to dispatch under the E-911 system.
      4.   Emergency Medical Services (EMS). All life-safety services,
including, but not limited to, advanced life support, basic life support,
ambulance, extrication and medical-related transport.
      5.   Emergency Personnel. Members of the Fire Department during their
involvement in an emergency and non-emergency incident.
      6.   Emergency Response. Providing, sending or utilizing firefighting,
emergency medical and rescue services or related services and personnel by the
Fire Department.
      7.   Extrication. When one or more members of the Fire Department are
required to use hydraulic, gas powered, electric powered, air powered, or other
specialized rescue equipment to remove a person from a vehicle or other
structure.
      8.   Fire Department. Fire Department means the Village of Forest View
Fire Department.
      9.   Hazardous Material (Hazmat). Any material that poses an unreasonable
risk to the health and safety of the public, environment or emergency
personnel, if not properly controlled during handling, storage, manufacture,
processing, packaging, use, disposal or transportation, and shall include but
not be limited to: explosives, pyrotechnics, flammable gas, flammable
compressed gas, nonflammable compressed gas, flammable liquid, combustible
liquid, oxidizing material, poisonous gases, poisonous liquid, poisonous solid,
irritating material, etiological material, radioactive material, corrosive
material or liquefied petroleum gas.
      10.   Incendiary Act. A fire purposely set by a person or persons.
      11.   Incident. Any request for the services of the Fire Department.
      12.   Malicious Incident. An incident which is created by an individual's
intentional purpose to cause property damage, endanger lives, and/or cause the
response of emergency personnel for something other than an actual emergency.
      13.   Mileage Charge. A charge per mile from the patient pick up to the
hospital facility where the patient is transported.
      14.   Negligent/Careless Act. Failure to exercise the standard of care
that a reasonably prudent person would use under similar circumstances,
including actions which a reasonably prudent person would not do, including the
disregard of the safety of others.
      15.   Nonresident. A person who is not domiciled within the corporate
limits of the Village of Forest View.
      16.   Nonresidential Refusal. All persons who are nonresidents of the
Village who have received or accepted ambulance or life-safety services from
Emergency Personnel but have refused transportation by ambulance to a hospital.
      17.   Nonresidents Transported to Hospital. All persons who are
nonresidents of the Village who are transported by a Fire Department operated
ambulance from within the corporate limits of the Village to a hospital or
other authorized medical facility for medical care or attention.
      18.   Person. Any natural person(s), partnership, corporation, limited
liability partnership or corporation, association, firm, insurance carrier,
servicing agent or other legal entity.
      19.   Resident. A person who is domiciled within the corporate limits of
the Village of Forest View.
      20.   Resident Refusal. All persons who are residents of the Village who
have received or accepted ambulance and/or life-safety services from Emergency
Personnel but have refused transportation by ambulance to a hospital.
      21.   Residents Transported to Hospital. All persons who are residents of
the Village who are transported by Emergency Personnel from within the
corporate limits of the Village to a hospital or other authorized medical
facility for medical care or attention.
   (B)   Occurrences/Incidents Requiring Reimbursement. The following types of
occurrences or incidents are subject to the reimbursement fees set forth in
subsection (C) below.
      1.   Negligent/careless actions by persons that cause an incident
resulting in an emergency response.
      2.   Malicious or incendiary actions by persons that cause an incident
resulting in an emergency response.
      3.   Driving under the influence. Any person found guilty, including an
order of supervision or probation, of "DUI", who proximately causes any
incident resulting in an emergency response.
      4.   Salvage operations. Fire Department salvage operations including but
not limited to tarping personal property and smoke or water removal.
      5.   Fire company standby. When a fire company (engine, truck or
ambulance) is requested or required to stand by for a non-Village sponsored
event. No other fire company standby services shall be provided within the
Village other than through the Village's Fire Department unless the Fire
Department is unable to provide such services.
      6.   Extrication of persons from vehicles involved in traffic accidents.
      7.   Extinguishment of a motor vehicle fire.
      8.   Debris removal, Hazmat removal, fluid removal, or any other
mitigation or operational tasks performed by a fire company at the scene.
      9.   Non-court ordered non-residents who request a child seat
installation.
      10.   All court ordered installations of a child car seat regardless of
residency.
      11.   False alarms.
   (C)   Fee Schedule. Fees for the acts enumerated in subsection (B) above,
shall be charged to the responsible party in accordance with the following
schedule:
Motor vehicle incidents and other emergency services:
Motor Vehicle Incidents:
Level 1 - Basic response four hundred and thirty-five dollars ($435.00) per
hour - Hazardous materials assessment and scene stabilization.
Level 2 - Intermediate response four hundred and ninety-five dollars ($495.00)
per hour - Includes Level 1 services, plus clean up and material used
(sorbents) for hazardous fluid clean up and disposal.
Level 3 - Advanced response six hundred and five dollars ($605.00) per hour -
Car fire services including one or more of the following. Provide scene safety,
fire suppression, breathing air, rescue tools, hand tools, foam structure
protection and clean up of gasoline or other automotive fluids that are spilled
as a result of the accident/incident.
Add on services:
Extrication one thousand and five dollars ($1,005.00) per hour - includes heavy
rescue tools, ropes, airbags, cribbing etc.
Create a landing zone - four hundred dollars ($400.00) per hour.
Additional time on scene:
Fire Engine billed at four hundred dollars ($400.00) per hour.
Fire Truck billed at five hundred dollars ($500.00).
Miscellaneous equipment billed at three hundred dollars ($300.00) per hour.
Fire Investigation:
Two hundred and seventy-five dollars ($275.00) per hour. Includes scene safety,
investigation, source identification, K-9/Arson dog unit, identification
equipment, mobile detection unit fire and fire report.
Water Incidents:
Level 1 - Basic response four hundred dollars ($400.00) per hour, plus fifty
dollars ($50.00) per rescue person. Includes engine response, first responder
set-up and command, scene safety and investigation (including possible patient
contact, hazard control).
Fire Prevention and Protection:
Fire Inspections:
Initial Inspection for a commercial property: one (1) square foot up to ten
thousand (10,000) square feet of property with one (1) reinspection within
thirty (30( days: fifty dollars ($50.00); for each reinspection thereafter
until all violations are corrected: seventy-five dollars ($75.00) per
inspection.
Initial Inspection for a commercial property: ten thousand and one (10,001)
square feet and above of property with one (1) reinspection within thirty (30)
days: one hundred and fifty dollars ($150.00); for each reinspection thereafter
until all violations are corrected: one hundred and seventy-five dollars
($175.00) per inspection.
Post-Fire Investigation:
Will be billed at two hundred and seventy-five dollars ($275.00) per hour.
Includes scene safety, investigation, source identification, K-9/Arson dog
unit, identification equipment, mobile detection unit fire and fire report.
Fire Alarms:
Nuisance Alarms shall be defined for this purpose as more than five (5) alarms
from one alarm position in a calendar month due to a system malfunction: Will
be billed at fifty dollars ($50.00) each alarm.
   (D)   Waiver of Fees. It is within the discretion of the Village
Administrator to waive or reduce any fee based on mitigating circumstances.
   (E)   Invoice/Payment. An invoice for the payment of the service fees set
forth in subsection (C) above, shall be sent to the responsible party's
insurance carrier, or to the responsible party directly if there is no
insurance involved. Payment shall be due upon the rendering of an invoice or
statement by the Village or its authorized billing and collection service
corporation or agent. (Ord. 80-4, 5-13-1980; amd. Ord. 22-33, 11-22-2022)
CHAPTER 6
COMMUNITY BLOOD REPLACEMENT
SECTION:
7-6-1: Village To Enter Into Assurance Plan
7-6-2: Village To File Copy Of Ordinance With Blood Center
7-6-1: VILLAGE TO ENTER INTO ASSURANCE PLAN:
The Village shall enter into the Michael Reese Blood Center Community Blood
Replacement Assurance Plan in conformance with the terms and conditions of the
memorandum of understanding, a copy of which is referred to herein and made a
part hereof by reference, which memorandum is hereby adopted. (Ord. 72-287, 10-
24-1972)
7-6-2: VILLAGE TO FILE COPY OF ORDINANCE WITH BLOOD CENTER:
The Village Clerk is directed to file a copy of said Ordinance with the Michael
Reese Blood Center. (Ord. 72-287, 10-24-1972)
CHAPTER 7
MOTOR VEHICLE STORAGE
SECTION:
7-7-1: Nuisance Declared
7-7-2: Notice; Removal
7-7-3: Removal
7-7-4: Definition
7-7-5: Operable Motor Vehicles; Limitation On Number
7-7-6: Penalty
7-7-1: NUISANCE DECLARED:
All inoperable motor vehicles, whether on public or private property, and in
view of the general public, are hereby declared to be a nuisance. (Ord. 93-1,
1-26-1993)
7-7-2: NOTICE; REMOVAL:
The owner of an inoperable motor vehicle, which is on open private property
under the control of the owner of the vehicle, shall cause such vehicle to be
removed and disposed of within fourteen (14) days from the issuance of a notice
to do so from the village 1 . (Ord. 00-10, 9-12-2000)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section
  9-2-12(B) of this code.
7-7-3: REMOVAL:
In the event an owner fails to remove and dispose of an inoperable motor
vehicle following the notice provided for in section
7-7-2 of this chapter, the village police department is hereby authorized and
directed to remove such inoperable motor vehicle or parts thereof. The owner of
the inoperable motor vehicle shall be entitled to a pre-tow hearing as provided
in subsection
9-4-3(C) and section
9-4-6 of this code. The owner of the inoperable motor vehicle shall be
responsible for all costs incurred by the village in removal, storage and
disposal. (Ord. 00-10, 9-12-2000)
7-7-4: DEFINITION:
As used in this chapter, "inoperable motor vehicle" means any motor vehicle
which for a period of at least thirty (30) days the engine, wheels or other
parts have been removed, or on which the engine, wheels or other parts have
been altered, damaged or otherwise so treated, or in such a state of disrepair
that the vehicle is incapable of being driven under its own power. "Inoperable
motor vehicle" shall not include a motor vehicle which has been rendered
temporarily incapable of being driven under its own motor power in order to
perform ordinary service or repair operations. (Ord. 93-1, 1-26-1993)
7-7-5: OPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLES; LIMITATION ON NUMBER:
The owner of property located within a residential zoning district of the
village shall not maintain on open private property a number of motor vehicles
exceeding the number of licensed drivers residing on the property, plus two
(2). For purposes of this section, "open private property" shall mean property
under the control of the owner, such that the vehicle or vehicles are visible
either from the street or from adjoining properties. "Motor vehicles" shall
include cars, trucks, minivans, four-wheel drive vehicles and similar vehicles,
but shall not include recreational vehicles, campers or boats. (Ord. 93-1, 1-
26-1993)
7-7-6: PENALTY:
Any person found in violation of any of the terms of this chapter shall be
fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than the maximum penalty
provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. Each day of violation shall be considered a separate
offense. The village may avail itself of any other administrative or judicial
remedy to prevent a violation of this chapter. (Ord. 93-1, 1-26-1993; amd. Ord.
95-23, 10-10-1995)
CHAPTER 8
ON-SITE RECYCLING FOR MULTI-FAMILY STRUCTURES
SECTION:
7-8-1: Definitions
7-8-2: On-Site Multi-Family Structure Recycling Program
7-8-3: Recyclable Material Collection Requirements For Village Scavengers
7-8-1: DEFINITIONS:
MULTI-FAMILY PROPERTY: A property consisting of one or more "multi-family
structures".
MULTI-FAMILY STRUCTURE: A building with more than one residential living unit.
OWNER: Any persons, corporation, partnership, or entity such as a condominium
or homeowners association, jointly or severally having an ownership interest in
a multi-family property or otherwise being responsible for solid waste
collection.
PRIVATE SCAVENGER: Any person, firm or corporation engaged in the removal of
solid waste, compostable material and/or recyclable material from any location
with the Village not covered by either an exclusive collection contract between
the Village and a contracted hauler, or a franchise agreement between the
Village and a franchised hauler.
RECYCLABLE MATERIAL: A material which would otherwise be abandoned or discarded
but which can be utilized in the secondary material market.
RECYCLING: The process by which materials that would otherwise be disposed of
or discarded are collected, separated or processed and returned to the economic
mainstream in the form of raw materials or products.
SOURCE SEPARATION: A process that separates recyclable material from other
refuse prior to collection for the purpose of recycling such materials. (Ord.
95-5, 3-28-1995)
7-8-2: ON-SITE MULTI-FAMILY STRUCTURE RECYCLING PROGRAM:
   (A)   Program Requirements:
      1.   All "multi-family properties", as defined above, shall be required
to institute an on-site recycling program, with collection of recyclable
materials to be no less than one pickup per week.
      2.   Said program shall be instituted by a multi-family property on or
before May 1, 1995.
      3.   An acceptable recycling program shall include, but is not limited
to, the following components:
         (a)   Recyclable materials collections;
         (b)   Data collection including the hauler's quarterly report;
         (c)   Education campaign and materials; and
         (d)   Recycling program administration and maintenance.
   (B)   Specific Requirements:
      1.   Recycling collection areas shall be conveniently located and
maintained within each dwelling unit, and consist of separate containers for
the purpose of temporary storage of recyclables. Whenever possible, recycling
containers should be placed adjacent to solid waste collection containers.
      2.   Indoor collection/storage areas shall be established in accordance
with appropriate Village fire and/or safety codes.
      3.   Each individual dwelling unit shall maintain their own recycling
area, including the container, in a clean, sanitary, and litter-free manner.
      4.   On-site multi-family structure recycling programs are required to
collect the same recyclable materials collected through the Village residential
recycling program.
      5.   Recyclable materials must be source separated from other solid waste
prior to collection for the purpose of recycling such materials. Separate
collection containers and collection vehicles shall be employed.
      6.   The contracted Village scavenger providing the on-site recycling
collection service shall be responsible for furnishing and maintaining
collection vehicles which are deemed necessary in the recycling program. The
contracted Village scavenger shall be responsible for the collection,
intermediate storage or transfer, transportation, and sale of recyclable
materials to a processor, broker, or market desired for reuse of materials.
      7.   The Village shall notify residents of the availability of recycling
services through a formal and ongoing educational campaign, and shall use their
best efforts to gain and maintain participation in the program.
      8.   It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized persons to remove or
damage any recyclable materials placed in designated containers, or the
containers themselves. Title to recyclable materials shall pass to the Village
scavenger when the materials are placed into the collection vehicle. (Ord. 95-
5, 3-28-1995)
7-8-3: RECYCLABLE MATERIAL COLLECTION REQUIREMENTS FOR VILLAGE SCAVENGERS:
   (A)   All Village contracted scavengers desiring to receive a scavenger
license to collect solid waste, compostable material and/or recyclable material
from multi-family properties in the Village must comply with all applicable
Federal, State, County and local laws, ordinances, rules and regulations. As a
condition of receiving, renewing and maintaining a scavenger license to collect
solid waste, compostable material and/or recyclable material from multi- family
properties within the Village, each licensee or applicant for such license
shall:
      1.   Obtain all permits and licenses required by Federal, State and
County laws, ordinances, rules and regulations and maintain the same in full
force and effect.
      2.   Provide collection and recycling services for all multi- family
properties in the residential area.
      3.   Failure to comply with the above provisions shall result in a denial
of receiving, renewing or maintaining a scavenger license until such time as
the applicant complies with all provisions set forth in this Section.
   (B)   Reporting Requirements:
      1.   The Village's exclusive recycling contractor shall submit a
quarterly report to both the Village and the West Cook County Solid Waste
Agency that contains the total weight or volume of recyclable materials
collected from multi-family properties it serves within the Village.
      2.   Quarterly reports submitted to the Village shall contain aggregate
totals concerning the information listed above for all multi-family properties
the contracted Village scavenger serves within the residential area.
      3.   Reports shall be due no later than twenty (20) days after the close
of each quarter. "Quarters" are defined as follows: First Quarter - January 1
through March 31; Second Quarter - April 1 through June 30; Third Quarter -
July 1 through September 30 and Fourth Quarter - October 1 through December 31.
Reports all follow the formate prescribed by the West Cook County Solid Waste
Agency.
   (C)   Implementation And Continuation Of Program Required:
      1.   Implementation of on-site multi-family structure recycling programs
shall be required as stated in subsection
7-8-2(A)2 of this Chapter. Such recycling programs shall be maintained in
effect regardless of any change of building ownership or Village scavenger
service. (Ord. 95-5, 3-28-1995)
CHAPTER 9
SPECIALIZED RESCUE TEAMS
SECTION:
7-9-1: Responsibility For Costs
7-9-2: Emergency Response Charges
7-9-3: Village Listed As Rescue Service
7-9-4: Fees Or Other Charges
7-9-5: Severability
7-9-6: Violation
7-9-1: RESPONSIBILITY FOR COSTS:
Notwithstanding any other provisions or rule of law, the following persons
shall be jointly, or jointly and severally liable for all costs of a
specialized rescue team as set forth in this chapter:
   (A)   The owner of the property on which the specialized emergency response
occurs;
   (B)   Any person involved in any activity which caused or contributed to the
causation of the emergency;
   (C)   In cases involving the rescue or recovery of an individual, the
individual and his/her employer if the person was in the village in furtherance
of the employer's interest; and
   (D)   In cases involving the rescue or recovery of property, the owner of
the property and anyone who had custody or control of the property at the time
of the emergency. (Ord. 03-10, 8-26-2003)
7-9-2: EMERGENCY RESPONSE CHARGES:
The charges for an emergency response of a specialized rescue team are as
follows for the purpose of tactical rescue, high angle rescue, confined space
rescue, below grade rescue, hazardous materials response and/or trench rescue:
   (A)   One hundred dollars ($100.00) per hour/per vehicle;
   (B)   Thirty five dollars ($35.00) per hour/per team member; and
   (C)   Cost of all materials or equipment necessary in providing the
response. (Ord. 03-10, 8-26-2003)
7-9-3: VILLAGE LISTED AS RESCUE SERVICE:
In addition to charges for a specialized rescue team response, if a person or
entity within the village requests that, pursuant to occupational safety and
health laws, the village or any intergovernmental agency to which the village
belongs be listed as the rescue service or as the backup rescue service on the
permit or a permit required confined space activity, the charge for such
service shall be one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per day. If a person or
entity lists the village as the rescue service or the backup rescue service
without notifying the village of Forest View, in writing, in advance of entry
into any permit required confined space, the person or entity shall be charged
one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) per day for each day the permit
is outstanding. (Ord. 03-10, 8-26-2003)
7-9-4: FEES OR OTHER CHARGES:
Nothing in this chapter shall preclude the assessment of fees or other charges
pursuant to any other village ordinance or resolution. (Ord. 03-10, 8-26-2003)
7-9-5: SEVERABILITY:
The provisions and sections of this chapter shall be deemed severable and the
invalidity of any portion of this chapter shall not affect the validity of the
remainder. (Ord. 03-10, 8-26-2003)
7-9-6: VIOLATION:
Any person or entity that refuses to pay or fails to pay the above listed
charges within sixty (60) days of notice of the charge will be deemed to have
violated this chapter and will incur a fine, as determined elsewhere in this
code, for each offense, plus all legal fees and all costs incurred by the
village for enforcement. Such fees and costs shall include, but not be limited
to, attorney fees and costs of collection. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed for each day on which a violation occurs and continues. (Ord. 03-10,
8-26-2003)
TITLE 8
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
CHAPTER 1
PUBLIC WAYS
SECTION:
8-1-1: Obstructions
8-1-2: Clay Holes
8-1-3: Railroad Ties; Combustible Material
8-1-4: Other Work Performed On A Right Of Way
8-1-1: OBSTRUCTIONS:
No person shall construct or maintain any bay window, bridge, wire, pipe or
other structure or device over any public way or other public place; or any
clock or post at the curb or any clock attached outside the face of any
building; or any loading platform switch track or pushcar track upon any public
way or other public place; or any tunnel or vault underneath the surface of any
public way or other public place; or install or maintain any wire, pipe or
conduit underneath the surface of any public way or other public place without
first having obtained specific authority by ordinance passed by the Board
authorizing such special privilege.
   (A)   To receive authority for erection of one of the aforementioned
structures written application shall be made to the Building Commissioner
accompanied by plans and specifications of the structure and a good sufficient
bond executed by the grantee, running to the Village, in the penal sum of ten
thousand dollars ($10,000.00) with sureties to be approved by said Commissioner
and conditional upon the faithful observances and performance of each condition
of the permit to be issued by the Board and conditioned further to indemnify,
keep and save harmless the Village against all liabilities, judgments, costs
and damages and expenses which may in any way come against the Village in
consequence of the granting of said permit or which may accrue against, be
charged to, or recovered from the Village by reason of any act or thing done by
virtue of the authority given in said permit. Said bond shall be kept in force
throughout the life of said permit and rights accruing under said permit shall
be cancelled whenever said bond lapses.
Upon receipt of said application together with accompanying documents the
Commissioner shall examine said application and determine whether: 1) the
erection of said structure will comply with the zoning and building provisions
of this Code, or 2) will not at any time be reasonably capable of constituting
a nuisance within the purport of the provisions of this Code. The Commissioner
shall submit said application to the Board together with his findings thereon.
Thereupon the Board shall examine the findings of the Commissioner and such
further information as it may otherwise acquire and make its own finding of
fact as to the conformity of said proposed structure with local ordinances. It
shall pass an ordinance enabling erection of the structure and cause the Clerk
to issue a permit thereon if it finds that the erection of the structure will
conform with local ordinances. Said permit shall be conditioned upon erection
of said structure in accordance with plans and specifications, payment of
appropriate fees and licenses, and shall be revokable upon a subsequent finding
by the Board that the proposed structure is not being built in conformity with
said plans or that there has been a failure to pay proper license and permit
fees.
   (B)   Annually it shall be the duty of the Commissioner of Buildings to
inspect said structures and ascertain whether or not said structure remains
sound and continues to be maintained in accordance with original plans and
specifications and upon submission of his annual report to the Clerk finding
the said structure is properly maintained in accordance thereto the Clerk, with
the requisites of this Section together with license fees pertaining thereto,
shall issue a license for the annual period. License fee for any year (or
portion thereof) in the event the structure is erected during a calendar year,
shall be as follows:
      1.   For erection of any structure protruding over any Village street,
way or place (said structure shall be not less than 12 feet from the surface of
the way or place): fifty cents ($0.50) for every lineal foot or portion thereof
so extended.
      2.   For erection of any loading platform switch track or pushcar track
upon any public way or other public place: two dollars fifty cents ($2.50) per
lineal foot or portion thereof fronting on said way or place.
      3.   For erection of any post at any curb: ten dollars ($10.00).
      4.   For erection of any tunnel or vault under any public way or place
(said structure shall not interfere with existing public works): ten dollars
($10.00) for each foot of its diameter.
Failure to pay license fees provided for herein shall be an offense punishable
by fine.
   (C)   In case of the installation and maintenance of an overhead system for
the conduct of electrical current at more than six hundred (600) volts upon the
public ways and places of the Village, in addition to other requirements of
this Section, said system shall be erected and maintained in accordance with
the following standards:
      1.   Conductors: Where copper is used as a conducting medium, the
breaking stress shall be not less than one thousand two hundred thirty seven
(1,237) pounds. Vertical space between conductors shall be one foot (1') per
one hundred feet (100') of span length and minimum clearances shall be twenty
six inches (26") up to eleven (11) K.V., thirty eight inches (38") where
between eleven (11) K.V., and thirty three (33) K.V., fifty six inches (56")
where between thirty three (33) K.V. and sixty six (66) K.V., and ninety two
inches (92") where above sixty six (66) K.V.
      2.   The minimum clearances between conductors and poles shall be twelve
inches (12") up to eleven (11) K.V., fourteen inches (14") from thence to
thirty three (33) K.V., twenty eight inches (28") from thence to sixty six (66)
K.V. and forty two inches (42") where above sixty six (66) K.V. Minimum
clearances between conductors and poles shall be as above stated where pin
insulators are used. Where, however, suspension type insulators are used,
clearances shall be as above indicated, plus seventy five one-hundredths (0.75)
times the length of the suspension insulator string.
      3.   Insulators: Insulators shall be of porcelain and smoothly glazed,
where either a suspension or pin type insulator is used more than one shed
shall be utilized where the line is carrying more than ten thousand (10,000)
volts. The total thickness of the insulator shall be one-eighth inch (1/8") per
sixteen thousand five hundred (16,500) volts carried or fraction thereof.
      4.   Grounding: A ground wire shall be strung between poles and grounded
in earth every quarter mile or, as an alternative thereto, each and every pole
shall be separately grounded.
      5.   Poles: Poles shall be constructed in accordance with the
requirements of the National Electrical Code Handbook, 3rd Edition. Terms used
herein shall be in accordance with definitions in said Handbook. (1940 Code
Sec. 8-5)
8-1-2: CLAY HOLES:
The owner, lessee or person in possession of any real estate within the Village
upon which are located or situated any clay holes or other similar excavations
is hereby required to cause such clay holes or other excavations to be enclosed
with wooden or wire fences of not less than six feet (6') in height. When such
fences are of wire, only smooth or nonbarbed wire shall be used, and such fence
or fences shall consist of not less than eight (8) rows of wire, and such rows
of wire shall not be more than nine inches (9") apart. (1940 Code Sec. 5-13)
8-1-3: RAILROAD TIES; COMBUSTIBLE MATERIAL:
It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, place, leave or suffer to be
thrown, placed or left any used railroad ties, refuse, or combustible material
in or upon any street, alley, parkway or other public place or upon any
railroad right of way, vacant, or unimproved lot or parcel of land in the
Village. (Ord. 72-77, 7-11-1972)
8-1-4: OTHER WORK PERFORMED ON A RIGHT OF WAY:
Whenever any work not specifically included in section
8-1-1 of this chapter is performed on a village right-of-way, the individual,
firm, or corporation performing such work shall first provide to the village a
cash bond in the amount of five hundred ($500.00) dollars. This cash bond shall
secure the cost to restore village right-of-way to at least as good a condition
as that existing prior to the construction under the permit, as determined by
the Village. If the Village determines to draw upon this cash bond, it will
provide the contractor with seven (7) days' notice specifying the reason for
such proposed draw. The contractor may, within said seven (7) day period,
appeal that determination to the Village Administrator. The decision of the
Village Administrator will be final. (Ord. 85-18, 11-12-1985; amd. Ord. 22-34,
12-13-2022)
CHAPTER 2
WATERWORKS
SECTION:
8-2-1: Water Rates
8-2-2: Billing And Payment
8-2-3: Turn On/Off Charge, And Connection Charge
8-2-4: Water Supplied Through Meters
8-2-5: Placement Of Meters
8-2-6: Defective Meters
8-2-7: Authority To Enter Premises
8-2-8: Water Service; Emergency And Temporary Construction
8-2-9: Obstruct Water Flow
8-2-10: Flushing Of Sanitary Sewers
8-2-11: Restricted Hours For Specified Uses
8-2-12: Emergency Proclamation
8-2-13: Regulation Of Potable Water Supply Wells Within The Corporate Limits Of
The Village Of Forest View
8-2-1: WATER RATES:
   Effective June 1, 2024, the following charges and rates for the use and for
the service supplied by the waterworks system of the village, based upon the
amount of water consumed, as shown by the water meters, as set forth
hereinafter:
   (A)   For each residential user, the quarterly charge for water service
shall be as follows:
 
For the first 9,000 gallons                                          $115.56
For excess over 9,000 gallons, per 1,000 gallons                     $14.44
The minimum quarterly charge for residential water service shall be: $115.56
 
   (B)   For each commercial user, the monthly charge for water service shall
be as follows:
 
For the first 3,000 gallons                                       $89.58
For excess over 3,000 gallons, per 1,000 gallons                  $14.44
The minimum monthly charge for commercial water service shall be: $89.58
 
   (C)   For each industrial (manufacturing) user, the monthly charge for water
shall be as follows:
 
For the first 9,000 gallons                                       $253.22
For excess over 9,000 gallons, per 1,000 gallons                  $14.44
The minimum monthly charge for industrial water service shall be: $253.22
 
   (D)   The rates and charges applicable to municipal and government users,
including the village, its offices, police and fires departments, shall be a
flat rate of one thousand three hundred ninety dollars and forty-four cents
($1,390.44) per month, irrespective of the quantity of water used. The Forest
View park district shall pay the monthly commercial rates as established and
amended from time to time for each metered water service.
   (E)   The village hereby authorizes the Metropolitan Water Reclamation
District of Greater Chicago to make connection to the potable water supply of
the village through the facilities of the Metropolitan Water Reclamation
District of Greater Chicago for domestic purposes only.
(Ord. 17-09, 5-23-2017; amd. Ord. 19-12, 5-28-2019; Ord. 21-03, 6-8-2021; Ord.
22-14, 5-10-2022; Ord. 23-03, 3-14-2023; Ord. 24-03, 3-12-2024; Ord. 25-09, 5-
13-2025)
8-2-2: BILLING AND PAYMENT:
   (A)   Charges: Charges for residential water service shall be billed on a
quarterly basis.
Billing periods shall be as follows:
      1.   February 1 through April 30
      2.   May 1 through July 31
      3.   August 1 through October 31
      4.   November 1 through January 31
Charges for industrial and commercial water service shall be billed monthly.
   (B)   Liability: The owner of the premises shall be liable to pay for the
service on said premises, and the service is furnished to the premises by the
Village only upon the condition that the owner of the premises is severally
liable therefor to the Village. Application for village water service must be
made in the owner's name with the owner's current mailing address.
   (C)   Due Date: All bills for residential water service shall be payable not
later than the close of business on the last day of the month following the end
of the billing period. All bills for industrial and commercial water service
shall be payable not later than the close of business on the fifteenth day
following the end of the billing period. A penalty of ten percent (10%) shall
be added to the principal amount of any bill (including all arrearages) not
paid within said thirty (30) day period or fifteen (15) day period, as the case
may be. (Ord. 97-16, 7-22-1997)
   (D)   Delinquent Charges: Whenever any charges for water service, or service
charges for installation, disconnection, turnon or shutoff of water service
remain unpaid, in whole or in part, for thirty (30) days (15 days for
commercial/industrial customers), such charges shall be deemed delinquent. Once
an account has been deemed to be delinquent, the water clerk shall immediately
send a series of three (3) letters spaced seven (7) business days apart
notifying the customer of the delinquency. If the account is not paid after the
third letter has been sent, a fourth and final letter notifying the customer
that if after seven (7) business days, the account remains delinquent, water
service will be terminated. This process will take place only once during any
rolling twelve (12) month period beginning on the date the initial late notice
is sent. Subsequent delinquencies will only receive the fourth or final notice
providing for a disconnect after seven (7) business days. Whenever the premises
is occupied by a person or persons other than the owner, and the village has
previously received notice of this, the notice of delinquency shall be mailed
to the owner of the property if his/her address is known to the village.
   (E)   Disconnection Of Service For Nonpayment; Reinstatement Fee: The water
supply may be shut off from any premises for which the water bill remains
unpaid for thirty (30) days (15 days for commercial/industrial customers) after
the rendition of the bill for such service. If water service is discontinued
after the owner of the premises or his/her representative has failed to make
payment, water service shall not be reinstated until all past due bills and
penalties due thereon are paid in full, together with payment of a fee of one
hundred dollars ($100.00) for shutoff of service for delinquency and a fee of
one hundred dollars ($100.00) for cost of reinstating service to the location.
The second shutoff and reinstatement is subject to surcharges of one hundred
fifty dollars ($150.00) each. A third such occurrence will result in surcharges
of two hundred dollars ($200.00) each and shall remain at this rate for any
subsequent disconnects.
   (F)   Delinquent Charges; Lien: Whenever any charges for water service or
service charges for installation, disconnection, turnon or shutoff of water
service remain unpaid, in whole or in part, for thirty (30) days (15 days for
commercial/industrial customers) such charges shall be deemed delinquent. After
the prescribed collection process has been followed and the account remains
delinquent, the water superintendent shall exercise his/her discretion to
initiate proceedings to place a lien upon the said property, by having the
village file a statement of lien claim with the Cook County recorder of deeds.
This statement of lien claim shall include the legal description of the
property to which service is provided; the amount unpaid including penalty; and
a notice that the village claims a lien for stated amount as well as for all
water service charges and penalties, subsequent to the period for which the
bill was rendered. Whenever the premises is occupied by a person or persons
other than the owner, and the village has previously received notice of this,
notice of delinquency and lien shall be mailed to the owner of the property if
his/her address is known to the village. The failure of the village to record
the lien with the Cook County recorder of deeds or to mail the notice of
delinquency and lien to the owner of the property or failure of the owner to
receive such notice, shall not affect the right of the village to foreclose the
lien for unpaid bills as mentioned herein. Property subject to a lien for
unpaid water charges shall be sold for nonpayment of the same, and the proceeds
of the sale shall be applied to pay the charges, after deducting costs, as is
the case in the foreclosure of statutory liens. Such foreclosure shall be by
bill in equity in the name of the village. The village attorney is hereby
authorized to initiate such proceedings against any property for which the bill
has remained unpaid for ninety (90) days after it has been rendered. (Ord. 05-
05, 9-27-2005)
   (G)   Severance And Restoration Of Water Service After Tampering: If it is
found that the water supply has been restored by persons other than water
department personnel to a building in violation of the provisions of the
waterworks ordinance, the village board shall have the authority to sever the
service through which the water is being supplied to any such building. No
water shall again be supplied to the premises until the charges of such
severing and also any other unpaid charges have been paid. The charges
hereinbefore provided shall be paid by the persons owning or occupying the
building at the time it is desired to have the water service restored,
irrespective of whether such person is being held responsible for any tampering
with the B box shutoff.
   (H)   Security Deposit: Whenever water service has been terminated due to
delinquency of payment, the water superintendent may require a security deposit
from the owner of the premises before restoring water service to the said
premises. The security deposit must be in the form of cash or certified check
and is not applicable to any future charges. (Ord. 97-16, 7-22-1997)
8-2-3: TURN ON/OFF CHARGE, AND CONNECTION CHARGE:
There shall be a service charge of twenty five dollars ($25.00) for turning
water on or for turning water off. In the event water service is terminated as
a result of a delinquent payment, said charges shall be increased to one
hundred dollars ($100.00) for the initial turnoff/turnon. Subsequent
delinquencies shall be increased to one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) and two
hundred dollars ($200.00) respectively. In addition, there shall be a service
charge for each water or sewer connection made, which charge shall be based on
the diameter of the water or sewer service connection serving any property or
premises: (Ord. 05-05, 9-27-2005)
Connection Size Fee
Connection Size Fee
3/4" - 2"       $ 50.00
3" - 4"         75.00
5"              100.00
6"               
8"              150.00
10"             175.00
12"             200.00
16"             225.00
 
(Ord. 85-17, 11-12-1985)
8-2-4: WATER SUPPLIED THROUGH METERS:
All water consumers supplied by the village shall be supplied through meters
only, and shall pay for the water at the rate and in the manner specified by
this chapter. (Ord. 58-12, 12-9-1958)
8-2-5: PLACEMENT OF METERS:
All meters shall be placed in the basement of buildings where service pipes
enter the same and so as to afford easy access for examining and reading. Where
there is no basement, the meter shall be placed in a tile or concrete box
inside the curb line, not more than one foot (1') distant from the service
cock. The box shall be so constructed as to amply protect the meter against
frost, and shall be easily accessible to the employees of the village. (Ord.
58-12, 12-9-1958)
8-2-6: DEFECTIVE METERS:
If any water meter is out of order or cannot be read, the superintendent shall
be authorized to submit an estimated bill to said water user for the billing
period involved. (Ord. 61-37, 5-23-1961)
8-2-7: AUTHORITY TO ENTER PREMISES:
Water department personnel shall have free access to any premises whenever such
access is deemed necessary or advisable for inspection of the water supply
thereto. Whenever any person in charge or control of a building shall refuse
entry or do any act for the purpose of preventing access, the water
superintendent may terminate service to the said building. Water service shall
continue to be shut off until written notice has been given to the
superintendent that access will be permitted. (Ord. 93-32, 11-23-1993)
8-2-8: WATER SERVICE; EMERGENCY AND TEMPORARY CONSTRUCTION:
Special water service from fire hydrants or village mains may be provided for
emergency or temporary construction purposes. Application for such special
water service shall be made in writing addressed to the president and board of
trustees. Such special use of water shall not be permitted without the approval
and consent of the president and board of trustees.
Upon approval by the corporate authorities all such water use shall be metered
through appropriate village meters or measuring devices installed and
maintained by the village water department. (Ord. 76-16, 7-6-1976)
The cost of water service from fire hydrants for emergency construction
purposes shall be a service charge of ten dollars ($10.00) daily for every day
in use, plus the prevailing industrial water rates of forty five dollars five
cents ($45.05) for the first one thousand two hundred (1,200) cubic feet and
one dollar twenty cents ($1.20) per one hundred (100) cubic feet in excess of
one thousand two hundred (1,200) cubic feet.
The cost of water service from village mains for temporary construction
purposes shall be at the rate of two dollars fifty cents ($2.50) per one
hundred (100) cubic feet. (Ord. 92-2, 1-28-1992)
8-2-9: OBSTRUCT WATER FLOW:
It shall be unlawful for any person to in any manner interfere with or obstruct
the flow, retention, storage or authorized use of water in the water system of
the village; or to interfere with or obstruct any plant or water main, hydrant,
service pipe, connected with the said water system or plant, or to cause,
suffer or permit any of such things to be done. (Ord. 58-12, 12-9-1958)
8-2-10: FLUSHING OF SANITARY SEWERS:
The flushing of sanitary sewers with potable water is prohibited except when
performed through the use of a high velocity type sewer jet. (Ord. 77-22, 12-
20-1977)
8-2-11: RESTRICTED HOURS FOR SPECIFIED USES:
Between May 15 and September 15 water from the village water distribution
system shall not be used on any day between the hours of eleven o'clock (11:00)
A.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. (local time) when evapotranspiration is at
its highest, nor shall watering be done on the same property on consecutive
days, for the purpose of:
   (A)   Watering or sprinkling of gardens, lawns, trees, shrubs and other
outdoor plants, except that such restriction shall not prohibit the watering of
newly planted gardens (less than 3 months old), lawns, trees, shrubs and plants
with handheld watering devices; and
   (B)   New/replacement sprinkler systems shall be equipped with a WaterSense
labeled irrigation controller and shall be in compliance with section 2.5(g) of
the Illinois plumbing license law 1 .
   (C)   Filling swimming pools. (Ord. 15-11A, 10-13-2015)
 
Notes
1 1. 225 ILCS 320.
8-2-12: EMERGENCY PROCLAMATION:
Whenever the water supply of the village is diminished from any cause whatever
to an amount which in the opinion of the village president is or is likely to
become dangerous to the health and safety of the public, the village president
is hereby authorized and empowered to issue a proclamation in the form of a
public notice containing regulations on the use of water from the village water
distribution system. Such regulations may provide for the limited use of water,
limitations on days and hours of use for some or all purposes and the
prohibition of specified uses. Upon making said proclamation the village
president shall make the contents thereof known to the public by news release
to the local newspapers and radio media and may also notify the citizens in any
other practical manner that he shall devise. Further, the village president
shall immediately notify all members of the board of trustees of the nature of
the emergency and the regulations that have been imposed.
The emergency proclamation of the village president and the regulations imposed
thereby shall remain in full force and effect until one of the following shall
occur:
   (A)   The village president determines that the emergency no longer exists
and that the emergency proclamation and the regulations imposed thereby shall
no longer continue in effect.
   (B)   The president and board of trustees modify, repeal or make permanent
the emergency proclamation and the regulations imposed thereby by means of an
ordinance passed at any regular or special meeting of the corporate
authorities.
   (C)   The first regular meeting of the president and board of trustees
occurring more than thirty (30) days after the emergency proclamation of the
village president.
Any village employee or officer may at the direction of the village president
notify and warn any person of the effects of said proclamation and direct said
person to comply with the regulations imposed thereby. If any such person after
having first been warned about such regulations and such proclamation shall
continue to violate said regulations, they shall be deemed to be in violation
of this section and liable for the general penalty set forth in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 77-22, 12-20-1977)
8-2-13: REGULATION OF POTABLE WATER SUPPLY WELLS WITHIN THE CORPORATE LIMITS OF
THE VILLAGE OF FOREST VIEW:
   (A)   Definitions: For the purposes of this section, unless the context
requires otherwise, the following terms shall be construed as herein defined:
    PERSON: Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, limited
liability company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust,
estate, political subdivision, or any other legal entity, or their legal
representatives, agents or assigns.
   POTABLE WATER: Water which meets the requirements of applicable federal and
state laws and regulations for drinking, culinary, swimming, bathing and
domestic purposes.
   (B)   Private And Public Wells Prohibited Within The Corporate Limits Of The
Village Of Forest View:
      1.   No person (including the village and any other unit of government)
shall install any potable water supply well or use any well for the purpose of
obtaining a potable water supply, within the corporate limits of the village of
Forest View.
      2.   No person shall drill a well, within the corporate limits of the
village of Forest View, in order to obtain a potable water supply for use in or
outside the village. (Ord. 08-13, 8-12-2008)
CHAPTER 3
DRIVEWAYS
SECTION:
8-3-1: Supervision
8-3-2: Permit Necessary
8-3-3: Board Order
8-3-4: Width Of Aprons
8-3-5: Width Of Driveways
8-3-6: Grade
8-3-7: Withdrawal Of Permit
8-3-1: SUPERVISION:
The location, construction and maintenance of driveways shall be under the
direction and supervision of the Building Commissioner and the location and
construction of the same shall be in accordance with the plans and
specifications as approved by the said Commissioner. (1940 Code Sec. 6-6; amd.
Ord. 95-20, 9-12-1995)
8-3-2: PERMIT NECESSARY:
No person shall construct, build, establish or maintain any driveway over,
across or upon any public sidewalk or public parkway where such driveway is for
other than residence or dwelling house use, or where it is necessary to cut
down or alter any street, curb or where the driveway depresses or elevates the
established grade of public sidewalks or parkways without first obtaining an
order so to do from the Board of Trustees and a permit so to do as hereinafter
provided.
A driveway over sidewalk space which does not elevate or depress the existing
grade of sidewalks and parkways and which does not cut down or alter any street
curb and which is for residence or dwelling house use may be established,
built, constructed and maintained upon permit issued by the Building
Commissioner with the order of Board of Trustees; provided, that all other
requirements of this Chapter dealing with driveways shall be fully complied
with. (1940 Code Sec. 6-6; amd. Ord. 95-20, 9-12-1995)
8-3-3: BOARD ORDER:
All Board orders for driveways shall contain the name of the person making said
application for driveway, the location and dimensions of the proposed driveway,
the use to which it is to be devoted and whether in the building thereof it
will be necessary to cut down or alter the street curb or depress the existing
grade of sidewalks or parkways. Construction of driveways may not alter the
adjacent gutter flow as established by the Village.
No permit for a driveway shall be issued upon order of the Board of Trustees
until written application therefor has been made and the bond herein provided
for has been filed. (1940 Code Sec. 6-6; amd. Ord. 95-20, 9-12-1995)
8-3-4: WIDTH OF APRONS:
Parkway driveway aprons are to be the same width as the private property
driveway at the public sidewalk and extend to a gradual expansion in width of
no more than six (6) additional feet at the curb. (Ord. 95-20, 9-12-1995)
8-3-5: WIDTH OF DRIVEWAYS:
All private driveways fronting on 45th and 46th Streets shall extend no more
than three feet (3') wider than the east-west width of the garage. (Ord. 99-13,
6-22-1999)
8-3-6: GRADE:
Where driveways are to be built across the sidewalk space, unless otherwise
expressly authorized, they shall conform to the sidewalk grade. Such driveways
shall be six inches (6") in depth and a top or finishing layer two inches (2")
in depth. This work shall be done in the manner and material shall be of the
quality and proportions specified for Portland cement concrete walks. Provided,
however, that in the case of driveways across viaduct sidewalks, variations of
construction and materials to conform to existing condition may be made when
approved by the Commissioner of Public Works and the Commissioner of Buildings.
No drive shall be so constructed as to prevent free and unobstructed passage
on, over or across the same, or in such manner as to interfere with the proper
drainage and safe grading of the streets. Gradual approaches to the regular
sidewalk grade shall be made from the grade of the driveway. The slope of any
driveway and the approaches thereto shall not exceed one inch (1") to one foot
(1') horizontal in any direction. When any driveway is to be constructed of
brick, stone, block or similar material that will not permit a smooth, even
surface without numerous joints, provision for foot travel shall be made by
constructing "crossings" or strips of concrete parallel to the street (lot)
line across such driveways; the top of such strips of concrete shall be flush
and even with the adjoining parts of the driveway; they shall be not less than
nine inches (9") in depth, eighteen inches (18") wide and shall be spaced
thirty six inches (36") apart from center to center in line with the sidewalk
on said street. For walks six feet (6') wide, two (2) such crossings shall be
provided and an additional crossing shall be provided for each three feet (3')
additional in the width of the walk. (1940 Code Sec. 6-6)
8-3-7: WITHDRAWAL OF PERMIT:
Permits required by this Chapter shall contain conditions as follows: said
permit may be revoked by the Building Commissioner, or by an order passed by
the Village in which case the authority and privileges granted shall thereupon
cease and determine; upon the termination by revocation, expiration or
otherwise of the authority, rights and privileges granted by said permit, the
driveway therein authorized shall have been located, shall be restored to its
proper condition to the satisfaction of the Building Commissioner, so that the
said portion of the said sidewalk space used for said driveway shall be safe
for public travel and in the same condition as the remaining portion of said
sidewalk space, at the sole expense of the grantee therein, without cost or
expense of any kind whatsoever to the Village; provided, that in the event of
the failure, neglect or refusal on the part of said grantee to remove said
driveway when directed so to do, the Village may proceed to remove some and
charge the expense thereof to said grantee.
Such permits may be revoked by the said Commissioner, for failure or neglect to
comply with the provisions of this Chapter. (1940 Code Sec. 6-6; amd. Ord. 95-
20, 9-12-1995)
CHAPTER 4
CABLE TV FRANCHISE
SECTION:
8-4-1: Title
8-4-2: Definitions
8-4-3: Grant Of Authority
8-4-4: Indemnification
8-4-5: Franchise Fee
8-4-6: Programming And Services
8-4-7: Emergency Facilities
8-4-8: Construction And Maintenance
8-4-9: Rates
8-4-10: Franchise Term
8-4-11: Resolution Of Subscriber Complaints
8-4-12: Construction Bond
8-4-13: Public, Educational And Municipal Access
8-4-14: Public, Educational And Municipal Connections
8-4-15: Interface Of CATV Companies
8-4-16: Studio Facility
8-4-17: Governmental Approvals
8-4-18: Equal Opportunity Employer
8-4-19: Exercise Of Reasonable Police Power
8-4-20: Right To Inspect Books
8-4-21: Regulating Officer Of The Village
8-4-22: Surrender Right
8-4-23: Transfers
8-4-24: Acceptance
8-4-25: Unlawful Acts
8-4-26: Automatic Amendments
8-4-27: Prohibited Activities
8-4-28: Cable Advisory Committee
8-4-29: Subscriber Privacy
8-4-30: Severability
8-4-31: Effective Date
8-4-1: TITLE:
This Chapter shall be known and may be cited as the CABLE TV FRANCHISE. (Ord.
79-24, 10-16-1979)
8-4-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this Chapter, and when not inconsistent with the context,
words used herein in the present tense include the future; words in plural
include the singular, and vice versa. The word "shall" is always mandatory. The
captions supplied herein for each section are for convenience only; said
captions have no force of law, are not part of the Section, and are not to be
used constructing the language of the Section. The following terms and phrases,
as used herein, shall be given the meanings set forth below:
FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION OR FCC: The present Federal agency of that
name as constituted by the Communications Act of 1934, or any successor agency
created by the United States Congress.
GRANTEE: Cablevision of Chicago, its successors and assigns.
GROSS REVENUES: Shall include any and all compensation or receipts derived by
Grantee from the operation within the Village of the cable television system
authorized herein but shall not include any refunds or credits made to
subscribers or any taxes imposed on the services furnished by Grantee.
PERSON: An individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or
organization of any kind.
REGULAR SUBSCRIBER SERVICES: Shall include the carriage of broadcast signals
and FCC mandated non-broadcast services, but shall not include "ancillary" or
"auxiliary" services, which include, but are not limited to, advertising,
leased channels and programming supplied on a per-program or per channel charge
basis, if any.
VILLAGE: The Village of Forest View, a Municipal Corporation under the laws of
the State of Illinois.
VILLAGE BOARD: The governing board of the Village of Forest View. (Ord. 79-24,
10-16-1979)
8-4-3: GRANT OF AUTHORITY:
There is hereby granted by the Village to Grantee the right and privilege to
construct, erect, operate and maintain, in, upon, along, across, above, over or
under the streets, alleys, easements, public ways and public places now laid
out or dedicated and all extensions thereof and additions thereto in the
Village, all poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes and other
conductors and fixtures necessary for the maintenance and operation in the
Village of a cable television system for the transmission of television signals
and other signals either separately or upon or in conjunction with any public
utility maintaining the same in the Village with all of the necessary and
desirable appliances and appurtenances pertaining thereto. Without limiting the
generality of the foregoing, this franchise and grant shall and does hereby
include the right in, over, under and upon the streets, sidewalks, alleys,
easements and public grounds and places in the Village to install, erect,
operate or in any way acquire the use of, as by leasing or licensing, all lines
and equipment necessary to a cable television system and the right to make
connections to subscribers and the right to repair, replace, enlarge and extend
said lines, equipment and connections. The rights herein granted for the
purposes herein set forth shall not be exclusive and the Village reserves the
right to grant a similar use of said streets, alleys, easements, public ways
and places to any person at any time during the period of this franchise;
provided, that nothing contained herein shall be deemed to require the granting
of additional CATV franchises if, in the opinion of the Village Board it is in
the public interest to restrict such franchise to one or more. (Ord. 79-24, 10-
16-1979)
8-4-4: INDEMNIFICATION:
Grantee shall indemnify, defend and save the Village harmless from any and all
loss and costs, including reasonable attorneys' fees, sustained by the Village
on account of any suit, judgment, execution, claim or demand whatsoever against
the Village resulting from the action of the Grantee, its employees, agents or
independent contractors, in the construction, operation or maintenance of its
cable television system in the Village, and including costs and attorneys' fees
incurred by the Village in enforcing this provision; and for this purpose,
Grantee shall carry property damage and personal injury insurance with some
responsible insurance company or companies qualified to do business in the
State of Illinois. The Village shall be named as an additional insured for the
entire term of the franchise under the policy and shall be furnished with a
certificate of insurance which may not be cancelled except upon thirty (30)
days' prior written notice to the Village. The amounts of such insurance to be
carried for liability due to property damage shall be three hundred thousand
dollars ($300,000.00) as to any one occurrence; and against liability due to
injury to or death of persons, one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) as to any
one person and three million dollars ($3,000,000.00) as to any one occurrence.
The Village may require periodic increases in the amount of such coverage, but
in no event shall such increases be greater than the cumulative increases in
the cost of living since the time of the last requested increase. The Village
shall notify Grantee, in writing, within twenty one (21) days after the
presentation of any claim or demand, either by suit or otherwise, made against
the Village on account of any action as aforesaid on the part of the Grantee.
Where any such claim or demand against the Village is made by suit or other
legal action, written notice thereof shall be given by the Village to Grantee
not less than five (5) days prior to the date upon which an answer to such
legal action is due or within twenty one (21) days after the claim or demand is
made upon the Village, whichever notice yields Grantee the larger amount of
time within which to prepare an answer. Failure by the Village to properly
notify Grantee in accordance with the foregoing of any such claim, suit or
demand against the Village shall release Grantee from its obligation to
indemnify the Village as provided herein, if the Grantee is prejudiced thereby.
(Ord. 79-24, 10-16-1979)
8-4-5: FRANCHISE FEE:
The Grantee shall pay, as compensation to the Village a fee of three percent
(3%) of its gross revenues per calendar year. The said franchise fee shall be
payable in semi-annual installments and shall be accompanied by a statement
detailing the gross revenues for the six (6) month period in question. (Ord.
79-24, 10-16-1979)
8-4-6: PROGRAMMING AND SERVICES:
Grantee will install a state-of-the-art cable television system capable of
providing at least thirty six (36) channels of programming, and maintain said
system with the latest state-of-the-art equipment and technology.
Grantee will provide a basic service (Family Cable), consisting of at least
thirty six (36) channels of programming. In addition to many automated
services, such as local, State and international news, financial information,
including stock market quotes, comparison shopping, swap n' shop, etc., as well
as numerous broadcast television stations, this service will include motion
pictures without commercial interruption, blacked-out sporting events each
month, together with public, educational, governmental and leased channel
access. Incorporated herein by reference, and referred to as Exhibit "A" is a
listing of channel allocations for the Village and a description of the
services to be offered. In addition, the terms of the proposal heretofore
submitted by Grantor to the Village, dated August 20, 1979, and consisting of
ten (10) sections and exhibits, are incorporated herein. A copy of said
proposal is on file in the office of the Village Clerk.
Grantee will also provide programming, consisting of additional motion
pictures, night club entertainment and sporting events, as well as special
programs, such as ballet, opera and other cultural events, as they become
available.
The proposed cable system will be capable of two-way transmission. This
capability will be utilized to offer the residents of the Village a complete
security monitoring system including fire, police and medical emergency alerts.
The security system will be centrally monitored twenty four (24) hours a day.
(Ord. 79-24, 10-16-1979)
8-4-7: EMERGENCY FACILITIES:
Subject to the applicable rules of the FCC, within six (6) months from the date
of a request in writing to Grantee by the Village, Grantee shall, without
charge, and as the state-of-the-art permits, provide public emergency broadcast
facilities whereby the Village can interrupt service on all channels in order
to make public emergency cablecasts. In no event shall Grantee be required to
provide such facilities until a plan for use of the said facilities has been
prepared and approved by the Board of the Village. The Village agrees to
indemnify and hold the Grantee harmless from any damages or penalties resulting
from the use of this service. (Ord. 79-24, 10-16-1979)
8-4-8: CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE:
   (A)   Construction of the system shall commence within thirty (30) days
after all required utility company licenses have been obtained by Grantee and
service shall be available to every resident of the Village within six (6)
months thereafter, time being of the essence. Grantee shall expedite the
procurement of such licenses to the best of its ability, and the Village shall
actively assist Grantee to the fullest extent possible in obtaining reasonable
joint pole or conduit use agreements from the owners thereof.
   (B)   All Grantee's house connections, structures, poles, wire, cable,
coaxial cable, fixtures and appurtenances and other equipment shall be
installed, located, erected, constructed, reconstructed, replaced, removed,
repaired, maintained and operated in accordance with good engineering
practices, performed by experienced pole-line construction crews and so as not
to endanger or interfere with improvements the Village may deem proper to make,
or to interfere in any manner with the rights of any property owner, or to
unnecessarily hinder or obstruct pedestrian or vehicular traffic on Municipal
properties. Further, all such plant and equipment and all construction shall
meet all relevant specifications of the Federal Communications Commission, and
other applicable Federal, State and local aboveground regulations. Signals
shall be transmitted to the Village by cable lines, and no microwave receiver
or other receiving device shall be constructed in the Village without the
permission of the Village.
   (C)   Any opening or obstructions in or disturbances of the streets, public
ways, or other Municipal properties made by the Grantee in the exercise of its
rights under this Chapter shall be done in compliance with directions to be
provided by the Village President or his designee, and any relevant section of
the Village Code which regulates work in the public ways of the Village.
Further, the Village may require Grantee to install the system underground in
the Village where other public utilities have been installed underground. The
Grantee shall, at its own cost and expense, replace all paving, sidewalks,
driveways, parkways, or surfaces so disturbed in as good condition as before
work was commenced. No open cuts in streets, sidewalks or driveways shall be
allowed, except as approved by the Village Superintendent of Public Works.
   (D)   Upon failure of Grantee to commence, pursue, or complete any work
required by law or by the provisions of this Chapter to be done in any street
or other public place of Municipal property, within the time prescribed, and to
the satisfaction of the Village Board or its designee, the Village Board or its
designee may, at its option, cause such work to be done and the Grantee shall
pay to the Village the cost thereof in the itemized amounts reported by the
Village Board or its designee to the Grantee within thirty (30) days after
receipt of such itemized report.
   (E)   Grantee shall, on the request of any private party holding an
appropriate permit issued by the Village, temporarily raise or lower its lines
to permit the moving of any building or other structure, and the actual expense
of the same shall be paid by the party requesting the same, and Grantee shall
have the right and authority to require such payment in advance. Requests for
such temporary movement of facilities shall not be given less than forty eight
(48) hours before the requested relocation.
   (F)   Grantee shall have the authority to trim trees upon and overhanging
all streets, alleys, easements, sidewalks and public places of the Village in
conjunction with, and after consultation with the Village President or his
designee, so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming into
potentially hazardous contact with Grantee's equipment or facilities.
   (G)   Grantee shall, at its expense, protect, support, temporarily
disconnect, relocate in the same street or other public place or Municipal
property, or remove from the street or other public place or Municipal
property, any property of Grantee when required by the Village Board or its
designee by reason of traffic conditions, public safety, street vacation,
freeway and street construction, change or establishment of street grade,
installation of sewers, drains, water pipes, power lines, signal lines, and
tracks, or any other type of structures or improvements by public agencies. If
existing aerial utilities are placed underground at some time in the future,
Grantee will, at its expense, install its system underground. (Ord. 79-24, 10-
16-1979)
8-4-9: RATES:
The rates for regular subscriber services shall be nondiscriminatory; provided
that nothing contained herein shall be deemed to prohibit reasonable
promotional rates which may, from time to time, be less than the standard rates
imposed. The rates and charges set forth in Exhibit "A" shall not be increased
for a period of two (2) years from the date that service is available to every
resident of the Village as provided in Section
8-4-8 of this Chapter. The rates for installation of equipment shall also be
nondiscriminatory; provided, however, that, Grantee may recover its costs of
extending service to any new area as part of its installation of equipment
charges even if such installation charges for subscribers living in the area
which is the subject of the extension of services is greater than the
subscribers in the areas where service was previously available. Except as
provided hereinabove, the Village shall not have the power to regulate the
rates charged by Grantee for a period of four (4) years from the effective date
of this Chapter. Within thirty (30) days following said four (4) year period,
the Grantee shall provide written notice to the Village of the option
hereinafter granted. Upon receipt of such notice, the Village, within a period
of ninety (90) days, may in its sole judgment, determine that it will in the
future exercise this option to regulate all future rate increases for Grantee's
regular subscription services or other services if such regulation is permitted
by law. In the event the Village determines that it shall regulate such rate,
Grantee shall not increase the said rate without the prior approval of the
Village. (Ord. 79-24, 10-16-1979)
8-4-10: FRANCHISE TERM:
   (A)   This franchise shall take effect and be in full force from and after
acceptance by Grantee as provided in Section
8-4-24 of this Chapter, and the same shall continue in full force and effect
for a term of fifteen (15) years.
   (B)   Grantee shall have the option to renew this franchise for an
additional period of five (5) years. Should Grantee desire to exercise this
option, it shall so notify the Village in writing, not less than three (3)
months prior to expiration of this franchise. Upon exercise of this option by
Grantee, this franchise shall be renewed by the Village, and all of the terms
and provisions contained herein shall be controlling during the renewal period.
   (C)   In addition to all other rights and powers of the Village by virtue of
franchise or this Chapter, the Village may terminate and cancel the franchise
and all rights and privileges of the Grantee thereunder in the event that
Grantee either:
      1.   Substantially violates any material provision of the franchise or
this Chapter, any rule, order or determination of the Village Board made
pursuant thereto, where such violation shall remain uncured for a period of
thirty (30) days subsequent to receipt by Grantee of written notice of said
violation, except where such violation is not the fault of Grantee or is due to
excusable neglect; or
      2.   Attempts to evade any of the provisions of this Chapter or practices
any fraud or deception upon the Village.
Such termination and cancellation shall be made by resolution of the Village
Board duly adopted after sixty (60) days' notice to Grantee and shall in no way
affect any of the Village's rights under this Chapter or any provisions of law;
provided, however, that before the franchise may be terminated and cancelled
under this Section, Grantee shall be provided with an opportunity to be heard
at a public hearing before the Village Board, upon thirty (30) days' written
notice to Grantee of the time and place of the public hearing; provided further
that said notice shall affirmatively cite the reasons alleged to constitute
cause for revocation; and provided further that notice of said public hearing
shall be published in a local newspaper of general circulation at least twenty
(20) days before the date of the hearing.
In the event that forfeiture is imposed upon Grantee, it shall be afforded a
period of twelve (12) months within which to sell, transfer or convey this
cable television system to a qualified purchaser at fair market value. During
this twelve (12) month period, which shall run from the effective date of the
final order or decision imposing forfeiture, including any appeal, Grantee
shall have the right to operate this cable television system pursuant to the
provisions of this franchise. (Ord. 79-24, 10-16-1979)
8-4-11: RESOLUTION OF SUBSCRIBER COMPLAINTS:
   (A)   Grantee shall maintain an office with telephone service in a place
reasonably accessible to residents of the Village, for so long as it continues
to operate the system hereunder, and hereby designates such office as the place
where all notices, directions, orders and requests may be served or delivered
under this franchise. Grantee shall file a notification with the Village
whenever such address is changed.
   (B)   All complaints against Grantee relating to its performance under this
franchise, including but not limited to those concerning quality of service,
equipment malfunctions, and billing disputes, shall be received at the
aforesaid office by duly authorized employees. All complaints so received will
be turned over to the head of the department to which the complaint relates.
The manager of the system shall establish a follow-up procedure for all
complaints other than those concerning equipment or system malfunction, so that
the resolution of all complaints shall be reviewed weekly. Grantee shall report
all complaints received to the City on an annual basis.
   (C)   Regarding complaints of equipment or system malfunction, Grantee shall
respond to such complaints within thirty six (36) hours after receipt thereof
and correct malfunctions as promptly as possible. Grantee shall provide a daily
pro-rata credit to any subscriber who is without service for any period in
excess of thirty six (36) hours due to the fault of Grantee. (Ord. 79-24, 10-
16-1979)
8-4-12: CONSTRUCTION BOND:
   (A)   Within thirty (30) days after the receipt of all necessary
governmental and utility company authorizations, Grantee shall deposit with the
Village a surety bond or the equivalent thereof in cash, marketable securities,
or a letter of credit from a banking institution, guaranteeing the timely
construction of the cable television system to be constructed pursuant to this
franchise.
   (B)   The value of the security bond posted hereunder shall be five thousand
dollars ($5,000.00). The Village shall have the right to require the Grantee to
increase the amount of such security, but in no event shall such security
exceed ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00).
   (C)   In the event that the deposit is forfeited to the Village in whole or
in part because of the failure of Grantee to perform as hereinabove set forth,
Grantee shall have twenty (20) business days after receipt of written notice
from the Village that such collateral has been forfeited in whole or in part,
to replace the collateral so forfeited.
   (D)   The surety shall remain in effect for a term of five (5) years or
until cable television services are available throughout the Village, whichever
occurs sooner.
   (E)   Anything contained herein to the contrary notwithstanding, there shall
be no default or forfeiture pursuant to the terms of this franchise if the
failure to perform by Grantee is caused by circumstances beyond the control of
Grantee. (Ord. 79-24, 10-16-1979)
8-4-13: PUBLIC, EDUCATIONAL AND MUNICIPAL ACCESS:
Grantee shall provide and maintain the public, educational and Municipal access
channels, described in Exhibit "A" and incorporated herein by reference;
provided, however, that Grantee shall have the right in its discretion to
provide other programming upon any such channel during such time or times as
any such channel shall not be utilized for access purposes; further provided
that access programming shall take precedence over Grantee's nonaccess
programming on any such channel. (Ord. 79-24, 10-16-1979)
8-4-14: PUBLIC, EDUCATIONAL AND MUNICIPAL CONNECTIONS:
Subject to the applicable rules and regulations of the FCC:
   (A)   Grantee shall without charge make one aerial connection for regular
subscriber services, as provided below into the internal distribution system of
each Village office building, police station, fire station, library and school
within the Village (hereinafter singly or collectively referred to as the
"Premises"). Grantee shall make a connection at one outlet in each such
premises for the purpose of enabling the said premises to distribute the
regular subscriber service. Where such premises consists of more than one
building, only one tie-in and connection shall be made.
   (B)   Grantee shall make such tie-in and connection at the location
designated by the appropriate official as the location of the "head-end" of the
internal distribution system of the premises. The responsibility of Grantee
shall terminate when the tie-in and connection to the internal distribution
system is completed, and the responsibility for performance of the internal
distribution system, and for distribution of the transmissions throughout such
system shall be solely that of the premises. Grantee makes no representation or
warranty as to the ability of such distribution system to carry the programs
transmitted over its cable system; however, Grantee will offer, without charge,
technical consulting services to the premises in order to make the internal
system work effectively for the purposes intended herein.
   (C)   The procedure for making such connections shall be as follows:
Connections will be made at the time when Grantee is serving the area within
which the premises is located. At such time, Grantee shall send written
notification of the provisions of this paragraph to such premises. Thereafter,
upon written request from the recipient official, Grantee will make the above
described tie-in and connection to the internal distribution system of such
premises. When Grantee is serving the area, but the building on the Premises to
be connected with an aerial installation is located more than five hundred feet
(500') from the nearest CATV cable, the cost of the aerial cable installation
beyond five hundred feet (500') will be paid by the premises. For underground
installations, Grantee shall charge the recipient its actual cost. Such costs
will be submitted to said premises, in writing, before installation is begun.
All such premises will be connected according to the orderly progress and
construction of the system. (Ord. 79-24, 10-16-1979)
8-4-15: INTERFACE OF CATV COMPANIES:
Subject to the applicable rules and regulations of the FCC, in the event that
more than one franchise is issued within, or immediately adjacent to the
Village, and if such operating systems are contiguous and technically
compatible with Grantee, and have allocated access channels, Grantee shall
provide suitable interconnection facilities for one access channel at the
boundary of its service areas. In no event, however, shall Grantee be required
to interconnect with a cable system not having substantially the same access
provisions in its franchise as contained in this franchise, unless such system
agrees voluntarily to connect with Grantee, nor shall Grantee be required to
interconnect at any point beyond any area where it has trunk or feeder service.
In no event shall interconnection be required where the combined cable systems
include more than fifty (50) trunk amplifiers in cascade or as the state-of-
the-art then permits. (Ord. 79-24, 10-16-1979)
8-4-16: STUDIO FACILITY:
Grantee shall establish and maintain a studio for local programming, consisting
of at least two (2) view finder cameras, switcher fader controls, audio system,
lighting system, film chain, two (2) video tape recorders and multiplexing
unit. All equipment shall be remotely controlled from a master control unit.
This facility shall be available on a time-sharing basis to the Village, its
agencies, public service organizations and schools lying wholly or partly
within the Village. The studio facility shall be provided as soon as reasonably
practicable, but in no event later than five (5) years from the date of
registration of this franchise with the FCC. (Ord. 79-24, 10-16-1979)
8-4-17: GOVERNMENTAL APPROVALS:
Grantee shall register this franchise with the FCC within sixty (60) days of
the execution hereof. (Ord. 79-24, 10-16-1979)
8-4-18: EQUAL OPPORTUNITY EMPLOYER:
Grantee hereby agrees that it will not refuse to hire or employ, nor will it
bar or discharge from employment, nor discriminate against any person in
compensation or in terms, conditions or privileges of employment, because of
age, race, creed, color, national origin or sex. (Ord. 79-24, 10-16-1979)
8-4-19: EXERCISE OF REASONABLE POLICE POWER:
Nothing contained herein shall in any way be deemed to limit the right of the
Village to adopt, in addition to the provisions of this franchise and existing
applicable Chapters, such additional regulations as it shall find necessary in
the exercise of its reasonable police power; provided, however, that such
regulations are reasonable and do not materially conflict with the terms and
conditions of this franchise. (Ord. 79-24, 10-16-1979)
8-4-20: RIGHT TO INSPECT BOOKS:
Grantee hereby grants to the Village the right to inspect all of its books,
records, maps, plans, financial statements and other similar materials of
Grantee, including lists of formal subscriber complaints and trouble calls
received by Grantee, insofar as they relate to the terms and conditions of this
franchise and the performance of the obligations hereunder, upon reasonable
notice to Grantee and during normal business hours. (Ord. 79-24, 10-16-1979)
8-4-21: REGULATING OFFICER OF THE VILLAGE:
The office or officer of the Village that bears the primary responsibility for
the continuing administration of the terms and conditions of this franchise is
the President or his designee. (Ord. 79-24, 10-16-1979)
8-4-22: SURRENDER RIGHT:
Grantee may surrender this franchise at any time upon filing with the Village
Clerk of the Village a written notice of its intention to do so at least three
(3) months before the surrender date. On the surrender date specified in the
notice, all of the rights and privileges and all of the obligations, duties and
liabilities of Grantee in connection with this franchise shall terminate. (Ord.
79-24, 10-16-1979)
8-4-23: TRANSFERS:
All of the rights and privileges and all of the obligations, duties and
liabilities created by this franchise shall pass to and be binding upon the
successors of the Village and the successors and assigns of Grantee. There can
be no transfer or assignment of:
   (A)   The franchise or
   (B)   Any of the rights, privileges and immunities contained herein, without
the prior approval of the Village, and the Village hereby agrees that it will
not unreasonably withhold such approval. In the event that Grantee shall desire
to transfer or assign the franchise or any of the rights, privileges and
immunities contained therein, the Village shall have the right of first refusal
to assume such transfer or assignment upon the same terms and conditions. Such
right shall be exercised within sixty (60) days after receipt from Grantee of a
request to transfer or assign either the franchise or any of the rights,
privileges and immunities contained therein. (Ord. 79-24, 10-16-1979)
8-4-24: ACCEPTANCE:
This Chapter shall become effective when accepted by Grantee and shall then be
and become a valid and binding contract between the Village and Grantee;
provided that these regulations shall be void unless Grantee shall, within
ninety (90) days after the final passage hereof file with the Village Clerk of
the Village a written acceptance of these regulations and the franchise herein
granted, agreeing that it will comply with all of the provisions and conditions
hereof, and that it will refrain from doing all of the things prohibited by
this Chapter. (Ord. 79-24, 10-16-1979)
8-4-25: UNLAWFUL ACTS:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to make any unauthorized
connection, whether physically, electrically, acoustically, inductively or
otherwise, with any part of Grantee's cable television system for the purpose
of enabling himself or others to receive any television signals, radio signals,
pictures, programs, sounds or any other information or intelligence transmitted
over Grantee's cable system without payment to Grantee or its lessee.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person, without the consent of the owner,
to wilfully tamper with, remove or injure any cable, wires or other equipment
used for the distribution of television signals, radio signals, pictures,
programs, sounds or any other information or intelligence transmitted over
Grantee's cable system.
   (C)   It shall be a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than five
hundred dollars ($500.00), or by imprisonment for a term not to exceed six (6)
months, or both, for any person to violate any of the provisions of this
Section. (Ord. 79-24, 10-16-1979)
8-4-26: AUTOMATIC AMENDMENTS:
Upon written notification to Grantee by the Village from time to time, this
franchise shall be deemed automatically amended to include the terms and
conditions more favorable to the Village and agreed to by the Grantee in any
other franchise granted to it by a municipality in Cook or DuPage County,
except where such more favorable terms or conditions are due to the larger
number of street miles or the greater number of housing units contained in such
municipality. The Grantee shall furnish to the Village all franchise ordinances
or amendments thereto relating to franchises granted to it in such counties.
(Ord. 79-24, 10-16-1979)
8-4-27: PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES:
Grantee shall not require any resident of the Village to enter into a
television repair contract with Grantee or anyone designated by Grantee as a
condition to providing cable television service to any resident. (Ord. 79-24,
10-16-1979)
8-4-28: CABLE ADVISORY COMMITTEE:
Grantee shall work closely with the Board of Trustees or with any Village Cable
Advisory Committee created by the Village in all areas of mutual Grantee-
Village concerns, particularly in the following:
   (A)   Establishment of rules for accessibility to the facilities, equipment,
channels, studios and services of the system;
   (B)   Resolution of conflicts between the Grantee and public and private
users of the system;
   (C)   Semi-annual reviews of the system performance.
Any such Cable Advisory Committee shall be created by a separate Village
Ordinance. In no case, however, shall its functions contravene any of the
provisions contained in this franchise agreement. (Ord. 79-24, 10-16-1979)
8-4-29: SUBSCRIBER PRIVACY:
Grantee shall not initiate or use any form, procedure or device for procuring
information or data from subscribers' terminals by use of the cable television
system without prior authorization from each subscriber so affected. Grantee
shall not sell or offer to sell, without prior authorization from each
subscriber so affected, any list designating subscribers' names or addresses to
any other party. Grantee shall not permit the installation of any special
terminal equipment in any subscriber's premises that will permit transmission
from subscribers' premises of two-way service without first obtaining
permission of the subscriber. (Ord. 79-24, 10-16-1979)
8-4-30: SEVERABILITY:
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this Chapter
is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any Federal or State
court or administration or governmental agency of competent jurisdiction,
specifically including the Federal Communications Commission, such portion
shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision, and such
holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof. (Ord.
79-24, 10-16-1979)
8-4-31: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This Chapter shall become effective upon acceptance by Grantee as provided in
Section
8-4-24 herein. The effective date shall be the date upon which the written
acceptance provided for in Section
8-4-24 as received by the Village Clerk. This Chapter was published forthwith
in pamphlet form and shall thereafter be effective as provided herein. (Ord.
79-24, 10-16-1979)
CHAPTER 5
CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL
SECTION:
8-5-1: Cross-Connection Control; Specific Policy
8-5-2: Cross-Connection Control; General Policy
8-5-3: Definitions
8-5-4: Water System
8-5-5: Cross-Connection Prohibited
8-5-6: Survey And Investigations
8-5-7: Where Protection Is Required
8-5-8: Type Of Protection Required
8-5-9: Backflow Prevention Devices
8-5-10: Inspection And Maintenance
8-5-11: Booster Pumps
8-5-12: Violations
8-5-1: CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL; SPECIFIC POLICY:
   (A)   All plumbing installed within the Village shall be installed in
accordance with the Illinois Plumbing Code, 77 Ill. Adm. Code 890. If in
accordance with the Illinois Plumbing Code or in the judgment of the
Superintendent of Water, an approved backflow prevention device is necessary
for the safety of the public water supply system, the Superintendent of Water
will give notice to the water customer to install such an approved device
immediately. The water customer shall, at his own expense, install such an
approved device at a location and in a manner in accordance with the Illinois
Plumbing Code, Illinois Environmental Protection Agency and all applicable
local regulations, and shall have inspections and tests made of such approved
devices upon installation and as required by the Illinois Plumbing Code,
Illinois Environmental Protection Agency and local regulations.
   (B)   No person shall establish or permit to be established or maintain or
permit to be maintained any connection whereby a private, auxiliary or
emergency water supply other than the regular public water supply of the
Village may enter the supply or distribution system of said Municipality,
unless such private, auxiliary or emergency water supply and the method of
connection and use of such supply shall have been approved by the
Superintendent of Water and the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
   (C)   It shall be the duty of the Superintendent of Water to cause surveys
and investigations to be made of industrial and other properties served by the
public water supply to determine whether actual or potential hazards to the
public water supply may exist. Such surveys and investigations shall be made a
matter of public record and shall be repeated at least every two (2) years, or
as often as the Superintendent of Water shall deem necessary. Records of such
surveys shall be maintained and available for review for a period of at least
five (5) years.
   (D)   The approved Cross-Connection Control Device Inspector shall have the
right to enter at any reasonable time any property served by a connection to
the public water supply or distribution system of the Village for the purpose
of verifying the presence or absence of cross-connections, and the Water
Superintendent or his authorized agent shall have the right to enter at any
reasonable time any property served by a connection to the public water supply
or distribution system of the Village for the purpose of verifying information
submitted by the customer regarding the required cross-connection control
inspection. On demand the owner, lessees or occupants of any property so served
shall furnish to the Superintendent of Water any information which he may
request regarding the piping system or systems of water use on such property.
The refusal of such information, when demanded, shall, within the discretion of
the Superintendent of Water, be deemed evidence of the presence of improper
connections as provided in this Chapter.
   (E)   The Superintendent of Water of the Village is hereby authorized and
directed to discontinue, after reasonable notice to the occupant thereof, the
water service to any property wherein any connection in violation of the
provisions of this Chapter is known to exist, and to take such other
precautionary measures as he may deem necessary to eliminate any danger of
contamination of the public water supply distribution mains. Water service to
such property shall not be restored until such conditions have been eliminated
or corrected in compliance with the provisions of this Chapter, and until a
reconnection fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) is paid to the Village.
Immediate disconnection with verbal notice can be effected when the
Superintendent of Water is assured that imminent danger of harmful
contamination of the public water supply system exists. Such action shall be
followed by written notification of the cause of disconnection. Immediate
disconnection without notice to any party can be effected to prevent actual or
anticipated contamination or pollution of the public water supply, provided
that, in the reasonable opinion of the Superintendent of Water or the Illinois
Environmental Protection Agency, such action is required to prevent actual or
potential contamination or pollution of the public water supply. Neither the
public water supply, the Superintendent of Water, or its agents or assigns
shall be liable to any customer for any injury, damages or lost revenues which
may result from termination of said customer's water supply in accordance with
the terms of this Chapter, whether or not said termination was with or without
notice.
   (F)   The consumer responsible for backsiphoned or back pressured material
or contamination through backflow, if contamination of the potable water supply
system occurs through an illegal cross-connection or an improperly installed,
maintained or repaired device, or a device which has been bypassed, must bear
the cost of cleanup of the potable water supply system. (Ord. 91-1, 1-22-1991,
eff. 2-1-1991)
8-5-2: CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL; GENERAL POLICY:
   (A)   Purpose: The purpose of these rules and regulations is:
      1.   To protect the public water supply system from contamination or
pollution by isolating within the customer's water system contaminants or
pollutants which could backflow through the service connection into the public
water supply system.
      2.   To promote the elimination or control of existing cross-connections,
actual or potential, between the public or consumer's potable water system and
nonpotable water systems, plumbing fixtures and sources or systems containing
substances of unknown or questionable safety.
      3.   To provide for the maintenance of a continuing program of cross-
connection control which will prevent the contamination or pollution of the
public and consumer's potable water systems.
   (B)   Application: These rules and regulations shall apply to all premises
served by the public potable water supply system of the Village.
   (C)   Policy: The owner or official custodian shall be responsible for
protection of the public water supply system from contamination due to backflow
or back-siphonage of contaminants through the customer's water service
connection. If, in the judgment of the Superintendent of Water or his
authorized representative, an approved backflow prevention device is necessary
for the safety of the public water supply system, the Superintendent of Water
shall give notice to the consumer to install such approved backflow prevention
device at each service connection to the premises. The consumer shall
immediately install such approved device or devices at his own expense;
failure, refusal or inability on the part of the consumer to install such
device or devices immediately shall constitute grounds for discontinuing water
service to the premises until such device or devices have been installed. The
consumer shall retain records of installation, maintenance, testing and repair
as required in subsection
8-5-6(D)4 below for a period of at least five (5) years. The Superintendent of
Water may require the consumer to submit a cross-connection inspection report
to the Village to assist in determining whether or not service line protection
will be required. All cross-connection inspections shall be conducted by a
Cross-Connection Control Device Inspector certified by the Illinois
Environmental Protection Agency. (Ord. 91-1, 1-22-1991, eff. 2-1-1991)
8-5-3: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of
these regulations:
AGENCY: Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
APPROVED: Backflow prevention devices or methods approved by the Research
Foundation for Cross-Connection Control of the University of Southern
California, Association of State Sanitary Engineers, American Water Works
Association, American National Standards Institute or certified by the National
Sanitation Foundation.
AUXILIARY WATER SYSTEM: Any water source or system on or available to the
premises other than the public water supply system and includes the water
supplied by the system. These auxiliary waters may include water from another
purveyor's public water supply system; or water from a source such as wells,
lakes, streams process fluids, or used water. These waters may be polluted or
contaminated or objectionable or constitute a water source or system over which
the water purveyor does not have control.
BACKFLOW: The flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or substances into the
distribution pipes of a potable water system from any source other than the
intended source of the potable water supply.
BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE: Any device, method or type of construction intended
to prevent backflow into a potable water system. All devices used for backflow
prevention in Illinois must meet the standards of the Illinois Plumbing Code
and the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
CONSUMER OR CUSTOMER: The owner, official custodian or person in control of any
premises supplied by or in any manner connected to a public water system.
CONSUMER'S WATER SYSTEM: Any water system located on the customer's premises. A
building plumbing system is considered to be a customer's water system.
CONTAMINATION: Impairment of the quality of the water by entrance of any
substance to a degree which could create a health hazard.
CROSS-CONNECTION: Any physical connection or arrangement between two (2)
otherwise separate piping systems, one of which contains potable water and the
other a substance of unknown or questionable safety or quality, whereby there
may be a flow from one system into the other.
   (A)   Direct Cross-Connection: A cross-connection formed when a water system
is physically joined to a source of unknown or unsafe substance.
   (B)   Indirect Cross-Connection: A cross- connection through which an
unknown substance can be forced, drawn by vacuum or otherwise introduced into a
safe potable water system.
DOUBLE CHECK VALVE ASSEMBLY: An assembly composed of single independently
acting check valves approved under ASSE Standard 1015. A double check valve
assembly must include tight shutoff valves located at each end of the assembly
and suitable connections for testing the water-tightness of each check valve.
FIXED PROPER AIR GAP: The unobstructed vertical distance through the free
atmosphere between the water discharge point and the flood level rim of the
receptacle.
HEALTH HAZARD: Any condition, device or practice in a water system or its
operation resulting from a real or potential danger to the health and well-
being of consumers. The word "severe" as used to qualify "health hazard" means
a hazard to the health of the user that could be expected to result in death or
significant reduction in the quality of life.
INSPECTION: A plumbing inspection to examine carefully and critically all
materials, fixtures, piping and appurtenances, appliances and installations of
a plumbing system for compliance with requirements of the Illinois Plumbing
Code, 77 Ill. Adm. Code 890.
NONPOTABLE WATER: Water not safe for drinking, personal or culinary use as
determined by the requirements of 35 Ill. Adm. Code 604.
PLUMBING: The actual installation, repair, maintenance, alteration or extension
of a plumbing system by any person. Plumbing includes all piping, fixtures,
appurtenances and appliances for a supply of water for all purposes, including
without limitation lawn sprinkler systems, from the source of a private water
supply on the premises or from the main in the street, alley or at the curb to,
within and about any building or buildings where a person or persons live, work
or assemble. Plumbing includes all piping, from discharge of pumping units to
and including pressure tanks in water supply systems. Plumbing includes all
piping, fixtures, appurtenances and appliances for a building drain and a
sanitary drainage and related ventilation system of any building or buildings
where a person or persons live, work or assemble from the point of connection
of such building drain to the building sewer or private sewage disposal system
five feet (5') beyond the foundation walls.
POLLUTION: The presence of any foreign substance (organic, inorganic,
radiological or biological) in water that tends to degrade its quality so as to
constitute a hazard or impair the usefulness of the water.
POTABLE WATER: Water which meets the requirement of 35 Ill. Adm. Code 604 for
drinking, culinary and domestic purposes.
POTENTIAL CROSS-CONNECTION: A fixture or appurtenance with threaded hose
connection, tapered spout, or other connection which would facilitate extension
of the water supply line beyond its legal termination point.
PROCESS FLUID(S): Any fluid or solution which may be chemically, biologically
or otherwise contaminated or polluted in a form or concentration such as would
constitute a health, pollutional, or system hazard if introduced into the
public or a consumer's potable water system. This includes but is not limited
to:
   (A)   Polluted or contaminated waters.
   (B)   Process waters.
   (C)   Used waters originating from the public water supply system which may
have deteriorated in sanitary quality.
   (D)   Cooling waters.
   (E)   Questionable or contaminated natural waters taken from wells, lakes,
streams or irrigation systems.
   (F)   Chemicals in solution or suspension.
   (G)   Oils, gases, acids, alkalis and other liquid and gaseous fluids used
in industrial or other processes, or for firefighting purposes.
PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY: All mains, pipes and structures through which water is
obtained and distributed to the public, including wells and well structures,
intakes and cribs, pumping stations, treatment plants, reservoirs, storage
tanks and appurtenances, collectively or severally, actually used or intended
for use for the purpose of furnishing water for drinking or general domestic
use and which serve at least fifteen (15) service connections or which
regularly serve at least twenty five (25) persons at least sixty (60) days per
year. A public water supply is either a community water supply or a
noncommunity water supply.
REDUCED PRESSURE PRINCIPLE BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE: A device containing a
minimum of two (2) independently acting check valves together with an
automatically operated pressure differential relief valve located between the
two (2) check valves and approved under ASSE Standard 1013. During normal flow
and at the cessation of normal flow, the pressure between these two (2) checks
shall be less than the supply pressure. In case of leakage of either check
valve, the differential relief valve, by discharging to the atmosphere, shall
operate to maintain the pressure between the check valves at less than the
supply pressure. The unit must include tightly closing shutoff valves located
at each end of the device, and each device shall be fitted with properly
located test cocks.
SERVICE CONNECTION: The opening, including all fittings and appurtenances, at
the water main through which water is supplied to the user.
SURVEY: The collection of information pertaining to a customer's piping system
regarding the location of all connections to the public water supply system and
must include the location, type and most recent inspection and testing date of
all cross-connection control devices and methods located within that customer's
piping system. The survey must be in written form, and should not be an actual
plumbing inspection.
SYSTEM HAZARD: A condition through which an aesthetically objectionable or
degrading material not dangerous to health may enter the public water supply
system or a consumer's potable water system.
USED WATER: Any water supplied by a public water supply system to a consumer's
water system after it has passed through the service connection and is no
longer under the control of the water supply official custodian.
WATER PURVEYOR: The owner or official custodian of a public water system. (Ord.
91-1, 1-22-1991, eff. 2-1-1991)
8-5-4: WATER SYSTEM:
   (A)   The water system shall be considered as made up of two (2) parts; the
public water supply system and the consumer's water system.
   (B)   The public water supply system shall consist of the source facilities
and the distribution system, and shall include all those facilities of the
potable water system under the control of the Superintendent of Water up to the
point where the consumer's water system begins.
   (C)   The source shall include all components of the facilities utilized in
the production, treatment, storage and delivery of water to the public water
supply distribution system.
   (D)   The public water supply distribution system shall include the network
of conduits used to deliver water from the source to the consumer's water
system.
   (E)   The consumer's water system shall include all parts of the facilities
beyond the service connection used to convey water from the public water supply
distribution system to points of use. (Ord. 91-1, 1-22-1991, eff. 2-1-1991)
8-5-5: CROSS-CONNECTION PROHIBITED:
   (A)   Connections between potable water systems and other systems or
equipment containing water or other substances of unknown or questionable
quality are prohibited except when and where approved cross-connection control
devices or methods are installed, tested and maintained to insure proper
operation on a continuing basis.
   (B)   No physical connection shall be permitted between the potable portion
of a supply and any other water supply not of equal or better bacteriological
and chemical quality as determined by inspection and analysis by the Agency.
There shall be no arrangement or connection by which an unsafe substance may
enter a supply. (Ord. 91-1, 1-22-1991, eff. 2-1-1991)
8-5-6: SURVEY AND INVESTIGATIONS:
   (A)   The consumer's premises shall be open at all reasonable times to the
approved Cross-Connection Control Device Inspector for the inspection of the
presence or absence of cross-connections within the consumer's premises, and
testing, repair and maintenance of cross-connection control devices within the
consumer's premises.
   (B)   On request by the Superintendent of Water, or his authorized
representative, the consumer shall furnish information regarding the piping
system or systems or water use within the customer's premises. The consumer's
premises shall be open at all reasonable times to the Superintendent of Water
for the verification of information submitted by the inspection consumer to the
public water supply custodian regarding cross-connection inspection results.
   (C)   It shall be the responsibility of the water consumer to arrange
periodic surveys of water use practices on his premises to determine whether
there are actual or potential cross-connections to his water system through
which contaminants or pollutants could backflow into his or the public potable
water system. All cross-connection control or other plumbing inspections must
be conducted in accordance with 225 Illinois Compiled Statutes 320/3.
   (D)   It is the responsibility of the water consumer to prevent backflow
into the public water system by ensuring that:
      1.   All cross-connections are removed; or approved cross-connection
control devices are installed for control of backflow and backsiphonage.
      2.   Cross-connection control devices shall be installed in accordance
with the manufacturer's instructions.
      3.   Cross-connection control devices shall be inspected at the time of
installation and at least annually by a person approved by the Agency as a
Cross-Connection Control Device Inspector (CCCDI). The inspection of mechanical
devices shall include physical testing in accordance with the manufacturer's
instructions.
      4.   Testing And Records:
         (a)   Each device shall be tested at the time of installation and at
least annually or more frequently if recommended by the manufacturer.
         (b)   Records submitted to the community public water supply shall be
available for inspection by Agency personnel in accordance with 415 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/4.
         (c)   Each device shall have a tag attached listing the date of most
recent test, name of Cross-Connection Control Device Inspector (CCCDI), and
type and date of repairs.
         (d)   A maintenance log shall be maintained and include:
(1) Date of each test;
(2) Name and approval number of person performing the test;
(3) Test results;
(4) Repairs or servicing required;
(5) Repairs and date completed; and
(6) Servicing performed and date completed. (Ord. 91-1, 1-22-1991, eff. 2-1-
1991)
8-5-7: WHERE PROTECTION IS REQUIRED:
   (A)   An approved backflow device shall be installed on all connections to
the public water supply as described in the Plumbing Code, 77 Ill. Adm. Code
890 and the Agency's regulations 35 Ill. Adm. Code 680. In addition, an
approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on each service line to
a consumer's water system serving premises, where in the judgment of the
Superintendent of Water, actual or potential hazards to the public water supply
system exist.
   (B)   An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on each
service line to a consumer's water system serving premises where the following
conditions exist:
      1.   Premises having an auxiliary water supply, unless such auxiliary
supply is accepted as an additional source by the Superintendent of Water and
the source is approved by the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
      2.   Premises on which any substance is handled which can create an
actual premises having sources or systems containing process fluids or waters
originating from the public water supply system which are no longer under the
sanitary control of the Superintendent of Water.
      3.   Premises having internal cross-connections that, in the judgment of
the Superintendent of Water and/or the Cross-Connection Control Device
Inspector, are not correctable or intricate plumbing arrangements which make it
impractical to determine whether or not cross-connections exist.
      4.   Premises where, because of security requirements or other
prohibitions or restrictions, it is impossible or impractical to make a
complete cross-connection survey.
      5.   Premises having a repeated history of cross-connections being
established or re-established.
   (C)   An approved backflow device shall be installed on all connections to
the public water supply as described in the Plumbing Code, 77 Ill. Adm. Code
890 and the Agency's regulations 35 Ill. Adm. Code 653. In addition, an
approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on each service line to
a consumer's water system serving, but not necessarily limited to, the
following types of facilities unless the Superintendent of Water determines
that no actual or potential hazard to the public water supply system exists:
      1.   Hospitals, mortuaries, clinics, nursing homes.
      2.   Laboratories.
      3.   Piers, docks, waterfront facilities.
      4.   Sewage treatment plants, sewage pumping stations or storm water
pumping stations.
      5.   Food or beverage processing plants.
      6.   Chemical plants.
      7.   Metal plating industries.
      8.   Petroleum processing or storage plants.
      9.   Radioactive material processing plants or nuclear reactors.
      10.   Car washes.
      11.   Pesticide, or herbicide or extermination plants and trucks.
      12.   Farm service and fertilizer plants and trucks. (Ord. 91-1, 1-22-
1991, eff. 2-1-1991)
8-5-8: TYPE OF PROTECTION REQUIRED:
   (A)   The type of protection required under sections 6.1, 6.2 and 6.3 of the
Illinois Plumbing Code, shall depend on the degree of hazard which exists as
follows:
      1.   An approved fixed proper air gap separation shall be installed where
the public water supply system may be contaminated with substances that could
cause a severe health hazard.
      2.   An approved fixed proper air gap separation or an approved reduced
pressure principle backflow prevention assembly shall be installed where the
public water supply system may be contaminated with a substance that could
cause a system or health hazard.
      3.   An approved fixed proper air gap separation or an approved reduced
pressure principle backflow prevention assembly or a double check valve
assembly shall be installed where the public water supply system may be
polluted with substances that could cause a pollution hazard not dangerous to
health.
   (B)   The type of protection required under sections 6.4 and 6.5 of the
Illinois Plumbing Code shall be an approved fixed proper air gap separation or
an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device.
   (C)   Where a public water supply or an auxiliary water supply is used for a
fire protection system, reduced pressure principle backflow preventers shall be
installed on fire safety systems connected to the public water supply when:
      1.   The fire safety system contains antifreeze, fire retardant or other
chemicals;
      2.   Water is pumped into the system from another source;
      3.   Water flows by gravity from a nonpotable source; or water can be
pumped into the fire safety system from any other source;
      4.   There is a connection whereby another source can be introduced into
the fire safety system.
   (D)   All other fire safety systems connected to the potable water supply
shall be protected by a double check valve assembly on metered service lines
and a double detector check valve assembly on unmetered service lines. (Ord.
91-1, 1-22-1991, eff. 2-1-1991)
8-5-9: BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICES:
   (A)   All backflow prevention devices or methods required by these rules and
regulations shall be approved by the Research Foundation for Cross-Connection
Control of the University of Southern California, American Water Works
Association, American Society of Sanitary Engineering or American National
Standards Institute or certified by the National Sanitation Foundation to be in
compliance with applicable industry specifications.
   (B)   Installation of approved devices shall be made in accordance with the
manufacturer's instructions. Maintenance as recommended by the manufacturer of
the device shall be performed. Manufacturer's maintenance manual shall be
available on-site. (Ord. 91-1, 1-22-1991, eff. 2-1-1991)
8-5-10: INSPECTION AND MAINTENANCE:
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the consumer at any premise on which backflow
prevention devices required by those regulations are installed to have
inspection, tests, maintenance and repair made in accordance with the following
schedule or more often where inspections indicate a need or are specified in
manufacturer's instructions:
      1.   Fixed proper air gap separations shall be inspected to document that
a proper vertical distance is maintained between the discharge point of the
service line and the flood level rim of the receptacle at the time of
installation and at least annually thereafter. Corrections to improper or
bypassed air gaps shall be made within twenty four (24) hours.
      2.   Double check valve assemblies shall be inspected and tested at time
of installation and at least annually thereafter, and required service
performed within five (5) days.
      3.   Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assemblies shall be
tested at the time of installation and at least annually or more frequently if
recommended by the manufacturer, and required service performed within five (5)
days.
   (B)   Testing shall be performed by a person who has been approved by the
Agency as competent to service the device. Proof of approval shall be in
writing.
   (C)   Each device shall have a tag attached listing the date of most recent
test or visual inspection, name of tester and type and date of repairs.
   (D)   A maintenance log shall be maintained and include:
      1.   Date of each test or visual inspection;
      2.   Name and approval number of person performing the test or visual
inspection;
      3.   Test results;
      4.   Repairs or servicing required.
      5.   Repairs and date completed; and
      6.   Servicing performed and date completed.
   (E)   Whenever backflow prevention devices required by these regulations are
found to be defective, they shall be repaired or replaced at the expense of the
consumer without delay as required by subsection
8-5-10(A).
   (F)   Backflow prevention devices shall not be bypassed, made inoperative,
removed or otherwise made ineffective without specific authorization by the
Superintendent of Water. (Ord. 91-1, 1-22-1991, eff. 2-1-1991)
8-5-11: BOOSTER PUMPS:
   (A)   Where a booster pump has been installed on the service line to or
within any premise, such pump shall be equipped with a low pressure cut off
device designed to shut off the booster pump when the pressure in the service
line on the suction side of the pump drops to twenty (20) psi or less.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of the water consumer to maintain the low
pressure cut off device in proper working order and to certify to the
Superintendent of Water, at least once a year, that the device is operable.
(Ord. 91-1, 1-22-1991, eff. 2-1-1991)
8-5-12: VIOLATIONS:
   (A)   The Superintendent of Water shall deny or discontinue, after
reasonable notice to the occupants thereof, the water service to any premise
wherein any backflow prevention device required by these regulations is not
installed, tested, maintained and repaired in a manner acceptable to the
Superintendent of Water, or if it is found that the backflow prevention device
has been removed or bypassed, or if an unprotected cross-connection exists on
the premises, or if a low pressure cut off required by these regulations is not
installed and maintained in working order.
   (B)   Water service to such premise shall not be restored until the consumer
has corrected or eliminated such conditions or defects in conformance with
these regulations and to the satisfaction of the Superintendent of Water, and
the required reconnection fee is paid.
   (C)   Water service to such premises shall not be restored until the
consumer has corrected or eliminated such conditions or defects on conformance
with these regulations and to the satisfaction of the Superintendent of
Utilities/Operations.
   (D)   Neither the Village, the Superintendent of Water nor its agents or
assigns shall be liable to any customer of the Village for any injury, damages
or lost revenues which may result from termination of the water supply with or
without prior notice.
   (E)   The consumer responsible for backsiphoned material or contamination
through backflow, if contamination of the potable water supply system occurs
through an illegal cross-connection or an improperly installed, maintained or
repaired device or a device which has been bypassed, must bear the cost of
cleanup of the potable water supply system.
   (F)   Any person found to be violating any provisions of this Chapter shall
be served with written notice stating the notice of the violation and providing
a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender
shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all
violation.
   (G)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this Chapter in addition
to the fine provided, shall become liable to the Village for any expense, loss
or damage occasioned by the Village by reason of such violation, whether the
same was caused before or after notice. (Ord. 91-1, 1-22-1991, eff. 2-1-1991)
CHAPTER 6
CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
SECTION:
8-6-1: Purpose And Scope
8-6-2: Definitions
8-6-3: Annual Registration Required
8-6-4: Permit Required; Applications And Fees
8-6-5: Action On Permit Applications
8-6-6: Effect Of Permit
8-6-7: Revised Permit Drawings
8-6-8: Insurance
8-6-9: Indemnification
8-6-10: Security
8-6-11: Permit Suspension And Revocation
8-6-12: Change Of Ownership Or Owner's Identity Or Legal Status
8-6-13: General Construction Standards
8-6-14: Traffic Control
8-6-15: Location Of Facilities
8-6-16: Construction Methods And Materials
8-6-17: Vegetation Control
8-6-18: Removal, Relocation, Or Modifications Of Utility Facilities
8-6-19: Cleanup And Restoration
8-6-20: Maintenance And Emergency Maintenance
8-6-21: Variances
8-6-22: Right To Appeal
8-6-23: Penalties
8-6-24: Enforcement
8-6-25: Severability
8-6-1: PURPOSE AND SCOPE:
   (A)   Purpose: The purpose of this Chapter is to establish policies and
procedures for constructing facilities on rights-of-way within the Village's
jurisdiction, which will provide public benefit consistent with the
preservation of the integrity, safe usage, and visual qualities of the Village
rights-of-way and the Village as a whole.
   (B)   Intent: In enacting this Chapter, the Village of Forest View intends
to exercise its authority over the rights-of-way in the Village of Forest View
and, in particular, the use of the public ways and property by utilities, by
establishing uniform standards to address issues presented by utility
facilities, including without limitation:
      1.   Prevent interference with the use of streets, sidewalks, alleys,
parkways and other public ways and places;
      2.   Prevent the creation of visual and physical obstructions and other
conditions that are hazardous to vehicular and pedestrian traffic;
      3.   Prevent interference with the facilities and operations of the
Village of Forest View's utilities and of other utilities lawfully located in
rights-of-way or public property;
      4.   Protect against environmental damage, including damage to trees,
from the installation of utility facilities;
      5.   Protect against increased stormwater run-off due to structures and
materials that increase impermeable surfaces;
      6.   Preserve the character of the neighborhoods in which facilities are
installed;
      7.   Preserve open space, particularly the tree-lined parkways that
characterize the Village of Forest View's residential neighborhoods;
      8.   Prevent visual blight from the proliferation of facilities in the
rights-of-way; and
      9.   Assure the continued safe use and enjoyment of private properties
adjacent to utility facilities locations.
   (C)   Facilities Subject to This Chapter: This Chapter applies to all
facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the public
rights-of-way within the jurisdiction of the Village. A facility lawfully
established prior to the effective date of this Chapter may continue to be
maintained, repaired and operated by the utility as presently constructed and
located, except as may be otherwise provided in any applicable franchise,
license or similar agreement. This Chapter shall not apply to any facilities
constructed by others to be owned by the Village.
   (D)   Franchises, Licenses, or Similar Agreements: The Village, in its
discretion and as limited by law, may require utilities to enter into a
franchise, license or similar agreement for the privilege of locating their
facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the Village
rights-of-way. Utilities that are not required by law to enter into such an
agreement may request that the Village enter into such an agreement. In such an
agreement, the Village may provide for terms and conditions inconsistent with
this Chapter.
   (E)   Effect of Franchises, Licenses, or Similar Agreements:
      1.   Telecommunications Providers: In the event of any conflict with, or
inconsistency between, the provisions of this Chapter and the provisions of any
franchise, license or similar agreement between the Village and any
telecommunications provider, the provisions of such franchise, license or
similar agreement shall govern and control during the term of such agreement
and any lawful renewal or extension thereof.
      2.   Utilities Other Than Telecommunications Providers: In the event that
a utility other than a telecommunications provider has a franchise, license or
similar agreement with the Village, such franchise, license or similar
agreement shall govern and control during the term of such agreement and any
lawful renewal or extension thereof.
   (F)   Conflicts with Other Ordinances: This Chapter supersedes all
ordinances or parts of ordinances adopted prior hereto that are in conflict
herewith to the extent of such conflict.
   (G)   Conflicts with State and Federal Laws: In the event that applicable
federal or State laws or regulations conflict with the requirements of this
Chapter, the utility shall comply with the requirements of this Chapter to the
maximum extent possible without violating federal or State laws or regulations.
   (H)   Sound Engineering Judgment: The Village shall use sound engineering
judgment when administering this Chapter and may vary the standards,
conditions, and requirements expressed in this Chapter when the Village so
determines. Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the ability of the
Village to regulate its rights-of-way for the protection of the public health,
safety and welfare. (Ord. 18-09, 7-24-2018)
8-6-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this Chapter and unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the
words and terms listed shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this
Section. Any term not defined in this Section shall have the meaning ascribed
to it in 92 Ill. Adm. Code § 530.30, unless the context clearly requires
otherwise.
AASHTO:                               American Association of State Highway and
                                      Transportation Officials.
                                      Any existing pole or other structure
                                      within the public right-of-way that can
ALTERNATIVE ANTENNA STRUCTURE:        be used to support an antenna and is not
                                      a utility pole or Village-owned
                                      infrastructure.
ANSI:                                 American National Standards Institute.
                                      Any equipment, device, or similar item
                                      designed for transmitting signals to a
ANTENNA:                              receiving station or for receiving
                                      television, radio, data, or other signals
                                      from satellites or other sources.
APPLICANT:                            A person applying for a permit under this
                                      Chapter.
ASTM:                                 American Society for Testing and
                                      Materials.
BACKFILL:                             The methods or materials for replacing
                                      excavated material in a trench or pit.
                                      To excavate an underground cylindrical
BORE OR BORING:                       cavity for the insertion of a pipe or
                                      electrical conductor.
CABLE OPERATOR:                       That term as defined in 47 U.S.C. 522(5).
CABLE SERVICE:                        That term as defined in 47 U.S.C. 522(6).
CABLE SYSTEM:                         That term as defined in 47 U.S.C. 522(7).
CARRIER PIPE:                         The pipe enclosing the liquid, gas or
                                      slurry to be transported.
                                      A structural protective enclosure for
CASING:                               transmittal devices such as: carrier
                                      pipes, electrical conductors, and fiber
                                      optic devices.
                                      The total roadside border area, starting
                                      at the edge of the pavement, available
                                      for safe use by errant vehicles. This
                                      area may consist of a shoulder, a
                                      recoverable slope, a non-recoverable
CLEAR ZONE:                           slope, and a clear run-out area. The
                                      desired width is dependent upon the
                                      traffic volumes and speeds, and on the
                                      roadside geometry. Distances are
                                      specified in the AASHTO Roadside Design
                                      Guide.
                                      Protective wrapping or mastic cover
COATING:                              applied to buried pipe for protection
                                      against external corrosion.
                                      The Village Code of the Village of Forest
CODE:                                 View and ordinances enacted by the
                                      Village of Forest View.
CONDUCTOR:                            Wire carrying electrical current.
CONDUIT:                              A casing or encasement for wires or
                                      cables.
                                      The installation, repair, maintenance,
CONSTRUCTION OR CONSTRUCT:            placement, alteration, enlargement,
                                      demolition, modification or abandonment
                                      in place of facilities.
COVER:                                The depth of earth or backfill over
                                      buried utility pipe or conductor.
CROSSING FACILITY:                    A facility that crosses one or more
                                      right-of-way lines of a right-of-way.
                                      For the purposes of this Chapter, any
                                      work that obstructs the right-of-way or
                                      causes an adverse effect on the ability
                                      of persons, other companies with
                                      facilities in the right-of-way, or
                                      vehicles to use the right-of-way for its
                                      intended use or which may damage, destroy
                                      or injure vegetation in the right-of-way.
                                      Such work shall include, without
DISRUPT THE RIGHT-OF-WAY:             limitation, the following: excavating or
                                      other cutting; placement (whether
                                      temporary or permanent) of materials,
                                      equipment, devices, or structures; damage
                                      to vegetation; and compaction or
                                      loosening of the soil, but shall not
                                      include the parking of vehicles or
                                      equipment in a manner that does not
                                      materially obstruct the flow of traffic
                                      on a road.
                                      Any immediate maintenance to the facility
                                      required for the safety of the public
EMERGENCY:                            using or in the vicinity of the right-of-
                                      way or immediate maintenance required for
                                      the health and safety of the general
                                      public served by the utility.
ENCASEMENT:                           Provision of a protective casing.
ENGINEER:                             The Village Engineer or his/her designee.
                                      Materials, tools, implements, supplies,
EQUIPMENT:                            and/or other items used to facilitate
                                      construction of facilities.
                                      The making of a hole or cavity by
EXCAVATION:                           removing material, or laying bare by
                                      digging.
EXTRA HEAVY PIPE:                     Pipe meeting ASTM standards for this pipe
                                      designation.
                                      All structures, devices, objects, and
                                      materials including, but no limited to,
                                      track and rails, wires, ducts, fiber
                                      optic cable, communications and video
                                      cables and wires, poles, conduits,
                                      grates, covers, pipes, cables, vaults,
FACILITY:                             boxes, cabinets and other equipment
                                      enclosures, power pedestals and
                                      appurtenances thereto located on, over,
                                      above, along, upon, under, across, or
                                      within rights-of-way under this Chapter,
                                      but excepting therefrom all structures,
                                      devices, objects or materials owned by
                                      the Village.
                                      A facility that is not a crossing
                                      facility or a parallel facility, such as,
FREESTANDING FACILITY:                but not limited to, vaults, boxes,
                                      cabinets, equipment enclosures, antennas,
                                      transformers, pumps, or meter stations.
                                      Roadway, usually parallel, providing
FRONTAGE ROAD:                        access to land adjacent to the highway
                                      where access to the land is precluded by
                                      control of access on the highway.
                                      Any substance or material which, due to
                                      its quantity, form, concentration,
                                      location, or other characteristics, is
                                      determined by the Village Superintendent
                                      of Public Works or the Village Engineer
                                      to pose an unreasonable and imminent risk
                                      to the life, health or safety of persons
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS:                  or property or to the ecological balance
                                      of the environment, including, but not
                                      limited to explosives, radioactive
                                      materials, petroleum or petroleum
                                      products or gases, poisons, etiology
                                      (biological) agents, flammables,
                                      corrosives or any substance determined to
                                      be hazardous or toxic under any federal
                                      or state law, statute or regulation.
                                      A specific type of right-of-way used for
                                      vehicular traffic including rural or
                                      urban roads or streets. "Highway"
                                      includes all highway land and
HIGHWAY:                              improvements, including roadways, ditches
                                      and embankments, bridges, drainage
                                      structures, signs, guardrails, protective
                                      structures and appurtenances necessary or
                                      convenient for vehicular traffic.
                                      The Illinois Highway Code, 605 ILCS 5/1-
HIGHWAY CODE:                         101 et seq., as amended from time to
                                      time.
                                      A person or entity that has received
                                      authorization to offer or provide cable
HOLDER:                               or video service from the Illinois
                                      Commerce Commission (the "ICC") pursuant
                                      to the Illinois Cable and Video
                                      Competition Law, 220 ILCS 5/21-401.
ICC:                                  Illinois Commerce Commission.
IDOT:                                 Illinois Department of Transportation.
                                      Pushing a pipe horizontally under a
JACKING:                              roadway by mechanical means with or
                                      without boring.
                                      Pushing a pipe through the earth using
JETTING:                              water under pressure to create a cavity
                                      ahead of the pipe.
JOINT USE:                            The use of pole lines, trenches or other
                                      facilities by two or more utilities.
                                      The Joint Utility Locating Information
J.U.L.I.E.:                           for Excavators Utility Notification
                                      Program.
MAJOR INTERSECTION:                   The intersection of two or more major
                                      arterial roads.
OCCUPANCY:                            The presence of facilities on, over or
                                      under right-of-way.
                                      A facility that is generally parallel or
PARALLEL FACILITY:                    longitudinal to the centerline of a
                                      right-of-way.
PARKWAY:                              Any portion of the right-of-way not
                                      improved by street or sidewalk.
                                      The removal of an area of pavement for
PAVEMENT CUT:                         access to facility or for the
                                      construction of a facility.
                                      That entity to which a permit has been
PERMITTEE:                            issued pursuant to Section
                                      8-6-4 and
                                      8-6-5 of this Chapter.
                                      Commercial mobile telecommunications
                                      services, unlicensed wireless
PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICES:           telecommunications services, and common
                                      carrier wireless telecommunications
                                      exchange access services.
PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICES ANTENNA:   An antenna used in connection with the
                                      provision of personal wireless services.
                                      That which is performable, feasible or
PRACTICABLE:                          possible, rather than that which is
                                      simply convenient.
                                      The internal force acting radically
PRESSURE:                             against the walls of a carrier pipe
                                      expressed in pounds per square inch gauge
                                      (psig).
                                      Pipelines carrying crude or refined
PETROLEUM PRODUCTS PIPELINES:         liquid petroleum products including, but
                                      not limited to, gasoline, distillates,
                                      propane, butane, or coal-slurry.
                                      That which is done within a period of
PROMPT:                               time specified by the Village. If no time
                                      period is specified, the period shall be
                                      thirty (30) days.
                                      A legal entity that constitutes or is
PUBLIC ENTITY:                        part of the government, whether at local,
                                      state or federal level.
                                      The repair of a right-of-way, highway,
RESTORATION:                          roadway, or other area disrupted by the
                                      construction of a facility.
                                      Any street, alley, other land or
                                      waterway, dedicated or commonly used for
                                      roadway or utility purposes, including
                                      utility easements in which the Village
                                      has the right and authority to authorize,
                                      regulate or permit the location of
                                      facilities other than those of the
RIGHT-OF-WAY:                         Village. "Right-of-way" shall not include
                                      any real or personal Village property
                                      that is not specifically described in the
                                      previous two sentences and shall not
                                      include Village buildings, fixtures, and
                                      other structures or improvements,
                                      regardless of whether they are situated
                                      in the right-of-way.
ROADWAY:                              That part of the right-of-way that
                                      includes the pavement and shoulders.
                                      The transmitting, supplying, or
                                      furnishing of telecommunications and all
                                      services rendered in connection therewith
                                      for a consideration, other than between a
                                      parent corporation and its wholly owned
SALE OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS AT RETAIL: subsidiaries or between wholly owned
                                      subsidiaries, when the gross charge made
                                      by one such corporation to another such
                                      corporation is not greater than the gross
                                      charge paid to the retailer for their use
                                      or consumption and not for sale.
                                      That amount of security required pursuant
SECURITY FUND:                        to Section
                                      8-6-10.
                                      A width of roadway, adjacent to the
                                      pavement, providing lateral support to
SHOULDER:                             the pavement edge and providing an area
                                      for emergency vehicular stops and storage
                                      of snow removed from the pavement.
                                      A decision(s) consistent with generally
SOUND ENGINEERING JUDGMENT:           accepted engineering principles,
                                      practices and experience.
                                      The Superintendent of the Village of
SUPERINTENDENT OF PUBLIC WORKS:       Forest View Department of Public Works,
                                      or his/her designee.
                                      This term includes, but is not limited
                                      to, messages or information transmitted
                                      through use of local, toll, and wide area
                                      telephone service, channel services,
                                      telegraph services, teletypewriter
                                      service, computer exchange service,
                                      private line services, specialized mobile
                                      radio services, cellular mobile
                                      telecommunications services, stationary
                                      two-way radio service, paging service or
                                      any other form of commercial mobile or
                                      portable one-way or two-way
                                      communications, and any other
                                      transmission of messages or information
                                      by electronic or similar means, between
                                      or among points of wide, cable, fiber
                                      optics, laser, microwave, radio,
                                      satellite, or similar facilities. For
                                      purposes of this definition, "Private
                                      Line" means a dedicated non-traffic
                                      sensitive service for a single customer
                                      to exclusive or priority use of a
                                      communications channel, or a group of
                                      such channels, from one or more specified
                                      locations to one or more other specified
TELECOMMUNICATIONS:                   locations. "Telecommunications" shall not
                                      include value added services in which
                                      computer processing applications are used
                                      to act on the form, content, code, and
                                      protocol of the information for purposes
                                      other than transmission.
                                      "Telecommunications" shall not include
                                      purchase of telecommunications by a
                                      telecommunications service provider for
                                      use as a component part of the service
                                      provided by him or her to the ultimate
                                      retail consumer who originates or
                                      terminates the end-to-end communications.
                                      "Telecommunications" shall not include
                                      the provision of cable services through a
                                      cable system as defined in the Cable
                                      Communications Act of 1984 (47 U.S.C.
                                      Sections 521 and following) as now or
                                      hereafter amended or cable or other
                                      programming services subject to an open
                                      video system fee payable to the Village
                                      through an open video system as defined
                                      in the Rules of the Federal
                                      Communications Commission (47 C.D.F.
                                      76.1550 and following) as now or
                                      hereafter amended.
                                      Means any person that installs, owns,
                                      operates or controls facilities in the
TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER:          public right-of-way used or designed to
                                      be used to transmit telecommunications in
                                      any form.
                                      Means and includes every person engaged
TELECOMMUNICATIONS RETAILER:          in making sales of telecommunications at
                                      retail as defined herein.
                                      A relatively narrow open excavation for
TRENCH:                               the installation of an underground
                                      facility.
                                      The individual or entity owning or
UTILITY:                              operating any facility as defined in this
                                      Chapter.
                                      A pipe to allow the dissipation into the
VENT:                                 atmosphere of gases or vapors from an
                                      underground casing.
                                      That term as defined in section 21-201(v)
VIDEO SERVICE:                        of the Illinois Cable and Video
                                      Competition Law of 2007, 220 ILCS 21-201
                                      (v).
VILLAGE:                              The Village of Forest View, Illinois.
                                      The Village of Forest View's construction
VILLAGE'S DESIGN MANUAL:              specifications and requirements embodied
                                      in a booklet or manual.
                                      Infrastructure in the public right-of-way
                                      within the Village that is owned,
VILLAGE-OWNED INFRASTRUCTURE:         operated or maintained by the Village,
                                      including, without limitation,
                                      streetlights, traffic signals, towers,
                                      structures or buildings.
WATER LINES:                          Pipelines carrying raw or potable water.
                                      Boring using water under pressure at the
WET BORING:                           cutting auger to soften the earth and to
                                      provide a sluice for the excavated
                                      material. (Ord. 18-09, 7-24-2018)
 
8-6-3: ANNUAL REGISTRATION REQUIRED:
Every utility that occupies right-of-way within the Village shall register on
January 1 of each year with the Superintendent of Public Works, or designee,
providing the utility's name, address and regular business telephone, e-mail
address and telecopy numbers, the name of one or more contact persons who can
act on behalf of the utility in connection with emergencies involving the
utility's facilities in the right-of-way and a 24-hour telephone number for
each such person, and evidence of insurance as required in Section
8-6-8 of this Chapter, in the form of a certificate of insurance. (Ord. 18-09,
7-24-2018)
8-6-4: PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATIONS AND FEES:
   (A)   Permit Required: No person shall construct (as defined in this
Chapter) any facility on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within
any Village right-of-way which (1) changes the location of the facility, (2)
adds a new facility, (3) disrupts the right-of-way (as defined in this
Chapter), or (4) materially increases the amount of area or space occupied by
the facility on, over, above, along, under across or within the right-of-way,
without first filing an application with the Superintendent of Public Works and
obtaining a permit from the Village therefor, except as otherwise provided in
this Chapter. No permit shall be required for installation and maintenance of
service connections to customers' premises where there will be no disruption of
the right-of-way.
   (B)   Permit Application: All applications for permits pursuant to this
Chapter shall be filed on a form provided by the Village and shall be filed in
such number of duplicate copies as the Village may designate. Duplicate copies
shall be submitted to the Village Engineer. The applicant may designate those
portions of its application materials that it reasonably believes contain
proprietary or confidential information as "proprietary" or "confidential" by
clearly marking each page of such materials accordingly.
   (C)   Minimum General Application Requirements: The application shall be
made by the utility or its duly authorized representative and shall contain, at
a minimum, the following:
      1.   The utility's name and address and telephone and telecopy numbers;
      2.   The applicant's name and address, if different than the utility, its
telephone, telecopy numbers, e-mail address, and its interest in the work;
      3.   The names, addresses and telephone and telecopy numbers of all
professional consultants, if any, advising the applicant with respect to the
application;
      4.   The names, addresses and telephone and telecopy numbers and e-mail
addresses of all general contractors and subcontractors performing any work
under the permit for which application is made;
      5.   The name of, and a 24-hour emergency contact telephone number (not a
voice mail or a recording) for at least one (1) person with primary
responsibility for the work under the permit for which application is made;
      6.   A general description of the proposed work and the purposes and
intent of the facility and the uses to which the facility will be put. The
scope and detail of such description shall be appropriate to the nature and
character of the work to be performed, with special emphasis on those matters
likely to be affected or impacted by the work proposed;
      7.   Evidence that the utility has placed on file with the Village:
         (a)   A written traffic control plan demonstrating the protective
measures and devices that will be employed consistent with the Illinois Manual
on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, to prevent injury or damage to persons or
property and to minimize disruptions to efficient pedestrian and vehicular
traffic; and
         (b)   An emergency contingency plan which shall specify the nature of
potential emergencies, including, without limitation, construction and
hazardous materials emergencies, and the intended response by the applicant.
The intended response shall include notification to the Village and shall
promote protection of the safety and convenience of the public. Compliance with
ICC regulations for emergency contingency plans constitutes compliance with
this Section unless the Village finds that additional information or assurances
are needed;
      8.   Drawings, plans and specifications showing the work proposed,
including the certification of an engineer that such drawings, plans, and
specifications comply with applicable codes, rules, and regulations;
      9.   Evidence of insurance as required in Section
8-6-8 of this Chapter;
      10.   Evidence of posting of the security fund as required in Section
8-6-9 of this Chapter;
      11.   Any request for a variance from one or more provisions of this
Chapter (See Section
8-6-21); and
      12.   Such additional information as may be reasonably required by the
Village.
   (D)   Supplemental Application Requirements for Specific Types of Utilities:
In addition to the requirements of Subsection (C) of this Section, the permit
application shall include the following items as applicable to the specific
utility that is the subject of the permit application:
      1.   In the case of new electric power, communications,
telecommunications, cable television service, video service or natural gas
distribution system installation, evidence that any "Certificate of Public
Convenience and Necessity" or other regulatory authorization that the applicant
is required by law to obtain, or that applicant has elected to obtain, has been
issued by the ICC or other jurisdictional authority;
      2.   In the case of natural gas systems, state the proposed pipe size,
design, construction class, and operating pressures;
      3.   In the case of water lines, indicate that all requirements of the
Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, Division of Public Water Supplies,
have been satisfied and provide copies of IEPA permits;
      4.   In the case of sewer line installations, indicate that the land and
water pollution requirements of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency,
Division of Water Pollution Control, or other local or state entities with
jurisdiction, have been satisfied and provide copies of IEPA permits;
      5.   In the case of petroleum products pipelines, state the type or types
of petroleum products, pipe size, maximum working pressure, and the design
standard to be followed.
      6.   In the case of personal wireless services installation (but
excluding small wireless facilities), include the following:
         (a)   A written statement of the wireless carrier or its contractor or
consultant of the need and purpose for the personal wireless services
facilities is proposed;
         (b)   A description, maps and data of the wireless carrier's existing
wireless facilities within the Village and within one-half (1/2) mile of the
Village;
         (c)   A statement of the coverage or capacity gaps or deficiencies
within the wireless carrier's system, and detailing how the installation of the
personal wireless facilities as proposed would address those coverage or
capacity gaps or deficiencies;
         (d)   The location and photographs of each proposed personal wireless
services facility site and its immediate surroundings, depicting the poles or
structures on which each proposed facility would be mounted;
         (e)   Specifications and drawings for each proposed personal wireless
services facility as it is proposed to be installed;
         (f)   A statement of the total number of personal wireless services
facilities the wireless carrier estimates it will seek within the Village and a
map or drawing generally depicting the locations within the Village of the
anticipated personal wireless services facility sites; and
         (g)   A schedule for the installment of the estimated personal
wireless services facilities, if approved.
      7.   In the case of a small wireless facility, compliance with the
Village regulations implementing the Small Wireless facilities Deployment Act.
   (E)   Applicant's Duty to Update Information: Throughout the entire permit
application review period and the construction period authorized by the permit,
any amendments to information contained in a permit application shall be
submitted by the utility in writing to the Village within thirty (30) days
after the change necessitating the amendment.
   (F)   Application Fees: Unless otherwise provided by franchise, license, or
similar agreement, all applications for permits pursuant to this Chapter shall
be accompanied by a fee in the amount of twenty dollars ($20.00) per one
hundred (100) linear feet of the facility within Village right-of-way, or a
minimum of one hundred ($100.00). No application fee is required to be paid by
any electricity utility that is paying the municipal electricity infrastructure
maintenance fee pursuant to the Electricity Infrastructure Maintenance Fee Act.
(Ord. 18-09, 7-24-2018)
8-6-5: ACTION ON PERMIT APPLICATIONS:
   (A)   Village Review of Permit Applications: Completed permit applications,
containing all required documentation, shall be examined by Village Engineer
and the Superintendent of Public Works within a reasonable time after filing.
If the application does not conform to the requirements of all applicable
ordinances, codes, laws, rules, and regulations, the Village Engineer or
Superintendent of Public Works shall reject such application in writing,
stating the reasons therefor. If the Village Engineer and Superintendent of
Public Works are satisfied that the proposed work conforms to the requirements
of this Chapter and all applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules, and
regulations, the Superintendent of Public Works shall issue a permit therefor
as soon as practicable. In all instances, it shall be the duty of the applicant
to demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the Village Engineer or Superintendent
of Public Works that the construction proposed under the application shall be
in full compliance with the requirements of this Chapter.
   (B)   Additional Village Review of Applications of Telecommunications
Retailers:
      1.   Pursuant to Section 4 of the Telephone Company Act, 220 ILCS 65/4, a
telecommunications retailer shall notify the Village that it intends to
commence work governed by this Chapter for facilities for the provision of
telecommunications services. Such notice shall consist of plans,
specifications, and other documentation sufficient to demonstrate the purpose
and intent of the facilities, and shall be provided by the telecommunications
retailer to the Village not less than ten (10) days prior to the commencement
of work requiring no excavation and not less than thirty (30) days prior to the
commencement of work requiring excavation. The Superintendent of Public Works
shall specify the portion of the right-of-way upon which the facility may be
placed, used and constructed.
      2.   In the event that the Superintendent of Public Works fails to
provide such specification of location to the telecommunications retailer
within either: (a) ten (10) days after service of notice to the Village by the
telecommunications retailer in the case of work not involving excavation for
new construction, or (b) twenty-five (25) days after service of notice by the
telecommunications retailer in the case of work involving excavation for new
construction, the telecommunications retailer may commence work without
obtaining a permit under this Chapter. For purposes of determining when the ten
or twenty-five day period specified in this sub-section begins, service of
notice to the Village shall be considered to have occurred on the date that the
Village has received all of the documentation required to be submitted under
Section
8-6-5(B)(1).
      3.   Upon the provision of such specification by the Village, where a
permit is required for work pursuant to Section
8-6-4 of this Chapter, the telecommunications retailer shall submit to the
Village an application for a permit and any and all plans, specifications and
documentation available regarding the facility to be constructed. Such
application shall be subject to the requirements of Subsection (A) of this
Section.
   (C)   Additional Village Review of Applications of Holders of State
Authorization under the Cable and Video Competition Law of 2007: Applications
by a utility that is a holder of a State-issued authorization under the Cable
and Video Competition Law of 2007 shall be deemed granted forty-five (45) days
after the submission to the Village, unless otherwise acted upon the Village,
provided the holder has complied with all applicable Village codes, ordinances
and regulations.
   (D)   Additional Review of Applications and Standards for Personal Wireless
Services Facilities (but excluding small wireless facilities): For a personal
wireless services facility in the right-of-way, review by the Village Engineer
and the Superintendent of Public Works of the application information in light
of the requirements in this Section. Standards for personal wireless services
review include:
      1.   The Village Engineer and the Superintendent of Public Works will
not:
         (a)   Unreasonably discriminate among the providers of functionally
equivalent services;
         (b)   Prohibit or create the effect of prohibiting the provision of
personal wireless services by a wireless carrier; or
         (c)   Regulate the placement, installation, and modification of
personal wireless services facilities on the basis of the environmental effects
of radio frequency emissions to the extent such facilities comply with the
FCC's regulations concerning such emissions.
      2.   The Village may reasonably limit the number of sites for personal
wireless services facilities available within the Village at the particular
time of the application and in the particular locations listed in the
application, based on the current inventory and locations of available sites
and current total demand for sites by wireless carriers.
      3.   The Village Engineer and the Superintendent of Public Works must
review a properly completed permit application within a reasonable time
consistent with applicable state and federal laws and regulations. A denial of
an application for a permit must be made in writing, stating the reason or
reasons for the denial. If the Village Engineer and the Superintendent of
Public Works are satisfied that the application conforms to the requirements of
this Chapter and all applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules and regulations,
then the Superintendent of Public Works must approve the application and issue
the permit as soon as practicable.
   (E)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, applications for small wireless
facilities shall be made and processed pursuant to the Village regulations
implementing the Small Wireless Facilities Deployment Act. (Ord. 18-09, 7-24-
2018)
8-6-6: EFFECT OF PERMIT:
   (A)   Authority Granted; No Property Right or Other Interest Created: A
permit from the Village authorizes a permittee to undertake only certain
activities in accordance with this Chapter on Village rights-of-way, and does
not create a property right or grant authority to the permittee to impinge upon
the rights of others who may have an interest in the public rights-of-way.
   (B)   Duration: No permit issued under this Chapter shall be valid for a
period longer than six (6) months unless the construction is actually begun
within that period and is thereafter diligently pursued to completion.
   (C)   Pre-Construction Meeting Required: No construction shall begin
pursuant to a permit issued under this Chapter prior to attendance by the
permittee and all major contractors and subcontractors who will perform any
work under the permit at a pre-construction meeting. The pre-construction
meeting shall be held at a date, time and place designated by the Village with
such Village representatives in attendance as the Village deems necessary. The
meeting shall be for the purpose of reviewing the work under the permit and
special considerations necessary in the areas where work will occur, including,
without limitation, presence or absence of other utility facilities in the area
and their locations, procedures to avoid disruption of other utilities, use of
rights-of-way by the public during construction, and access and egress by
adjacent property owners.
   (D)   Compliance with All Laws Required: The issuance of a permit by the
Village does not excuse the permittee from complying with other requirements of
the Village and all applicable statutes, laws, ordinances, rules, and
regulations. (Ord. 18-09, 7-24-2018)
8-6-7: REVISED PERMIT DRAWINGS:
In the event that the actual locations of any facilities deviate in any
material respect from the locations identified in the plans, drawings and
specifications submitted with the permit application, the permittee shall
submit a revised set of drawings or plans to the Village within ninety (90)
days after the completion of the permitted work. The revised drawings or plans
shall specifically identify where the locations of the actual facilities
deviate from the locations approved in the permit. If any deviation from the
permit also deviates from the requirements of this Chapter, it shall be treated
as a request for variance in accordance with Section 8-6-21 of this Chapter. If
the Village denies the request for a variance, then the permittee shall either
remove the facility from the right-of-way or modify the facility so that it
conforms to the permit and submit revised drawings or plans therefor. (Ord. 18-
09, 7-24-2018)
8-6-8: INSURANCE:
   (A)   Required Coverages and Limits: Unless otherwise provided by franchise,
license, or similar agreement, each utility occupying right-of-way or
constructing any facility in the right-of-way shall secure and maintain the
following liability insurance policies insuring the utility as named insured
and naming the Village, and its elected and appointed officers, officials,
agents, and employees as additional insureds on the policies listed in
paragraphs 1 and 2 below:
      1.   Commercial general liability insurance, including premises-
operations, explosion, collapse, and underground hazard (commonly referred to
as "X", "C", and "U" coverages) and products-completed operations coverage with
limits not less than:
         (a)   Five million dollars ($5,000,000) for bodily injury or death to
each person;
         (b)   Five million dollars ($5,000,000) for property damage resulting
from any one accident; and
         (c)   Five million dollars ($5,000,000) for all other types of
liability;
      2.   Automobile liability for owned, non-owned and hired vehicles with a
combined single limit of one million dollars ($1,000,000) for personal injury
and property damage for each accident;
      3.   Worker's compensation with statutory limits; and
      4.   Employer's liability insurance with limits of not less than one
million dollars ($1,000,000) per employee and per accident.
   If the utility is not providing such insurance to protect the contractors
and subcontractors performing the work, then such contractors and
subcontractors shall comply with this Section.
   (B)   Excess or Umbrella Policies: The coverages required by this Section
may be in any combination of primary, excess, and umbrella policies. Any excess
or umbrella policy must provide excess coverage over underlying insurance on a
following-form basis such that when any loss covered by the primary policy
exceeds the limits under the primary policy, the excess or umbrella policy
becomes effective to cover such loss.
   (C)   Copies Required: The utility shall provide copies of any of the
policies required by this Section to the Village within ten (10) days following
receipt of a written request therefor from the Village. In lieu of a copy of
the policy, a certificate indicating that the insurance policies required by
this Section have been obtained and are in force, may be submitted with the
approval of the Superintendent of Public Works.
   (D)   Maintenance and Renewal of Required Coverages: The insurance policies
required by this Section shall contain the following endorsement:
   "It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be canceled nor
the intention not to renew be stated until ten (10) days after receipt by the
Village, by registered mail or certified mail, return receipt requested, of a
written notice addressed to the Village's Superintendent of Public Works of
such intent to cancel or not to renew."
   Within seven days after receipt by the Village of said notice, and in no
event later than three days prior to said cancellation, the utility shall
obtain and furnish to the Village evidence of replacement insurance policies
meeting the requirements of this Section.
   (E)   Self-Insurance: A utility may self-insure all or a portion of the
insurance coverage and limit requirements required by Subsection (A) of this
Section. A utility that self-insures is not required, to the extent of such
self-insurance, to comply with the requirement for the naming of additional
insureds under Subsection a), or the requirements of Subsections (B), (C) and
(D) of this Section. A utility that elects to self-insure shall provide to the
Village evidence sufficient to demonstrate its financial ability to self-insure
the insurance coverage and limit requirements required under Subsection (A) of
this Section, such as evidence that the utility is a "private self-insurer"
under the Workers Compensation Act.
   (F)   Effect of Insurance and Self-Insurance on Utility's Liability: The
legal liability of the utility to the Village and any person for any of the
matters that are the subject of the insurance policies or self-insurance
required by this Section shall not be limited by such insurance policies or
self-insurance or by the recovery of any amounts thereunder.
   (G)   Insurance Companies: All insurance provided pursuant to this Section
shall be effected under valid and enforceable policies issued by insurers
legally able to conduct business with the utility in the State of Illinois.
(Ord. 18-09, 7-24-2018)
8-6-9: INDEMNIFICATION:
By occupying or constructing facilities in the right-of-way, a utility shall be
deemed to agree to defend, indemnify and hold the Village and its elected and
appointed officials and officers, employees, agents and representatives
harmless from and against any and all injuries, claims, demands, judgments,
damages, losses and expenses, including reasonable attorney's fees, and costs
of suit or defense, arising out of, resulting from or alleged to arise out of
or result from the negligent, careless or wrongful acts, omissions, failures to
act or misconduct of the utility or its affiliates, officers, employees,
agents, contractors or subcontractors in the construction of facilities or
occupancy of the rights-of-way, and in providing or offering service over the
facilities, whether such acts or omissions are authorized, allowed or
prohibited by this Chapter or by a franchise, license, or similar agreement;
provided, however, that the utility's indemnity obligations hereunder shall not
apply to any injuries, claims, demands, judgments, damages, losses or expenses
arising out of or resulting from the negligence, misconduct or breach of this
Chapter by the Village, its officials, officers, employees, agents or
representatives. (Ord. 18-09, 7-24-2018)
8-6-10: SECURITY:
   (A)   Purpose: The permittee shall establish a Security Fund in a form and
in an amount as set forth in this Section. The Security Fund shall be
continuously maintained in accordance with this Section at the permittee's sole
cost and expense until the completion of the work authorized under the permit.
The Security Fund shall serve as security for:
      1.   The faithful performance by the permittee of all the requirements of
this Chapter;
      2.   Any expenditure, damage, or loss incurred by the Village occasioned
by the permittee's failure to comply with any codes, rules, regulations,
orders, permits and other directives of the Village issued pursuant to this
Chapter; and
      3.   The payment by permittee of all liens and all damages, claims,
costs, or expenses that the Village may pay or incur by reason of any action or
non-performance by permittee in violation of this Chapter including, without
limitation, any damage to public property or restoration work the permittee is
required by this Chapter to perform that the Village must perform itself or
have completed as a consequence solely of the permittee's failure to perform or
complete, and all other payments due the Village from the permittee pursuant to
this Chapter or any other applicable law.
   (B)   Form: The permittee shall provide the Security Fund to the Village in
the form, at the permittee's election, of cash, a surety bond in a form
acceptable to the Village, or an unconditional letter of credit in a form
acceptable to the Village. Any surety bond or letter of credit provided
pursuant to this Subsection shall, at a minimum:
      1.   Provide that it will not be canceled without prior notice to the
Village and the permittee;
      2.   Not require the consent of the permittee prior to the collection by
the Village of any amounts covered by it; and
      3.   Shall provide a location within Cook, McHenry, Lake, Kane, or DuPage
Counties, Illinois at which it can be drawn.
   (C)   Amount: The dollar amount of the Security Fund shall be sufficient to
provide for the reasonably estimated cost to restore the right-of-way to at
least as good a condition as that existing prior to the construction under the
permit, as determined by the Village, and may also include reasonable, directly
related costs that the Village estimates are likely to be incurred if the
permittee fails to perform such restoration. Where the construction of
facilities proposed under the permit will be performed in phases in multiple
locations in the Village, with each phase consisting of construction of
facilities in one location or a related group of locations, and where
construction in another phase will not be undertaken prior to substantial
completion of restoration in the previous phase or phases, the Village may, in
the exercise of sound discretion, allow the permittee to post a single amount
of security which shall be applicable to each phase of the construction under
the permit. The amount of the Security Fund for phased construction shall be
equal to the greatest amount that would have been required under the provisions
of this Subsection (C) for any single phase. The security fund for each
construction project will be ten dollars ($10.00) per lineal foot of the
project, or the company may post a yearly cash retainer or letter of credit for
twenty thousand dollars ($20,000) (replenished yearly), or a bond for an amount
determined by the Village, for all construction work to be undertaken that
year.
   (D)   Withdrawals: The Village, upon fourteen (14) days' advance written
notice stating the reason for, and its intention to exercise withdrawal rights
under this Subsection, may withdraw an amount from the Security Fund, provided
that the permittee has not reimbursed the Village for such amount within the
fourteen (14) day notice period. Withdrawals may be made if the permittee:
      1.   Fails to make any payment required to be made by the permittee
hereunder;
      2.   Fails to pay any liens relating to the facilities that are due and
unpaid;
      3.   Fails to reimburse the Village for any damages, claims, costs or
expenses which the Village has been compelled to pay or incur by reason of any
action or non-performance by the permittee; or
      4.   Fails to comply with any provision of this Chapter that the Village
determines can be remedied by an expenditure of an amount in the Security Fund.
   (E)   Replenishment: Within fourteen (14) days after receipt of written
notice from the Village that any amount has been withdrawn from the Security
Fund, the permittee shall restore the Security Fund to the amount specified in
Subsection (C) of this Section.
   (F)   Interest: The permittee may request that any and all interest accrued
on the amount in the Security Fund be returned to the permittee by the Village,
upon written request for said withdrawal to the Village, provided that any such
withdrawal does not reduce the Security Fund below the minimum balance required
in Subsection (C) of this Section.
   (G)   Closing and Return of Security Fund: Upon completion of the work
authorized under the permit, the permittee shall be entitled to the return of
the Security Fund, or such portion thereof as remains on deposit, within a
reasonable time after account is taken for all offsets necessary to compensate
the Village for failure by the permittee to comply with any provisions of this
Chapter or other applicable law. In the event of any revocation of the permit,
the Security Fund, and any and all accrued interest therein, shall become the
property of the Village to the extent necessary to cover any reasonable costs,
loss or damage incurred by the Village as a result of said revocation, provided
that any amounts in excess of said costs, loss or damage shall be refunded to
the permittee.
   (H)   Rights Not Limited: The rights reserved to the Village with respect to
the Security Fund are in addition to all other rights of the Village, whether
reserved by this Chapter or otherwise authorized by law, and no action,
proceeding or exercise of right with respect to said Security Fund shall affect
any other right the Village may have. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the
Village shall not be entitled to a double monetary recovery with respect to any
of its rights which may be infringed or otherwise violated. (Ord. 18-09, 7-24-
2018)
8-6-11: PERMIT SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION:
   (A)   Village Right to Revoke Permit: The Village may revoke or suspend a
permit issued pursuant to this Chapter for one or more of the following
reasons:
   1.   Fraudulent, false, misrepresenting, or materially incomplete statements
in the permit application;
      2.   Non-compliance with this Chapter;
      3.   Permittee's physical presence or presence of permittee's facilities
on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the public rights-of-way
presents a direct or imminent threat to the public health, safety, or welfare;
or
      4.   Permittee's failure to construct the facilities substantially in
accordance with the permit and approved plans.
   (B)   Notice of Revocation or Suspension: The Village shall send written
notice of its intent to revoke or suspend a permit issued pursuant to this
Chapter stating the reason or reasons for the revocation or suspension and the
alternatives available to permittee under this Section.
   (C)   Permittee Alternatives Upon Receipt of Notice of Revocation or
Suspension: Upon receipt of a written notice of revocation or suspension from
the Village, the permittee shall have the following options:
      1.   Immediately provide the Village with evidence that no cause exists
for the revocation or suspension;
      2.   Immediately correct, to the satisfaction of the Village, the
deficiencies stated in the written notice, providing written proof of such
correction to the Village within five (5) working days after receipt of the
written notice of revocation;
      3.   Immediately remove the facilities located on, over, above, along,
upon, under, across, or within the public rights-of-way and restore the rights-
of-way to the satisfaction of the Village providing written proof of such
removal to the Village within ten (10) days after receipt of the written notice
of revocation.
   The Village may, in its discretion, for good cause shown, extend the time
periods provided in this Subsection; or
   (D)   Village Correction and Notice: If the deficiency creates an imminent
threat to life, health or safety, the Village may correct the deficiency
immediately upon verbal notice by the Village to permittee.
   (E)   Stop Work Order: In addition to the issuance of a notice of revocation
or suspension, the Village may issue a stop work order immediately upon
discovery of any of the reasons for revocation set forth within Subsection (A)
of this Section.
   (F)   Failure or Refusal of the Permittee to Comply: If the permittee fails
to comply with the provisions of Subsection (C) of this Section, the Village or
its designee may, at the option of the Village: (1) correct the deficiencies;
(2) upon not less than twenty (20) days' notice to the permittee, remove the
subject facilities or equipment; or (3) after not less than thirty (30) days'
notice to the permittee of failure to cure the non-compliance, deem them
abandoned and property of the Village. The permittee shall be liable in all
events to the Village for all costs of removal. (Ord. 18-09, 7-24-2018)
8-6-12: CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP OR OWNER'S IDENTITY OR LEGAL STATUS:
   (A)   Notification of Change: A utility shall notify the Village no less
than thirty (30) days prior to the transfer of ownership of any facility in the
right-of-way or change in identity of the utility. The new owner of the utility
or the facility shall have all the obligations and privileges enjoyed by the
former owner under the permit, if any, and all applicable laws, ordinances,
rules and regulations, including this Chapter, with respect to the work and
facilities in the right-of-way.
   (B)   Amended Permit: A new owner shall request that any current permit be
amended to show current ownership. If the new owner fails to have a new or
amended permit issued in its name, the new owner shall be presumed to have
accepted, and agreed to be bound by, the terms and conditions of the permit if
the new owner uses the facility or allows it to remain on the Village's right-
of-way.
   (C)   Insurance and Bonding: All required insurance coverage or bonding must
be changed to reflect the name of the new owner upon transfer.
8-6-13: GENERAL CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS:
   (A)   Standards and Principles: All construction in the right-of-way shall
be consistent with applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules and regulations,
and commonly recognized and accepted traffic control and construction
principles, sound engineering judgment and, where applicable, the principles
and standards set forth in any applicable ordinances, rules, regulations or
manuals of the Village and in the following IDOT publications:
      1.   Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction;
      2.   Supplemental Specifications and Recurring Special Provisions;
      3.   Highway Design Manual;
      4.   Highway Standards Manual;
      5.   Standard Specifications for Traffic Control Items;
      6.   Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (92 Ill. Adm.
Code § 545);
      7.   Flagger's Handbook;
      8.   Work Site Protection Manual for Daylight Maintenance Operations; and
      9.   Public Improvements Standards Manual.
   (B)   Interpretation of Municipal Standards and Principles: If a discrepancy
exists between or among differing principles and standards required by this
Chapter, the Village Engineer shall determine, in the exercise of sound
engineering judgment, which principles apply and such decision shall be final.
If requested, the Village Engineer shall state which standard or principle will
apply to the construction, maintenance, or operation of a facility in the
future. (Ord. 18-09, 7-24-2018)
8-6-14: TRAFFIC CONTROL:
   (A)   Minimum Requirements: The Village's minimum requirements for traffic
protection are contained in IDOT's Illinois Manual of Uniform Traffic Control
Devices and this Code. The Village Superintendent of Public Works may require
that additional traffic protection measures be taken, if because of the
location where the work is to be performed or because of anticipated high
traffic volumes, he determines additional traffic protection measures are
warranted.
   (B)   Warning Signs, Protective Devices, and Flaggers. The utility is
responsible for providing and installing warning signs, protective devices and
flaggers, when necessary, meeting all applicable federal, state, and local
requirements for protection of the public and the utility's workers when
performing any work on the public rights-of-way.
   (C)   Interference with Traffic: All work shall be phased so that there is
minimum interference with pedestrian and vehicular traffic. The Superintendent
of Public Works may prohibit work from being performed at specified hours or on
specified days where higher than usual traffic volumes are anticipated.
   (D)   Notice When Access is Blocked: At least forty-eight (48) hours prior
to beginning work that will partially or completely block access to any
residence, business or institution, the utility shall notify the resident,
business or institution of the approximate beginning time and duration of such
work; provided, however, that in cases involving emergency repairs pursuant to
Section
8-6-20 of this Chapter, the utility shall provide such notice as is practicable
under the circumstances.
   (E)   Compliance: The utility shall take immediate action to correct any
deficiencies in traffic protection requirements that are brought to the
utility's attention by the Village. (Ord. 18-09, 7-24-2018)
8-6-15: LOCATION OF FACILITIES:
   (A)   General Requirements: In addition to location requirements applicable
to specific types of utility facilities, all utility facilities, regardless of
type, shall be subject to the general location requirements of this Subsection.
      1.   No Interference with Village Facilities. No utility facilities shall
be placed in any location if the Village Engineer and the Superintendent of
Public Works determine that the proposed location will require the relocation
or displacement of any of the Village's utility facilities or will otherwise
interfere with the operation or maintenance of any of the Village's utility
facilities.
      2.   Rights-of-Way and Adjacent Lands. Any utility facility shall be
located in the right-of-way so as to cause only minimum interference with the
use of the public right-of-way and public places, and to cause only minimum
possible interference with the rights and reasonable convenience of property
owners who adjoin the public right-of-way and public places.
      3.   No Interference with Travel. No utility facility shall be placed in
any location that interferes with the usual travel on such right-of-way.
      4.   No Limitations on Visibility. No utility facility shall be placed in
any location so as to limit visibility of or by users of the right-of-way.
      5.   Cooperation. Any utility seeking to place a facility in the Village
shall comply with the Village's reasonable requests to place facilities on
public property where possible, and shall comply with Village direction with
respect to the location and screening of equipment and facilities.
      6.   Size of Facilities. The propose installation shall use the smallest
suitable vaults, boxes, equipment enclosures, power pedestals, and/or cabinets
then in use by the facility owner, regardless of location, for the particular
application.
   (B)   Parallel Facilities Located Within Rights-of-Way:
      1.   Overhead Parallel Facilities. An overhead parallel facility may be
located within the right-of-way only if overhead utility facilities already
exist in the area of the right-of-way where the overhead parallel facility is
proposed to be located and if:
         (a)   Lines are located as near as practicable to the right-of-way
line and as nearly parallel to the right-of-way line as reasonable pole
alignment will permit;
         (b)   Where pavement is curbed, poles are as remote as practicable
from the curb with a minimum distance of two feet (0.6 m) behind the face of
the curb, where available;
         (c)   Where pavement is uncurbed, poles are as remote from pavement
edge as practicable with minimum distance of four feet (1.2 m) outside the
outer shoulder line of the roadway and are not within the clear zone;
         (d)   No pole is located in the ditch line of a highway; and
         (e)   Any ground-mounted appurtenance is located within one foot (0.3
m) of the right-of-way or as near as possible to the right-of-way line.
      2.   Underground Parallel Facilities. An underground parallel facility
may be located within the right-of-way only if approved by the Superintendent
of Public Works and:
         (a)   The facility is located as near the right-of-way line as
practicable and not more than eight (8) feet (2.4 m) from and parallel to the
right-of-way line, and five (5) feet (1.5 m) from any water main;
         (b)   A new facility may be located under the paved portion of a
roadway only if other locations are impracticable or inconsistent with sound
engineering judgment (e.g., a new cable may be installed in existing conduit
without disrupting the pavement); and
         (c)   In the case of an underground power or communications line, the
facility shall be located as approved by the Superintendent of Public Works and
any above-grounded appurtenance shall be located within one foot (0.3 m) of the
right-of-way line or as near as practicable.
         (d)   Electric service feeds on or within aerial streets shall be
underground.
   (C)   Facilities Crossing Roadways.
      1.   No Future Disruption. The construction and design of crossing
facilities installed between the ditch lines or curb lines of Village roadways
may require the incorporation of materials and protections (such as encasement
or additional cover) to avoid settlement or future repairs to the roadway
resulting from the installation of such crossing facilities.
      2.   Culverts or Drainage Facilities. Crossing facilities shall not be
located in culverts, or drainage facilities.
      3.   Ninety (90) Degree Crossing Required. Crossing facilities shall
cross at or as near to a ninety (90) degree angle to the centerline as
practicable, unless otherwise approved by the Village.
      4.   Overhead Power or Communication Facility. An overhead power or
communication facility may cross a right-of-way only if:
         (a)   It has a minimum vertical line clearance as required by ILCC's
rules entitled, "Construction of Electric Power and Communication Lines" (83
Ill. Adm. Code 305);
         (b)   Poles are located within one foot (0.3 m) of the right-of-way
line and outside of the clear zone; and
         (c)   Overhead crossings at major intersections are avoided.
      5.   Underground Power or Communication Facility. An underground power or
communication facility may cross a right-of-way only if:
         (a)   The design materials and construction methods will provide
maximum maintenance-free service life; and
         (b)   Capacity for the utility's foreseeable future expansion needs is
provided in the initial installation.
      6.   Markers. The Village may require the utility to provide a marker at
each right-of-way line where an underground facility other than a power or
communication facility crosses a highway. Each marker shall identify the type
of facility, the utility, and an emergency phone number. Markers may also be
eliminated as provided in current Federal regulations. (49 C.F.R. 192.707).
   (D)   Facilities to be Located within Particular Rights-of-Way: The Village
may require that facilities be located within particular rights-of-way (a
public utility easement, for example) that are not highways, rather than within
particular highways.
   (E)   Freestanding Facilities:
      1.   The Village may restrict the location and size of any freestanding
facility located within a right-of-way.
      2.   The Village may require any freestanding facility located within a
right-of-way to be screened from view.
   (F)   Appearance Standards:
      1.   The Village may prohibit the installation of facilities in
particular locations in order to preserve visual quality.
      2.   A facility may be constructed only if its construction does not
require extensive removal or alteration of trees, vegetation or terrain
features visible to the right-of-way user or adjacent residents and property
owners or impair the aesthetic quality of the lands being traversed by the
right-of-way.
   (G)   Aboveground Facilities: Above ground facilities may be installed only
if:
      1.   Existing facilities in the area are located above ground;
      2.   New underground installation is not technically feasible as
determined by the Village Engineer; and
      3.   The proposed installation will be made at a location, and will
employ suitable design and materials, to provide the greatest protection of
aesthetic qualities of the area being traversed without adversely affecting
safety. Suitable designs include, but are not limited to, self-supporting
armless, single-pole construction with vertical configuration of conductors and
cable. Existing utility poles and light standards shall be used wherever
practicable - the installation of additional utility poles is strongly
discouraged.
      4.    The above ground facilities installed are located so as to cause
only minimal interference with the use of any right-of-way within which the
facilities are installed and with the rights and reasonable convenience of
property owners who adjoin said right-of-way.
      5.   The smallest suitable vaults, boxes, equipment enclosures, power
pedestals, and/or cabinets then in use by the facility owner for the type of
above ground facility shall be used.
      6.   For purposes of this Chapter, a facility shall be considered above
ground if more than ten percent of the overall height of the facility measured
from the base or bottom support of the facility is located above ground.
   (H)   Facility Attachments to Bridges or Roadway Structures:
      1.   Facilities may be installed as attachments to bridges or roadway
structures only where the utility has demonstrated that all other means of
accommodating the facility are not practicable. Other means shall include, but
are not limited to, underground, underwater, independent poles, cable supports
and tower supports, all of which are completely separated from the bridge or
roadway structure. Facilities transmitting commodities that are volatile,
flammable, corrosive, or energized, especially those under significant pressure
or potential, present high degrees of risk and such installations are not
permitted.
      2.   A utility shall include in its request to accommodate a facility
installation on a bridge or roadway structure supporting data demonstrating the
impracticability of alternate routing. Approval or disapproval of an
application for facility attachment to a bridge or roadway structure will be
based upon the following considerations:
         (a)   The type, volume, pressure or voltage of the commodity to be
transmitted and an evaluation of the resulting risk to persons and property in
the event of damage to or failure of the facility;
         (b)   The type, length, value, and relative importance of the roadway
structure in the transportation system;
         (c)   The alternative routings available to the utility and their
comparative practicability;
         (d)   The proposed method of attachment;
         (e)   The ability of the structure to bear the increased load of the
proposed facility;
         (f)   The degree of interference with bridge maintenance and painting;
         (g)   The effect on the visual quality of the structure; and
         (h)   The public benefit expected from the utility service as compared
to the risk involved.
   (I)   Personal Wireless Services Facilities: Personal wireless facilities
(other than small wireless facilities) may be installed only if:
      1.   Number. Not more than one (1) personal wireless services facilities
will be permitted on a single utility pole, alternative antenna structure, or
item of Village-owned infrastructure.
      2.   Separation of Buildings. All personal wireless services facilities
shall be separated from any principal building that is used for residential or
institutional purposes by a distance that is not less than one hundred ten
(110) percent of the height of the higher of the highest point of:
         (a)   The antennas; or
         (b)   The utility pole, alternative antenna structure or Village-owned
infrastructure on which it is located.
      All personal wireless services facilities located on a utility pole,
alternative antenna structure or Village-owned infrastructure shall be
separated from another such facility by not less than five hundred (500) feet.
Such distance shall be measured horizontally from the center of the base of the
supporting structure to the point where the ground meets a vertical wall of
such principal building, or to the center of the base of the other supporting
structure.
      3.   Village-Owned Infrastructure. Personal wireless services facilities
may be mounted on Village-owned infrastructure such as street lights, traffic
control devices, towers or buildings, only if authorized by a license or other
agreement between the facility owner and the Village.
      4.   Height. A personal wireless service facility installed on an
existing utility pole, alternative antenna structure or Village-owned
infrastructure may extend no more than seven (7) feet above the top of that
existing structure or infrastructure or to a height of forty-five (45) feet,
whichever is lower. The lowest portion of any facility-mounted on a structure
or infrastructure shall not be lower than eight (8) feet above grade.
      5.   Replacement Structure. A new utility pole, alternative antenna
structure or Village-owned infrastructure that replaces an existing pole,
alternative antenna structure or Village-owned infrastructure in the same
location may extend not more than seven (7) feet higher than the height of the
support structure it is replacing, but in no event more than forty-five (45)
feet. N part of the personal wireless services facility installed on a
replacement structure may extend more than five (5) feet above the top of that
replacement structure.
      6.   New Structure. No new utility pole or alternative antenna structure
shall be installed for the purpose of installing a new personal wireless
facility.
      7.   Volume. No personal wireless services antenna may exceed seven (7)
cubic feet in volume, including any panel, whip or dish-shaped antennas. The
total combined volume of all above-ground equipment or appurtenances comprising
a personal wireless services facility, exclusive of antenna, shall exceed
thirty-two (32) cubic feet. No cabinet or other equipment component of a
personal wireless services facility shall exceed seventeen (17) cubic feet. The
volume of camouflage structure or device required by the Village Engineer and
Superintendent of Public Works. Any wiring or cables must be covered with an
appropriate cover.
      8.   Color. Every personal wireless services facility shall be of neutral
colors that are harmonious with, and that blend with, the natural features,
buildings and structures surrounding such antenna ad supporting structures as
determined by the Village Engineer and Superintendent of Public Works. Any
wiring or cables must be covered with an appropriate cover.
      9.   Antenna Panel Cover. A personal wireless services antenna panel may
include a radome, cap or other panel covering or shield, to the extent such
covering will not result in a larger or more noticeable facility and is of a
color that blends with the structure on which it is mounted.
      10.   Guy or Support Wires. No guy or other support wires or other
similar mechanisms or techniques may be installed as part of any personal
wireless services facility.
      11.   Protection Against Climbing. Every personal wireless facility shall
be protected against unauthorized climbing or other access by the public in
compliance with the National Electrical Code and other applicable law.
      12.   Signs. Except as provided in this Subsection, no personal wireless
services facility may bear any placard, sign, sticker, banner, or label. A
personal wireless services facility may bear warning or notification signs
required by federal law or regulations and one (1) small alphanumeric
identification marking at a location on the facility that, to the extent
reasonably feasible, is not visible from grade level.
      13.   Other Codes. All personal wireless services facility shall comply
with all other codes and ordinances of the Village, as well as state and
federal laws, rules and regulations.
      14.   Landscaping and Screening. All ground-mounted portions of personal
wireless services facilities shall be screened in order to minimize the
visibility of such facilities, with a natural screen or fence so as to achieve
the maximum reasonable achievable screening as determined by the Village
Engineer and the Superintendent of Public Works. Any natural screen shall be a
minimum of six (6) feet in height when planted, with dense plantings spaced no
more than two (2) feet apart. Any fence shall be a minimum of four (4) feet in
height, except where fence height is otherwise limited by law, and shall be of
a style of construction that provides a visual shield or the facilities.
Screening or fencing shall be installed at least three (3) feet from equipment
installed at grade and eight (8) feet from the edge of any roadway.
      15.   Abandonment and Removal. In addition to the provisions for
abandonment and removal in Section
8-6-18 of this Chapter, when one (1) or more personal wireless services
antenna, facility or related equipment are not operated for the provision of
personal wireless services for a continuous period of twelve (12) months or
more, such antenna, facility, or related equipment may be deemed to be
abandoned by the Village. The owner of such antenna, facility, or related
equipment shall remove such items within ninety (90) days following the mailing
of written notice that removal is required. Suh notice shall be sent by
certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, by the Village to such
owner at the last known address of such owner. (Ord. 18-09, 7-24-2018)
8-6-16: CONSTRUCTION METHODS AND MATERIALS:
   (A)   Standards and Requirements for Particular Types of Construction
Methods:
      1.   Boring or Jacking.
         (a)   Pits and Shoring. Boring or jacking under rights-of-way shall be
accomplished from pits located at a minimum distance specified by the Village
Engineer and/or Superintendent of Public Works from the edge of the pavement.
Pits for boring or jacking shall be excavated no more than 48 hours in advance
of boring or jacking operations and backfilled within 48 hours after boring or
jacking operations are completed. While pits are open, they shall be clearly
marked and protected by barricades. Shoring shall be designed, erected,
supported, braced, and maintained so that it will safely support all vertical
and lateral loads that may be imposed upon it during the boring or jacking
operation.
         (b)   Wet Boring or Jetting. Wet boring or jetting shall not be
permitted under the roadway.
         (c)   Borings with Diameters Greater Than 6 Inches. Borings over six
inches (0.15 m) in diameter shall be accomplished with an auger and following
pipe, and the diameter of the auger shall not exceed the outside diameter of
the following pipe by more than one inch (25 mm).
         (d)   Borings with Diameters 6 Inches or Less. Borings of six inches
or less in diameter may be accomplished by either jacking, guided with auger,
or auger and following pipe method.
         (e)   Tree Preservation. Any facility located within the drip line of
any tree designated by the Village to be preserved shall be bored under or
around the root system.
      2.   Trenching. Trenching for facility installation, repair, or
maintenance on rights-of-way shall be done in accord with any applicable
ordinances, rules, regulations or manuals of the Village and the applicable
portions of Section 603 of IDOT's "Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction."
         (a)   Length. The length of open trench shall be kept to the
practicable minimum consistent with requirements for pipe-line testing. Only
one-half of any intersection may have an open trench at any time unless special
permission is obtained from the Village Engineer and/or Superintendent of
Public Works.
         (b)   Open Trench and Excavated Material. Open trench and windrowed
excavated material shall be protected as required by Chapter 6 of the Illinois
Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. Where practicable, the excavated
material shall be deposited between the roadway and the trench as added
protection. Excavated material shall not be allowed to remain on the paved
portion of the roadway. Where right-of-way width does not allow for windrowing
excavated material off the paved portion of the roadway, excavated material
shall be hauled to an off-road location.
         (c)   The utility shall not trench within the drip line of any tree
designated by the Village to be preserved.
      3.   Backfilling.
         (a)   Any pit, trench, or excavation created during the installation
of facilities shall be backfilled for its full width, depth, and length using
methods and materials in accordance with any applicable ordinances, rules,
regulations or manuals of the Village and with IDOT's "Standard Specifications
for Road and Bridge Construction." When excavated material is hauled away or is
unsuitable for backfill, suitable granular backfill shall be used.
         (b)   For a period of three years from the date construction of a
facility is completed, the utility shall be responsible to remove and restore
any backfill area that has settled due to construction of the facility. If so
ordered by the Village Engineer and/or Superintendent of Public Works, the
utility, at its expense, shall remove any pavement and backfill material to the
top of the installed facility, place and properly compact new backfill
material, and restore new pavement, sidewalk, curbs, and driveways to the
proper grades, as determined by the Village Engineer and/or Superintendent of
Public Works.
      4.   Pavement Cuts. Pavement cuts for facility installation or repair
shall be permitted on a roadway only if that portion of the roadway is closed
to traffic. If a variance to the limitation set forth in this paragraph is
permitted under Section
8-6-21, the following requirements shall apply:
         (a)   Any excavation under pavements shall be backfilled as soon as
practicable with granular material of CA-6 or CA-10 gradation, as designated by
the Village Engineer and/or Superintendent of Public Works.
         (b)   Restoration of pavement, in kind, shall be accomplished as soon
as practicable, and temporary repair with bituminous mixture shall be provided
immediately. Any subsequent failure of either the temporary repair or the
restoration shall be rebuilt upon notification by the Village.
         (c)   All saw cuts shall be full depth.
         (d)   For all rights-of-way which have been reconstructed with a
concrete surface/base in the last seven (7) years, or resurfaced in the last
four (4) years, permits shall not be issued unless such work is determined to
be an emergency repair or other work considered necessary and unforeseen before
the time of the reconstruction or resurfacing or unless a pavement cut is
necessary for a J.U.L.I.E. locate.
      5.   Encasement.
         (a)   Casing pipe shall be designed to withstand the load of the
roadway and any other superimposed loads. The casing shall be continuous either
by one-piece fabrication or by welding or jointed installation approved by the
Village. Casing pipes shall be installed where required and approved by the
Village Engineer and/or Superintendent of Public Works.
         (b)   The venting, if any, of any encasement shall extend within one
foot (0.3 m) of the right-of-way line. No above-ground vent pipes shall be
located in the area established as clear zone for that particular section of
the roadway.
         (c)   In the case of gas pipelines of 60 psig or less, encasement may
be eliminated.
         (d)   In the case of gas pipelines or petroleum products pipelines
with installations of more than 60 psig, encasement may be eliminated only if:
(1) extra heavy pipe is used that precludes future maintenance or repair and
(2) cathodic protection of the pipe is provided;
         (e)   If encasement is eliminated for a gas or petroleum products
pipeline, the facility shall be located so as to provide that construction does
not disrupt the right-of-way.
      6.   Minimum Cover of Underground Facilities. Cover shall be provided and
maintained at least in the amount specified in the following table for minimum
cover for the type of facility:
 
Type Of Facility                         Minimum Cover
Power or Communication Line (In General) 30 Inches (0.8 m)
Communication, Cable or Video Service    24 Inches (0.6 m)
Lines
Gas or Petroleum Products                30 Inches (0.8 m)
Water Line                               72 Inches (1.83 m)
                                         Sufficient Cover to Provide Freeze
Sanitary Sewer, Storm Sewer, or Drainage Protection, as approved by Village
Line                                     Engineer or Superintendent of Public
                                         Works
 
   No power or communication line shall be located at a depth of cover between
four (4) and seven (7) feet without express approval by the Village in the
permit.
   (B)   Standards and Requirements for Particular Types of Facilities:
      1.   Electric Power or Communication Lines.
         (a)   Code Compliance. Electric power or communications facilities
within Village rights-of-way shall be constructed, operated, and maintained in
conformity with the provisions of 83 Ill. Adm. Code 305 (formerly General Order
160 of the Illinois Commerce Commission) entitled "Rules for Construction of
Electric Power and Communications Lines", and the National Electrical Safety
Code.
         (b)   Overhead Facilities. Overhead power or communication facilities,
if otherwise permitted under this Chapter, shall use single pole construction
and, where practicable, joint use of poles shall be used. Utilities shall make
every reasonable effort to design the installation so guys and braces will not
be needed. Variances may be allowed if there is no feasible alternative and if
guy wires are equipped with guy guards for maximum visibility.
         (c)   Underground Facilities.
            (1)   Cable may be installed by trenching or plowing, provided that
special consideration is given to boring in order to minimize damage when
crossing improved entrances and side roads.
            (2)   If a crossing is installed by boring or jacking, encasement
shall be provided between jacking or bore pits. Encasement may be eliminated
only if:
               (i)   The crossing is installed by the use of "moles," "whip
augers", or other approved method which compress the earth to make the opening
for cable installation; or
                  (ii)   The installation is by the open trench method which is
only permitted prior to roadway construction.
            (3)   Cable shall be grounded in accordance with the National
Electrical Safety Code.
         (d)   Burial of Drops. All temporary service drops placed between
November 1 of the prior year and March 15 of the current year, also known as
snowdrops, shall be buried by May 31 of the current year, weather permitting,
unless otherwise permitted by the Village. Weather permitting, utilities shall
bury all temporary drops, excluding snowdrops, within ten (10) business days
after placement.
      2.   Underground Facilities Other than Electric Power or Communication
Lines. Underground facilities other than electric power or communication lines
may be installed by:
         (a)   The use of "moles", "whip augers", or other approved methods
which compress the earth to move the opening for the pipe;
         (b)   Jacking or boring with encasement provided between the ditch
lines or toes of slopes of the roadway;
         (c)   Open trench with vented encasement between ultimate ditch lines
or toes of slopes, but only if prior to roadway construction;
         (d)   Tunneling with vented encasement, but only if installation is
not possible by other means; or
         (e)   Open trench in a manner approved by Village Engineer and/or
Superintendent of Public Works.
      3.   Gas Transmission, Distribution and Service. Gas pipelines within
rights-of-way shall be constructed, maintained, and operated in a Village
approved manner and in conformance with the Federal Code of the Office of
Pipeline Safety Operations, Department of Transportation, Part 192 -
Transportation of Natural Gas and Other Gas by Pipeline: Minimum Federal Safety
Standards (49 CFR 192), IDOT's "Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction," and all other applicable laws, rules, and regulations.
      4.   Petroleum Products Pipelines. Petroleum products pipelines within
rights-of-way shall conform to the applicable sections of ANSI Standard Code
for Pressure Piping. (Liquid Petroleum Transportation Piping Systems ANSI-
B 31.4).
      5.   Waterlines, Sanitary Sewer Lines, Storm Water Sewer Lines or
Drainage Lines. Water lines, sanitary sewer lines, storm sewer lines, and
drainage lines within rights-of-way shall meet or exceed the requirements of
the Village's Design Manual and the current "Standard Specifications for Water
and Sewer Main Construction in Illinois".
      6.   Ground Mounted Appurtenances. Ground mounted appurtenances to
overhead or underground facilities, when permitted within a right-of-way, shall
be provided with a vegetation-free area extending one foot (305 mm) in width
beyond the appurtenance in all directions. The vegetation-free area may be
provided by an extension of the mounting pad, or by heavy duty plastic or
similar material approved by the Village Engineer and/or Superintendent of
Public Works. With the approval of the Village Engineer and/or Superintendent
of Public Works, shrubbery surrounding the appurtenance may be used in place of
vegetation-free area. The housing for ground-mounted appurtenances shall be
painted a neutral color to blend with the surroundings.
   (C)   Materials:
      1.   General Standards. The materials used in constructing facilities
within rights-of-way shall be those meeting the accepted standards of the
appropriate industry, the requirements of the Village's Design Manual, and the
applicable portions of IDOT's "Standards Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction", the requirements of the Illinois Commerce Commission, or the
standards established by other official regulatory agencies for the appropriate
industry.
      2.   Material Storage on Right-of-Way. All pipe, conduit, wire, poles,
cross arms, or other materials shall be distributed along the right-of-way
prior to and during installation in a manner to minimize hazards to the public
or an obstacle to right-of-way maintenance or damage to the right-of-way and
other property. If material is to be stored on right-of-way, prior written
approval must be obtained from the Village.
      3.   Hazardous Materials. The plans submitted by the utility to the
Village shall identify any hazardous materials that may be involved in the
construction of the new facilities or removal of any existing facilities.
   (D)   Operational Restrictions.
      1.   Construction operations on rights-of-way may, at the discretion of
the Village, be required to be discontinued when such operations would create
hazards to traffic or the public health, safety, and welfare. Such operations
may also be required to be discontinued or restricted when conditions are such
that construction would result in extensive damage to the right-of-way or other
property.
      2.   These restrictions may be waived by the Village Engineer and/or the
Superintendent of Public Works when emergency work is required to restore vital
utility services.
      3.   Unless otherwise permitted by the Village or restricted in
accordance with this Chapter, the hours of construction are sunrise to sunset.
   (E)   Location of Existing Facilities: Any utility proposing to construct
facilities in the Village shall contact J.U.L.I.E. and ascertain the presence
and location of existing above-ground and underground facilities within the
rights-of-way to be occupied by its proposed facilities. The Village will make
its permit records available to a utility for the purpose of identifying
possible facilities. When notified of an excavation or when requested by the
Village or by J.U.L.I.E., a utility shall locate and physically mark its
underground facilities within 48 hours, excluding weekends and holidays, in
accordance with the Illinois Underground Facilities Damage Prevention Act (220
ILCS 50/1 et seq.). (Ord. 18-09, 7-24-2018)
8-6-17: VEGETATION CONTROL:
   (A)   Electric Utilities - Compliance with State Laws and Regulations. An
electric utility shall conduct all tree-trimming and vegetation control
activities in the right-of-way in accordance with applicable Illinois laws and
regulations, and additionally, with such local franchise or other agreement
with the Village of Forest View as permitted by law.
   (B)   Other Utilities - Tree Trimming Permit Required. Tree trimming that is
done by any other utility with facilities in the right-of-way and that is not
performed pursuant to applicable Illinois laws and regulations specifically
governing same, shall not be considered a normal maintenance operation, but
shall require the application for, and the issuance of, a permit, in addition
to any other permit required under this Chapter.
      1.   Application for Tree Trimming Permit. Applications for tree trimming
permits shall include assurance that the work will be accomplished by competent
workers with supervision who are experienced in accepted tree pruning
practices. Tree trimming permits shall designate an expiration date in the
interest of assuring that the work will be expeditiously accomplished.
      2.   Damage to Trees. Poor pruning practices resulting in damaged or
misshapen trees will not be tolerated and shall be grounds for cancellation of
the tree trimming permit and for assessment of damages. The Village will
require compensation for trees extensively damaged and for trees removed
without authorization. The formula developed by the International Society of
Arboriculture will be used as a basis for determining the compensation for
damaged trees or unauthorized removal of trees. The Village may require the
removal and replacement of trees if trimming or radical pruning would leave
them in an unacceptable condition.
   (C)   Specimen Trees or Trees of Special Significance: The Village may
require that special measures be taken to preserve specimen trees or trees of
special significance. The required measures may consist of higher poles, side
arm extensions, covered wire or other means.
   (D)   Chemical Use: Spraying of any type of vegetation controlling chemicals
will not be permitted on rights-of-way unless approved by the Village Engineer
and/or Superintendent of Public Works. (Ord. 18-09, 7-24-2018)
8-6-18: REMOVAL, RELOCATION, OR MODIFICATIONS OF UTILITY FACILITIES:
   (A)   Notice: Within ninety (90) days following written notice from the
Village, a utility shall, at is own expense, temporarily or permanently remove,
relocate, change or alter the position of any utility facilities within the
rights-of-way whenever the corporate authorities have determined that such
removal, relocation, change or alteration, is reasonably necessary for the
construction, repair, maintenance, or installation of any Village improvement
in or upon, or the operations of the Village in or upon, the rights-of-way.
   (B)   Removal of Unauthorized Facilities: Within thirty (30) days following
written notice from the Village, any utility that owns, controls, or maintains
any unauthorized facility or related appurtenances within the public rights-of-
way shall, at its own expense, remove all or any part of such facilities or
appurtenances from the public rights-of-way. A facility is unauthorized and
subject to removal in the following circumstances:
      1.   Upon expiration or termination of the permittee's license or
franchise, unless otherwise permitted by applicable law;
      2.   If the facility was constructed or installed without the prior grant
of a license or franchise, if required;
      3.   If the facility was constructed or installed without prior issuance
of a required permit in violation of this Chapter; or
      4.   If the facility was constructed or installed at a location not
permitted by the permittee's license or franchise.
   (C)   Emergency Removal or Relocation of Facilities: The Village retains the
right and privilege to cut or move any facilities located within the rights-of-
way of the Village, as the Village may determine to be necessary, appropriate
or useful in response to any public health or safety emergency. If
circumstances permit, the municipality shall attempt to notify the utility, if
known, prior to cutting or removing a facility and shall notify the utility, if
known, after cutting or removing a facility.
   (D)   Abandonment of Facilities: Upon abandonment of a facility within the
public rights-of-way of the Village, the utility shall notify the Village
within ninety (90) days. Following receipt of such notice the Village may
direct the utility to remove all or any portion of the facility if the Village
Engineer and/or Superintendent of Public Works determines that such removal
will be in the best interest of the public health, safety and welfare. In the
event that the Village does not direct the utility that abandoned the facility
to remove it, by giving notice of abandonment to the Village, the abandoning
utility shall be deemed to consent to the alteration or removal of all or any
portion of the facility by another utility or person. (Ord. 18-09, 7-24-2018)
8-6-19: CLEANUP AND RESTORATION:
Upon completion of all construction or maintenance of facilities, the utility
shall remove all excess material and restore all turf and terrain within 10
days, and to the satisfaction of the Village. This includes restoration of all
disturbed areas. Restoration of roadway surfaces shall be made using materials
and methods approved by the Village Engineer and/or Superintendent of Public
Works. Such cleanup and repair may be required to consist of backfilling,
regrading, reseeding, resodding, or any other requirement to restore the right-
of-way to a condition substantially equivalent to that which existed prior to
the commencement of the project. (Ord. 18-09, 7-24-2018)
8-6-20: MAINTENANCE AND EMERGENCY MAINTENANCE:
   (A)   General: Facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or
within rights-of-way are to be maintained by or for the utility in a manner
satisfactory to the Village and at the utility's expense.
   (B)   Emergency Maintenance Procedures: Emergencies may justify non-
compliance with normal procedures for securing a permit:
      1.   If an emergency creates a hazard on the traveled portion of the
right-of-way, the utility shall take immediate steps to provide all necessary
protection for traffic on the roadway or the public on the right-of-way
including the use of signs, lights, barricades or flaggers. If a hazard does
not exist on the traveled way, but the nature of the emergency is such as to
require the parking on the shoulder of equipment required in repair operations,
adequate signs and lights shall be provided. Parking on the shoulder in such an
emergency will only be permitted when no other means of access to the facility
is available.
      2.   In an emergency, the utility shall, immediately, notify the Village
Police Department of the situation. This notification shall include a
description of the problem, work being undertaken, and what steps have been
taken for protection of the traveling public and what will be required to make
the necessary repairs. If the nature of the emergency is such as to interfere
with the free movement of traffic, the Village Police Department shall be
notified immediately.
      3.   In an emergency, the utility shall use all means at hand to complete
repairs as rapidly as practicable and with the least inconvenience to the
traveling public.
   (D)   Emergency Repairs: The utility must file in writing with the
Superintendent of Public Works a description of the repairs undertaken in the
right-of-way within forty-eight (48) hours after an emergency repair. (Ord. 18-
09, 7-24-2018)
8-6-21: VARIANCES:
   (A)   Request for Variance: A utility requesting a variance from one or more
of the provisions of this Chapter must do so in writing to the Superintendent
of Public Works as a part of the permit application. The request shall identify
each provision of this Chapter from which a variance is requested and the
reasons why a variance should be granted.
   (B)   Authority to Grant Variances: The Village Board shall decide whether a
variance is authorized for each provision of this Chapter identified in the
variance request on an individual basis.
   (C)   Conditions for Granting of Variance: The Village Board may authorize a
variance only if the utility requesting the variance has demonstrated that:
      1.   One or more conditions not under the control of the utility (such as
terrain features or an irregular right-of-way line) create a special hardship
that would make enforcement of the provision unreasonable, given the public
purposes to be achieved by the provision; and
      2.   All other designs, methods, materials, locations or facilities that
would conform with the provision from which a variance is requested are
impracticable in relation to the requested approach.
   (D)   Additional Conditions for Granting of a Variance: As a condition for
authorizing a variance, the Village Board may require the utility requesting
the variance to meet reasonable standards and conditions that may or may not be
expressly contained within this Chapter but which carry out the purposes of
this Chapter. (Ord. 18-09, 7-24-2018)
8-6-22: RIGHT TO APPEAL:
   (A)   Generally: Any utility aggrieved by any order, requirement, decision
or determination, including denial of a variance, made by the Superintendent of
Public Works under the provisions of this Chapter shall have the right to
appeal to the Village Administrator. The application for appeal shall be
submitted in writing to the Village Clerk within thirty (30) days after the
date of such order, requirement, decision or determination. The Village
Administrator shall timely decide the appeal.
   (B)   Personal Wireless Services: Any personal wireless services provider
adversely affected by any decision of the Superintendent of Public Works shall
have the right to appeal any decision of the Superintendent.
      1.   Village Administrator. All such appeals shall be taken initially to
the Village Administrator by filing a written notice with the Village
Administrator within five (5) days following receipt of the Superintendent of
Public Works' decision from which the appeal is taken. Within twenty-one (21)
days following receipt of the written notice of appeal, the Village
Administrator shall review the application and any other reliable and relevant
evidence, documents, or information, and may receive and consider new evidence.
Within thirty (30) days after the Village Administrator receives the written
notice of appeal of the Superintendent of Public Works' decision, the Village
Administrator shall render a recommendation to the President and Board of
Trustees to either uphold, reverse, or amend the Superintendent of Public
Works' decision. The Village Administrator shall notify the person who filed
the appeal within two (2) business days after such recommendation and shall
provide such person a copy of the recommendation, as well as the date upon
which the President and Board of Trustees will consider the recommendation.
      2.   Final Decision by the President and Board of Trustees. Within thirty
(30) days after the Village Administrator's recommendation, the President and
Board of Trustees shall review the findings of the Village Administrator's
recommendation and may receive and consider new evidence. Within thirty (30)
days after review of the Village Administrator's recommendations, the President
and Board of Trustees shall render their decision at a regularly scheduled
meeting. The action taken by the President and Board of Trustees shall be
final. The Village Administrator shall notify the person who filed the appeal
within five (5) days after such final action.
      3.   Stay of Regulated Personal Wireless Services Activities. The filing
of written notice of appeal pursuant to this Section shall stay all activity
pursuant to the requested permit under this Chapter subject to the completion
of the appeal.
8-6-23: PENALTIES:
Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with
any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be subject to fine in accordance
with the penalty provisions of this Code. There may be times when the Village
will incur delay or other costs, including third party claims, because the
utility will not or cannot perform its duties under its permit and this
Chapter. Unless the utility shows that another allocation of the cost of
undertaking the requested action is appropriate, the utility shall bear the
Village's costs of damages and its costs of installing, maintaining, modifying,
relocating, or removing the facility that is the subject of the permit. No
other administrative agency or commission may review or overrule a permit
related cost appointment of the Village. Sanctions may be imposed upon a
utility who does not pay the costs apportioned to it. (Ord. 18-09, 7-24-2018)
8-6-24: ENFORCEMENT:
Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed as limiting any additional or
further remedies that the Village may have for enforcement of this Chapter.
(Ord. 18-09, 7-24-2018)
8-6-25: SEVERABILITY:
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this Chapter
is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and
independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the
remaining portions hereof. (Ord. 18-09, 7-24-2018)
CHAPTER 7
REGULATION OF SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES
Section:
8-7-1: Purpose And Scope
8-7-2: Definitions
8-7-3: Regulation Of Small Wireless Facilities
8-7-4: Permit Required; Applications And Fees
8-7-5: Completeness Of Application/Tolling Of Time
8-7-6: Action On Permit Applications
8-7-7: Effect Of Permit
8-7-8: Permit Suspension And Revocation
8-7-9: Pole Attachment Agreement
8-7-10: Collocation Requirements And Conditions
8-7-11: Collocation Completion Deadline
8-7-12: Aerial Facilities
8-7-13: Annual Recurring Rate/Rental Fee
8-7-14: Construction; Maintenance; Safety; Inspection; And Restoration
8-7-15: Insurance
8-7-16: Indemnification
8-7-17: Security
8-7-18: Change Of Ownership Or Owner's Identity Or Legal Status
8-7-19: Removal, Relocation Or Abandonment
8-7-20: Exceptions To Applicability Of This Chapter
8-7-21: Penalties
8-7-22: Enforcement
8-7-23: Dispute Resolution
8-7-24: Severability
8-7-1: PURPOSE AND SCOPE:
   (A)   Purpose: The purpose of this Chapter is to establish regulations,
standards and procedures for the siting and collocation of small wireless
facilities on rights-of-way within the Village's jurisdiction, or outside the
rights-of-way on property zoned by the Village as commercial or industrial
zoning districts, in a manner not inconsistent with the Small Wireless
Facilities Deployment Act (Public Act 100-0585).
   (B)   Intent:
      1.   Except as specifically provided in this Chapter, this Chapter does
not limit the applicability of the provisions of Chapter 6 of Title 8, entitled
Construction of Utility Facilities in the Public Rights-of-Way, to the location
and installation of small wireless facilities within the Village. If the
provisions of this Chapter and the provisions of Title 8, Chapter 6, are in
conflict, this Chapter applies and controls.
      2.   In the event that applicable federal or State laws or regulations
conflict with the requirements of this Chapter, the wireless provider shall
comply with the requirements of this Chapter to the maximum extent possible
without violating Federal or state laws or regulations. (Ord. 18-10, 7-24-2018)
8-7-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this Chapter and unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the
words and terms listed shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this
Section. Any term not defined in this Section shall have the meaning ascribed
to it in the Small Wireless Facilities Deployment Act (Public Act 100-0585),
unless the context clearly requires otherwise.
ANTENNA:       Communications equipment that transmits or receives electromagnetic radio
               frequency signals used in the provision of wireless services.
APPLICABLE     Uniform building, fire, electrical, plumbing, or mechanical codes adopted by a
CODES:         recognized national code organization or village amendments to those codes,
               including the national electric safety code.
APPLICANT:     Any person who submits an application and is a wireless provider.
               A request submitted by an applicant to the village for a permit to collocate
APPLICATION:   small wireless facilities, and a request that includes the installation of a new
               utility pole for such collocation, as well as any applicable fee for the review
               of such application.
COLLOCATE or   To install, mount, maintain, modify, operate, or replace wireless facilities on
COLLOCATION:   or adjacent to a wireless support structure or utility pole.
               A cable service, as defined in 47 u.s.c. 522(6), as amended; information service,
COMMUNICATIONS as defined in 47 u.s.c. 153(24), as amended; telecommunications service, as
SERVICE:       defined in 47 u.s.c. 153(53), as amended; mobile service, as defined in 47 u.s.c.
               153 (43), as amended; or wireless service other than mobile service.
COMMUNICATIONS A cable operator, as defined in 47 u.s.c. 522(5), as amended; a provider of
SERVICE        information service, as defined in 47 u.s.c. 153(24), as amended; a
PROVIDER:      telecommunications carrier, as defined in 47 u.s.c. 153(51), as amended; or a
               wireless provider.
FCC:           The federal communications commission of the united states.
FEE:           A one-time charge.
               A building, property, or site, or group of buildings, properties, or sites that
               are either:
               (A)   Listed in the national register of historic places or formally determined
               eligible for listing by the keeper of the national register, the individual who
               has been delegated the authority by the federal agency to list properties and
HISTORIC       determine their eligibility for the national register, in accordance with section
DISTRICT or    vi.d.1.a.i through section vi.d.1.a.v of the nationwide programmatic agreement
HISTORIC       codified at 47 cfr part 1, appendix c; or
LANDMARK:      (B)   Designated as a locally landmarked building, property, site, or historic
               district by an ordinance adopted by the village council pursuant to a
               preservation program that meets the requirements of the certified local
               government program of the Illinois State Historic Preservation Office or where
               such certification of the preservation program by the Illinois State Historic
               Preservation Office is pending.
LAW:           A Federal of state statute, common law, code, rule, regulation, order or village
               ordinance or resolution.
MICRO-WIRELESS A small wireless facility that is not larger in dimension than 24 inches in
FACILITY:      length, 15 inches in width, and 12 inches in height and that has an exterior
               antenna, if any, no longer than 11 inches.
MUNICIPAL      A utility pole owned or operated by the village in a public right-of-way.
UTILITY POLE:
PERMIT:        A written authorization required by the village to perform an action or initiate,
               continue, or complete a project.
PERSON:        An individual, corporation, limited liability company, partnership, association,
               trust, or other entity or organization.
               The functional division of the federal government, the state, a unit of local
PUBLIC SAFETY  government, or a special purpose district located in whole or in part within this
AGENCY:        state, that provides or has authority to provide firefighting, police, ambulance,
               medical, or other emergency services to respond to and manage emergency
               incidents.
RATE:          A recurring charge.
               An area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway, street, public sidewalk,
RIGHT-OF-WAY:  alley, or utility easement dedicated for compatible use. Right-of-way does not
               include Village-owned aerial lines.
               A wireless facility that meets both of the following qualifications:
               (A)   Each antenna is located inside an enclosure of no more than six (6) cubic
               feet in volume or, in the case of an antenna that has exposed elements, the
               antenna and all of its exposed elements could fit within an imaginary enclosure
               of no more than six (6) cubic feet; and
SMALL WIRELESS (B)   All other wireless equipment attached directly to a utility pole associated
FACILITY:      with the facility is cumulatively no more than twenty-five (25) cubic feet in
               volume.
               The following types of associated ancillary equipment are not included in the
               calculation of equipment volume: electric meter, concealment elements,
               telecommunications demarcation box, ground-based enclosures, grounding equipment,
               power transfer switch, cut-off switch, and vertical cable runs for the connection
               of power and other services.
               A method of camouflaging any tower, antenna, wireless facilities, or other
STEALTH        ancillary supporting communications facility, including, but not limited to,
DESIGN:        supporting electrical, optical, or mechanical, or other equipment, which enhances
               compatibility with adjacent land uses and which is visually and aurally
               unobtrusive. Stealth design may include a repurposed structure.
               A pole or similar structure that is used in whole or in part by a communications
UTILITY POLE:  service provider or for electric distribution, lighting, traffic control, or a
               similar function.
               Equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless communications between user
               equipment and a communications network, including:
               (A)   Equipment associated with wireless communications; and
               (B)   Radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and
               backup power supplies, and comparable equipment, regardless of technological
WIRELESS       configuration. Wireless facility includes small wireless facilities.
FACILITY:      Wireless facility does not include:
               (A)   The structure or improvements on, under, or within which the equipment is
               collocated; or
               (B)   Wireline backhaul facilities, coaxial or fiber optic cable that is between
               wireless support structures or utility poles or coaxial, or fiber optic cable
               that is otherwise not immediately adjacent to or directly associated with an
               antenna.
               Any person authorized to provide telecommunications service in the State that
WIRELESS       builds or installs wireless communication transmission equipment, wireless
INFRASTRUCTURE facilities, wireless support structures, or utility poles and that is not a
PROVIDER:      wireless services provider but is acting as an agent or a contractor for a
               wireless services provider for the application submitted to the Village.
WIRELESS       A wireless infrastructure provider or a wireless services provider.
PROVIDER:
               Any services provided to the general public, including a particular class of
WIRELESS       customers, and made available on a nondiscriminatory basis using licensed or
SERVICES:      unlicensed spectrum, whether at a fixed location or mobile, provided using
               wireless facilities.
WIRELESS
SERVICES       A person who provides wireless services.
PROVIDER:
WIRELESS       A freestanding structure, such as a monopole; tower, either guyed or self-
SUPPORT        supporting; billboard; or other existing or proposed structure designed to
STRUCTURE:     support or capable of supporting wireless facilities. Wireless support structure
               does not include a utility pole. (Ord. 18-10, 7-24-2018)
 
8-7-3: REGULATION OF SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES:
Small wireless facilities shall be classified as Permitted Uses and shall not
be subject to zoning review or approval if they are collocated in rights-of-way
in any zoning district and outside of rights-of-way in commercial and
industrial zoning districts. Applications for permits to collocate small
wireless facilities on said property shall be subject to administrative review
as set forth in this Chapter and, if applicable, approval of any request for
height exceptions or other variances. Requests for approval of small wireless
facilities to be located in all other zoning districts and not in rights-of-way
shall be subject to zoning review and approval as set forth in the Forest View
Zoning Ordinance. (Ord. 18-10, 7-24-2018)
8-7-4: PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATIONS AND FEES:
   (A)   Permit Required: No small wireless facility shall collocate on a
utility pole or similar structure or other wireless support structure without
first filing an application with the Superintendent of Public Works and
obtaining one or more permits from the Village therefor, except as otherwise
provided in this Chapter.
   (B)   Permit Application: All applications for permits pursuant to this
Chapter shall be filed on a form provided by the Village and shall be filed
with the Superintendent of Public Works in such number of duplicate copies as
the Village may designate. Duplicate copies shall be submitted to the Village
Engineer. Applicants shall submit applications, the supporting information, and
notices to the Village to the Superintendent of Public Works by personal
delivery, by regular mail postmarked on the date due or by any other commonly
used means, i.e., overnight mail, or by e-mail.
   (C)   Minimum General Application Requirements: A wireless provider shall
provide the following information to the Village, together with the Village's
permit application, as a condition of any permit application to collocate small
wireless facilities on a utility pole or wireless support structure:
      1.   Site specific structural integrity and, for a municipal utility
pole, make-ready analysis prepared by a structural engineer, as that term is
defined in Section 4 of the Structural Engineering Practice Act of 1989;
      2.   The location where each proposed small wireless facility or utility
pole would be installed and photographs of the location and its immediate
surroundings depicting the utility poles or structures on which each proposed
small wireless facility would be mounted or location where utility poles or
structures would be installed, and a depiction of the completed facility;
      3.   Specifications and drawings prepared by a structural engineer, as
that term is defined in Section 4 of the Structural Engineering Practice of
1989, for each proposed small wireless facility covered by the application as
it is proposed to be installed;
      4.   The equipment type and model numbers for the antennas and all other
wireless equipment associated with the small wireless facility;
      5.   A proposed schedule for the installation and completion of each
small wireless facility covered by the application, if approved;
      6.   Certification that the collocation complies with all of the
collocation requirements and conditions set forth in Section
8-7-10 of this Chapter, to the best of the applicant's knowledge;
      7.   In the event the proposed small wireless facility is to be attached
to an existing pole owned by an entity other than the Village, the wireless
provider shall provide legally competent evidence of the consent of the owner
of such pole to the proposed collocation; and
      8.   Such additional information as may be reasonably required by the
Village, but in no event shall the applicant be required to provide more
information to obtain a permit than the Village requires a communications
service provider that is not a wireless provider that requests to attach
facilities to a structure.
   (D)   Consolidated Applications: An applicant seeking to collocate small
wireless facilities within the jurisdiction of the Village, shall be allowed,
at the applicant's discretion, to file a consolidated application and receive a
single permit for the collocation of up to twenty-five (25) small wireless
facilities if the collocations each involve substantially the same type of
small wireless facility and substantially the same type of structure. If the
consolidated application includes multiple small wireless facilities, the
Village has the right to remove small wireless facility collocations from the
application and treat separately small wireless facility collocations for which
incomplete information has been provided or that do not qualify for
consolidated treatment or that are denied. The Village may issue separate
permits for each collocation that is approved in a consolidated application.
   (E)   Applicant's Duty to Update Information: Throughout the entire permit
application review period and the construction period authorized by the permit,
any amendments and/or revisions to information contained in the permit
application shall be submitted by the applicant in writing to the
Superintendent of Public Works within thirty (30) days after the change
necessitating the amendment and/or revision.
   (F)   Application Fees: All applications for permits pursuant to this
Chapter shall be accompanied by the following non-refundable applicable fees:
      1.   Six hundred and fifty dollars ($650.00) for an application to
collocate a single small wireless facility on an existing utility pole or
wireless support structure;
      2.   Three hundred and fifty dollars ($350.00) for each small wireless
facility addressed in a consolidated application to collocate more than one
small wireless facility on existing utility poles or wireless support
facilities, as provided in Section
8-7-4(D) of this Chapter; or
      3.   One thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each small wireless facility
addressed in an application that includes the installation of a new utility
pole or wireless support structure for such collocation.
   (G)   Exceptions to Application; Approval of Permit: The Village shall not
require an application, approval or permit or any fees or other charges from a
communications service provider authorized to occupy the rights-of-way, for:
      1.   Routine maintenance;
      2.   The replacement of wireless facilities with wireless facilities that
are substantially similar, the same size, or smaller if the wireless provider
notifies the Village at least ten (10) days prior to the planned replacement
and includes equipment specifications for the replacement of equipment
consistent with the requirements of subsection
8-7-4(C) of this Chapter; or
      3.   The installation, placement, maintenance, operation or replacement
of micro wireless facilities suspended on cables that are strung between
existing utility poles in compliance with applicable safety codes.
      4.   Notwithstanding subsections (G) 1, 2 and 3, above, wireless
providers shall secure a permit to work within rights-of-way for activities
that affect traffic patterns or require lane closures as provided in Title 8,
Chapter 6, Construction of Utility Facilities in the Public Rights-of -Way of
the Village Code.
   (H)   Duration of Permit: The duration of a permit shall be for a period of
not less than five (5) years. The permit shall be renewed for a period of
equivalent durations unless the Village makes a finding that the small wireless
facilities or the new or modified utility pole do not comply with the
applicable Village codes or any provision, condition or requirement contained
in this Chapter. If the Small Wireless Facilities Deployment Act is repealed as
provided in the Act, renewal of permits shall be subject to the applicable
Village code provisions or regulations in effect at the time of renewal of the
permit. (Ord. 18-10, 7-24-2018)
8-7-5: COMPLETENESS OF APPLICATION/TOLLING OF TIME:
   (A)   Completeness of Application: Within thirty (30) days of receiving an
application, the Village shall determine whether the application is complete
and notify the applicant of the status of the application. If the application
is incomplete, the Village shall specifically identify the missing information.
An application shall be deemed complete if the Village fails to notify the
applicant within thirty (30) days after all documents, information and the
applicable fees specifically enumerated in the Permit Application Form are
submitted to the Superintendent of Public Works by the applicant.
   (B)   Tolling of Time: The processing deadlines set forth in Section
8-7-6(B) of this Chapter shall be tolled for the following reasons:
      1.   The application is incomplete and the Village sends notice of such
incompleteness to the application within thirty (30) days after the receipt of
the application. The time for processing the application is tolled until the
applicant provides the missing information.
      2.   An express agreement in writing by both the applicant and the
Village to toll the time period for the application.
      3.   A local, state or Federal disaster declaration or similar emergency
that cause the delay. (Ord. 18-10, 7-24-2018)
8-7-6: ACTION ON PERMIT APPLICATIONS:
   (A)   Village Review of Permit Applications: Completed permit applications,
containing all of the required documentation, shall be reviewed by the Village
Engineer and the Superintendent of Public Works.
   (B)   Application Process: The Village shall process applications as
follows:
      1.   The first completed application shall have priority over
applications received by different applicants for collocation on the same
utility pole or wireless support structure.
      2.   An application to collocate a small wireless facility on an existing
utility pole or wireless facility shall be processed within ninety (90) days
after the submission of a completed application. If the Village does not
approve or deny the completed application within said 90 days, the application
shall be deemed approved.
         (a)   If the applicant intends to proceed with the permitted activity
on a deemed approved basis, the applicant must notify the Village, in writing,
its intention to invoke the deemed approved remedy no sooner than seventy-five
(75) days after the submission of a completed application.
         (b)   The permit shall be deemed approved on the latter of the 90th
day after submission of the complete application or the 10th day after the
receipt by the Village of the deemed approved notice by the Village.
         (c)   The receipt of the deemed approved notice shall not preclude the
Village's denial of the permit request within the time limits as provided under
this Chapter.
      3.   An application to collocate a small wireless facility that includes
the installation of a new utility pole or wireless support structure or a
replacement of a utility pole or wireless support structure shall be processed
within one hundred twenty (120) days after the submission of a completed
application. If the Village does not approve or deny the competed application
within said 120 days, the application shall be deemed approved.
         (a)   If the applicant intends to proceed with the permitted activity
on a deemed approved basis, the applicant must notify the Village, in writing,
its intention to invoke the deemed approved remedy no sooner than one hundred
five (105) days after the submission of a completed application.
         (b)   The permit shall be deemed approved on the latter of the 120th
day after submission of the completed application or the 10th day after the
receipt by the Village of the deemed approved notice by the Village.
         (c)   The receipt of the deemed approved notice shall not preclude the
Village's denial of the permit request within the time limits as provided under
this Chapter.
   (C)   Approval/Denial of Permit: The Village shall deny any permit
application which does not meet the requirements of this Chapter.
      1.   If the Village makes the determination that applicable codes,
ordinances or regulations that concern public safety, or the Collocation
Requirements and Conditions set forth in Section
8-7-10 of this Chapter, require that the existing utility pole or wireless
support structure must be replaced before the requested collocation is
permitted, the approval shall be conditioned on the replacement of the utility
pole or wireless support structure at the applicant's expense. The replacement
of the utility pole or wireless support structure shall be subject to the
provisions set forth in Title 8, Chapter 6, Construction of Utility Facilities
in the Public Rights-of-Way.
      2.   The Village shall document the basis for denial of the permit,
including the specific code provisions or application conditions on which the
denial is based. The documentation shall be sent to the applicant on or before
the day the Village denies the permit application.
      3.   The applicant may submit a revised application once within thirty
(30) days after notice of denial is sent to the applicant without paying an
additional application fee.
      The revised application shall cure the deficiencies identified by the
Village in its written denial of the original application. The Village shall
approve or deny the revised application within thirty (30) days of receipt of
the applicant's revised application or it is deemed approved. Failure to
resubmit the revised application within thirty (30) days of denial of the
application, shall trigger the requirement that the applicant submit a new
application with the applicable fees and the recommencement of the Village's
applicable review period.
         (a)   If the applicant intends to proceed with the permitted activity
on a deemed approved basis, the applicant must notify the Village, in writing,
its intention to proceed with the permitted activity on a deemed approved
basis. This notice may be submitted with the revised application.
         (b)   Any review of the revised application by the Village shall be
limited to the deficiencies cited by the Village in its denial of the original
application.
         (c)   The revised application procedure shall not apply if the cure
for the deficiencies set forth in the denial requires the review of a new
location, new or different structure to be collocated upon, new antennas, or
other wireless equipment associated with the small wireless facility. (Ord. 18-
10, 7-24-2018)
8-7-7: EFFECT OF PERMIT:
   (A)   Authority Granted; No Property Right or Other Interest Created: A
permit from the Village authorizes a permittee to undertake only certain
activities in accordance with this Chapter and does not create a property right
or grant authority to the permittee to impinge upon the rights of others who
may have an interest in the public rights-of-way.
   (B)   Compliance with All Laws Required: The issuance of a permit by the
Village does not excuse the permittee from complying with other requirements of
the Village and all applicable statutes, laws, ordinances, rules and
regulations.
   (C)   The approval of the installation, placement, maintenance, or operation
of a small wireless facility pursuant to this Chapter does not authorize the
installation, placement, maintenance, or operation of any communications
facilities other than small wireless facilities in the right-of-way. (Ord. 18-
10, 7-24-2018)
8-7-8: PERMIT SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION:
   (A)   Village Right to Revoke Permit: The Village may revoke or suspend a
permit issued pursuant to this Chapter for one or more of the following
reasons.
      1.   Fraudulent, false, misrepresenting, or materially incomplete
statements in the permit application;
      2.   Non-compliance with this Chapter;
      3.   The wireless provider's placement or maintenance of a small wireless
facility in the public rights-of-way presents a direct or imminent threat to
the general public or other users of the public rights-of-way and the wireless
provider fails to remedy the danger promptly after receipt of written notice
from the Village;
      4.   The wireless provider's failure to construct the facilities
substantially in accordance with the permit and approved plans;
      5.   A federal or state authority suspends, denies, or revokes a wireless
provider's certification or license to provide communication services; or
      6.   The wireless provider ceases to use its small wireless facilities in
public rights-of-way and has not complied with Section
8-7-19(C) of this Chapter.
   (B)   Notice of Revocation or Suspension: The Village shall send written
notice of its intent to revoke or suspend a permit issued pursuant to this
Chapter stating the reason or reasons for the revocation or suspension and the
alternatives available to permittee under this Section.
   (C)   Permittee Alternatives Upon Receipt of Notice of Revocation or
Suspension: Upon receipt of a written notice of revocation or suspension from
the Village, the permittee shall have the following options:
      1.   Immediately provide the Village with evidence that no cause exists
for the revocation or suspension;
      2.   Immediately correct, to the satisfaction of the Village, the
deficiencies stated in the written notice, providing written proof of such
correction to the Village within five (5) working days after receipt of the
written notice of revocation; or
      3.   Immediately remove the small wireless facilities located on, over,
above, along, upon, under, across, or within the public rights-of-way and
restore the rights-of-way to the satisfaction of the Village providing written
proof of such removal to the Village within ten (10) days after receipt of the
written notice of revocation. The Village may, in its discretion, for good
cause shown, extend the time periods provided in this subsection.
   (D)   Village Correction and Notice: If the deficiency creates an imminent
threat to life, health, or safety, the Village may correct the deficiency
immediately upon verbal notice by the Village to permittee.
   (E)   Stop Work Order: In addition to the issuance of a notice of revocation
or suspension, the Village may issue a stop work order immediately upon
discovery of any of the reasons for revocation set forth within subsection (A)
of this Section.
   (F)   Failure or Refusal of the Permittee to Comply: If the permittee fails
to comply with the provision of subsection (C) of this Section, the Village or
its designee may, at the option of the Village: (i) correct the deficiencies;
(ii) upon not less than twenty (20) days' notice to the permittee, remove the
subject facilities or equipment; or (iii) after not less than thirty (30) days'
notice to the permittee of failure to cure the non-compliance, deem them
abandoned and property of the Village. The permittee shall be liable in all
events to the Village for all costs of removal. (Ord. 18-10, 7-24-2018)
8-7-9: POLE APPLICATION AGREEMENT:
Within thirty (30) days after the permit application is approved to collocate a
small wireless facility on a municipal utility pole, the Village and applicant
shall enter into a Master Pole Attachment Agreement for the initial collocation
on the municipal pole. The Village shall be responsible for providing said
Agreement. The Village and the applicant shall enter into supplements to the
Master Pole Attachment Agreement for subsequent approved permits to collocate
additional small wireless facilities on the municipal utility poles not
included in the Master Pole Attachment Agreement.
   (A)   Pre-Existing Agreements: Existing agreements between the Village and
wireless providers that relate to the collocation of small wireless facilities
in a right-of-way, including the collocation of small wireless facilities on
Village utility poles, that are effect on June 1, 2018, shall remain in effect
for all small wireless facilities collocated on the Village's utility poles
pursuant to applications submitted to the Village before June 1, 2018, subject
to applicable termination provisions contained therein. Agreements entered into
on or after June 1, 2018 shall comply with this Chapter.
      1.   A wireless provider that has an existing agreement with the Village
on June 1, 2018 may accept the rates, fees and terms set forth in this Chapter
for the collocation of small wireless facilities or the installation of new
utility poles for the collocation of small wireless facilities that are the
subject of an application submitted two (2) or more years after June 1, 2018 by
notifying the Village that it opts to accept such rates, fees and terms, The
existing agreement shall remain in effect, subject to applicable termination
provisions, for the small wireless facilities the wireless provider has
collocated on the Village's utility poles pursuant to applications submitted to
the Village before the wireless provider provides such notice and exercises its
option under this subsection. (Ord. 18-10, 7-24-2018)
8-7-10: COLLOCATION REQUIREMENTS AND CONDITIONS:
   (A)   Public Safety Conditions:
      1.   Reservation of Space: The Village has the right to reserve space on
municipal utility poles for future public safety uses, for the Village's
electric utility uses, or both. The reservation of such space shall not
preclude the collocation of a small wireless facility unless the Village
reasonably determines that the Village utility pole cannot accommodate both
uses.
      2.   Interference with Public Safety Communication Frequencies:
         (a)   The wireless provider's operation of the small wireless
facilities shall not interfere with the frequencies used by a public safety
agency for public safety communications.
         (b)   The wireless provider shall install small wireless facilities of
the type and frequency that will not cause unacceptable interference with a
public safety agency's communications equipment.
         (c)   Unacceptable interference will be determined by and measured in
accordance with industry standards and the FCC's regulations addressing
unacceptable interference to public safety spectrum or any other spectrum
licensed by a public safety agency.
         (d)   If a small wireless facility causes interference as set forth in
(c) above, and the wireless provider has been given written notice of the
interference by the public safety agency, the wireless provider, at its own
expense, shall take all reasonable steps necessary to correct and eliminate the
interference, including but not limited to, powering down the small wireless
facility and later powering up the small wireless facility for intermittent
testing, if necessary. The wireless provider shall remedy the problem in a
manner consistent with the abatement and resolution procedures for interference
with public safety spectrum established by the FCC, including 47 CFR 22.970
through 47 CFR 22.973, and 47 CFR 90.672 through 47 CFR 90.675.
         (e)   The Village has the right to terminate the permit for a small
wireless facility based on such interference if the wireless provider is not in
compliance with the sections of the Code of Federal Regulations set forth in
subsection 2(d) above. Failure to remedy the interference as required in herein
shall constitute a public nuisance.
   (B)   Public Safety Concerns: The wireless provider shall comply with all
applicable Federal, state and local codes, code provisions, and regulations
concerning public safety. The proposed collocation cannot materially interfere
with the following:
   1.   The safe operation of traffic control equipment;
      2.   Sight lines or clear zones for transportation, pedestrians, or
public safety purposes; and
      3.   Compliance with the Americans with Disabilities Act, or similar
federal or state standards and regulations regarding pedestrian access or
movement.
      Additionally, for the safety of electrical utility workers and members of
the public, the small wireless facility shall comply with the following:
      1.   Small wireless facilities collocated on the same Village pole as a
street light shall be on the same disconnect as the street light;
      2.   Small wireless facilities shall be grounded and otherwise fully
comply with all applicable electrical codes;
      3.   Whenever conduit of small wireless facilities crosses telephone or
electric power wires, wires shall be crossed and be maintained in accordance
with the National Electric Code, the National Electric Safety Code and the
Safety Rules for the Installation and Maintenance of Electrical Supply and
Communication Lines established by the Department of Commerce, Bureau of
Standards of the United States in force at the time of the effective date of
this Chapter, and as amended from time to time.
   (C)   Third-Party Contracts: The wireless provider shall comply with
requirements that are imposed in a contract between the Village and a private
property owner that concern design or construction standards applicable to
utility poles and ground-mounted equipment located in the right-of-way.
   (D)   Non-Interference with Electric Distribution/Transmission System:
      1.   The wireless provider shall not collocate small wireless facilities
on Village utility poles that are part of an electric distribution or
transmission system within the communication worker safety zone of the pole or
the electric supply zone of the pole.
      2.   Notwithstanding the above, the antenna and support equipment of the
small wireless facility may be located in the communications space on the
Village utility pole and on the top of the pole, if not otherwise unavailable,
if the wireless provider complies with applicable codes for work involving top
of the pole.
      For purposes of this subsection, the terms communications space,
communication worker safety zone, and electric supply zone have the meanings
given to those terms in the National Electric Safety Code, published by the
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers.
   (E)   Compliance With Applicable Codes and Regulations:
      1.   Design Standards: The wireless provider shall comply with the
Village's written design standards applicable for decorative utility poles,
stealth structures, concealment and aesthetic requirements set forth in a
Village ordinance, written policy, comprehensive plan or other written design
that applies to other occupiers of the rights-of-way, including on a historic
landmark or in a historic district.
      2.   Signage: The wireless provider shall comply with any applicable
provisions of Title 10, Zoning Ordinance, of the Village Code.
      3.   Ground-Mounted Equipment Spacing: The wireless provider shall comply
with applicable spacing requirements set forth in Title 8, Chapter 6,
Construction of Utility Facilities in the Public Rights-of-Way. Any request by
the wireless provider for a variance from the applicable spacing requirements
shall be subject to the procedures set forth in Section 8-6-21, Variances, of
Chapter 6.
      4.   Underground Regulations: The wireless provider shall comply with the
provisions set forth in Title 8, Chapter 6, regulating undergrounding
requirements that prohibit the installation of new or the modification of
existing utility poles in a right-of-way without prior approval if the
requirements include a variance. Any request by a wireless provider for a
variance to install such new utility poles or modify existing utility poles
shall be subject to the procedures set forth in Section
8-6-21, Variance, of Chapter 6.
      5.   The wireless provider shall comply with sign regulations applicable
to public rights-of-way.
   (F)   Alternate Placements:
      1.   Existing Utility Poles: Except as provided in this Chapter, a
wireless provider shall not be required to collocate small wireless facilities
on an existing specific utility pole or category of existing utility poles or
be required to collocate multiple antenna systems on a single existing pole.
      2.   New Utility Poles: For an application for the collocation of a small
wireless facility on a new utility pole, the Village may propose that the small
wireless facility be collocated on an existing utility pole or existing
wireless support structure within 100 feet of the proposed collocation. The
applicant shall be required to accept the Village's proposal if the applicant
has the right to use the alternate structure on reasonable terms and conditions
and the alternate location and structure does not impose technical limits or
additional material costs as determined by the applicant.
         (a)   If the applicant refuses a collocation as proposed by the
Village, the applicant shall be required to provide a written certification
describing the property rights, technical limits or material cost reasons the
alternate location does not satisfy the criteria set forth in this subsection.
   (G)   Height Limitations: The maximum height of a small wireless facility
shall be no more than ten (10) feet above the utility pole or wireless support
structure on which the small wireless facility is collocated.
      1.   New or Replacement Utility Poles or Wireless Support Structures: The
height for new or replacement utility poles or wireless support structures on
which small wireless facilities are collocated may not exceed the higher of:
         (a)   Ten (10) feet in height above the tallest existing utility pole,
other than a utility pole that only supports wireless facilities that exists
within the right-of-way on the date the applicant is submitted to the Village,
and is located within 300 feet of the new or replacement utility pole or
wireless support structure and is in the same right-of-way within the
jurisdictional boundary of the Village; provided, however, the Village may
designate which intersecting right-of-way within the 300 feet of the proposed
utility pole or wireless support structures shall control the height limitation
for such facility; or
         (b)   Forty-five (45) feet above ground level.
      2.   Height Exceptions/Variances: If an applicant proposes a height for a
new or replacement utility pole or wireless support structure in excess of the
height limitations set forth above, the applicant may request a variance for
the height limitation pursuant to the procedures, terms and conditions set
forth in Section
8-6-21 of Chapter 6, Construction of Utility Facilities in the Public Rights-
of-Way. (Ord. 18-10, 7-24-2018)
8-7-11: COLLOCATION COMPLETION DEADLINE:
Collocation for which a permit is granted shall be completed within one
hundred-eighty (180) days after the issuance of the permit by the Village
unless the Village and the wireless provider agree to extend this time period,
there is a delay caused by make-ready work for a Village utility pole, or there
is a lack of commercial power or backhaul availability at the site, provided
the wireless provider has made a timely request within sixty (60) days after
the issuance of the permit for commercial power or backhaul services, and the
additional time to complete the installation does not exceed three hundred-
sixty (360) days after the issuance of the permit. Otherwise, the permit shall
be declared void unless the Village grants an extension writing to the wireless
provider. (Ord. 18-10, 7-24-2018)
8-7-12: AERIAL FACILITIES:
   (A)   A wireless provider shall comply with the process for make-ready work
under 47 U.S.C. 224, and its implementing regulations for collocation on
Village utility poles that support aerial facilities used to provide
communications services or electric services.
      1.   The Village shall follow a substantially similar process for make-
ready work, except to the extent that the timing requirements are otherwise set
forth in this Chapter.
      2.   The good-faith estimate of the person owning or controlling the
Village utility pole for any make-ready work necessary to enable the pole to
support the requested collocation shall include Village utility pole
replacement, if necessary.
   (B)   If a utility pole does not support aerial facilities used to provide
communication services or electric service, the Village shall provide a good-
faith estimate for any make-ready work necessary to enable the Village utility
pole to support the requested collocation, including pole replacement, if
necessary, within ninety (90) days after the receipt of a complete application.
      1.   Make-ready work, including any Village utility pole replacement,
shall be completed within sixty (60) days of written acceptance of the good-
faith estimate by the applicant at the wireless provider's sole cost and
expense.
      2.   If the Village determines that applicable codes or public safety
regulations require the Village utility pole to be replaced to support the
requested collocation, the Village shall require the wireless provider to
replace the Village utility pole at the wireless provider's sole cost and
expense.
   (C)   The make-ready work shall meet all of the applicable codes and/or
industry standards. Make-ready work shall include all work needed to
accommodate additional public safety communications needs that are identified
in Section
8-7-10(A) of this Chapter and included in an existing or preliminary Village or
public service agency budget for attachment within one (1) year of the
submitted application.
      1.   Fees for make-ready work, including any Village utility pole
replacement, shall not exceed actual costs or the amount charged to
communication service providers for similar work. Said fees shall not include
any consultant's fees or expenses for the Village utility poles that do not
support aerial facilities used to provide communications services or electric
service.
      2.   Make-ready work, including any pole replacement, shall be completed
within sixty (60) days of written acceptance of the good-faith estimate by the
wireless provider, at its sole cost and expense. (Ord. 18-10, 7-24-2018)
8-7-13: ANNUAL RECURRING RATE/RENTAL FEE:
The wireless provider shall pay to the Village an annual recurring rate to
collocate a small wireless facility on a Village utility pole located in a
right-of-way that equals:
   (A)   Two hundred dollars ($200.00) per year; or
   (B)   The actual, direct and reasonable costs related to the wireless
provider's use of space on the Village utility pole, if the actual, direct and
reasonable costs are greater than two hundred dollars ($200.00).
The Village shall have the burden of proving the actual, direct and reasonable
costs. If the Village has not billed the wireless provider actual and direct
costs, the fee of two hundred dollars ($200.00) shall be payable on the first
annual anniversary of the issuance of the permit or notice of intent to
collocate, and on each annual anniversary date thereafter. (Ord. 18-10, 7-24-
2018)
8-7-14: CONSTRUCTION; MAINTENANCE; SAFETY; INSPECTION AND RESTORATION:
   (A)   The wireless provider shall install, maintain, repair and modify its
small wireless facilities in safe condition and good repair and in compliance
with the requirements and conditions of this Chapter and Title 8, Chapter 6.
The wireless provider shall ensure that its employees, agents and contractors
that perform work in connection with its small wireless facilities are
adequately trained and skilled in accordance with all applicable industry and
governmental standards and regulations. Specifically, the wireless provider
shall comply with the following requirements and conditions:
      1.   The wireless provider shall maintain its small wireless facilities
in a manner consistent with accepted industry practice and applicable law.
      2.   All safety practices required by applicable law or accepted industry
practices and standards shall be used during the construction, installation, or
maintenance of small wireless facilities.
      3.   After the completion of any placement or maintenance of a small
wireless facilities in a public right-of-way, the wireless provider shall, at
its own expense, restore the public right-of-way to its original condition
before such work. If the wireless provider within ten (10) days, or such longer
period of time as may be agreed to between the Village and the wireless
provider in writing, following completion of such placement or maintenance, the
Village may perform restoration and charge the costs of the restoration against
the wireless provider.
      4.   The wireless provider shall use and exercise due caution, care and
skill in performing work in the public right-of-way and shall take all
necessary and reasonable steps to safeguard work site areas. The persons
constructing, installing and maintaining small wireless facilities must be a
licensed electrician, certified to work as a lineworker, or successfully
complete an accredited lineworker apprenticeship program.
      5.   A wireless provider shall not place or maintain its small wireless
facilities so as to interfere with, displace, damage or destroy any utilities,
including, but not limited to, sewers, gas or watermains, storm drains, pipes,
cables or conduits of the Village or any other person's facilities lawfully
occupying the Village's public rights-of-way.
      6.   The Village shall have the right to make such inspections of small
wireless facilities placed or maintained in public rights-of-way as it finds
necessary to ensure compliance with this Chapter. (Ord. 18-10, 7-24-2018)
8-7-15: INSURANCE:
   (A)   Required Coverages and Limits: Except for a wireless provider with an
existing franchise to occupy and operate the rights-of-way, during the period
in which the wireless provider's facilities are located within the Village's
improvements or rights-of-way the wireless provider, at its own cost and
expense, shall secure and maintain the following liability insurance policies
insuring the wireless provider as named insured:
      1.   Property insurance for its property's replacement cost against all
risks;
      2.   Worker's compensation insurance with the statutory limits;
      3.   Commercial general liability insurance with respect to its
activities on the Village's improvements or rights-of-way, with limits not less
than:
         (a)   Five Million dollars ($5,000,000) for bodily injury or death to
each person;
         (b)   Five million dollars ($5,000,000) for property damage resulting
from any one accident; and
         (c)   Five million dollars ($5,000,000) for all other types of
liability;
      4.   Automobile liability for owned, non-owned and hired vehicles with a
combined single limit of one million dollars ($1,000,000) for personal injury
and property damage for each accident; and
      5.   Employer's liability insurance with limits of not less than one
million dollars ($1,000,000) per employee and per accident.
      If the wireless provider is not providing such insurance to protect the
contractors and subcontractors performing the work, then such contractors and
subcontractors shall comply with this Section.
   (B)   Copies Required: The wireless provider shall name the Village, and
it's elected and appointed officers, officials, agents and employees as
additional insureds on the commercial general liability policy and provide
certification and documentation of inclusion of the Village in a commercial
general liability policy prior to the collocation of any small wireless
facility.
   (C)   Maintenance and Renewal of Required Coverages: The insurance policies
required by this Section shall contain the following endorsement:
   It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be canceled nor
the intention not to renew be stated until ten (10) days after receipt by the
Village, by registered mail or certified mail, return receipt requested, of a
written notice addressed to the Village's Superintendent of Public Works of
such intent to cancel or not to renew.
   Within seven (7) days after receipt by the Village of said notice, and in no
event later than three (3) days prior to said cancellation, the wireless
provider shall obtain and furnish to the Village evidence of replacement
insurance policies meeting the requirements of this Section.
   (D)   Self-Insurance: The wireless provider may self-insure all or a portion
of the insurance coverage and limit requirements required by subsection (A) of
this Section. A wireless provider that self-insures is not required, to the
extent of the self-insurance, to comply with the requirement for the naming of
additional insureds under this Section. A wireless provider that elects to
self-insure shall provide to the Village evidence sufficient to demonstrate its
financial ability to self-insure the insurance coverage and limits required by
the Village.
   (E)   Effect of Insurance and Self-Insurance on Wireless Provider's
Liability: The legal liability of the wireless provider to the Village and any
person for any of the matters that are the subject of the insurance policies or
self-insurance required by this Section shall not be limited by such insurance
policies or self-insurance or by the recovery of any amounts thereunder. (Ord.
18-10, 7-24-2018)
8-7-16: INDEMNIFICATION:
A wireless provider shall indemnity and hold the Village, and its elected and
appointed officials and officers, employees, agents and representatives
harmless against any and all liability or loss from personal injury or property
damage resulting from or arising out of, in whole or in part, the use or
occupancy of the Village improvements or rights-of-way associated with such
improvements by the wireless provider or its employees, agents or contractors
arising out of the rights and privileges granted under this Chapter or the
Small Wireless Facilities Deployment Act. The wireless provider's indemnity
obligations hereunder shall not apply against any liabilities and losses as may
be due to or caused by the soles negligence of the Village, its employees or
agents. The wireless provider shall further waive any claims that it may have
against the Village with respect to consequential, incidental, or special
damages, however caused, based on the theory of liability. (Ord. 18-10, 7-24-
2018)
8-7-17: SECURITY:
The wireless provider shall comply with the Security provisions set forth in
Section
8-5-10, Security of the Village Code. (Ord. 18-10, 7-24-2018)
8-7-18: CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP OR OWNER'S IDENTITY OR LEGAL STATUS:
   (A)   Notification of Change: A wireless provider shall notify the Village
not less than thirty (30) days prior to the transfer of ownership of any small
wireless facility in the right-of-way or change in identity of the wireless
provider. The new owner of the wireless provider or the small wireless facility
shall have all the obligations and privileges enjoyed by the former owner under
the permit, if any, and all applicable laws, ordinances, rules and regulations,
including this Chapter with respect to the work and facilities in the right-of-
way.
   (B)   Amended Permit: A new owner shall request that any current permit be
amended to show current ownership. If the new owner fails to have a new or
amended permit issued in its name, the new owner shall be presumed to have
accepted, and agreed to be bound by the terms and conditions of the permit and
any applicable agreement between the Village and the prior owner if the new
owner uses the small wireless facility or allows it to remain on the Village's
right-of-way.
   (D)   Insurance and Bonding: All required insurance, coverage or bonding
must be changed to reflect the name of the new owner upon transfer. (Ord. 18-
10, 7-24-2018)
8-7-19: REMOVAL, RELOCATION OR ABANDONMENT:
   (A)   Removal by Village: Under this Chapter, the Village is not required to
install or maintain any specific utility pole or to continue to install or
maintain any specific utility pole in any location if the Village determines to
eliminate above-ground utility poles of a particular type generally, such as
electric utility poles, in all or a significant portion of its geographic
jurisdiction.
   If the Village determines to eliminate above-ground Village utility poles of
a particular type generally, and collocated small wireless facilities are in
place, the Village shall either: (i) continue to maintain the utility pole or
install and maintain a reasonable alternative utility pole or wireless support
structure for the collocation of the small wireless facility; or (ii) offer to
sell the utility pole to the wireless provider at a reasonable cost or allow
the wireless provider to install its own utility pole so it can maintain
service form that location.
   (B)   Emergency Removal or Relocation: The Village retains the right and
privilege to cut or move any small wireless facilities within the rights-of-way
of the Village, as the Village may determine to be necessary, appropriate or
useful in response to any public health or safety emergency. If the
circumstances permit, the Village shall attempt to notify the wireless provider
prior to cutting or removing the facility and shall notify the wireless
provider after cutting or removing the facility.
   (C)   Abandonment: A small wireless facility that is not operated for a
continuous period of twelve (12) months shall be considered abandoned. The
owner of the facility must remove the small wireless facility within ninety
(90) days after the date of the written notice from the Village notifying the
wireless provider of the abandonment. The notice shall be sent by certified or
registered mail, return receipt requested, by the Village to the owner at the
last known address of the owner. If the small wireless facility is not removed
within ninety (90) days of such notice, the Village has the right to remove or
cause the removal of the facility pursuant to the terms of its pole attachment
agreement for Village utility poles or through whatever actions are provided
for abatement of nuisances or by other law for removal and cost recovery. The
Village shall charge the cost of the removal against the wireless provider or
any successor in interest to the wireless provider. (Ord. 18-10, 7-24-2018)
8-7-20: EXCEPTIONS TO APPLICABILITY OF THIS CHAPTER:
Nothing in this Chapter authorizes a person to collocate small wireless
facilities on:
   (A)   Property owned by a private party or property owned or controlled by
the Village or another unit of local government that is not located within
public rights-of-way, or a privately owned utility pole or wireless support
structure without the consent of the property owner;
   (B)   Property owned, leased, or controlled by a park district, forest
preserve district, or conservation district for public park, recreation, or
conservation purposes without the consent of the affected district, excluding
the placement of facilities on rights-of-way located in an affected district
that are under the jurisdiction and control of a different unit of local
government as provided by the Illinois Highway Code; or
   (C)   Property owned by a rail carrier registered under Section 18c-7201 of
the Illinois Vehicle Code, Metra Commuter Rail or any other public commuter
rail service, or an electric utility as defined in Section 16-102 of the Public
Utilities Act, without the consent of the rail carrier, public commuter rail
service, or electric utility, The provisions of this Chapter do not apply to an
electric or gas public utility or such utility's wireless facilities if the
facilities are being used, developed and maintained consistent with the
provisions of subsection (i) of Section 16-108.5 of the Public Utilities Act.
   For the purposes of this subsection, public utility has the meaning given to
that term in Section 3-105 of the Public Utilities Act. Nothing in this
Ordinance shall be construed to relieve a person from any requirement: (i) to
obtain a franchise or a State-issued authorization to offer cable service or
video service; or (ii) to obtain any required permission to install, place,
maintain, or operate communications facilities, other than small wireless
facilities subject to this Chapter. (Ord. 18-10, 7-24-2018)
8-7-21: PENALTIES:
Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with
any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be subject to fine in accordance
with the penalty provisions of the Village Code. (Ord. 18-10, 7-24-2018)
8-7-22: ENFORCEMENT:
Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed as limiting any additional or
further remedies that the Village may have for enforcement of this Chapter.
(Ord. 18-10, 7-24-2018)
8-7-23: DISPUTE RESOLUTION:
The Circuit Court of Cook County, Illinois shall have exclusive jurisdiction to
resolve all disputes arising under the Small Wireless Facilities Deployment
Act. Pending resolution of a dispute concerning rates for collocation of small
wireless facilities on Village utility poles within the right-of-way, the
Village shall allow the collocating wireless provider to collocate on its poles
at annual rates of no more than $200.00 per year per Village utility pole, with
rates to be determined upon final resolution of the dispute. (Ord. 18-10, 7-24-
2018)
8-7-24: SEVERABILITY:
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this Chapter
is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and
independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the
remaining portions hereof. (Ord. 18-10, 7-24-2018)
TITLE 9
TRAFFIC
CHAPTER 1
TRAFFIC CODE
SECTION:
9-1-1: Traffic Code Adopted
9-1-2: Amendments (Rep. by Ord. 11-11, 8-23-2011)
9-1-3: Citations ("P" Tickets) In Certain Traffic Violation Cases
9-1-1: TRAFFIC CODE ADOPTED:
There is hereby adopted by reference the Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 Illinois
Compiled Statutes, as amended from time to time, the same being a public record
of the State. (Ord. 11-11, 8-23-2011)
9-1-2: AMENDMENTS:
(Rep. by Ord. 11-11, 8-23-2011)
9-1-3: CITATIONS ("P" TICKETS) IN CERTAIN TRAFFIC VIOLATION CASES:
   (A)   Issuance Of “P” Tickets: Whenever a police officer is authorized to
arrest a person without a warrant because of a violation of any section or
provision of this Code or Illinois Vehicle Code listed in subsection (B) of
this section, said police officer, may, in lieu of the filing of a complaint in
court, issue a citation (“P” ticket) to the alleged violator. Such citation, on
a form prescribed by the Chief of Police, shall: (Ord. 17-07, 4-11-2017)
      1.   Advise said person that he has violated a specified ordinance;
      2.   Request said person to make payment of a specified amount applicable
to said alleged violation, as set forth in subsection (B) of this section, as
settlement of said violation claim;
      3.   Inform said person that upon failure to settle said claim as
provided herein, a complaint will be filed in the Circuit Court of Cook County
charging him with such violation. (Ord. 10-03, 2-23-2010)
   (B)   Applicable Sections: The procedure for citations (“P” tickets) set
forth herein shall be applicable with respect to the violations of the
following sections:
Violations Settlement Amount
Violations                                                    Settlement Amount
1.    Parking regulations - section                        $75.00
9-2-1 et seq., of this Code
2.    Vehicle license requirements - section               75.00
3-4-1 et seq., of this Code
3.    Illinois Vehicle Code (IVC) sections as follows:      
IVC Section           Description                             Settlement Amount
5/3-413(a,b,f)        Improper display of registration plates $75.00
                      or stickers
5/3-701               No valid registration plates or         75.00
                      stickers
5/6-116               Failure to notify Secretary of State of 75.00
                      address/change
5/11-1406             Obstruction to driver’s view          75.00
5/11-1407             Improper opening of door into traffic   75.00
5/11-1502             Disobey traffic control signal          75.00
                      (bicycle)
5/12-101              Unsafe motor vehicle                    75.00
5/12-201(a)           Driving without lighted lamp            75.00
                      (motorcycle)
5/12-201(b)           Driving without lights when required    75.00
5/12-201(b)           No taillights                           75.00
5/12-201(b)           No red taillight                        75.00
5/12-201(b)           Only one red taillight                  75.00
5/12-201(c)           No rear registration light              75.00
5/12-205.1            No lights when required (specific       75.00
                      vehicle)
5/12-208              No signal lamp or device                75.00
5/12-211              Improper lighting                       75.00
5/12-212              Illegal lights (red or flashing)        75.00
5/12-215              Illegal use of oscillating, rotating or 75.00
                      flashing lights
5/12-301              Defective or no brakes                  75.00
5/12-401              Use of illegal tires (studs)            75.00
5/12-405(c)           Use of unsafe tire                      75.00
5/12-501              No safety glass                         75.00
5/12-502              Mirrors                                 75.00
5/12-503(a,a-5,b,c,e) Obstruction of driver’s view          250.00
5/12-503(d)           No windshield wiper or cleaning device  75.00
5/12-601              Defective horn/unlawful use of siren    75.00
5/12-602              Muffler (loud; excessive noise; no      75.00
                      muffler)
5/12-603.1            Seat belt not worn, driver/             75.00
                      passenger
5/12-606              Tow trucks (identification)             75.00
5/12-607              Vehicle suspension system               75.00
5/12-608              Vehicle bumpers                         75.00
5/12-610              Wearing headset receiver while driving  75.00
5/12-702(a)           No flags, flares, warning devices       75.00
                      carried
5/12-702(c)           No flags, flares, warning devices       75.00
                      displayed
5/12-703              Dripping oil on roadway                 75.00
5/12-710              Inadequate or no splashguards           75.00
5/12-712              Construction equipment to display       75.00
                      company name
                      Commercial trucks used by construction
5/12-713              contractors or Subcontractors to        75.00
                      display company name
 
   (C)   Settlement:
      1.   Pursuant to said citation, the person accused of the violation may
settle and compromise the violation claim by paying to the village the
applicable settlement amount set forth in subsection (B) of this section within
ten (10) days of the date said alleged offense was committed.
      2.   Such settlement shall be made in accordance with the instruction set
forth on the citation, at the office of the village clerk, who shall issue a
receipt for the money so received and promptly remit said amount to the village
treasurer to be credited to the proper municipal fund.
   (D)   Second Notice; Penalty: In the event that the person to whom said
citation is issued fails to settle and pay the violation within ten (10) days,
a second notice may be mailed to him. When the second notice has been mailed,
the violation may then be settled by paying double the amount of the initial
settlement amount within ten (10) days of the date the second notice is mailed.
   (E)   Final Notice; Penalty: In the event the person to whom the citation is
issued fails to settle and pay the violation claim within the time specified in
the second notice, a final notice may be mailed to him. When the final notice
has been mailed, the violation may then be settled by paying double the amount
of the second notice within ten (10) days of the date the final notice is
mailed.
   (F)   Issuance Of Complaint; Collection:
      1.   In the event the person to whom the citation is issued fails to
settle and pay the violation claim as provided in subsection (C), (D), or (E)
of this section, the violation claim may be forwarded to a collection agency
for collection on behalf of the village. When the violation claim has been
forwarded to a collection agency, the violation may then be settled by paying
one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) within the time specified by such agency.
      2.   In the event the person to whom the citation is issued fails to
settle and pay the violation claim as provided in subsection (C), (D), (E), or
(F)1 of this section, a notice to appear or complaint shall be served upon the
alleged violator and filed in the circuit court of Cook County for prosecution.
The fine and costs shall be in such amounts as may be determined by the circuit
court, but not to exceed the sum of six hundred dollars ($600.00) for any one
violation; provided that the offense(s) may be settled and compromised for the
amount specified in a notice to appear at least three (3) working days before
the court date. Such amount shall be three (3) times, i.e., four hundred fifty
dollars ($450.00) the settlement amount set forth in subsection (E) of this
section.
   (G)   Correction Of Violation: Payment of any amount as settlement herein
will not excuse any party from securing a required license, and paying the fee
therefor, or from correcting the violation described in the citation. Proof
that the violation has been corrected shall be presented to the village clerk.
   (H)   Parking Violation: The fact that an automobile or motor vehicle which
is illegally operated or parked is registered with the secretary of state in
the name of an alleged violator, or that a vehicle sticker issued by a
municipality has been issued in the name of the alleged violator, shall
constitute proof that the alleged violator was in control of or was the
operator of the automobile or motor vehicle at the time of the alleged
violation.
(Ord. 10-03, 2-23-2010; amd. Ord. 15-09, 7-28-2015; Ord. 2022-02, 1-11-2022;
Ord. 2022-19, 8-23-2022; Ord. 25-19, 8-26-2025)
CHAPTER 2
PARKING REGULATIONS 1
SECTION:
9-2-1: Parking Regulations On Certain Streets
9-2-2: Parking Of Commercial Vehicles On Residential Streets Prohibited During
Certain Hours
9-2-3: Stopping, Standing Or Parking Prohibited In Specified Places
9-2-4: No Parking; Snow Removal
9-2-5: Unauthorized Use Of Parking Spaces Reserved For Handicapped Persons
9-2-6: Designating Residents Only Parking On Certain Streets
9-2-7: Parking Regulations In The Municipal Lot
9-2-8: Overnight Parking On Certain Streets In The Village Prohibited
9-2-9: Removal Of Cars Illegally Parked
9-2-10: Signs To Be Erected
9-2-11: Abandoned, Unattended Vehicles
9-2-12: Violation; Towing And Storage Fees
 
Notes
1 1. For violation settlement see subsection
  9-1-3(A) of this title.
9-2-1: PARKING REGULATIONS ON CERTAIN STREETS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to stop, stand or park a motor vehicle at
any time on the following designated streets, or portions thereof, within the
corporate limits of the village:
On the east side of Harlem Avenue within the corporate limits of the village.
On the west side of Home Avenue from the entrance of the municipal parking lot
on the north to the north right-of-way line of 46th Street on the south.
On the east side of Oak Park Avenue between 46th Street on the south and 45th
Street on the north.
On the east side of the 4500 block of Clinton Avenue from the north right-of-
way line of 46th Street on the south to a point twenty feet (20') north of the
north right-of-way line of 46th Street.
On the joint fee strip located approximately 4700 South, between Home Avenue
and Harlem Avenue, except where specifically authorized by the owners thereof.
Any person found in violation of the terms of this paragraph shall be fined not
less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00).
On the east side of the 4500 block of Home Avenue from the north right-of-way
line of 46th Street on the south to a point forty feet (40') north of the north
right-of-way line of 46th Street.
On the east side of the 4500 block of Home Avenue from the entrance to the
driveway of the property commonly known as 4507 S. Home on the north to the
entrance to the driveway of the property commonly known as 4509 S. Home on the
south.
On the east side of the 4500 block of Wenonah Avenue from the north right-of-
way line of 46th Street on the south to the north entrance of the municipal
parking lot on the north.
On the west side of the 4600 block of Clinton from the north right-of-way line
of the joint fee strip on the south to a point one hundred feet (100') north of
the north right-of-way line of the joint fee strip.
On the west side of the 4600 block of Clinton from the south right of way of
46th Street on the north to a point twenty feet (20') south of the south right-
of-way line of 46th Street.
On the west side of the 4600 block of Clinton from a point twenty feet (20')
south of the south right-of-way line of 46th Street on the north to a point one
hundred feet (100') north of the north right-of-way line of the joint fee strip
on the south, between the hours of nine thirty o'clock (9:30) P.M. and eight
o'clock (8:00) A.M.
On the east side of the 4600 block of Wenonah Avenue from the entrance to the
driveway of the property commonly know as the park district garage on the south
to the entrance to the driveway of the property commonly known as 4619 S.
Wenonah on the north.
On the west side of the 4600 block of Wenonah Avenue from the north right-of-
way line of the joint fee strip on the south to the entrance to the driveway of
the property commonly known as 4626 S. Wenonah on the north.
On the south side of 45th Street between Harlem Avenue and Maple Avenue.
On both sides of 47th Street between Central Avenue on the west and Laramie
Avenue on the east.
On Central Avenue from 47th Street to approximately two hundred feet (200')
south. (Ord. 73-307, 10-9-1973; amd. Ord. 77-16, 11-1-1977; Ord. 78-3, 2-21-
1978; Ord. 80-7, 7-15-1980; Ord. 81-12, 10-20-1981; Ord. 94-3, 4-12-1994; Ord.
94-10, 6-14-1994; Ord. 94-14, 8-23-1994)
9-2-2: PARKING OF COMMERCIAL VEHICLES ON RESIDENTIAL STREETS PROHIBITED DURING
CERTAIN HOURS:
It shall be unlawful to stop, stand or park any "commercial vehicle" (as
defined in paragraph 5/1-114 of the Illinois vehicle code) weighing in excess
of eight thousand (8,000) pounds (class D or greater) on any street within the
residential districts of the village, except when actually engaged in the
loading or unloading of goods or merchandise. (Ord. 89-9, 6-27-1989)
9-2-3: STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING PROHIBITED IN SPECIFIED PLACES:
Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or in compliance
with law or directions of a police officer or official traffic-control device,
no person shall:
   (A)   Stop, Stand Or Park: Stop, stand or park a vehicle:
      1.   On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or
curb of a street;
      2.   On a sidewalk, or blocking more than two feet (2') of a sidewalk
between the hours of 8:00 a.m. - 10:00 p.m.;
      3.   Within an intersection;
      4.   On a crosswalk;
      5.   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when
stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic;
      6.   Upon any bridge or other elevated structure;
      7.   At any place where official signs prohibit stopping.
      8.   In a residential district, on any unpaved surface, either on public
property or private property in front or side yards as defined in Section 10-2-
2 of the Village Code.
   (B)   Pick Up Or Discharge Passengers: Stand or park a vehicle, whether
occupied or not, except momentarily to pick up or discharge passengers:
      1.   In front of a public or private driveway;
      2.   Within fifteen feet (15') of a fire hydrant;
      3.   Within twenty feet (20') of a crosswalk at an intersection;
      4.   Within thirty feet (30') upon the approach to any flashing signal
stop sign, yield sign, or traffic-control signal located at the side of a
roadway;
      5.   Within twenty feet (20') of the driveway entrance to any fire
station and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station
within seventy five feet (75') of such entrance (when properly signposted);
      6.   At any place where official signs prohibit standing.
   (C)   Loading Or Unloading: Park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except
temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or
unloading merchandise or passengers:
      1.   Within fifty feet (50') of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing;
      2.   At any place where official signs prohibit parking.
   (D)   Additional Parking Regulations:
      1.   Except as otherwise provided in this section, every vehicle stopped
or parked upon a two-way roadway shall be so stopped or parked with the right-
hand wheels parallel to and within twelve inches (12") of the right-hand curb
or as close as practicable to the right edge of the right-hand shoulder.
      2.   Except when otherwise provided by local ordinance, every vehicle
stopped or parked upon a one-way roadway shall be so stopped or parked parallel
to the curb or edge of the roadway, in the direction of authorized traffic
movement, with its right-hand wheels within twelve inches (12") of the right-
hand curb or as close as practicable to the right edge of the right-hand
shoulder, or with its left-hand wheels within twelve inches (12") of the left-
hand curb or as close as practicable to the left edge of the left-hand
shoulder.
      3.   Local authorities may permit angle parking on any roadway, except
that angle parking shall not be permitted on any federal-aid or state highway
unless the department has determined that the roadway is of sufficient width to
permit angle parking without interfering with the free movement of traffic.
      4.   The department with respect to highways under its jurisdiction may
place signs prohibiting, limiting, or restricting the stopping, standing or
parking of vehicles on any highway where in its opinion such stopping, standing
or parking is dangerous to those using the highway or where the stopping,
standing or parking of vehicles would unduly interfere with the free movement
of traffic thereon. No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle in
violation of the restrictions indicated by such devices.
   (E)   Recreational Vehicle And Certain Commercial Vehicle Parking
Regulations: No commercial vehicle (as defined in Section 9-2-2 of this Code)
and no recreational vehicle, including camping, trailer, motor home, mini motor
home, travel trailer, truck camper, van camper or boats may be parked on either
a paved or unpaved surface on any Village parkway in a residential zoning
district.
(Ord. 73-307, 10-9-1973; amd. Ord. 95-10, 6-13-1995; Ord. 98-7, 5-12-1998; Ord.
19-05, 2-12-2019; Ord. 23-10, 9-12-2023; Ord. 24-02, 3-26-2024; Ord. 25-16, 8-
12-2025)
9-2-4: NO PARKING; SNOW REMOVAL:
   It shall be unlawful to park any motor vehicle on any public street in the
village at any time after a snowfall of two inches (2") or more has occurred,
until such time as village snow removal operations have been completed on such
public street.
(Ord. 79-25, 11-6-1979)
9-2-5: UNAUTHORIZED USE OF PARKING SPACES RESERVED FOR HANDICAPPED PERSONS:
   (A)   It is unlawful to park any motor vehicle which is not bearing
registration plates or decals issued to a "handicapped person" as defined by
section 5/1-159.1, pursuant to section 5/3-616 or 5/11-1301.2, or to a disabled
veteran pursuant to section 5/3-609 of the Illinois motor vehicle code, as
evidence that the vehicle is operated by or for a handicapped person or
disabled veteran in any parking place, including any private or public off-
street parking facility specifically reserved by the posting of an official
sign as designated by the motor vehicle code for motor vehicles bearing such
registration plates.
   (B)   Every day a violation of this section shall occur shall be deemed a
separate offense. If the official sign placed upon the location shall so
indicate, any vehicle not permitted to be parked at that location may be towed
without any pre-tow hearing. Any person found guilty of violating the
provisions of this section shall be fined one hundred dollars ($100.00) in
addition to any costs or charges connected with the removal or storage of that
vehicle. (Ord. 00-10, 9-12-2000)
9-2-6: DESIGNATING RESIDENTS ONLY PARKING ON CERTAIN STREETS:
It shall be unlawful for any person other than a village resident to stop,
stand or park a motor vehicle at any time on the following designated streets
or portions thereof, within the corporate limits of the village:
On the east side of the 4500 block of Clinton Avenue except from the north
right- of-way line of 46th Street on the south to a point twenty feet (20')
north of the north right-of-way line of 46th Street.
On the west side of the 4500 block of Clinton Avenue.
On the east side of the 4500 block of Home Avenue except the following:
From the entrance to the driveway of the property commonly known as 4507 S.
Home on the north to the entrance of the driveway of the property commonly
known as 4513 S. Home on the south.
From the north right-of-way line of 46th Street on the south to a point forty
feet (40') north of the north right-of-way line of 46th Street.
On the east side of the 4600 block of Clinton Avenue.
On the east side of the 4600 block of Wenonah Avenue except from the entrance
to the driveway of the property commonly known as the park district garage on
the south to the entrance to the driveway of the property commonly known as
4619 S. Wenonah on the north.
On the west side of the 4600 block of Wenonah Avenue except from the north
right-of-way line of the joint fee strip on the south to the entrance to the
driveway of the property commonly known as 4626 S. Wenonah on the north.
On the west side of the 4600 block of Clinton from a point twenty feet (20')
south of the south right-of-way line of 46th Street on the north to a point one
hundred feet (100') north of the north right-of-way line of the joint fee strip
on the south between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and nine thirty
o'clock (9:30) P.M. (Ord. 94-3, 4-12-1994; amd. Ord. 94-10, 6-14-1994; Ord. 23-
01, 2-14-2023)
9-2-7: PARKING REGULATIONS IN THE MUNICIPAL LOT:
It shall be unlawful for any person other than a person conducting Village
business in the Municipal complex to stop, stand or park a motor vehicle at any
time in the following designated parking spaces within the Municipal parking
lot of the Village:
On the north side of the Municipal building from a point thirteen feet (13')
west of the west right-of-way line of Home Avenue on the east to a point forty
seven feet (47') west of the west right-of-way line of Home Avenue on the west.
From a point forty five feet (45') south of the northern boundary of the
Municipal complex property on the north to a point sixty four feet (64') south
of the northern boundary of the Municipal complex on the south. (Ord. 94-10, 6-
14-1994)
9-2-8: OVERNIGHT PARKING ON CERTAIN STREETS IN THE VILLAGE PROHIBITED:
   (A)   Definition: For purposes of this section, the term "residential
street" shall mean those streets identified in subsection
9-3-4(B) of this title. (Ord. 98-6, 5-12-1998, eff. retroactive to 1-1-1998)
   (B)   Overnight Parking Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to
park any motor vehicle on any residential street in the Village between the
hours of one o'clock (1:00) A.M. and five o'clock (5:00) A.M., unless that
person has received a permit to do so by the Office of the Chief of Police.
   (C)   Short-Term And Long-Term Parking Permits: The Chief of Police is
hereby authorized and directed to establish regulations pursuant to which the
Chief of Police will issue short-term and long-term parking permits. Said
permits shall be issued in accordance with the following guidelines: 1) short-
term permits shall be limited to circumstances where the owner is experiencing
construction on or about his property which limits off-street parking; where a
vehicle is temporarily disabled; or where the owner has overnight or late night
guests and there are no off-street parking spaces available for such guests; 2)
long-term permits shall be issued only to parties who are residents of property
on a residential street as of January 1, 1998. Said permit shall be issued only
where, due to the number of vehicles owned and the configuration of the house
and property, the resident is unable to park all of his or her vehicles on off-
street spaces. Long-term permits will be reviewed on an annual basis by the
Chief of Police. If conditions change and said permit is no longer needed, it
will be deleted.
   (D)   Appeal: A resident whose application for permit is denied by the Chief
of Police may appeal that denial to the President and Board of Trustees. Such
appeal shall be in writing and shall explain the circumstances which the
resident believes qualifies the resident for a permit. The decision of the
President and Board of Trustees shall be final. (Ord. 17-07, 4-11-2017)
9-2-9: REMOVAL OF CARS ILLEGALLY PARKED:
The Police Department is hereby authorized to remove and tow away, or have
towed away by a commercial towing service, any car or other vehicle illegally
parked in any place where such parked vehicle creates or constitutes a traffic
hazard, blocks the use of a fire hydrant or obstructs or may obstruct the
movement of any emergency vehicle. (Ord. 00-10, 9-12-2000)
9-2-10: SIGNS TO BE ERECTED:
Official signs shall be posted in all areas where parking is limited or
prohibited, indicating such limitations or prohibitions and indicating such
areas as "tow zones", where appropriate. (Ord. 00-10, 9-12-2000)
9-2-11: ABANDONED, UNATTENDED VEHICLES:
The procedure to be followed by the Police Department in regard to the towing
of abandoned vehicles, as that term is defined in section
9-4-1 of this title, shall be in accordance with chapter 4, "Towing
Provisions", of this title. (Ord. 00-10, 9-12-2000)
9-2-12: VIOLATION; TOWING AND STORAGE FEES:
   (A)   Any vehicle parked in violation of any provision of section
9-2-1,
9-2-2,
9-2-3,
9-2-4,
9-2-5,
9-2-6,
9-2-7,
9-2-8 or
9-2-9 of this chapter shall be subject to an immediate tow as provided in
subsection
9-4-3(B) of this title.
   (B)   Any vehicle parked in violation of any provision of section
7-7-2 of this Code or section
9-2-11 of this chapter shall be towed, with prior notice, as provided in
subsection
9-4-3(C) of this title.
   (C)   Any towing or storage fees imposed pursuant to the Forest View Traffic
Code shall be separate from and in addition to any fine or penalty imposed for
the parking violation. (Ord. 00-10, 9-12-2000)
CHAPTER 3
TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
SECTION:
9-3-1: Speed Restrictions
9-3-2: Stop Streets
9-3-3: Reserved
9-3-4: Limited Load Streets
9-3-5: Reserved
9-3-6: Driving Of Certain Motorized Vehicles Prohibited
9-3-7: Electronic Communication Device
9-3-1: SPEED RESTRICTIONS:
   (A)   The speed limit for motor vehicles in the Village shall be twenty (20)
miles per hour with the exception of Harlem Avenue.
   (B)   Speeding While Passing Schools. For the purpose of this Section,
"school" means the following entities:
      1.   A public or private primary or secondary school.
      2.   A primary or secondary school operated by a religious institution.
      3.   A public, private, or religious nursery school.
      "School Zone" means eastbound 45th Street between Harlem Avenue on the
west and Oak Park Avenue on the east.
      No person shall drive a motor vehicle at a speed in excess of twenty (20)
miles per hour in a School Zone on a school day. For purposes of this Section,
the school day begins at six thirty (6:30) a.m. and concludes at four o’clock
(4:00) p.m.
   (C)   Speeding Near a Public Park. Any person who drives a motor vehicle at
a speed in excess of twenty (20) miles per hour on 46th Street, between Grove
on the east and Maple on the west is guilty of speeding in the vicinity of a
public park.
   (D)   Aggravated Speeding In the Vicinity of a Public Park. Any person who
drives a motor vehicle at a speed in excess of 26 miles per hour on 46th Street
between Grove on the east and Maple on the west is guilty of aggravated
speeding in the vicinity of a public park.
   (E)   Penalties. A violation of Subsection A of this Ordinance is punishable
by a minimum fine of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). A violation of
Subsection B or C of this section is punishable by a minimum fine of two
hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). A violation of Subsection D of this section is
punishable by a minimum fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00). (Ord. 62-68, 4-
24-1962; amd. Ord. 06-16, 7-11-2006; Ord. 23-14, 11-14-2023)
9-3-2: STOP STREETS:
The chief of police is hereby directed to erect appropriate signs as indicated
herein to effectuate the purposes of this section. The following described
intersections are hereby designated as stop intersections:
Clinton Avenue northbound to stop for 45th Street.
Grove Avenue northbound to stop for 45th Street.
Home Avenue and 45th Street.
Home Avenue and 46th Street.
Kenilworth Avenue northbound to stop for 45th Street.
Maple Avenue northbound to stop for 45th Street.
Oak Park Avenue northbound to stop for 45th Street.
Wenonah Avenue to stop for 45th Street, going north.
Wisconsin Avenue northbound to stop for 45th Street.
45th Street to stop for Wenonah Avenue, going east.
46th Street to stop for Clinton Avenue, east and westbound.
46th Street and Home Avenue in all directions, within a park zone street.
46th Street to stop for Kenilworth Avenue, east and westbound.
46th Street to stop for Maple Avenue, east and westbound.
46th Street and Oak Park Avenue.
46th Street to stop for Wenonah Avenue, east and westbound. (Ord. 59-18A, 7-28-
1959; amd. Ord. 69-195, 7-8-1969; Ord. 69-209, 12-23-1969; Ord. 77-17, 11-1-
1977; Ord. 85-8, 7-9-1985; Ord. 86-9, 7-8-1986; Ord. 06-16, 7-11-2006; Ord. 18-
13, 10-23-2018; Ord. 20-06, 7-28-2020)
9-3-3: RESERVED:  
(Reserved by Ord. 23-17.)
9-3-4: LIMITED LOAD STREETS:
   (A)   Whenever the weight of vehicles permitted on the street is limited by
this section or by any amendment hereto and signs indicating such limitations
are posted, it shall be unlawful to operate a vehicle in excess of such weight
on such street, except for the purpose of making delivery or picking up a load,
in which case such vehicle may be driven on such street for not more than the
minimum distance necessary for the purpose.
   (B)   The following streets located within the village are hereby declared
to be limited load streets and vehicles of the weight in excess of ten thousand
(10,000) pounds are hereby prohibited from using such streets except as
provided in subsection (A) of this section:
All of Clinton Avenue.
All of Grove Avenue.
All of Home Avenue.
All of Kenilworth Avenue.
All of Maple Avenue.
All of Oak Park Avenue.
All of Wenonah Avenue.
All of Wisconsin Avenue.
45th Street from Harlem Avenue to Oak Park Avenue.
46th Street from Harlem Avenue to Oak Park Avenue.
   (C)   Any person violating any provision of this section shall be fined not
less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than the maximum penalty
provided in section
1-4-1 of this code for each offense. (Ord. 79-7, 4-17-1979; amd. Ord. 95-23,
10-10-1995)
9-3-5: RESERVED:  
(Reserved by Ord. 23-17.)
9-3-6: DRIVING OF CERTAIN MOTORIZED VEHICLES PROHIBITED:
   (A)   No person shall use, operate, or be in control of any all-terrain
vehicle, go-kart, minibike, motorized skateboard or scooter, or off road
motorcycle, not capable of being licensed under the Illinois vehicle code, on
any public street, public sidewalk, or on any private property without the
express consent of the owner.
   (B)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to any of the above
referenced devices when participating in a parade authorized by the village, or
when operated by a law enforcement officer in the performance of official
duties. (Ord. 03-09, 7-22-2003)
9-3-7: ELECTRONIC COMMUNICATION DEVICE:
   (A)   Definition: As used in this section, "electronic communication device"
shall mean an electronic device, including, but not limited to, a handheld
wireless telephone, handheld personal digital assistant, or a portable or
mobile computer, but does not include a global positioning system or navigation
system or a device that is physically or electronically integrated into the
motor vehicle.
   (B)   Violation:
      1.   A person may not operate a motor vehicle on a roadway within the
corporate boundaries of the village while using an electronic communication
device.
      2.   A person commits aggravated use of an electronic communication
device when he/she violates subsection (B)1 of this section and in committing
the violation he/she was involved in a motor vehicle accident that results in
great bodily harm, permanent disability, disfigurement, or death to another and
the violation was a proximate cause of the injury or death.
   (C)   Exceptions: This section does not apply to the following:
      1.   A law enforcement officer or operator of an emergency vehicle while
performing his or her official duties;
      2.   A driver using an electronic communication device for the sole
purpose of reporting an emergency situation and continued communication with
emergency personnel during the emergency situation;
      3.   A driver using an electronic communication device in handsfree or
voice operated mode, which may include the use of a headset;
      4.   A driver of a commercial motor vehicle reading a message displayed
on a permanently installed device designed for a commercial motor vehicle with
a screen that does not exceed ten inches tall by ten inches wide (10" x 10") in
size;
      5.   A driver using an electronic communication device while parked on
the shoulder of a roadway;
      6.   A driver using an electronic communication device when the vehicle
is stopped due to normal traffic being obstructed and the driver has the motor
vehicle transmission in neutral or park;
      7.   A driver using two-way or citizens band radio services;
      8.   A driver using two-way mobile radio transmitters or receivers for
the licensees of the federal communication commission in the amateur radio
service;
      9.   A driver using an electronic communication device by pressing a
single button to initiate or terminate a voice communication; or
      10.   A driver using an electronic communication device capable of
performing multiple functions, other than a handheld wireless telephone or
handheld personal digital assistant (for example, a fleet management system,
dispatching device, citizens band radio, or music player) for a purpose that is
not otherwise prohibited by this section.
   (D)   Penalties:
      1.   A person who violates this section shall be fined a maximum of
seventy five dollars ($75.00) for a first offense; one hundred dollars
($100.00) for a second offense; one hundred twenty five dollars ($125.00) for a
third offense; and one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for a fourth or
subsequent offense. A second or subsequent violation of this section is an
offense against traffic regulations governing the movement of vehicles.
      2.   A person convicted of violating subsection (B)2 of this section,
commits a class A misdemeanor if the violation resulted in great bodily harm,
permanent disability, or disfigurement to another. A person convicted of
violating subsection (B)2 of this section commits a class 4 felony if the
violation results in the death of another person. (Ord. 14-09, 10-28-2014)
CHAPTER 4
TOWING PROVISIONS
SECTION:
9-4-1: Definitions
9-4-2: Abandoned, Lost, Stolen Or Unclaimed Vehicles
9-4-3: Authorization For Towing
9-4-4: Police Tows; Reports; Release Of Vehicles; Payment
9-4-5: Pre-Tow Notice For Abandoned Vehicles
9-4-6: Pre-Tow Hearing Procedures
9-4-7: Post-Tow Notice For Hazardous And Unlawful Vehicles
9-4-8: Post-Tow Hearing Procedures
9-4-9: Towing Service Subject To Ordinance
9-4-10: Record Searches; Identification
9-4-11: Reclaimed Vehicles; Expenses
9-4-12: Disposal Of Unclaimed Vehicles
9-4-13: Disposal Of Hazardous Dilapidated Vehicles
9-4-14: Police Reports After Vehicle Is Reclaimed Or Disposed Of
9-4-15: Disposition Of Proceeds Of Sale Of Unclaimed Vehicles
9-4-16: Liability
9-4-17: Violation
9-4-18: Severability
9-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of
this chapter. Any term not defined herein shall have the meaning ascribed to it
in other ordinances of the village, and if not defined in any other village
ordinance, it shall have the meaning ascribed in the Illinois vehicle code, 625
Illinois Compiled Statutes act 5:
ABANDONED VEHICLE: (A) A vehicle parked or otherwise located on the public way,
and
      1.   In such a state of disrepair that it is incapable of being driven;
or
      2.   That has been unmoved for a period of at least seven (7) days and
from its condition, the period during which it has not been moved, or some
other circumstance, appears to have been and will presume to have been,
abandoned by its owner;
   (B)   Vehicles parked in a public parking lot or on private property without
the consent of the lot owner, proprietor or agent of the property, which person
has requested that the vehicle be towed; or
   (C)   A vehicle defined as abandoned, or capable of being towed, by any
other ordinance of the village, and which does not fall into the categories of
"hazardous" or "unlawful" vehicles, and therefore is not subject to an
immediate tow.
HAZARDOUS VEHICLE: (A) A vehicle that has been involved in an accident and is
disabled or cannot be immediately moved by the owner or operator of the
vehicle;
   (B)   A vehicle that presents an immediate danger to the health or welfare
of the members of the public;
   (C)   A vehicle abandoned or disabled on a public street, way or alley that
is impeding the orderly flow of traffic or poses a potential danger to
pedestrians and operators of other vehicles; or
   (D)   A vehicle that must be moved to allow for proper village snow removal
from a public street, way or alley.
OWNER: A person who holds legal title to the vehicle, or the right of
possession of the vehicle.
UNLAWFUL VEHICLE: (A) A vehicle that has been reported stolen or is the subject
of a search and seizure by the Forest View police department; or
   (B)   A vehicle parked in violation of state statutes or village ordinances
which prohibit parking at the location in question or for the period of time
for which the vehicle has been parked, and where either the statute or the
ordinance authorize the vehicle to be towed and the sign(s) posted at the
general location note that fact.
VEHICLE: Any device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be
transported or drawn upon a street, highway or any public way, except devices
moved by human power, devices used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks,
or snowmobiles.
VILLAGE: The village of Forest View, Cook County, Illinois. (Ord. 00-10, 9-12-
2000)
9-4-2: ABANDONED, LOST, STOLEN OR UNCLAIMED VEHICLES:
   (A)   The abandonment of a vehicle or any part thereof on private property
without the consent of the lot owner, or public property in view of the general
public, is unlawful. A vehicle or any part thereof so abandoned on private
property shall be authorized for removal by the police department after a
waiting period of seven (7) days or more, or may be moved immediately if
determined to be a hazardous dilapidated vehicle. A violation of this section
is subject to penalties set forth in section
9-4-17 of this chapter.
   (B)   When an abandoned, lost, stolen or unclaimed vehicle comes into
temporary possession or custody of a person in the village, not the owner of
the vehicle, but upon whose privately owned property within the village the
vehicle is abandoned, that person shall immediately notify the police
department of such abandonment. Upon receipt of the notification, the police
department will authorize a towing service to remove and take possession of the
abandoned, lost, stolen or unclaimed vehicle. The towing service will safely
keep the towed vehicle and its contents and maintain a record of the tow as set
forth in section
9-4-4 of this chapter until the vehicle is claimed by the owner or any other
person legally entitled to possession thereof or until it is disposed of as
provided in this chapter. (Ord. 00-10, 9-12-2000)
9-4-3: AUTHORIZATION FOR TOWING:
   (A)   Generally: The towing of vehicles by the village, or its approved
towing service operators on behalf of the village, shall be authorized only by
the police department and only under the circumstances herein provided. Towed
vehicles shall be impounded at facilities designated by the police department
until lawfully claimed or disposed of pursuant to this chapter.
   (B)   Towing Without Notice; Immediate Tows: Hazardous or unlawful vehicles
may be towed without prior notice. Within a working period of twenty four (24)
hours after towing a vehicle pursuant to this chapter, a notice shall be sent
to or personally delivered to the owner of the vehicle, affording the
opportunity for a hearing as provided in sections
9-4-7 and
9-4-8 of this chapter. For the purposes of this section, a working period of
twenty four (24) hours shall not include Saturdays, Sundays and holidays. If
there is no request for a hearing and the vehicle remains unclaimed within the
fifteen (15) day period set forth in subsection
9-4-7(C) of this chapter, the police department shall send notification within
ten (10) business days by certified mail to the owner advising where the
vehicle is held, requesting a disposition be made, and setting forth public
sale information.
   (C)   Towing With Prior Notice; Abandoned Vehicles: Abandoned vehicles may
be towed after the mailing or delivery of prior notice and the affording of an
opportunity for a hearing as provided in sections
9-4-5 and
9-4-6 of this chapter. If there is no request for a hearing and the vehicle is
towed after the seven (7) day waiting period set forth in subsection
9-4-5(A) of this chapter, the police department shall send notification within
ten (10) business days after impoundment by certified mail to the owner
advising where the vehicle is held, requesting a disposition be made, and
setting forth public sale information. (Ord. 00-10, 9-12-2000)
9-4-4: POLICE TOWS; REPORTS; RELEASE OF VEHICLES; PAYMENT:
When a vehicle is authorized to be towed away as provided in sections
9-4-2 and
9-4-3 of this chapter:
   (A)   The authorization, any hold order, and any release shall be in
writing, with a copy given to the towing service.
   (B)   The police department shall keep and maintain a record of the vehicle
towed, listing the color, year of manufacture, manufacturer's trade name,
manufacturer's series name, body style, vehicle identification number and
license plate year and number and registration sticker year and number
displayed on the vehicle. The record shall also include the date and hour of
the tow, location towed from, location towed to, reason for towing and the name
of the officer authorizing the tow.
   (C)   The owner, operator, or other legally entitled person shall be
responsible to the towing service for payment of applicable removal, towing,
storage, and processing charges and collection costs associated with a vehicle
towed or held under order or authorization of the police department. If a
vehicle towed or held under order or authorization of the police department is
seized by the police department or any other law enforcement or governmental
agency and sold, any unpaid removal, towing, storage, and processing charges
and collection costs shall be paid to the towing service from the proceeds of
the sale. If applicable law provides that the proceeds are to be paid into the
village treasury, then any unpaid removal, towing, storage, and processing
charges and collection costs shall be paid to the towing service from the
village treasury. That payment shall not, however, exceed the amount of
proceeds from the sale, with the balance to be paid by the owner, operator, or
other legally entitled person.
   (D)   Upon delivery of a written release order to the towing service, a
vehicle subject to a hold order shall be released to the owner, operator, or
other legally entitled person upon proof of ownership or other entitlement and
upon payment of applicable removal, towing, storage, and processing charges and
collection fees. (Ord. 00-10, 9-12-2000)
9-4-5: PRE-TOW NOTICE FOR ABANDONED VEHICLES:
   (A)   Notice pursuant to subsection
9-4-3(C) of this chapter shall be personally delivered to the owner or shall be
forwarded by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, to the
address of the owner of the vehicle as indicated in the most current
registration list of the secretary of state. In the event that an out-of-state
vehicle is proposed to be towed, inquiry by computer, telephone or letter shall
be made of the secretary of state of the particular jurisdiction for the
furnishing of the most current registered name and address of the owner of the
vehicle, and notice shall be mailed as provided herein to the address
furnished, though in no case will the village be required to delay towing more
than seven (7) days after the date of the mailing or personal delivery of the
notice if no request for a hearing has been received within that seven (7) day
period. The notice shall be in such form as may be developed by police
department regulation, and shall contain substantially the following
information:
      1.   A description of the vehicle;
      2.   The present location of the vehicle;
      3.   The legal and factual basis for the towing which is proposed;
      4.   The opportunity to request a pre-tow hearing and the procedure for
filing a written request for hearing;
      5.   The advisement that a request for hearing must be filed within seven
(7) days from mailing of the notice; and
      6.   The address and telephone number of the office to which a request
for a hearing must be made.
   (B)   A notice of intent to tow sticker with the earliest date upon which
the tow may take place and the address and telephone number of the police
department shall be placed on the vehicle. (Ord. 00-10, 9-12-2000)
9-4-6: PRE-TOW HEARING PROCEDURES:
   (A)   Opportunity For Hearing: The owner or person entitled to possession of
a vehicle to be towed as an abandoned vehicle shall have seven (7) days after
the date of mailing or personal delivery of the notice to request, in writing,
a pre-tow hearing. Subsequent to this seven (7) day period, the vehicle may be
towed if the owner has not filed a written request for a hearing within the
seven (7) day period, and any hearing rights under the provisions of this
chapter shall be deemed waived.
   (B)   Scheduling Of Pre-Tow Hearings: The pre-tow hearing shall be scheduled
for a date within fourteen (14) days of the mailing or personal delivery of the
pre-tow notice. The village shall not be required to delay towing longer than
such fourteen (14) day period.
   (C)   Request For Pre-Tow Hearings: Requests for a pre-tow hearing are to be
made in person to the office indicated on the notice. Requests for hearing by
persons who reside more than fifty (50) miles from the village may be made by
mail. Forms for such requests shall be made available at the police department.
At the time of making the request, the owner will be provided a hearing date
and time by mail or in person, as the circumstances require.
   (D)   Appointment Of Hearing Officer: The village shall choose an officer or
employee of the village to serve as hearing officer. In no case shall the
hearing officer be an individual who was involved in the initial decision to
tow the vehicle. The hearing officer shall have the authority to require the
presence of the enforcement officer who initiated the proposed tow or any other
village personnel.
   (E)   Nature Of Hearing: The hearing shall be informal in nature, and the
rules of evidence shall not apply. The hearing will not be determinative of, or
adjudicate, any citation relative to any vehicle. After receiving all relevant
evidence, the hearing officer shall make a written decision based upon a
preponderance of the evidence as to whether towing of the vehicle is authorized
by the laws of the state or village ordinances, with a specific statutory or
ordinance section cited in the decision. The owner shall be provided a copy of
such pre-tow hearing decision.
   (F)   Decision To Tow And Rates To Be Charged: If the preponderance of the
evidence supports towing and compliance with the provisions of this chapter,
the hearing officer shall direct that the vehicle be towed, with any towing and
storage costs to then be imposed upon the owner thereof. The fees to be charged
for towing and storage services shall be no more than the maximum rates posted
by the towing service operator pursuant to the provisions of subsection
9-4-7(E) of this chapter. The owner of such vehicle, having had such a hearing,
may avoid the towing by immediately removing the vehicle from the improper
location to a proper, lawful location and correcting any unlawful condition(s)
of the vehicle.
   (G)   Decision Not To Tow:
      1.   If the preponderance of the evidence fails to support towing of the
vehicle, the hearing officer shall direct that the vehicle shall not be towed.
The village shall furnish a copy of such decision to the owner, who may place
it inside the vehicle in a location plainly visible from the outside, such as
the dashboard or rear window. No vehicle about which such a decision has been
rendered shall be towed by the village unless the circumstances under which the
decision was rendered have changed.
      2.   If, at some subsequent time, the village should wish to tow the
vehicle from the same location, it shall follow the same procedures required
for the towing of any other similarly situated vehicle.
   (H)   Reports And Documents To Be Retained; Contesting Decision: Originals
or copies of all notices, pre-tow hearing decisions, towing reports, and any
associated police reports or documents, shall be retained by the police
department for a period of at least five (5) years after each hearing. The
village or the owner may contest the decision of the hearing officer in any
manner provided by law. (Ord. 00-10, 9-12-2000)
9-4-7: POST-TOW NOTICE FOR HAZARDOUS AND UNLAWFUL VEHICLES:
   (A)   Mailing Or Delivery Of Notice; Contents Of Notice: The police
department shall transmit information relating to the right to a hearing as
provided in section
9-4-8 of this chapter, when mailing a notice of impoundment. Notice pursuant to
this section shall be forwarded by certified or registered mail, return receipt
requested, to the address of the owner of the vehicle as indicated in the most
current registration list of the secretary of state, unless the notice is
personally delivered to the owner, in which case, the date and time of the
delivery and the name of the police officer making the delivery shall be noted
in the police department records or reports. The notice shall be mailed or
delivered within twenty four (24) hours, Monday through Friday, excluding
holidays. In the event that the village has towed an out-of-state, hazardous or
unlawful vehicle, inquiry by computer, telephone or letter shall be made of the
secretary of state of the particular jurisdiction for the furnishing of the
most current registered name and address of the owner of the vehicle, and
notice shall be mailed as provided herein to the address furnished. The notice
shall be in such form as may be provided by the police department, and shall
contain substantially the following information:
      1.   A description of the vehicle;
      2.   The present location of the impounded vehicle;
      3.   The legal and factual basis for the particular tow;
      4.   The opportunity to request a post-tow hearing and the procedure for
filing a written request for hearing;
      5.   The advisement that a request for hearing must be filed within
fifteen (15) days from mailing or personal delivery of the notice, or from
release of the vehicle, whichever occurs first;
      6.   The address and telephone number of the office to which the request
for the hearing must be made.
The notice required by this section may be appended to the Police Department's
tow release form in accordance with subsection
9-4-4(D) of this chapter.
   (B)   Posting Of Signs Showing Hearing Rights: All approved towing service
operators shall prominently post at least one sign, with dimensions of at least
twelve inches by eighteen inches (12" x 18"), indicating the opportunity and
procedures for a hearing to contest the validity of a towed vehicle. The sign
shall be placed in locations readily visible to the public transacting business
at any towing facility. If the towing service operator performs services for
more than one municipality, the information for contacting the various
appropriate municipal officers can be listed on one such sign.
   (C)   Requests For Post-Tow Hearings:
      1.   Requests for hearings may be made in person at the office indicated
on the notice within fifteen (15) days of the mailing or personal delivery of
the notification of tow, or release of the vehicle, whichever occurs first;
otherwise the right to a hearing shall be deemed waived. Requests for hearings
by persons who reside more than fifty (50) miles from the Village may be made
in person or by mail received by the Village within the fifteen (15) day
period.
      2.   Any police personnel receiving inquiries in the field for hearings
shall direct such person to the police station.
      3.   Police personnel in the police station, when receiving a tow
inquiry, shall advise the person making the inquiry of the right to a hearing
as set forth herein, and upon request shall provide a hearing request form.
   (D)   Release Of Vehicles:
      1.   The owner of the vehicle shall be responsible for all towing and
storage charges. Vehicles authorized to be removed from public or private
property by the Police Department and stored by a towing service operator hired
by the Village shall be subject to a possessor lien for services pursuant to
"An Act Concerning Liens for Labor, Services, Skill or Materials Furnished Upon
Or Storage Furnished for Chattels", filed July 24, 1941, as amended, and the
provisions of section 1 of that Act relating to notice and implied consent
shall be deemed satisfied by compliance with section 18a-302 and subsection (6)
of section 18a-300 of the Illinois Vehicle Code. In no event shall such lien be
greater than the rate or rates established in accordance with subsection (6) of
section 18a-200(3) of the Illinois Vehicle Code. In no event shall such lien be
increased or altered to reflect any charge for services or materials rendered
in addition to those authorized by such Act. Every such lien shall be payable
by use of any major credit card, in addition to being payable in cash. (Ord.
00-10, 9-12-2000)
      2.   Before the owner or a person entitled to possession of any impounded
vehicle shall be permitted to remove the same, the owner or other person
legally entitled to possession shall furnish evidence of his or her identity,
ownership of the vehicle, or his or her right to possession, sign a receipt for
the vehicle, and pay the amount currently owed for towing and storage fees to
the towing service operator. The Chief of Police is authorized to promulgate
regulations as to the documents or other proof necessary to establish these
facts. (Ord. 17-07, 4-11-2017)
   (E)   Establishment Of Maximum Towing And Storage Rates:
      1.   The owner shall pay fees to the towing service operator for towing
and storage on police ordered tows at rates that do not exceed the maximum rate
schedule posted at the storage site and on file with the Police Department. The
basic rates for such fees shall be shown in the form and on the sign concerning
vehicle release requirements.
      2.   However, nothing in this section is intended to prevent a
competitive towing service operator from charging less than the established
maximum rates for police-ordered or any other tows. For particularly difficult
or unusual towing jobs, such as large or serious accidents, the towing
operators may charge rates above those established for normal situations. The
special charges must be based upon the cost of services provided, taking into
account such matters as the man-hours and equipment time required for the job.
A towing service operator must fully itemize in writing the details of such a
billing at special rates for a particularly difficult or unusual tow, and
supply a copy of the itemized bill to the owner and the police department. Any
such special rates charged must be customary in the towing industry in the area
for the nature and extent of the services provided. Every towing service
operator and the police department shall have available a copy of the complete
current rate schedule and any special rate policy established by the towing
service operator, for vehicle owners to view upon request. (Ord. 00-10, 9-12-
2000)
9-4-8: POST-TOW HEARING PROCEDURES:
   (A)   Opportunity For Hearing: The owner of a vehicle towed as an immediate
tow, by or pursuant to the authority of the police department as set forth
herein, shall be provided the opportunity for a post-tow hearing to determine
the validity of such tow and any towing or storage charges. The hearing will
not be determinative of, or adjudicate, any citation issued relative to any
towed vehicle.
   (B)   Nature Of The Hearing And Hearing Officer: The nature of the hearing
and the appointment of the hearing officer shall be the same as set forth in
section
9-4-6 of this chapter.
   (C)   Time Of Hearings: Hearings shall take place as follows:
      1.   In those instances where the vehicle has been released upon the
deposit of the full payment currently owed for towing and storage charges, and
the owner has properly requested a hearing, the hearing shall take place within
fifteen (15) days after the release of such vehicle, unless the owner requests
a later date convenient to all parties.
      2.   In those instances where the vehicle remains impounded, the hearing
shall take place, at the option of the owner:
         (a)   On the next calendar day after the owner's demand for such
hearing, excluding Saturdays, Sundays and holidays. If such demand is made
after three o'clock (3:00) P.M., or if the unavailability of a necessary
witness or evidence creates a particular difficulty in conducting the hearing
on the next calendar day, then a hearing shall be held on the second day
following the request, excluding Saturdays, Sundays and holidays; or
         (b)   If acceptable to the owner, within fifteen (15) days of such
request on a date convenient to all parties.
   (D)   Duties Of The Hearing Officer:
      1.   The hearing officer, or other designated personnel of the village,
processing the owner's request for a hearing, shall have the authority to
designate in writing a hearing date and time, and to so inform the owner of the
date and time of the hearing by personal service at the time the owner files a
hearing request. In the event that a hearing request is made by mail by a
person residing more than fifty (50) miles from the village, the written
designation of the hearing date and time shall be mailed to the owner not less
than seven (7) days before the designated hearing date, unless the owner waives
such seven (7) day period by requesting an earlier hearing date;
      2.   The hearing officer shall review all evidence presented by the
vehicle owner and the police department or other village employees, and shall
make a finding based upon the preponderance of the evidence presented, as to
the lawful authority of the towing and storage of the vehicle. The village must
establish such authority by a preponderance of the evidence;
      3.   For each hearing, the hearing officer shall complete a post- tow
hearing decision and attach such decision to the police department's original
towing report, and supply a copy of the decision to the owner by personal
delivery if the owner is present, otherwise by mail.
   (E)   Post-Tow Hearing Decision: After receiving all relevant evidence, the
hearing officer shall make one of the following written findings, which must be
incorporated into the post-tow hearing decision:
      1.   Tow Authorized: The towing and storage of the vehicle was authorized
by state statute or village ordinance. One or more specific statutory or
ordinance sections and the amount owed for towing and storage shall be stated
in such a finding;
      2.   Tow Not Authorized: There was no authorization in law for the towing
and storage of the vehicle, or the village employee causing the vehicle to be
towed did not comply with the requirements of the state statute or village
ordinance authorizing the tow;
      3.   Tow Authorized; Storage Reimbursable: The towing of the vehicle was
authorized by law, but the owner was caused to incur additional storage charges
because of late notification of towing or other reasons not the fault of the
owner. The specific amount owed by the owner, and the specific amount excused,
shall be stated in the decision; or
      4.   Owner Failed To Appear; No Continuance Requested: A hearing was
requested but the person requesting the hearing failed to appear and failed to
request a continuance. This finding also constitutes a default finding that the
tow was authorized by the applicable State Statute or Village ordinance as
stated in the post-tow notice.
   (F)   Actions By Hearing Officer Upon Conclusion Of Hearing: The Hearing
Officer shall advise the owner of his or her findings at the conclusion of the
hearing, and take the following actions:
      1.   If the towing and storage was found to be authorized by law, and is
not otherwise reimbursable, the owner shall be so informed and further advised
as to the amount then due for towing and storage if the vehicle has remained
impounded;
      2.   If the towing and/or storage is found to be unauthorized or
reimbursable, the Hearing Officer shall:
         (a)   If the vehicle has been released to the owner:
(1) Note the amount of the towing and storage fees prepaid by the owner on the
post-tow hearing decision;
(2) Complete a printed voucher form for the amount to be reimbursed; (Ord. 00-
10, 9-12-2000)
(3) Transmit said decision and voucher form to the Chief of Police for his
authorization for payment; (Ord. 17-07, 4-11-2017)
(4) Advise the owner that a refund of said cash deposit or fees will be
transmitted to the appropriate officials of the Village for payment;
(5) Transmit a copy of said hearing decision and the voucher to the appropriate
Village official within forty eight (48) hours of the hearing;
(6) Unless the Village files a lawsuit to contest the decision of the Hearing
Officer, the owner shall be paid the money due within thirty (30) days after
the decision of the Hearing Officer.
         (b)   If the vehicle is still in the possession of the towing company
at the time of the hearing, the following procedures shall be followed:
(1) An order for the release of the vehicle shall be prepared in duplicate; the
owner shall be provided with the original, and a copy shall be attached to the
post-tow decision;
(2) Upon presentation by the owner to the towing company of the order for
release, said vehicle shall immediately be released to the owner without
payment of any service charges excused by the hearing decision.
   (G)   Reports And Documents To Be Retained; Contesting Decision: All
originals or copies of the notices, post-tow hearing decisions, towing reports,
and any associated police reports or documents shall be retained by the Police
Department for a period of at least five (5) years after each hearing. The
Village or the owner may contest the decision of the Hearing Officer in any
manner provided by law. (Ord. 00-10, 9-12-2000)
9-4-9: TOWING SERVICE SUBJECT TO ORDINANCE:
Notwithstanding any other ordinance or statutory provisions to the contrary,
any towing service operator authorized to perform tows on behalf of the Village
must perform its services subject to the provisions of this chapter. However,
the towing company shall have the right to recover the reasonable value of its
services for police ordered tows, from the Village. Provided, however, that if
a tow or the charge for a tow is found by a court having competent
jurisdiction, to be illegal and the towing service operator is required to
return the charge for the tow to the owner of the vehicle, the Village shall
not be liable to reimburse the operator for the towing charges. (Ord. 00-10, 9-
12-2000)
9-4-10: RECORD SEARCHES; IDENTIFICATION:
   (A)   Search Procedures: When the Police Department cannot determine the
owner of the vehicle from registration files of this State or a foreign state,
if applicable, the department will request, by directed communication to the
State police, that the stolen motor vehicle files be searched for stolen or
wanted information on the vehicle. If the State files are searched with
negative results, the information contained in the National Crime Information
Center ("NCIC") files will be searched by the State police. The information
determined from these record searches will be returned to the Police Department
for its use in sending notification by certified mail to the owner advising
where the vehicle is held, requesting a disposition to be made, and setting
forth public sale information. Said notification will be sent no later than ten
(10) business days after the date the police department impounds the vehicle;
provided, however, if the police department is unable to determine the identity
of the owner within a ten (10) day business period after impoundment, then
notification shall be sent no later than two (2) days after the date the
identity of the owner of the impounded vehicle is determined. Exceptions to
notification by certified mail to the owner are set forth in section
9-4-12 of this chapter.
   (B)   Identifying And Tracing Of Vehicle Ownership By State Police: When the
owner cannot be identified from the registration files of this state or a
foreign state, if applicable, the police department shall notify the state
police for the purpose of identifying the owner. The information obtained by
the state police will be immediately forwarded to the police department for
notification of owner purposes as set forth in subsection (A) of this section.
(Ord. 00-10, 9-12-2000)
9-4-11: RECLAIMED VEHICLES; EXPENSES:
   (A)   Any time before a vehicle is sold at public sale or disposed of as
provided in section
9-4-12 of this chapter, the owner or other person legally entitled to its
possession may reclaim the vehicle by presenting to the police department proof
of ownership or proof of the right to possession of the vehicle.
   (B)   No vehicle shall be released to the owner or other person under this
section until all towing, storage and processing charges have been paid. (Ord.
00-10, 9-12-2000)
9-4-12: DISPOSAL OF UNCLAIMED VEHICLES:
   (A)   Vehicles Seven Years Of Age Or Newer: When an abandoned, lost, stolen
or unclaimed vehicle seven (7) years of age or newer remains unclaimed by the
owner or other person legally entitled to its possession for a period of thirty
(30) days after notice has been given as provided in sections
9-4-3 and
9-4-10 of this chapter, the police department or towing service having
possession of the vehicle shall cause it to be sold at public auction to a
person licensed as an automotive parts recycler, rebuilder or scrap processor
under 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/5-100 et seq., or the towing operator
which towed the vehicle. Notice of the time and place of the sale shall be
posted in a conspicuous place for at least ten (10) days prior to the sale on
the premises where the vehicle has been impounded. At least ten (10) days prior
to the sale, the police department or the towing service where the vehicle is
impounded shall cause a notice of the time and place of the sale to be sent by
certified mail to the owner or other legally entitled persons. Such notice
shall contain a complete description of the vehicle to be sold and what steps
must be taken by the owner or other person legally entitled to possession to
reclaim the vehicle.
      1.   If an abandoned, lost, stolen, or unclaimed vehicle displays dealer
plates, notice under this section shall be sent to both the dealer and the
registered owner, lienholder, or other legally entitled persons.
      2.   In those instances where the certified notification specified in
sections
9-4-3 and
9-4-10 of this chapter has been returned by the postal authorities to the
police department or the towing service due to the addressee having moved, or
being unknown at the address obtained from the registration or other records of
this state or a foreign state, if applicable, the sending of a second certified
notice will not be required.
      3.   When the identity of the owner or other person legally entitled to
the possession of an abandoned, lost or unclaimed vehicle cannot be determined
by any means provided in this chapter, the vehicle may be sold as provided in
the preceding subsections of this section without notice to any person whose
identity cannot be determined.
   (B)   Vehicles More Than Seven Years Of Age: When an abandoned vehicle of
more than seven (7) years of age is impounded as provided in this chapter, or
when any such vehicle is towed with the knowledge of the owner or operator and
is subsequently abandoned, it will be kept in custody or storage for a minimum
of ten (10) days for the purpose of determining the identity of the owner or
other legally entitled persons and contacting the owner or other such persons
by the U.S. mail, public service or in person for a determination of
disposition; and an examination of the state police stolen vehicle files for
theft and wanted information. At the expiration of the ten (10) day period,
without the benefit of disposition information being received from the owner or
other legally entitled persons, the vehicle may be disposed of by the police
department or other law enforcement agency having jurisdiction as junk or
salvage. Provided, however, a vehicle classified as an antique may be sold to a
person desiring to restore it. (Ord. 00-10, 9-12-2000)
9-4-13: DISPOSAL OF HAZARDOUS DILAPIDATED VEHICLES:
Any hazardous dilapidated vehicle impounded pursuant to this chapter, whether
impounded at a public facility or on the property of a private towing service,
shall be kept in custody for a period of ten (10) days for the purpose of
determining the identity of the registered owner or lienholder and contacting
the registered owner or lienholder, if known, by regular U.S. mail. At the
expiration of the ten (10) day period, without benefit of disposition
information being received from the registered owner or lienholder, the police
department or other law enforcement agency having jurisdiction will authorize
the disposal of the vehicle as junk. (Ord. 00-10, 9-12-2000)
9-4-14: POLICE REPORTS AFTER VEHICLE IS RECLAIMED OR DISPOSED OF:
When a vehicle is reclaimed by the owner or other legally entitled person and
no pre- or post-towing hearing has been requested or held, or when the vehicle
is sold at public sale or otherwise disposed of as provided in this chapter, a
report of the transaction will be maintained by the police department for a
period of one year from the date of sale or disposal. (Ord. 00-10, 9-12-2000)
9-4-15: DISPOSITION OF PROCEEDS OF SALE OF UNCLAIMED VEHICLES:
When a vehicle authorized to be towed by the police department is disposed of
as set forth in this chapter, the proceeds of the public sale or disposition
after deduction of towing, storage and processing charges, shall be deposited
in the treasury of the village. (Ord. 00-10, 9-12-2000)
9-4-16: LIABILITY:
The village, its officers and employees, the village police department, its
officers and employees, or a towing service owner, its operators or employees,
shall not be held to answer or be liable for damages in any action brought by
the owner or other person legally entitled to possession of a vehicle, or his
or her legal representative, when the vehicle was processed and sold or
disposed of as provided by this chapter. (Ord. 00-10, 9-12-2000)
9-4-17: VIOLATION:
Any person who violates section
9-4-2 of this chapter shall be subject to a mandatory fine of two hundred
dollars ($200.00) and shall be required by the court to make a disposition on
the abandoned or unclaimed vehicle and pay all towing, storage and processing
charges, and collection fees. (Ord. 00-10, 9-12-2000)
9-4-18: SEVERABILITY:
It is the intention of the village that this chapter, and every provision
thereof, shall be considered separable, and that the invalidity of any section,
clause, provision or part or portion of any section, clause or provision of
this chapter, shall not affect the validity of any other portion of this
chapter. If any part or provision of this chapter or the application thereof to
any person or circumstances shall be adjudicated invalid by a court of
competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not affect independently any
portion or provision ruled invalid, and to this end, the provisions of this
chapter are declared to be severable. (Ord. 00-10, 9-12-2000)
CHAPTER 5
SEIZURE AND IMPOUNDMENT OF MOTOR VEHICLES
SECTION:
9-5-1: Definitions
9-5-2: Conduct Prohibited
9-5-3: Exceptions
9-5-4: Administrative Fees
9-5-5: Notice Of Impoundment
9-5-6: Administrative Hearing
9-5-7: Administrative Penalty
9-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
BUSINESS DAY: Any day in which the office of the village clerk of the village
of Forest View is open to the public for a minimum of seven (7) hours.
MOTOR VEHICLE: Any vehicle which is self-propelled, including, but not limited
to, automobiles, trucks, vans, motorcycles and motor scooters.
OWNER OF RECORD OR OWNER: The record titleholder(s) of a motor vehicle as
registered with the secretary of state of the state of Illinois, or if not
registered in Illinois, the particular state where the motor vehicle is
registered. (Ord. 12-1, 3-27-2012)
9-5-2: CONDUCT PROHIBITED:
A motor vehicle operated with the permission, express or implied, of the owner
of record, shall be declared a public nuisance and shall be subject to seizure
and impoundment under this chapter where such a motor vehicle is used in
connection with any of the following violations. This chapter is in addition to
and shall not replace or otherwise abrogate any existing federal or state laws
or village codes or ordinances pertaining to the seizure, towing and/or
impoundment of motor vehicles.
   (A)   Any motor vehicle which is used by a person during the aiding or
abetting or commission of, or in the attempt to commit, a misdemeanor or felony
as those terms are defined in the Illinois criminal code, 720 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/2-7 and 2-8, as amended, and as provided in the Illinois vehicle
code, as amended, and adopted in section
9-1-1 of this title.
   (B)   Any motor vehicle that is used in the commission of, or in the attempt
to commit, the following offenses set forth in article 9 of the Illinois
criminal code, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/9 et seq., as amended: 1) first
degree murder (9-1); and 2) involuntary manslaughter and reckless homicide (9-
3).
   (C)   Any motor vehicle that is used in the commission of, or in the attempt
to commit, aggravated kidnaping in violation of section 10-2 of the Illinois
criminal code, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/10-2, as amended.
   (D)   Any motor vehicle that is used in the commission of, or in the attempt
to commit, the following offenses set forth in article 11 of the Illinois
criminal code, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11 et seq., as amended: 1)
criminal sexual assault (11-1.20); 2) aggravated criminal sexual assault (11-
1.30); 3) predatory criminal sexual assault of a child (11-1.40); 4) criminal
sexual abuse (11-1.50(a)); 5) aggravated criminal sexual assault (11-1.60(a),
(c) or (d)); 6) indecent solicitation of a child (11-6); 7) promoting juvenile
prostitution (except for keeping a place of juvenile prostitution (11-14.4); 8)
soliciting for a minor engaged in prostitution (11-15.1); 9) child pornography
(11-20.1); and 10) aggravated child pornography (11.20.1B).
   (E)   Any motor vehicle that is used in the commission of, or attempt to
commit, aggravated battery in violation of subsection (a)(1), (a)(2), (a)(4),
(b)(1), (e)(1), (e)(2), (e)(3), (e)(4), (e)(5), (e)(6) or (e)(7) of section 12-
3.05 of the Illinois criminal code, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/12-3.05,
as amended.
   (F)   Any motor vehicle that is used in the commission of, or attempt to
commit, the following offenses set forth in article 12 of the Illinois criminal
code, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/12 et seq., as amended: 1) stalking (12-
7.3); 2) aggravated stalking (12-7.4); 3) criminal sexual abuse (12-15(a)); and
4) aggravated criminal sexual abuse (12-16(a), (c) or (d)).
   (G)   Any motor vehicle that is used in the commission of, or attempt to
commit, theft in violation of article 16 (theft and related offenses) and
article 16A (retail theft) of the Illinois criminal code, 720 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/16-1 et seq., and 5/16A-1 et seq., respectively, as amended.
   (H)   Any motor vehicle that is used in the commission of, or attempt to
commit, armed robbery in violation of the Illinois criminal code, 720 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/18-2, as amended.
   (I)   Any motor vehicle that is used in the commission of, or attempt to
commit, the following offenses set forth in article 19 of the Illinois criminal
code, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes, 5/19 et seq., as amended: 1) burglary
(19-1); 2) possession of burglary tools (19-2); and 3) residential burglary
(19-3).
   (J)   Any motor vehicle used in the commission of, or attempt to commit, the
following offenses as set forth in article 20 of the Illinois criminal code,
720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/20 et seq., as amended: 1) arson (20-1); and
2) possession of incendiary devices (20-2).
   (K)   Any motor vehicle that is used in the commission of, or attempt to
commit, the following offenses set forth in article 24 of the Illinois criminal
code, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/24 et seq., as amended: 1) unlawful use
of weapons (24-1); 2) aggravated discharge of a firearm (24-1.2); 3) aggravated
discharge of a machine gun or firearm equipped with a device designed or used
for silencing the report of a firearm (24-1.2-5); 4) reckless discharge of a
firearm (24-1.5); and 5) unlawful possession of firearms and firearm ammunition
(24-3.1).
   (L)   Any motor vehicle that is used in the commission of, or attempt to
commit, gambling in violation of the Illinois criminal code, 720 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/28-1, as amended.
   (M)   Any motor vehicle that is used in the commission of, or attempt to
commit, possession of a deadly substance in violation of the Illinois criminal
code, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/29D-15.2, as amended.
   (N)   Any motor vehicle that is used in the commission of, or attempt to
commit, the following offenses set forth in the cigarette tax act, 35 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 130 et seq., as amended, if the vehicle contains more than
ten (10) cartons of cigarettes: 1) destruction or use of forfeited property
(130/21); 2) counterfeiting or forging stamps (130/22); 3) sale of packages
with counterfeit stamps or stamps previously affixed (130/23); 4) sale or
possession of contraband cigarettes (130/24); and 5) acting as distributor
without license (130/26).
   (O)   Any motor vehicle that is used in the commission of, or attempt to
commit, the following offenses set forth in the cigarette use tax act, 35
Illinois Compiled Statutes 135 et seq., as amended, if the motor vehicle
contains more than ten (10) cartons of cigarettes: 1) forging, altering, or
counterfeiting stamps (135/28); 2) sale of improper stamp (135/29); and 3) sale
or possession of unstamped packages of cigarettes, other than by a licensed
distributor or transporter (135/30).
   (P)   Any motor vehicle that is used in the commission of, or attempt to
commit, disposal of hazardous waste in violation of the environmental
protection act, 415 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/44, as amended.
   (Q)   Any motor vehicle that is operated by a person driving under the
influence of alcohol or other drug or drugs, intoxicating compound or compounds
or any combination thereof under section 11-501 of the Illinois vehicle code,
625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-501, as amended, during a period in which
his/her driving privileges are revoked or suspended where the revocation or
suspension was driving under the influence of alcohol or other drug or drugs,
intoxicating compound or compounds or any combination thereof; section 11-501.1
of the Illinois vehicle code, 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-501.1, as
amended (statutory summary suspension or revocation of driver's license for
driving under the influence); section 11-401(b) of the Illinois vehicle code,
625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-401(b), as amended (failing to stop when
involved in an accident resulting in personal injury or death); and reckless
homicide as defined in section 9-3 of the Illinois criminal code, 720 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/9-3, as amended.
   (R)   Any motor vehicle that is operated by a person driving under the
influence of alcohol or other drug or drugs, intoxicating compound or compounds
or any combination thereof and has been previously convicted of reckless
homicide or a similar provision of a law of another state relating to reckless
homicide in which the person was determined to have been under the influence of
alcohol, other drug or drugs, or intoxicating compound or compounds as an
element of the offense or the person has previously been convicted of
committing a violation of driving under the influence of alcohol or other drug
or drugs, intoxicating compound or compounds or any combination thereof and was
involved in a motor vehicle accident that resulted in death, great bodily harm
or permanent disability or disfigurement to another when the violation was a
proximate cause of the death or injuries.
   (S)   Any motor vehicle otherwise subject to seizure and impoundment
pursuant to 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/36-1, as amended.
   (T)   Any motor vehicle that is operated or used in the commission of, or in
the attempt to commit, an offense in violation of the Illinois cannabis control
act, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 550/1 et seq., as amended, and the Illinois
controlled substances act, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 570/100 et seq., as
amended, including, but not limited to, the solicitation, possession, attempt
to solicit or possess, delivery, trafficking, purchase, attempt to purchase,
sale or attempt to sell such cannabis or controlled substances in violation of
said acts.
   (U)   Any motor vehicle which is operated by a person with an expired
driver's license or permit or a restricted driver's permit in violation of 625
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-101, as amended, of the Illinois vehicle code;
except said violation does not include instances where a driver's license was
validly issued to the vehicle operator but has been expired for a period of one
year or less.
   (V)   Any motor vehicle which is operated by a person who was never issued a
driver's license, permit or restricted driving permit in violation of 625
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-101, as amended, of the Illinois vehicle code,
or operating a motor vehicle without ever having been issued a driver's
license, permit or restricted driving permit due to a person's age.
   (W)   Any motor vehicle which is operated by a person driving while his/her
driver's license, permit or privilege to operate a motor vehicle is suspended
or revoked in violation of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-303, as amended,
of the Illinois vehicle code; except that a motor vehicle shall not be
subjected to seizure or impoundment if the suspension is for an unpaid citation
(parking or moving) or due to failure to comply with emission testing.
   (X)   Any motor vehicle which is operated by a person which is not covered
by a liability insurance policy in violation of 7-601 of the Illinois vehicle
code, 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/7-601, as amended.
   (Y)   Any motor vehicle which is operated by a person when such vehicle is
used by the person in fleeing or attempting to elude a law enforcement officer
or in aggravated fleeing or attempting to elude a law enforcement officer in
violation of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-204 and 204.1, respectively,
as amended, of the Illinois vehicle code.
   (Z)   Any motor vehicle which is operated by a person who is under the
influence of alcohol, other drug or drugs, intoxicating compound or compounds,
or any combination thereof, in violation of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/
11-501, as amended, of the Illinois vehicle code.
   (AA)   Any motor vehicle which is operated by a person driving against whom
a warrant has been issued by a circuit court in Illinois for failing to answer
charges that the driver violated section 6-101 (driving without license, permit
or restricted driving permit), section 6-303 (driving while driver's license,
permit or privilege to operate motor vehicle is revoked), or 11-501 (driving
while under the influence of alcohol, other drug or drugs, intoxicating
compound or compounds or any combination thereof) of the Illinois vehicle code,
625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-101, 5/6-303 or 5/11-501, respectively, as
amended.
   (BB)   Any motor vehicle which is operated by a person who commits reckless
driving as defined in 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-503, as amended, of
the Illinois vehicle code.
   (CC)   Any motor vehicle which is operated by a person who is engaging in
street racing as defined in 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-506, as
amended, of the Illinois vehicle code.
   (DD)   Any motor vehicle which is operated by a person when such vehicle's
registration is canceled, suspended or revoked in violation of 625 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/3-702, as amended, of the Illinois vehicle code, unless the
registration of the motor vehicle has been suspended for noninsurance or the
registration of the motor vehicle has been suspended for failure to purchase a
vehicle tax sticker.
      1.   Any motor vehicle which is operated by a person when such vehicle's
registration is suspended for noninsurance is subject to seizure and
impoundment where a person has been convicted of a second or subsequent
violation of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3-708, as amended, of the
Illinois Vehicle Code (operation of a motor vehicle when the registration is
suspended for noninsurance).
   (EE)   Any motor vehicle which is operated by a person when such vehicle is
being operated with a false, fraudulent, stolen or altered registration in
violation of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3-703, as amended, of the
Illinois Vehicle Code.
   (FF)   Any motor vehicle which is operated by a person when such vehicle's
registration is suspended for noninsurance in violation of 625 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/3-708, as amended, of the Illinois Vehicle Code, as
provided in subsection (DD)1 of this section.
   (GG)   Any motor vehicle which is operated by a person who presents or
displays a false insurance card to a law enforcement officer, court, or officer
of the court in violation of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3-710, as
amended, of the Illinois Vehicle Code. (Ord. 12-1, 3-27-2012)
9-5-3: EXCEPTIONS:
This chapter shall not apply to:
   (A)   A vehicle used in any of the violations set forth in section
9-5-2 of this chapter that was stolen at the time and the owner provides
verifiable proof that the vehicle was stolen at the time the vehicle was
impounded; or
   (B)   Any person who is the lessor of the vehicle pursuant to a written
lease agreement; provided, that upon the request of the Village received within
one hundred twenty (120) days after the violation occurred, the lessor provides
within sixty (60) days after receipt of such receipt, the name and address of
the lessee. The driver's license number of the lessee may be subsequently
individually requested by the Village if needed for enforcement of this
chapter. The lessee shall be provided an opportunity for a hearing, as afforded
the registered owner, as provided in section
9-5-6 of this chapter. (Ord. 12-1, 3-27-2012)
9-5-4: ADMINISTRATIVE FEES:
The registered owner of record of a properly impounded vehicle, or the agent(s)
of said owner, shall be liable to the Village for an administrative fee of
seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). Said administrative fee represents the
administrative and processing costs associated with the investigation, arrest
and detention of an offender, or the removal, impoundment, storage and release
of the vehicle. The administrative fee is in addition to any towing and storage
fees charged for the towing and storage of the impounded vehicle.
   (A)   All administrative fees and towing and storage charges shall be
imposed on the registered owner of the motor vehicle or agents of that owner.
   (B)   The fees shall be in addition to: 1) any other penalties that may be
assessed by a court of law for the underlying violations; and 2) any towing or
storage fees, or both, charged by the towing company.
   (C)   The fees shall be collected by and paid to the Village.
   (D)   The towing or storage fees, or both, shall be collected by and paid to
the person, firm, or entity that tows and stores the impounded vehicle. The
towing and storage fees shall be those approved by the Chief of Police for all
towers authorized to tow for the Village of Forest View Police Department.
(Ord. 12-1, 3-27-2012; amd. Ord. 17-07, 4-11-2017; Ord. 22-12, 3-22-2022)
9-5-5: NOTICE OF IMPOUNDMENT:
   (A)   Notice: Whenever a Forest View police officer determines that a motor
vehicle is subject to seizure and impoundment pursuant to this chapter, the
police officer shall provide for the towing of the vehicle to a facility
authorized by the Chief of Police. Before or at the time the vehicle is towed,
the police officer shall notify or make a reasonable attempt to notify the
owner, lessee or any person identifying him/herself as the owner or lessee of
the vehicle or any person who is found to be in control of the vehicle at the
time of the alleged violation, and who is physically present at the scene, of
the alleged violation, seizure and impoundment of the vehicle, and of the
vehicle owner’s or lessee’s right to an administrative hearing. If the owner or
lessee of the vehicle is not present at the scene, the Village shall send the
owner or lessee written notice of the seizure and impoundment by personal
service or first class mail, at the address listed on the owner’s vehicle
registration within twenty four (24) hours of the impoundment, excluding
Saturdays, Sundays and Village holidays. Said notice shall inform the owner or
lessee that he/she has the right to an administrative hearing.
   (B)   Impoundment Pending Hearing: The village shall provide notice to the
owner or lessee that the vehicle shall remain impounded pending the completion
of the administrative hearing unless the owner or lessee of the vehicle or a
lienholder posts with the village a cash bond equal to, or pays by money order
or certified check with the village of Forest View police department the amount
of the administrative fee and pays for all towing and storage charges. (Ord.
12-1, 3-27-2012; amd. Ord. 17-07, 4-11-2017; Ord. 22-12, 3-22-2022)
9-5-6: ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING:
   (A)   Notice: Within ten (10) days after a motor vehicle has been seized and
impounded pursuant to this chapter, the village shall notify the owner of
record, lessee, and any lienholder by personal service or by first class mail,
to the interested party’s address as registered with the secretary of state, of
the date, time and location of the scheduled hearing that will be conducted
pursuant to this section. The name and address of the person to whom a vehicle
is registered as shown on the records of the state in which the vehicle is
registered shall be conclusive evidence of the name and address of the owner of
record of the vehicle, unless the owner of record has given the village actual
written notice of a different name and/or address. The notice shall state the
penalty and fees that may be imposed, and that a motor vehicle not released by
cash bond or other form of payment acceptable to the village may be sold or
disposed of by the village in accordance with applicable law.
   (B)   Hearing: The administrative hearing shall be scheduled no later than
forty five (45) days after the date of the mailing of the notice of hearing.
The hearing shall be conducted and the case heard and decided by a hearing
officer appointed by the village. Formal or technical rules of evidence shall
not apply. The hearings shall be recorded and the hearing officer shall be
empowered to administer oaths and to secure by subpoena both the attendance and
testimony of witnesses and the production of relevant books and papers. Persons
appearing at the hearing may be represented by counsel at their expense. At the
conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall issue a written decision
either sustaining or overruling the vehicle impoundment. If, after the hearing,
the hearing officer determines that the motor vehicle, operated with the
permission, express or implied of the owner, was used in connection with a
violation set forth in this chapter, the hearing officer shall enter an order
finding the owner of record civilly liable to the village for an administrative
penalty in an amount not to exceed seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) and
requiring the vehicle to continue to be impounded until the owner pays the
administrative penalty to the village plus any applicable towing and storage
fees. If the owner of record fails to appear at the hearing, the hearing
officer shall enter a default order in favor of the village, requiring the
payment to the village of an administrative penalty in the amount of seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). A copy of the default order shall be sent to
the registered owner via certified mail, return receipt requested. If a cash
bond or other acceptable form of payment has been posted, that amount shall be
applied to the amount owed. If the hearing officer finds that the vehicle was
improperly seized and impounded pursuant to this chapter, the hearing officer
shall order the immediate return of the owner’s vehicle along with any
previously paid cash bond and any additional fees. All final decisions of the
hearing officer shall be subject to review under the provisions of the Illinois
administrative review law 1 .
   (C)   Driving While Intoxicated; Standard Of Evidence: A sworn report of a
police officer prepared in conformity with section 11-501.1 of the Illinois
vehicle code, 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-501.1, as amended,
establishing that a person refused testing or has submitted to a test that
discloses a blood alcohol concentration of 0.08 or more, or any amount of a
drug, substance, or intoxicating compound in the person’s breath, blood or
urine resulting from the unlawful use or consumption of cannabis listed in the
cannabis control act, controlled substance listed in the controlled substances
act, or an intoxicating compound listed in the use of intoxicating compounds
act, shall constitute prima facie evidence under this chapter sufficient to
establish a finding of the vehicle owner’s liability under this chapter. The
presumption may be rebutted by clear and convincing evidence.
(Ord. 12-1, 3-27-2012; amd. Ord. 25-14, 8-12-2025)
 
Notes
1 1. 735 ILCS 5/3-101 et seq.
9-5-7: ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTY:
   (A)   Liability For Administrative Penalty And Costs: If an administrative
penalty is imposed pursuant to this chapter, such penalty shall constitute a
debt due and owing the village. If a cash bond or other form of monetary
payment acceptable to the village has been posted pursuant to this chapter,
such amount shall be applied to the total penalty assessed at the hearing.
Unless stayed by a court of competent jurisdiction, any fine, penalty or
administrative fee imposed under this chapter, which remains unpaid in whole or
in part after the expiration of the deadline for seeking judicial review under
the administrative review law, may be enforced in the same manner as a judgment
entered by a court of competent jurisdiction. Except as provided otherwise in
this chapter, a vehicle shall continue to be impounded until: 1) the
administrative penalty is paid to the village and any applicable towing and
storage fees are paid to the tower, in which case possession of the vehicle
shall be given to the person who is legally entitled to possess the vehicle; or
2) the vehicle is sold or otherwise disposed of to satisfy a judgment to
enforce a lien as provided by law. If the administrative penalty and other
applicable fees are not paid within thirty five (35) days after the hearing
officer issues a written decision, the vehicle shall be deemed unclaimed and
shall be disposed of in the manner provided for the disposition of unclaimed
vehicles under section 4-208 of the Illinois vehicle code, 625 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/4-208, as amended; provided, however, where proceedings
have been instituted under state or federal drug asset forfeiture laws, the
vehicle may not be disposed of by the village except in a manner consistent
with the disposition of vehicles that is provided for in those proceedings.
   (B)   Vehicle Possession: Except as otherwise specifically provided by law,
no owner, lienholder, or other person shall be legally entitled to take
possession of a vehicle impounded under this chapter until the administrative
penalty and other applicable fees under this chapter have been paid in full.
However, whenever a person with a lien of record against an impounded vehicle
has commenced foreclosure proceedings, possession of the vehicle shall be given
to that person if he/she agrees in writing to refund to the village the amount
of the net proceeds of any foreclosure sale, less any amounts required to pay
all lienholders of record, not to exceed the administrative penalty plus
applicable fees.
(Ord. 12-1, 3-27-2012)
CHAPTER 6
ADMINISTRATIVE FEES FOR FLEEING AND ELUDING VEHICLES
SECTION:
9-6-1: Administrative Fees And Notice
9-6-2: Request For Hearing
9-6-3: Appeal; Administrative Hearing
9-6-4: Administrative Fee A Debt
9-6-1: ADMINISTRATIVE FEES AND NOTICE:
   (A)   The Police Department will charge an administrative fee of one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00) to the registered owner of a motor vehicle that
the police department has probable cause to believe was driven or operated
within the jurisdictional limits of the Village of Forest View to commit the
criminal offense of fleeing or attempting to elude a peace officer under 625
ILCS 5/11-204 or 625 ILCS 5/11-204.1.
   (B)   The registered owner of the motor vehicle shall be established by the
Police Department’s vehicle registration inquiry with the Illinois Secretary of
State.
   (C)   Notice shall be given in writing to the registered owner. The notice
shall include the following:
      1.   Statement that the driver or operator of a motor vehicle registered
to said owner fled or attempted to elude a Forest View peace officer after
having been given a visual or audible signal by a peace officer directing such
driver or operator to bring his or her vehicle to a stop.
      2.   Date, approximate time, and approximate location of the event.
      3.   Description of the motor vehicle as contained in the police
officer’s report.
      4.   Notice of the opportunity to contest the imposition of the
administrative fee by an adjudication hearing with instructions.
      5.   Notice that the administrative fee constitutes a debt due and owing
to the Village.
      6.   Notice shall be served upon the registered owner in any of the
following manners:
         a.   Personal service by handing the notice to the registered owner,
or to their employees or agents, by any authorized Village of Forest View
official, police officer, or code enforcement officer.
         b.   Mailing the notice by certified mail, return receipt requested,
to the registered owner’s last known address, according to the Illinois
Secretary of State; or in the case of a business, to the address for the
registered agent or the address for its principal place of business.
         c.   Personal service of process as authorized by the Illinois Code of
Civil Procedure, 735 ILCS 5/2-203.3.
      7.   The date of service of the notice shall be the date in which
personal service is accomplished or the date on which the written notice is
mailed.
   (D)   The administrative fee set forth in this section may be transferred by
the police department from the registered owner of the motor vehicle that the
police department has probable cause to believe was used in fleeing or
attempting to elude a peace officer to the driver or operator of said motor
vehicle at the time of the offense, if the registered owner produces to the
police department an affidavit attesting to the same, signed, under penalties
of perjury, and notarized by both the registered owner and the driver or
operator. Said affidavit must be served to the police department within thirty
(30) days of the imposition of the administrative fee.
(Ord. 25-22, 8-26-2025)
9-6-2: REQUEST FOR HEARING:
   (A)   An individual or entity charged with an administrative fee may
request, in writing, a hearing within thirty (30) days of the imposition
service of the notice of the administrative fee.
      1.   If the registered owner does not request a hearing under section
9-6-2 to contest the administrative fee within thirty (30) days of service, the
registered owner shall have thirty (30) days to pay the debt. If not paid, the
Village may seek to obtain a judgment on the debt and collect the judgment in
any manner provided by law.
      2.   The chief of police, of their designee, shall conduct the hearing.
      3.   The hearing shall be informal, not subject to the formal rules of
evidence.
      4.   If, after the hearing, the chief of police of their designee
determines that the imposition of the administrative fee was proper, then they
shall direct the collection of the administrative fee.
   (B)   If there is a determination that the imposition of the administrative
fee was improper, then the arrestee or entity charged with the administrative
fee shall not be required to pay the administrative fee. If the administrative
fee has already been paid, then the fee paid will be refunded.
   (C)   The individual or entity charged with an administrative fee may appeal
the decision of the hearing, or their designee, by requesting, in writing,
within fourteen (14) days of the decision, an administrative hearing as set
forth herein. After the expiration of the 14-day period, the Village shall
submit this determination of the administrative fee through the Village’s
administrative adjudication process for further hearing, determination and
imposition of the fee.
(Ord. 25-22, 8-26-2025)
9-6-3: APPEAL-ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING:
   (A)   Upon the timely written request by the individual entity who has been
charged the administrative fee or the submission of the determination by the
Village, a hearing on the lawfulness of the imposition of the administrative
fee shall be conducted in conjunction with the administrative adjudication
provisions contained in chapter 36 of this Code.
   (B)   Any sworn or affirmed report that is prepared in the performance of a
law enforcement officer’s duties and sufficiently describes the circumstances
leading to the individual’s arrest and processing or that a motor vehicle
registered to the entity charged with an administrative fee was used in fleeing
or attempting to elude a peace officer under 625 ILCS 5/11-204 or 625 ILCS 5/
11-204.1 shall be admissible prima facie evidence of probable cause and the
individual’s entity’s liability, unless rebutted by clear and convincing
evidence.
   (C)   If after the hearing, the hearing officer finds that the imposition of
the administrative fee was proper under the terms of this article, the hearing
officer may enter a written order finding the individual entity civilly liable
to the Village of Forest View.
   (D)   If the individual entity requests a hearing but fails to appear at the
hearing, the hearing officer may enter a default order for the amount of the
administrative fee against the individual entity.
   (E)   If the individual entity fails to timely request an administrative
hearing, an order for the amount of the administrative fee shall be entered
against the individual entity, unless said individual entity has affirmatively
waived the right to an administrative hearing and agreed to pay the
administrative fee.
   (F)   If after hearing, the hearing officer finds that the imposition of the
administrative fee was improper then, the individual entity will not be charged
the administrative fee.
(Ord. 25-22, 8-26-2025)
9-6-4: ADMINISTRATIVE FEE A DEBT:
   (A)   The administrative fee imposed upon an individual or entity shall
constitute a debt due and owing to the Village. If an individual or entity has
not previously paid the administrative fee, the individual entity shall have
thirty-five (35) days to pay the debt after the final determination. If not
paid, the Village may seek to obtain a judgment on the debt and collect the
judgment in any manner provided by law.
(Ord. 25-22, 8-26-2025)
TITLE 10
ZONING
CHAPTER 1
TITLE; PURPOSE
SECTION:
10-1-1: Title
10-1-2: Purpose
10-1-3: Objectives
10-1-4: Findings And Statements Adopted
10-1-1: TITLE:
This Title shall be known, cited and referred to as THE FOREST VIEW ZONING
ORDINANCE. (Ord. 61-56, 12-1961)
10-1-2: PURPOSE:
This Title is adopted for the purpose of:
   (A)   Promoting the public health, safety, comfort, morals, convenience and
general welfare.
   (B)   Securing adequate light, pure air and safety from fire and other
dangers.
   (C)   Conserving the taxable value of land and buildings throughout the
Village.
   (D)   Lessening or avoiding congestion in the streets.
   (E)   Lessening or avoiding hazards to persons and damage to property
resulting from the accumulation or runoff of storm or flood waters.
   (F)   Insuring and facilitating the preservation of sites, areas, and
structures of historical, architectural and aesthetic importance. (Ord. 93-13,
8-10-1993)
10-1-3: OBJECTIVES:
To these ends the Title is designed to set up and accomplish certain standards
and objectives by:
   (A)   Dividing the entire Village into zones or districts and restricting
and regulating therein the location, construction, reconstruction, alteration
and use of buildings, structures and land, whether for residence, business,
manufacturing or other specified uses.
   (B)   Preventing the overcrowding of land through regulating and limiting
the height and bulk of buildings hereafter erected as related to land area.
   (C)   Establishing, regulating and limiting the building or setback lines on
or along streets, alleys or property lines.
   (D)   Regulating and limiting the intensity of the use of lot areas, and
regulating and determining the area of open spaces within and surrounding such
buildings.
   (E)   Establishing standards to which buildings or structures therein shall
conform.
   (F)   Prohibiting uses, buildings or structures incompatible with the
character of the residence, business or manufacturing districts.
   (G)   Providing for off-street parking of motor vehicles and setting
standards for the loading and unloading of commercial vehicles.
   (H)   Preventing additions to and alterations or remodeling of existing
buildings or structures in such a way as to avoid the restrictions and
limitations imposed hereunder.
   (I)   Providing for the gradual elimination of those uses, buildings and
structures which are incompatible with the character of the districts in which
they are made or located, including, without being limited thereto: 1)
elimination of such uses of unimproved lands or lot areas when existing rights
of the persons in possession thereof are terminated or when the uses to which
they are devoted are discontinued; 2) elimination of uses to which such
buildings and structures are devoted if they are adaptable for permitted uses;
and 3) elimination of such buildings and structures when they have reached the
age fixed by the corporate authorities of the Municipality as the normal useful
life of such buildings or structures.
   (J)   Providing for the acquisition by purchase, condemnation or otherwise
of any buildings or structures which do not conform to the standards fixed by
the Village.
   (K)   Defining and limiting the powers and duties of the administrative
officers and bodies as provided hereinafter.
   (L)   Prescribing penalties for the violation of the provisions of this
Title or of any amendment thereto. (Ord. 93-13, 8-10-1993)
10-1-4: FINDINGS AND STATEMENTS ADOPTED:
The President and Board of Trustees adopt as findings the statements made in
the preambles to Ordinance 93-13, passed August 10, 1993. (Ord. 93-13, 8-10-
1993)
CHAPTER 2
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
10-2-1: Rules Of Construction
10-2-2: Definitions
10-2-1: RULES OF CONSTRUCTION:
The language used in the text of this Title shall be interpreted in accordance
with the following rules of construction:
   (A)   The singular number includes the plural and the plural the singular.
   (B)   The present tense includes the past and future tenses, and the future
the present.
   (C)   The words "shall" and "will" are mandatory and the word "may" is
permissive.
   (D)   The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter.
   (E)   Any words appearing in parenthesis in a definition shall be considered
a part of the definition of the word or term defined.
   (F)   All measured distances shall be to the nearest integral foot; if a
fraction is one-half foot (1/2') or more, the integral foot next above shall be
taken.
   (G)   The provisions of this Title shall be read as a whole so as to give
effect to its purposes and objectives.
   (H)   Section headings are descriptive and used for purpose of organization.
Where section headings are inconsistent with the text, the meaning of the text
shall prevail. (Ord. 93-13, 8-10-1993)
10-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
Certain commonly used words and terms have a particular meaning when used in
relation to zoning and land use. Wherever they occur in this Title, the
following words, terms and phrases, and their derivations, shall have the
meanings given in this Section.
ACCESSORY BUILDING OR USE: One which:
   (A)   1. Is subordinate to and serves a principal building or principal use;
      2.   Is subordinate in area, extent or purpose to the principal building
or principal use served;
      3.   Contributes to the comfort, convenience or necessity of occupants of
the principal building or principal use served; and
      4.   Is located on the same zoning lot as the principal building or
principal use served, with the single exception of such accessory off-street
parking facilities as are permitted to locate elsewhere than on the same zoning
lot with the building or use served.
   (B)   An "accessory use" includes, but is not limited to, the following:
      1.   A children's playhouse, garden house or private greenhouse;
      2.   A shed, garage or building for domestic storage;
      3.   Private swimming pools, for use by the occupant and his guests;
      4.   Storage of merchandise normally carried in stock on the same lot
with any retail service or business use, unless such storage is excluded by the
zoning district's regulations;
      5.   Storage of goods used in or produced by manufacturing activities on
the same lot or parcel of ground with such activities, unless such storage is
excluded by the zoning district's regulations;
      6.   Off-street motor vehicle parking areas, and loading and unloading
facilities;
      7.   Signs as regulated and permitted in each zoning district;
      8.   Carports;
      9.   Outdoor parking and storage of recreational vehicles or boat
trailers on lots or parcels of land zoned and/or used exclusively for single-
family detached dwelling purposes.
ALLEY: A public right of way, usually not more than thirty feet (30') wide,
which normally affords a secondary means of access to abutting property.
ALTERATION: Any change in size, shape, character, occupancy or use of a
building or structure.
ANIMAL HOSPITAL: Any building, or portion thereof, designed or used for the
care, observation or treatment of domestic animals.
AUDITORIUM: A room, hall or building, part of a church, theater, school,
recreation building or buildings, or any freestanding building, designed or
used for the gathering of people as an audience to hear lectures, plays or
other presentations.
AUTOMOBILE AND TRAILER SALES AREA: An open area, other than a street, used for
the display or sale of new or used motor vehicles or trailers, and where no
repair work is done except for minor automobile repair of motor vehicles or
trailers to be displayed and sold on the premises.
AUTOMOBILE LAUNDRY (Car Wash): A building or portion thereof used for washing
automobiles, using a chain conveyor, blower, steam cleaning device or other
mechanical devices.
AUTOMOBILE REPAIR, MAJOR: Means a) engine rebuilding or reconditioning of worn
or damaged motor vehicles or trailers; or b) collision service, including body,
frame, or fender straightening or repair; or c) painting of vehicles.
AUTOMOBILE REPAIR, MINOR: Incidental repairs, replacement of parts and motor
service to automobiles, but not including any operation or service specified as
"automobile repair, major" above.
AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION: A place where gasoline, stored only in underground
tanks, kerosene, lubricating oil or grease, are dispensed or offered for sale
at retail for the operation of automobiles, and where tires, batteries and
similar automobile accessories may be offered for sale on the premises at
retail. An "automobile service station" may include "minor automobile repair",
and installations customarily incidental thereto, and facilities other than an
automobile laundry, for washing cars, only if enclosed in a building.
"Automobile service station" does not include "open sale lots" as defined
herein or the sale or storage of new or used automobiles, trucks or trailers.
Automobile service stations may not provide major automobile repair.
AUTOMOBILE WRECKING YARD: Any place where two (2) or more motor vehicles, not
in running condition, or parts thereof, are stored in the open and are not
being restored to operation; or any land, building or structure used for
wrecking or storing of such motor vehicles or parts thereof, stored in the open
and not being restored to operating condition and including the commercial
salvaging of any other goods, articles or merchandise.
AWNING: A rooflike projection from the wall of a building, that is retractable
in operation and is covered with flexible material.
BASEMENT: A portion of a building partly or wholly under ground. Where more
than one-half (1/2) of its floor-to-ceiling height is above the established
curb level or above the average level of the adjoining ground where the curb
level has not been established, a basement shall be counted as a story for
purposes of height measurement.
BILLBOARD: Any structure or portion thereof upon which are signs or
advertisements used as an outdoor display. This definition does not include
signs or bulletin boards used to announce church services or to display court
or other public office notices, or signs offering the sale or lease of the
premises on which the sign is located.
BLOCK: A tract of land bounded by streets or by a street or streets and any
combination of boundary lines of public or institutionally owned lands,
railroad rights of way, rivers and lakes, Municipal corporate boundaries and
other lines of demarcation.
BOARDING HOUSE: See definition of Lodging House.
BOUNDARY LINE: A line on the Zoning District Map designating the edge of a use
district. Such a boundary line may be a boundary line for two (2) use districts
depending on the particular use district located on each side of said line.
BUILDABLE AREA: The space remaining on a zoning lot after the minimum open
space and setback requirements have been complied with.
BUILDING: A structure built for the support, enclosure, shelter or protection
of persons, animals, chattels or movable property of any kind, and which is
permanently affixed to the land.
BUILDING, ACCESSORY: A subordinate building or portion of a principal building,
the use of which is incidental to that of the principal building and is
customary in connection with that use.
BUILDING, COMPLETELY ENCLOSED: A building separated on all sides from the
adjacent open space, or from other buildings or other structures, by a
permanent roof and by exterior walls or party walls, pierced only by windows
and normal entrance or exit doors.
BUILDING, DETACHED: A building surrounded by open space on the same lot.
BUILDING HEIGHT: The vertical distance from the curb level to the highest point
of the under side of the ceiling beams in the case of a flat roof; to the deck
line of a mansard roof; and to the mean level of the under side of the rafters
between the eaves and the ridge of a gable, hop or gambrel roof. Chimneys,
spires, towers, elevator penthouses, tanks and similar projections other than
signs shall not be included in calculating the height.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL: A nonaccessory building in which the principal use of the
zoning lot on which it is located, is conducted.
BUILDING, RESIDENTIAL: A building which is arranged, designed, used or intended
to be used for residential occupancy by one or more families or lodgers and
which includes, but is not limited to, the following types: a) single-family
detached dwellings; b) two-family dwellings; c) single-family or two-family
attached and semi-detached dwellings developed initially under single ownership
or unified control; and d) multiple family dwellings.
BUILDING, TEMPORARY: Any building not designed to be permanently located in the
place where it is or where it is intended to be placed or affixed.
BULK: The term used to indicate the size and setbacks of buildings or
structures and the location of same with respect to one another, and includes
the following: a) size and height of buildings; b) location of exterior walls
at all levels in relation to lot line, streets or to other buildings; c) floor
area ratio; d) all open spaces allocated to buildings; e) amount of lot area
provided per dwelling unit; and f) required parking areas.
BUSINESS: An occupation, employment or enterprise which occupies time,
attention, labor and materials, or wherein merchandise is exhibited or sold, or
where services are offered.
CLINIC, MEDICAL OR DENTAL: An establishment where two (2) or more doctors,
licensed to practice medicine or dentistry, engage in such practice, operating
on a group or individual basis, with pooled facilities, such as coordinated x-
ray and allied departments, for the diagnosis and treatment of humans, and
which may include a drug prescription counter (not a drug store) for the
dispensing of drugs and pharmaceutical products to the patients of the clinic.
A medical or dental clinic may also be referred to as a medical, health or
dental center.
CLUB OR LODGE, PRIVATE: A nonprofit association of persons who are bona fide
members paying annual dues, which meets the following requirements:
   (A)   Owns, hires or leases a building or portion thereof, the use of such
premises being restricted to members and their guests; and
   (B)   Has its management and affairs conducted by a board of directors,
executive committee or similar body chosen by the members at an annual meeting.
Food and meals may be served to members and their guests on the association's
premises; provided, that adequate dining room space and kitchen facilities are
available. The sale of alcoholic beverages to members and their guests shall
not be allowed unless it is secondary and incidental to the promotion of some
other common objective of the organization and unless such sale is in
compliance with all applicable Federal and State laws and with all applicable
provisions of the Village Code.
COMMUNITY RESIDENCE: See definition of Group Home.
CURB LEVEL: The level of the established curb in front of a building measured
at the entrance of the front of the building. (Where no curb level has been
established, the pavement elevation at the street center line similarly
measured, or the mean elevation of the finished lot grade immediately adjacent
to a building shall be considered the "curb level".)
DAY CARE CENTER OR DAY NURSERY: A building or part thereof used to provide
daytime care of three (3) or more pre-school age children, for compensation.
DISABILITY: A physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one or
more of a person's major life activities, impairs their ability to live
independently, or a record of having such impairment, or being regarded as
having such an impairment. The current use of, or addiction to, alcohol or a
controlled substance is not a disability.
DISTRICT: A portion of the incorporated territory of the Village within which
certain uniform regulations and requirements, or various combinations thereof,
apply under the provisions of this Title.
DRIVE-IN ESTABLISHMENT: One which accommodates on the lot its patrons'
automobiles, from which the occupants may watch, purchase, etc.
DWELLING: A permanent building, or portion thereof, designed or used
exclusively for residential occupancy, including single-family dwellings, two-
family dwellings and multiple- family dwellings. The term does not include
hotels, motels or boarding or lodging houses; or automobile house trailers or
mobile homes.
DWELLING, DETACHED: A dwelling which is entirely surrounded by open space on
the same zoning lot.
DWELLING UNIT: One or more rooms which are arranged, designed or used as living
quarters for one family, or for a group home, as a single housekeeping unit. A
"dwelling unit" shall include permanently installed bathroom and kitchen
facilities in addition to sleeping and living areas.
ELECTRIC DISTRIBUTION CENTER: A terminal at which electric energy is received
from the transmission system and from which it is delivered to the distribution
system only.
ELECTRIC SUBSTATION: A terminal at which electric energy is received from the
transmission system and is delivered to other elements of the transmission
system and, generally, to the local distribution system.
ESTABLISHMENT, BUSINESS: A place of business carrying on operations, the
ownership and management of which are separate and distinct from those of any
other place of business located on the same zoning lot.
FAMILY: (A) Either one or more persons related by blood, adoption or marriage,
living and cooking together as a single housekeeping unit, exclusive of
household servants.
   (B)   Or not more than two (2) adult persons living and cooking together as
a single housekeeping unit though not related by blood, adoption, or marriage.
FLOOR AREA, GROSS: For determining the floor area ratio, "gross floor area"
means the sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors of the
building measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls or from the
center line of walls separating two (2) buildings. As used in this context, the
"floor area of a building" shall include: the basement floor area which at
least one-half (1/2) of the basement height is above the established curb
level; elevator shafts; stairwells at each floor; floor space used for
mechanical equipment, except equipment, open or enclosed, located on the roof;
penthouses; attic space having headroom of seven feet ten inches (7'10") or
more; interior balconies and mezzanines; enclosed porches; and floor area
devoted to accessory uses; but shall not include floor area devoted to off-
street parking or loading.
For structures devoted to bulk storage of materials, including, but not limited
to, grain elevators and petroleum storage tanks, the "gross floor area" shall
be determined on the basis of the height of such structure in feet, with each
ten feet (10') in height considered to be equal to one floor. If the remaining
portion of a structure measures more than five feet (5') over full floor
equivalents, that remainder shall be considered as an additional floor.
FLOOR AREA OF A BUILDING: For determining off-street parking and loading
requirements, "floor area of a building" means the sum of the gross horizontal
areas of the several floors of the building, or portion thereof, devoted to a
specific use, including: accessory storage areas located within selling or
working space such as counters, racks or closets; and any basement floor area
devoted to retailing activities, to the production or processing of goods, or
to business or professional offices. For purposes of this definition, floor
area shall not include: a) floor area devoted primarily to storage purposes,
except as otherwise noted herein; b) floor area devoted to off-street parking
or loading facilities, including aisles, ramps and maneuvering space; or c)
basement floor area other than area devoted to retailing activities, to the
production or processing of goods, or to business or professional offices.
FLOOR AREA RATIO (F.A.R.): The gross floor area of all buildings on a lot,
divided by the area of such lot. In the case of a planned development, the
"floor area ratio" means the gross floor area of all buildings in the
development site, divided by the net site area.
FRONTAGE (Of A Block): All of the property fronting on one side of a street,
between the nearest intersecting streets or between a street and a right of
way, waterway or similar barrier.
FRONTAGE LOT: All of the property of such lot fronting on a street, and as
measured between side lot lines.
GARAGE, BUS: Any building used or intended to be used for the storage of two
(2) or more passenger motor buses, or motor coaches, used in public
transportation, including school buses.
GARAGE, PRIVATE: An accessory building or an accessory portion of the principal
building, including a carport, which is intended for and used for storing the
private passenger vehicles of the family or families resident upon the
premises, and in which no business, service or industry connected directly or
indirectly with automotive vehicles is carried on; provided, that not more than
one-half (1/2) of the space may be rented for the private passenger vehicles of
persons not resident on the premises, except that all the space in a garage of
one or two (2) car capacity may be so rented.
GARAGE, PUBLIC: Any building other than a private garage, used for the care or
incidental servicing of automobiles, and sale of automobile supplies, or where
motor vehicles are parked or stored for remuneration, hire or sale within the
structure, but not including truck tractors, truck trailers and commercial
vehicles exceeding one and one-half (11/2) tons capacity.
GARAGE, STORAGE: A building or premises used for the housing only of motor
vehicles pursuant to previous arrangements and not by transients; and where no
equipment or parts are sold, and vehicles are not rebuilt, serviced, repaired,
hired or sold, except that fuel, grease or oil may be dispensed within the
building to vehicles stored therein.
GARAGE, TRUCK: A building which is intended to be used for the storage of motor
trucks, truck trailers, tractors and commercial vehicles exceeding one and one-
half (11/2) tons capacity.
GRADE: The average level of the finished surface of the ground adjacent to the
exterior walls of the building or structure.
GROUP HOME: A single dwelling unit occupied on a relatively permanent basis in
a family-like environment by a group of three (3) or more unrelated persons
with disabilities, plus paid professional support staff provided by a
sponsoring agency, either living with the residents on a twenty four (24) hour
basis, or present whenever residents with disabilities are present at the
dwelling.
GUEST, PERMANENT: A person or persons who occupies or has the right to occupy
accommodations in a lodging house, motel, hotel or apartment hotel as his
domicile and place of permanent residence.
HOME OCCUPATION: Any occupation or profession carried on by a member of the
immediate family residing on the premises, in connection with which: a) there
is used no sign or display that will indicate from the exterior that the
building is being utilized in whole or in part for any purpose other than that
of a dwelling; b) there is no commodity sold upon the premises; c) no person is
employed other than a member of the immediate family residing on the premises;
and d) no mechanical or electrical equipment is used except such as may also be
used for domestic or household purposes. A professional person may use his
residence for consultation, emergency treatment, or performance of religious
rites but not for the general practice of his profession. No accessory building
shall be used for such home occupation.
HOTEL: An establishment which is open to transient guests, in contradistinction
to a lodging house, and is commonly known as a hotel in the community in which
it is located and which provides customary hotel services such as maid service,
furnishing and laundering of linen, telephone and secretarial or desk service,
the use and upkeep of furniture, and bellboy service.
HOTEL, APARTMENT: A hotel in which at least ninety percent (90%) of the hotel
accommodations are occupied by permanent guests.
IMPERMEABLE SURFACES: Surfaces which do not allow water to drain, seep, filter
or pass through into the ground below. Such surfaces shall include, but are not
limited to, buildings, driveways, patios and other similar paved surfaces;
except, however, that such surfaces shall not include any such continuous
surface that has an area of less than sixteen feet (16').
INCOMPATIBLE USE: A use or service which is incapable of direct association
with certain other uses because it is contradictory, incongruous or discordant.
INDUSTRIAL PARK: A planned development designed to accommodate a community of
compatible and nonnuisance types of industry. Industrial parks may be promoted
or sponsored by private developers, community organizations or government
organizations.
JUNKYARD: An open area where waste or scrap materials are brought, sold,
exchanged, stored, baled, packed, disassembled or handled, including, but not
limited to, scrap iron and other metals, paper, rags, rubber tires and bottles.
A "junkyard" includes an auto wrecking yard, but does not include uses
established entirely within enclosed buildings, nor does it include an
establishment engaged only in the processing of scrap iron or other metals to
be sold specifically for the manufacture of steel or metal alloys.
KENNEL: Any premises or portion thereof on which more than four (4) dogs, cats
or other household domestic animals over four (4) months of age are kept, or on
which more than two (2) such animals are cared for, maintained, boarded or bred
for compensation, or are kept for the purpose of sale.
LODGING HOUSE: A residential building or portion thereof, other than a motel,
apartment hotel or hotel, containing lodging rooms for accommodation of three
(3) or more persons who are not members of the keeper's family and where
lodging or meals or both are provided by prearrangement and for definite
periods, other than on a daily, overnight or per meal basis to transient
guests.
LODGING ROOM: A room rented as sleeping and living quarters, but without
cooking facilities and with or without an individual bathroom. (In a suite of
rooms without cooking facilities, each room which provides sleeping
accommodations shall be counted as one "lodging room" for the purposes of this
Title.)
LOT: A parcel of land legally described as a distinct portion or piece of land
of record. As used herein, a lot may be one of two (2) kinds: a lot of record
or a zoning lot.
LOT AREA, GROSS: The area of a horizontal plane bounded by the front, side and
rear lot lines.
LOT, CORNER: A lot situated at the intersection of two (2) or more streets, the
interior angle of such intersection not exceeding one hundred thirty five
degrees (135°).
LOT DEPTH: The mean horizontal distance between the front lot line and the rear
lot line of a lot, measured within the lot boundaries.
LOT LINE, FRONT: The boundary of a lot which is along an existing or dedicated
public street, or where no public street exists, is along a public way, where
such public way is not a dedicated street. The owner of a corner lot may select
either street lot line as the front lot line.
LOT LINE, REAR: The boundary of a lot which is most distance from, and is, or
is most nearly, parallel to, the front lot line.
LOT LINE, SIDE: Any boundary of a lot which is not a front or rear lot line.
LOT OF RECORD: A lot which is part of a subdivision, the plat of which has been
recorded in the office of the Recorder of Deeds of Cook County, or a parcel of
land, the deed to which was recorded in the office of said Recorder prior to
the adoption of this Title.
LOT, THROUGH: A lot having a frontage on two (2) nonintersecting streets as
distinguished from a corner lot. On a through lot, both street lines shall be
deemed front lot lines.
LOT WIDTH: The horizontal distance between the side lot lines of a lot,
measured at the narrowest width within the first thirty feet (30') of lot depth
immediately in back of the required front yard setback line.
LOT, ZONING: A single tract of land located within a single block, which (at
the time of filing for a building permit) is designated by its owner or
developer as a tract to be used, developed or built upon as a unit, under
single ownership or unified control. A "zoning lot" may or may not coincide
with a "lot of record" as defined in this Section.
MANUFACTURE: The making of any thing by any method of process.
MARQUEE OR CANOPY: A rooflike structure of a permanent nature which projects
from the wall of a building and may overhang into a required yard.
MOBILE HOME: A trailer designed and constructed for dwelling purposes. (See
definition of Trailer.)
MOBILE HOME PARK: A lot, parcel or tract of land developed with facilities for
accommodating three (3) or more "mobile homes" as defined above, provided each
mobile home contains a kitchen, flush toilet and shower or bath; and such park
shall be for use only by nontransient dwellers remaining continuously for more
than one month, whether or not a charge is made. The term "mobile home park"
shall not include a sales lot in which automobiles or unoccupied trailers are
parked for the purpose of inspection or sale.
MOTEL: An establishment consisting of a group of attached or detached living or
sleeping accommodations with individual bathrooms and closet space, located on
a single lot and designed for use by transients. A motel furnishes customary
hotel services such as maid service and laundering of linen, telephone and
secretarial or desk service, and the use and upkeep of furniture. In a motel,
less than fifty percent (50%) of the living and sleeping accommodations are
occupied or designed for occupancy by persons other than transient automobile
tourists.
MOTOR FREIGHT TERMINAL: A building, a group of buildings, or an area, in which
freight brought by motor truck is assembled and/or stored for routing and
intrastate or interstate shipment by motor truck.
MOTOR VEHICLE: A passenger vehicle, truck, truck-trailer, trailer or semi-
trailer propelled or drawn by mechanical power. "Motor vehicle" includes
"recreational vehicle" as defined in this Section.
MUNICIPAL SERVICE BUILDING: A building or structure belonging to the Village
and used by the Village for Municipal purposes.
NAMEPLATE: A sign indicating the name and address of a building, or the name of
an occupant thereof and the practice of a permitted occupation therein.
NONCONFORMING BUILDING OR STRUCTURE: Any building or structure which: a) does
not comply with all of the regulations of this Title or of any amendment hereto
governing "bulk", as that term is defined in this Title, for the zoning
district in which such building or structure is located; or b) is designed or
intended for a nonconforming use.
NONCONFORMING USE: A use of land, buildings or structures which does not comply
with all of the regulations of this Title or of any amendment hereto governing
use for the zoning district in which such use is located.
NOXIOUS MATTER: That which is capable of causing injury to living organisms by
chemical reaction or is capable of causing detrimental effects upon the
physical or economic well-being of individuals.
NURSING HOME: See definition of Rest Home.
OPEN SALES LOT: Land used or occupied for the purpose of buying or selling
merchandise stored or displayed out-of-doors prior to sale. (Such merchandise
includes, but is not limited to, passenger cars, trucks, motor scooters,
motorcycles, boats and monuments.)
PARTICULATE MATTER: Finely divided solid or liquid matter, other than water,
which is released into the atmosphere.
PERFORMANCE STANDARDS: The criteria established in Section
10-8-10 of Chapter 8 of this Title to control noise, odor, smoke, toxic or
noxious matter, vibration, fire and explosive hazards, waste or glare or heat
generated by or inherent in uses of land or buildings.
PLAN COMMISSION: The Planning and Zoning Board of the Village, as provided in
Chapter 1 of Title 2 of the Village Code.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT: A tract of land which is developed as a unit under
single ownership or unified control, which includes two (2) or more principal
buildings and one or more principal uses and which may be granted waivers from
specified land use regulations and design standards in order to accomplish the
purposes of the planned unit development regulations as specified in Chapter 13
of this Title.
PRINCIPAL USE: The main use of land or buildings as distinguished from a
subordinate or accessory use.
PROPERTY LINES: The boundary lines of a lot.
PUBLIC UTILITY: Any person, firm, corporation or governmental unit duly
authorized to furnish the general public with cable television, electricity,
gas, sewer, steam, telephone, transportation, water or similar services,
pursuant to applicable regulations.
PUBLIC WAY: A sidewalk, alley, street or limited access highway.
RAILROAD RIGHT OF WAY: A strip of land with railroad tracks and auxiliary
facilities for track operation, but not including freight depots or stations,
loading platforms, train sheds, warehouses, car or locomotive shops or car
yards.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A vehicular type unit originally designed or permanently
connected and used for temporary living quarters while camping, traveling or on
vacation from the owner's residence, and which has its own motive power or is
mounted on or drawn by another vehicle and is not used for commercial purposes.
This definition shall include the following:
   (A)   Travel trailers, being portable vehicular structures built on a
chassis, designed to be drawn by another vehicle, usually having fixed and
rigid sides, ends and rooms and sometimes referred to as "self-contained";
   (B)   Truck campers, being portable units designed to be loaded onto or
affixed to the bed or chassis of a truck;
   (C)   Camping trailers, being portable vehicular units mounted on a chassis
constructed with collapsible side walls, ends and roof which fold down for
travel and storage;
   (D)   Motor homes, being vehicular units built on a self-propelled motor
vehicle chassis as a self-contained integral part of the chassis; and
   (E)   Boat trailers, being portable vehicular units designed to be drawn by
another vehicle and designed or utilized for the transportation of a boat or
boats, whether or not loaded with a boat or boats.
RESERVOIR PARKING: Those off-street parking spaces allocated to automobiles
awaiting entrance to a particular establishment.
REST HOME (Or Nursing Home): A private home for the care of children or the
aged or infirm, or a place of rest for those suffering bodily disorders, but
which does not contain equipment for surgical care or for the treatment of
disease or injury.
SETBACK: The minimum horizontal distance between the front line of a building
or structure and the front property line.
SIGN: A name, identification, description, display or illustration which is
affixed to, or painted or represented directly or indirectly upon a building,
structure, billboard, or piece of land and which directs attention to an
object, product, place, activity, person, institution, organization or
business. A "sign" shall not include: a) the display of official court or
public office notices; b) the flag, emblem or insignia of a nation, political
unit, school or religious group; nor c) one located completely within an
enclosed building, except signs located behind window areas so as to be exposed
to view from outside the building. Each display surface of a sign shall be
considered to be a separate sign.
SIGN, ADVERTISING: A type of sign which directs attention to a business,
commodity, service or entertainment not exclusively related to the premises
where such sign is located or to which it is affixed.
SIGN, BUSINESS: A type of sign which directs attention to a business or
profession conducted or to a commodity, service or entertainment sold or
offered upon the premises where such sign is located or to which it is affixed.
SIGN, FLASHING: An illuminated sign on which the artificial light is not
maintained stationary or constant in intensity and color at all times when such
sign is in use. Any revolving, illuminated sign shall be considered to be a
"flashing sign".
SIGN, GROSS AREA OF: The entire area within a single continuous perimeter
enclosing the extreme limits of such sign and in no case passing through or
between any adjacent elements of same. However, such perimeter shall not
include any structural or framing elements lying outside the limits of such
sign and not forming an integral part of the display.
SIGN, IDENTIFICATION: A structure, building, wall or other outdoor surface used
to display and identify the name of the individual business, profession,
organization or institution occupying the premises on which it is located.
SMOKE: The visible discharge from a chimney, stack, vent, exhaust or combustion
process which is made up of particulate matter.
STORY: The portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and
the surface of the floor next above or, if there is no floor above, the space
between the floor and the ceiling next above. A basement having more than one-
half (1/2) the clear floor-to-ceiling height above curb level shall be
considered a story. Any portion of a story exceeding fourteen feet (14') in
height shall be considered as an additional story for each fourteen feet (14')
or fraction thereof.
STORY, HALF: The portion of a building or structure under any type of sloping
roof, the wall plates of which on at least two (2) opposite exterior walls are
not more than four and one-half feet (41/2') above the top level of the story
below.
STREET: A platted, partially or fully improved public right of way, which
affords the principal means of access to abutting property, excluding driveways
to buildings and alleys.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATION: Any change, other than incidental repairs, which would
prolong the life of the supporting members of a building, such as the addition,
removal or alteration of bearing walls, columns, beams, girders or foundations.
STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires more or
less permanent location on the ground or attached to something having a
permanent location on the ground including but not limited to fences,
freestanding walls, buildings, decks and parking lots. A sign, billboard or
other detached or projecting advertising medium shall be construed to be a
structure.
TOXIC MATTER OR MATERIALS: Any substances, whether solid, liquid or gaseous,
which are capable of impairing health or causing injury to living organisms by
chemical means when present in relatively small amounts.
TRAILER: A vehicle, which may be self-propelled or propelled by other means,
used or adaptable for living, sleeping, business or storage purposes, no
foundation other than wheels, blocks, skids, jacks, horses or skirting, and
which has been or reasonably may be equipped with wheels or other devices for
transporting it from place to place. A permanent foundation shall not change
its character unless the entire structure is erected in accordance with
prevailing Village laws.
USE (Of Property): The purpose or activity for which the land or a building
thereon is designed, arranged or intended, or for which it is occupied or
maintained.
USE, NONCONFORMING: The use of any building, structure or parcel of land which
is lawfully occupied and maintained upon the effective date of the adoption or
amendment of this Title and which does not conform to the use regulations of
the zoning district in which the use is located by reason of the adoption or
amendment of this Title.
USE, PERMITTED: A use which may be lawfully established in a particular
district or districts, provided it conforms with all requirements, regulations
and performance standards of such district.
USE, PRINCIPAL: The main use of land or buildings as distinguished from a
subordinate or accessory use.
USE, SPECIAL: A use which, because of its unique characteristics, cannot be
properly classified as a permitted use in any particular district or districts,
but which may be permitted pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 17 of this
Title.
UTILITY FACILITY: A building, structure or use of land which provides, under
public regulations, electricity, gas, steam, telephone, communications,
television, transportation, sewer or water services and which is operated by a
public utility.
VARIATION: A waiver of the terms of applicable zoning regulations pursuant to
the procedures of Chapter 16 of this Title where, due to conditions peculiar to
the property, a literal enforcement of the regulations would result in
unnecessary and undue hardship.
YARD: An open space on the same zoning lot with a principal building or
structure, which is unoccupied and unobstructed from its lowest level upward,
except as otherwise permitted. A yard extends along a lot line, and to a depth
or width specified in the yard requirements for the zoning district in which
such zoning lot is located.
YARD, CORNER SIDE: A side yard which adjoins a public street or limited access
highway.
YARD, FRONT: A yard extending along the full length of the front lot line
between the side lot lines.
YARD, INTERIOR SIDE: A side yard which is located immediately adjacent to
another lot or to an alley separating such side yard from another lot.
YARD, REAR: A yard extending along the full length of the rear lot line between
the side lot lines.
YARD, SIDE: A yard extending along a side lot line from the front yard to the
rear yard.
YARD, TRANSITIONAL: A yard which must be provided: a) on a lot in a business
district which adjoins a lot in a residence district; or b) on a lot in a
manufacturing district which adjoins a lot in either a residence or business
district.
ZONING ADMINISTRATOR: The person appointed by the Village President and Board
of Trustees to be responsible for enforcing and administering all requirements
of this Title.
ZONING BOARD: The Planning and Zoning Board of the Village, as provided in
Title 2, Chapter 1 of this Code.
ZONING DISTRICT: A section or sections of the Village for which the regulations
and requirements governing use, lot and bulk of buildings and premises are
uniform.
ZONING MAP: The map or maps incorporated herein by reference, designating
zoning districts.
ZONING ORDINANCE: The Forest View Zoning Ordinance. (Ord. 93-13, 8-10-1993;
amd. Ord. 96-19, 12-10-1996; Ord. 99-19, 9-28-1999)
CHAPTER 3
DISTRICTS; MAP
SECTION:
10-3-1: Establishment Of Districts
10-3-2: Map
10-3-3: Boundaries Of Districts
10-3-4: Annexed Territory
10-3-1: ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS:
In order to carry out the purposes and provisions of this Title, the Village is
hereby divided into the following districts.
   (A)   Residence District:
R   Single-Family Residence
   (B)   Business Districts:
B-1   Retail and Service Business
B-2   General Business
   (C)   Manufacturing Districts:
M-1   Limited Manufacturing
M-1-1   Motor Freight Terminals
M-2   General Manufacturing
(Ord. 93-13, 8-10-1993)
10-3-2: MAP:
The location and boundaries of the districts established by this Title are set
forth on the "Zoning District Map, dated May 25, 1965", and including all
revisions through December 31, 1978, which is adopted by reference and made a
part of this Title. The said Map, together with everything shown thereon and
all amendments thereto, shall be as much a part of this Title as though fully
set forth and described herein. The said Map shall be filed with the office of
the Clerk and certified copies thereof in the office of the Zoning Enforcement
Officer, and shall be open to public reference at all times during which those
offices are open. (Ord. 61-56, 12-1961; amd. Ord. 65-113, 5-1965; Ord. 93-13,
8-10-1993)
10-3-3: BOUNDARIES OF DISTRICTS:
When uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of the various districts
as shown on the Zoning District Map, the following rules shall apply:
   (A)   District boundary lines are either the center lines of railroads,
highways, streets, alleys or easements; tract or lot lines or such lines
extended, unless otherwise indicated.
   (B)   In areas not subdivided into lots and blocks, wherever a district is
indicated as a strip adjacent to and paralleling a street, highway or railroad,
the depth of such strips shall be in accordance with dimensions shown on the
maps measured at right angles from the center line of a street, highway or
railroad, and the length of frontage shall be in accordance with dimensions
shown on the map from center lines of streets, highways or railroad rights of
way unless otherwise indicated.
   (C)   Where a district boundary line divides a lot in single ownership, the
regulations for either portion of the lot may, in the owner's discretion,
extend to the entire lot, but not more than twenty five feet (25') beyond the
boundary line of the district. (Ord. 61-56, 12-1961)
10-3-4: ANNEXED TERRITORY:
Any additions to the incorporated area of the Village, resulting from
annexations or otherwise, shall be automatically classified among the R single-
family residence districts until otherwise classified by amendment. (Ord. 61-
56, 12-1961)
CHAPTER 4
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
10-4-1: Interpretation
10-4-2: Separability
10-4-3: Building On Lot
10-4-4: Allowable Use Of Land Or Buildings
10-4-5: Uses Not Specifically Permitted In Districts
10-4-6: Prohibited Use Of Land Or Buildings
10-4-7: Control Over Use
10-4-8: Control Over Bulk
10-4-9: Accessory Building And Uses
10-4-10: Special Uses
10-4-11: Permitted Obstructions; Yards
10-4-12: Yards, General
10-4-13: Business Hours; Specific District
10-4-14: Fences
10-4-1: INTERPRETATION:
   (A)   In their interpretation and application the provisions of this title
shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public
health, safety, morals and welfare.
   (B)   Where the conditions imposed by any provision of this title upon the:
1) use of land or buildings; 2) bulk of buildings; 3) floor area requirements;
4) lot area requirements; and 5) yard requirements are either more restrictive
or less restrictive than comparable conditions imposed by any other provision
of this title, or of any other law, ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation
of any kind, the regulations which are more restrictive or which impose higher
standards or requirements shall govern.
   (C)   This title is not intended to abrogate any easement, covenant or other
private agreement; provided, that where the regulations of this title are more
restrictive or impose higher standards or requirements than such easements,
covenants or other private agreements, the requirements of this title shall
govern.
   (D)   No building, structure or use, not lawfully existing at the time of
the adoption of this title, shall become or be made lawful solely by reason of
the adoption of this title, and to the extent that, and in any manner that,
said unlawful building, structure or use is in conflict with the requirements
of this title, said building, structure or use remains unlawful hereunder.
(Ord. 61-56, 12-1961)
10-4-2: SEPARABILITY:
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the president and board of
trustees of the village that the several provisions of this title are
separable, in accordance with the following:
   (A)   If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge any provisions of
this title to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect any other provision of
this title not specifically included in said judgment.
   (B)   If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge invalid the
application of any provision of this title to a particular property, building,
or other structure, such judgment shall not affect the application of said
provision to any other property, building or structure not specifically
included in said judgment. (Ord. 61-56, 12-1961)
10-4-3: BUILDING ON LOT:
In single-family residence districts, every single-family dwelling hereafter
erected or structurally altered shall be located on a lot, and there shall not
be more than one principal building on one lot. (Ord. 61-56, 12-1961)
10-4-4: ALLOWABLE USE OF LAND OR BUILDINGS:
The following uses of land or buildings are allowed in the districts indicated
in this title under the conditions specified in this title:
   (A)   Uses lawfully established on the effective date of this title.
   (B)   Permitted uses as designated in this title.
   (C)   Special uses. (Ord. 61-56, 12-1961)
10-4-5: USES NOT SPECIFICALLY PERMITTED IN DISTRICTS:
When a use is not specifically listed in the sections devoted to permitted
uses, it shall be assumed that such uses are hereby expressly prohibited
unless, by application and authorization as provided under Chapter 18 of this
Title it is determined that said use is similar to and not more objectionable
than uses listed, in which event such use may then be permitted as a special
use. (Ord. 93-13, 8-10-1993)
10-4-6: PROHIBITED USE OF LAND OR BUILDINGS:
No building or tract of land shall be devoted to any use other than one which
is specified as a permitted or special use in this Title in the zoning district
in which such building or land is located. However, where a building permit for
a building or structure has been issued in accordance with law prior to the
effective date of this Title, and where construction has been begun within six
(6) months of such effective date and is being diligently prosecuted to
completion, said building or structure may be completed in accordance with
approved plans on the basis of which the building permit was issued; and
further, may, upon completion, be occupied under a certificate of occupancy by
the use originally designated, subject to the provisions of Chapter 14 of this
Title. (Ord. 61-56, 12-1961)
10-4-7: CONTROL OVER USE:
No building or premises shall hereafter be used or occupied, and no building or
structure, or part thereof, shall be erected, raised, moved, reconstructed,
extended, enlarged or altered, except in conformity with the regulations herein
specified for the district in which it is located, except that in residence
districts a lot in an ownership which was of record at the time of adoption
hereof, even though not meeting the requirements of this Title as to area and
width, may be used for single-family residence purposes; provided, that the
Zoning Board of Appeals, in accordance with procedure set forth in this Title,
decides that a hardship to the owner is involved. (Ord. 61-56, 12-1961)
10-4-8: CONTROL OVER BULK:
All new buildings shall conform to the bulk regulations established herein for
the district in which each building is located. Further, no existing building
shall be enlarged, reconstructed, structurally altered, converted or relocated
in such a manner as to conflict, or to further conflict with the bulk
regulations of this Title for the district in which such building shall be
located. (Ord. 61-56, 12-1961)
10-4-9: ACCESSORY BUILDING AND USES:
   (A)   Accessory uses shall be compatible with the principal use and shall
not be established prior to the establishment of the principal use, and shall
not include the keeping, propagation or culture of pigeons, poultry or
livestock, whether or not for profit. (Ord. 61-56, 12-1961)
   (B)   No accessory building unless it is structurally a part of the
principal building and unless it conforms with requirements of accessory
buildings for special uses, shall be erected or altered at, nor moved to a
location within ten feet (10') of the nearest wall of the principal building,
nor within the required area for front or side yard of a lot, as set forth for
the district, and in residence districts an accessory building in a rear yard
shall not be less than four feet (4') from any property line. An accessory
building on a corner residential lot of less than forty four foot (44')
frontage, located on 45th or 46th Street, shall be allowed to be erected within
the side yard opposite the public sidewalk of that lot, provided that such new
construction shall not be less than three feet (3') from that respective side
lot line. (Ord. 99-14, 6-22-1999)
   (C)   No accessory building shall encroach upon that side yard of a corner
lot which is adjacent to the street, nor upon that side yard of a reversed
corner lot which is adjacent to the street, nor upon the rear yard of a through
lot.
   (D)   No accessory building shall have more than one story and exceed
seventeen feet (17') in height unless otherwise permitted as accessory to
business and manufacturing uses or to authorized special uses. (Ord. 61-56, 12-
1961)
   (E)   All new garage construction fronting on 45th and 46th Streets within
the Village shall require a minimum setback of eighteen feet (18') from the
public sidewalk. However, new garage construction on a corner residential lot
of less than forty four foot (44') frontage, located on 45th or 46th Street,
shall be limited to a north-south depth of no greater than twenty two feet
(22'). If such a new structure is no greater than three feet (3') from the side
lot line opposite the public sidewalk and twenty two feet (22') in north-south
depth, the resultant setback distance from the public sidewalk shall be
accepted as conforming to the provisions of this subsection. (Ord. 99-14, 6-22-
1999)
10-4-10: SPECIAL USES:
   (A)   To provide for the location of certain uses as specified in chapter 18
of this title which are deemed desirable for the public welfare within a given
district or districts, but which might have an adverse effect upon nearby
properties, or upon the character and future development of the district in
which they are located, a classification of special uses is hereby established.
Procedures for special uses are set forth in chapter 18 of this title.
   (B)   Where a use exists on the effective date of this title and it is
classified as a special use by said title, it shall be considered to be a
lawful special use. Additions or alterations to existing buildings or land
improvements for expansion of lawful special uses may be made within the area
of the lot included in the ownership existing at the time of adoption of this
title, and they shall be subject to yard, floor area ratio and building height
requirements set forth in this title for permitted uses in the districts in
which they are located. (Ord. 61-56, 12-1961)
10-4-11: PERMITTED OBSTRUCTIONS; YARDS:
For the purpose of this title the following shall not be considered as
obstructions when located in the yards indicated:
   (A)   In Any Yards: Chimneys, overhanging roof eaves, open terraces,
marquees and awnings adjoining the principal building if they do not exceed ten
percent (10%) of the depth of the yard, ornamental light standards and
flagpoles, and trees and shrubs. On corner lots, such obstructions shall be no
higher than twenty four inches (24") above curb level if located in that
portion of a required front or side yard situated within twenty feet (20') of
the lot corner formed by the intersection of any two (2) street lines.
   (B)   In Side Yards: Private garages, if attached or structurally a part of
the principal building; private garages, detached; open accessory off street
parking spaces, accessory sheds, tool rooms or other similar accessory
buildings; recreational and laundry drying equipment; arbors and trellises;
fences not to exceed six feet (6') in height. However, a side yard which
adjoins a street shall be considered as a front yard for the full depth of the
lot. Accessory buildings or structures may occupy not more than thirty percent
(30%) of a rear yard. (Ord. 61-56, 12-1961)
10-4-12: YARDS, GENERAL:
   (A)   The minimum yard space required for one structure shall not again be
considered as yard space for another adjoining structure.
   (B)   No lot shall be reduced in area so that the yards or other open space
become less than required by this title.
   (C)   On streets where a front yard setback has been maintained for
buildings existing on lots or tracts having a frontage of fifty percent (50%)
or more of the total frontage on one side of that portion of any street lying
between two (2) intersecting streets, there shall be maintained a front yard
setback of not less than the average setback of the aforementioned existing
buildings, or thirty feet (30'), whichever is smaller.
   (D)   On a vacant through or corner lot either of the lot lines abutting a
street right of way line may be established as its front lot line, except that
where two (2) or more through lots are contiguous and a front lot line has been
duly established, the same street lot line shall thereafter be deemed to be the
front lot line of all such contiguous lots. On a through lot, a front yard
shall be provided along any lot line abutting a street. (Ord. 61-56, 12-1961)
10-4-13: BUSINESS HOURS; SPECIFIC DISTRICT:
Unless otherwise provided by title 3 of this code, all business establishments
within the village which are located within any area zoned for single-family
residential purposes by the zoning title, or within one hundred feet (100') of
a boundary of any such area shall be required to cease doing business and close
their doors to the public at two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and remain so closed for
business until six o'clock (6:00) A.M., with the exception that said business
establishments may remain open until four o'clock (4:00) A.M. on Sunday
morning. (Ord. 93-13, 8-10-1993)
10-4-14: FENCES:
   (A)   Definitions:
    DOUBLE FENCE: For purposes of this section, the term "double fence" shall
mean a second fence that is installed adjacent and approximately parallel to an
existing perimeter fence.
   FENCE: An enclosure about a parcel of land, field or other space or about
any object; any barrier such as a structure of wood, brick, stone, steel or the
like that is intended to prevent straying from within or intrusion therein.
   SIDE DRIVE: A land corridor between the principal residential structure and
the side lot line which is generally paved with a hard surface to provide for
the ingress/egress of motor vehicles.
   (B)   Double Fences: No more than one perimeter fence shall be erected per
adjoining residential properties.
   (C)   Fence Obstructions: No person shall erect, alter or relocate any fence
nor plant shrubbery which limits the side drive corridor of an adjacent
property to less than nine and one-half feet (9.5') in width, measured
perpendicular to the side lot line. A backyard, side lot line fence, where
there is a side drive on the adjacent property, shall not extend any further in
a front yard direction than the rear original building line of the principal
residential structure.
   (D)   Front Yard Fences: Front yard fences shall be permitted provided that
such fence is not closer to the front lot line than the required front yard
setback. (Ord. 02-01, 1-22-2002)
CHAPTER 5
R SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT
SECTION:
10-5-1: Permitted Uses
10-5-2: Special Uses
10-5-3: Lot Area
10-5-4: Lot Width
10-5-5: Floor Area Ratio
10-5-6: Building Height
10-5-7: Ground Floor Area Per Dwelling
10-5-8: Front Yard
10-5-9: Side Yards
10-5-10: Rear Yard
10-5-11: Yards
10-5-12: Off-Street Loading
10-5-13: Off-Street Parking
10-5-14: Accessory Buildings
10-5-15: Prohibited Uses; Yards
10-5-16: Home Occupations
10-5-17: Signs
10-5-1: PERMITTED USES:
The following uses are permitted in the R Single-Family Residential District:
Home occupations, subject to the regulations of Section
10-5-16 of this Chapter.
Parks and playgrounds, publicly owned and operated.
Schools, nonboarding, elementary, junior high and high, public or private.
Signs, subject to the regulations of Section
10-5-17 of this Chapter.
Single-family detached dwellings.
Temporary buildings or sheds for construction purposes, for a period not to
exceed the earlier of the date of completion of such construction or one year.
Accessory uses. (Ord. 93-13, 8-10-1993)
10-5-2: SPECIAL USES:
The following uses may be allowed by special use permit in accordance with the
provisions of Chapter 18 of this Title.
Cemeteries, including mausoleums in conjunction therewith, but excluding
crematories.
Day care centers and day nurseries.
Libraries, public.
Municipal service buildings.
Municipally owned buildings and community centers.
Satellite dishes no more than three feet (3') in diameter, but only when used
as an accessory use.
Utility and public service uses:
Electric substations.
Fire stations.
Police stations.
Telephone exchanges.
Water filtration plants, pumping stations and reservoirs.
Other similar public service uses. (Ord. 93-13, 8-10-1993)
10-5-3: LOT AREA:
Not less than five thousand four hundred (5,400) square feet. (Ord. 61-56, 12-
1961)
10-5-4: LOT WIDTH:
Not less than forty feet (40') at the buildable area. (Ord. 61-56, 12-1961)
10-5-5: FLOOR AREA RATIO:
Floor area ratio, nonresidential permitted uses and special uses, not to exceed
0.6. (Ord. 61-56, 12-1961)
10-5-6: BUILDING HEIGHT:
Single-family dwelling uses, not to exceed two and one-half (21/2) stories, or
thirty five feet (35'), whichever is lower. (Ord. 61-56, 12-1961)
10-5-7: GROUND FLOOR AREA PER DWELLING:
All dwellings not less than one thousand (1,000) square feet. (Ord. 61-56, 12-
1961)
10-5-8: FRONT YARD:
Single-family dwelling uses, not less than twenty five feet (25') in depth.
(Ord. 61-56, 12-1961)
10-5-9: SIDE YARDS:
Single-family dwelling uses:
   (A)   Two (2) side yards having a combined width of twelve feet (12') and
neither side yard less than four feet (4') in width on less than sixty foot
(60') lots; on sixty foot (60') lots no less than five feet (5') on either
side.
   (B)   A side yard abutting a street not to be less than twenty five feet
(25') wide, except if a corner lot, subdivided and duly recorded on the
effective date of this Title, has insufficient width to provide such yard of
twenty five feet (25') width and still to maintain a buildable width of thirty
two feet (32'), including required side yard along the opposite side lot line,
then the side yard abutting the street may be reduced in width by the distance
necessary to maintain a buildable width of thirty two feet (32'), provided the
side yard abutting a street is not reduced to less than thirty percent (30%) of
the width of the lot. (Ord. 61-56, 12-1961)
10-5-10: REAR YARD:
For single-family dwelling uses, the rear yard shall be not less than forty
feet (40') in depth. The total of all impermeable surfaces in the rear yard
shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the total area of the rear yard. (Ord.
96-19, 12-10-1996)
10-5-11: YARDS:
Nonresidential permitted uses and special uses, front, side and rear yards, as
required for single-family dwelling uses for a building less than thirty five
feet (35') in height; but for a building thirty five feet (35') or more in
height, each yard, front, side and rear, as required for single- family
dwellings, shall be increased by one foot (1') in depth or width for each
additional one foot (1') of building height over thirty five feet (35'). (Ord.
61-56, 12-1961)
10-5-12: OFF-STREET LOADING:
Nonresidential permitted uses and special uses: loading berths in accordance
with provisions set forth in Chapter 12 of this Title. (Ord. 61-56, 12-1961)
10-5-13: OFF-STREET PARKING:
Parking spaces in accordance with provisions set forth in Chapter 12 of this
Title. (Ord. 61-56, 12-1961)
10-5-14: ACCESSORY BUILDINGS:
   (A)   Private garages shall be permitted accessory uses in the Residential
Zoning District. No private garage shall be more than twenty four feet (24') in
length, twenty four feet (24') in width and fourteen feet six inches (14'6")
high. The garage shall be no less than four feet (4') from any side lot line
and no less than four feet (4') from the rear lot line.
   (B)   Private sheds shall be permitted accessory uses in the Residential
Zoning District. Private sheds shall not exceed ten feet (10') in length, or
ten feet (10') in width, and twelve feet (12') in height. The shed shall be no
less than four feet (4') from any side lot line and no less than four feet (4')
from the rear lot line.
   (C)   Private gazebos or covered patios shall be permitted accessory uses in
the Residential Zoning District. Private gazebos or covered patios shall not
exceed one hundred fifty square feet (150 sq ft) or exceed twelve feet (12') in
height. The gazebo shall be no less than four feet (4') from any side lot line
and no less than four feet (4') from the rear lot line.
   (D)   Private carports shall be permitted accessory uses in the Residential
Zoning District. Private carports shall not exceed two hundred square feet (200
sq ft) or exceed twelve feet (12') in height. The carport shall be no less than
four feet (4') from any side lot line and no less than four feet (4') from the
rear lot line. (Ord. 96-19, 12-10-1996; amd. Ord. 22-21, 9-13-2022)
10-5-15: PROHIBITED USES; YARDS:
Specifically prohibited in front, side or back yards are:
   (A)   Open storage of building material except during active construction
for permissible uses and not to exceed a period of one year from date of permit
issue.
   (B)   Storing of junk or nonoperating automobiles or trucks.
   (C)   Storing of machinery and equipment used in building construction and
alteration or heavy road type machinery.
   (D)   Open storing of mobile homes and residence in same.
   (E)   Dilapidated, unsightly, unsanitary sheds or temporary shelter for
materials or equipment.
   (F)   Burning of paper and rubbish.
   (G)   Piles of rubbish, junk or miscellaneous articles.
   (H)   Raising of poultry, pigeons, bees, livestock or furbearing animals for
sale or for sale of the products therefrom. (Ord. 61-56, 12-1961)
10-5-16: HOME OCCUPATIONS:
Home occupations shall be governed by the following regulations:
   (A)   Permitted home occupations may include any of the following:
      1.   Art, craft or ceramic studio.
      2.   Dressmaking.
      3.   Professional offices of a clergyman, lawyer, architect, engineer or
accountant.
      4.   Barbershop or beauty parlor, provided that such services are not
rendered to more than one person at a time or more than three (3) persons per
day.
      5.   Babysitting services, but excluding daycare centers or day
nurseries. (Ord. 93-13, 8-10-1993)
   (B)   Permitted home occupations shall not, under any circumstances, include
any other occupation such as, but not limited to, the following:
      1.   The operation of any wholesale or retail business unless conducted
entirely by mail or via the internet, and which does not involve the sale,
receipt or delivery of merchandise on the premises; (Ord. 17-06, 3-25-2017)
      2.   Any manufacturing or fabricating of products other than art works,
craft works, pottery works and dressmaking;
      3.   A repair shop or service establishment of any kind operating on or
from the premises;
      4.   A clinic or hospital;
      5.   A barbershop or beauty parlor rendering more services than provided
in subsection (A)4 of this section;
      6.   A daycare center or day nursery;
      7.   A stable or kennels;
      8.   A restaurant;
      9.   Any activity that produces noxious matter, or in any other respect
constitutes a nuisance.
   (C)   Permitted home occupations shall not be conducted in any building on
the premises other than the building which is used by the occupant as his
private dwelling.
   (D)   Permitted home occupations may not include the employment of any
additional person on the premises in the performance of such service, except
such members of the immediate family residing on the premises, and further,
shall not include exterior display or exterior signs except as such are
permitted by section
10-5-17 of this chapter. There shall be no exterior storage of equipment or
materials used in such home occupations, and no mechanical equipment shall be
used except such as may also be used for domestic or household purposes. (Ord.
93-13, 8-10-1993)
10-5-17: SIGNS:
   (A)   Illuminated nameplates are permitted subject to the following
conditions:
      1.   A nameplate shall not exceed forty eight (48) square inches in area,
and shall indicate only the name or name and address of the occupant.
      2.   There shall not be more than one such nameplate for each dwelling.
   (B)   Unilluminated "for sale" and "for rent" signs are permitted, subject
to the following conditions:
      1.   There shall not be more than one sign per lot, except that on a
corner lot two (2) signs, one facing each street, shall be permitted.
      2.   No sign shall exceed twelve (12) square feet in area, nor be closer
than eight feet (8') to any side and rear lot line, and four feet (4') to the
front lot line, or one-half (1/2) the depth of the front yard, whichever is
greater.
      3.   No sign shall project higher than one story, or twenty feet (20')
above curb level, whichever is lower. (Ord. 93-13, 8-10-1993)
CHAPTER 6
B-1 RETAIL AND SERVICE BUSINESS DISTRICT
SECTION:
10-6-1: General Conditions
10-6-2: Permitted Uses
10-6-3: Special Uses
10-6-4: Floor Area Ratio
10-6-5: Yards
10-6-6: Signs
10-6-7: Off-Street Loading
10-6-8: Off-Street Parking
10-6-1: GENERAL CONDITIONS:
   (A)   Dwelling units are not permitted, except as accessory uses to the
principal business use.
   (B)   All business, service, storage, merchandise, display and, where
permitted, repair and processing shall be conducted wholly within an enclosed
building, except for off-street automobile parking, off-street loading and open
sales lots.
   (C)   Unless otherwise specifically permitted in this Chapter, goods sold
shall consist primarily of new merchandise and any goods produced on the
premises shall be sold at retail, primarily on the premises.
   (D)   All nonresidential uses shall meet the performance standard
requirements of the M-1 Restricted Manufacturing District, as set forth in
Section
10-8-10 of Chapter 8 of this Title. (Ord. 93-13, 8-10-1993)
10-6-2: PERMITTED USES:
The following retail business and service uses are permitted in the B-1 Retail
and Service Business District:
Antique shops.
Art galleries and museums, but not including auction rooms.
Art supply stores.
Automobile accessory stores.
Bakeries where not more than fifty percent (50%) of the floor area is devoted
to processing.
Banks and financial institutions.
Barber shops and beauty parlors.
Bicycle stores, sales, rental and repair.
Blueprinting and photocopying establishments.
Book and stationery stores.
Building material sales, not including outside storage.
Camera and photographic supply stores.
Candy and ice cream stores.
Carpet and rug stores.
Catering establishments.
China and glassware stores.
Clothes pressing establishments.
Clothing and costume rental shops.
Coin and philatelic stores.
Contractors' and construction offices, not including outside storage.
Custom dressmaking.
Currency exchanges.
Department stores.
Drug stores and pharmacies.
Dry cleaning and laundry receiving establishments, with processing done off-
site.
Dry cleaning establishments, retail only, with processing done on-site.
Dry goods stores.
Electrical and household appliance sales and service, including radio and
television sales and repairs.
Flower shops.
Food stores, grocery stores, meat markets and delicatessens.
Frozen food shops, but not including locker rental in conjunction therewith.
Furniture sales, which may include furniture upholstering and the making of
draperies, slipcovers and other similar articles, when conducted as part of the
retail operations and secondary to the principal use.
Furrier shops, including the incidental storage and conditioning of furs.
Garden supply and seed stores.
Gift shops.
Hardware stores.
Hobby shops, retail, for sale of items to be assembled or used away from the
premises.
Interior decorating and design shops, which may include furniture upholstering
and making of draperies, slip covers and other similar articles, when conducted
as part of the retail operations and secondary to the principal use.
Jewelry sales and repairs.
Laboratories, medical, dental and optical.
Leather goods and luggage stores.
Liquor stores, retail sales.
Loan offices.
Locksmith shops.
Machinery sales, but not including outside display or storage.
Mail order houses.
Mail order service stores.
Medical and dental clinics, including laboratories incidental thereto.
Musical instrument sales and repair.
Newspaper office, but not including newspaper printing operations.
Office and school supply stores.
Office and business support services, including printing, mailing and photocopy
services.
Offices, business, professional and public.
Optician and optometrist offices, including laboratories as incidental thereto.
Orthopedic and medical appliance stores, but not including the assembly or
manufacture of such articles.
Paint and wallpaper stores.
Pet shops, including pet supplies and pet grooming.
Photography studios, including developing and printing of photographs when
conducted on the premises as part of the retail business.
Physical culture and health services, reducing salons.
Picture framing.
Plumbing showrooms and shops.
Post offices.
Restaurants, but not including entertainment or dancing.
Schools, music, dance or business.
Shoe sales and repair.
Signs, subject to the provisions of Section
10-6-6 of this Chapter.
Sporting goods stores.
Tailoring, alterations and needlework services.
Taverns and cocktail lounges.
Telegraph offices.
Temporary buildings for construction purposes, for a period of one year or the
end of construction, whichever is shorter.
Toy shops.
Travel agencies, travel bureaus and transportation ticket offices.
Variety stores.
Wearing apparel shops, including hats and shoes.
Accessory uses. (Ord. 93-13, 8-10-1993)
10-6-3: SPECIAL USES:
The following uses may be allowed by special use permit in accordance with the
provisions of Chapter 18 of this Title:
Animal hospitals.
Auditoriums.
Automobile body work facility.
Automobile service stations.
Churches.
Clubs and lodges, private, fraternal or religious.
Garages, public, servicing automotive vehicles of three (3) ton weight and
under, but not including body repair or painting.
Greenhouses.
Health centers.
Laboratories, medical, dental and optical, including research and testing.
Libraries, public.
Liquor stores, retail sales.
Municipal buildings, recreational buildings and community centers.
Municipal service buildings.
Satellite dishes no more than three feet (3') in diameter, but only when used
as an accessory use.
Schools, commercial or trade, including those teaching music, dance,
commercial, business or technical subjects.
Utility and public service uses:
   Electric substations and distribution centers.
   Fire stations.
   Police stations.
   Telephone exchanges.
   Planned unit developments. (Ord. 93-13, 8-10-1993)
10-6-4: FLOOR AREA RATIO:
Not to exceed 1.8. (Ord. 61-56, 12-1961)
10-6-5: YARDS:
   (A)   Side Yards: If a side yard is provided, not less than five feet (5')
wide, except where a side lot line coincides with a side lot line in an
adjacent residence district, or adjacent to an alley which separates business
and residence districts, a yard shall be provided along such side lot line.
Such yard shall be equal in dimension to the minimum side yard which would be
required under this Title for a residential use on an adjacent residential lot.
   (B)   Rear Yard: There shall be provided a rear yard of not less than twenty
feet (20') in depth. (Ord. 61-56, 12-1961)
   (C)   Front Yard: There shall be provided a front yard of not less than five
feet (5') in depth measured from the inner edge of the sidewalk away from the
curb of the street. (Ord. 93-31, 11-23-1993)
10-6-6: SIGNS:
Nonflashing but illuminated business signs with no moving parts, awnings and
marquees are permitted subject to regulations set forth elsewhere in the
provisions of the Village Code and the following:
   (A)   Exterior signs may be illuminated until eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M.,
or the close of business, whichever is later. Where a sign is illuminated by
light reflected upon it, direct rays of light shall not beam upon any part of
any existing residential building, nor into a residence district, or into a
street. A sign in direct line of vision of any traffic signal shall not have
red, green or amber illumination.
   (B)   The gross surface area in square feet of business signs on a lot shall
not exceed three (3) times the lineal feet of frontage of the lot, and for lots
fronting on more than one street, only the established front lot line shall be
considered as frontage of the lot.
   (C)   No sign shall project more than twenty four inches (24") into a public
right of way. (Ord. 61-56, 12-1961)
   (D)   Any sign located within three feet (3') of a driveway, parking area,
or within fifty feet (50') of the intersection of two (2) or more streets shall
have the lowest elevation at least twelve feet (12') above the curb level. No
temporary, portable or removable signs shall be placed on or within a driveway,
public right of way or parkway area. (Ord. 69-206, 10-28-1969)
   (E)   No sign shall project higher than the building height or thirty feet
(30') above the curb level, whichever is lower.
   (F)   In a unified shopping center, in single ownership or control, one
additional sign may be erected for it; the sign shall not exceed one hundred
twenty (120) square feet in area nor display more than the name and the
location of the shopping center; such sign shall be set back at least half the
required yard depth distance from each abutting street and its bottom edge
shall be at least eight feet (8') above the level of the ground, and its
overall height shall not exceed sixteen feet (16') above the curb level. (Ord.
61-56, 12-1961)
10-6-7: OFF-STREET LOADING:
Loading berths in accordance with provisions set forth in Chapter 12 of this
Title. (Ord. 61-56, 12-1961)
10-6-8: OFF-STREET PARKING:
Parking spaces in accordance with provisions set forth in Chapter 12 of this
Title. (Ord. 61-56, 12-1961)
CHAPTER 7
B-2 GENERAL BUSINESS DISTRICT
SECTION:
10-7-1: General Conditions
10-7-2: Permitted Uses
10-7-3: Special Uses
10-7-4: Floor Area Ratio
10-7-5: Yards
10-7-6: Signs
10-7-7: Off-Street Loading
10-7-8: Off-Street Parking
10-7-1: GENERAL CONDITIONS:
   (A)   Dwelling units and lodging rooms are not permitted, except those in a
hotel, motel, lodging house or group home, which may be permitted as special
uses.
   (B)   All business, service, storage, merchandise, display and, where
permitted, repair and processing shall be conducted wholly within an enclosed
building, except for off-street automobile parking, off-street loading and open
sales lots.
   (C)   Unless otherwise specifically permitted in this Chapter, goods sold
shall consist primarily of new merchandise and any goods produced on the
premises shall be sold at retail, primarily on the premises.
   (D)   All nonresidential uses shall meet the performance standard
requirements of the M-1 Limited Manufacturing District, as set forth in Section
10-8-10 of Chapter 8 of this Title.
   (E)   Within three hundred feet (300') of a residence district boundary line
all uses, except drive-in types of business establishments, and off-street
parking for vehicles in operable condition shall be within completely enclosed
buildings. Outdoor storage is permitted in rear yards only and then if
completely screened by a solid wall or uniformly painted solid fence at least
eight feet (8') in height, and open storage shall not be of a greater height
than that of the enclosing fence. (Ord. 93-13, 8-10-1993)
10-7-2: PERMITTED USES:
The following general business uses shall be permitted in the B-2 General
Business District:
Uses permitted in the B-1 Retail and Service Business District.
Amusement establishments, bowling alleys, pool halls, dance halls, gymnasiums,
swimming pools and skating rinks.
Auction rooms.
Auditoriums.
Automobile service stations.
Caskets and casket supplies.
Employment agencies.
Feed stores.
Fire stations.
Frozen food lockers.
Greenhouses.
Libraries.
Monument sales.
Motor vehicle and motor vehicle equipment sales.
Police stations.
Schools, art, dancing, vocation, professional and business.
Taxidermists.
Telephone exchanges and telephone transmission equipment buildings, excluding
microwave relay towers.
Theaters, not including drive-in theaters.
Any establishment engaged in production, processing, assembly, disassembly,
cleaning, servicing, testing, repair or storage of material goods or products.
Accessory uses. (Ord. 93-13, 8-10-1993)
10-7-3: SPECIAL USES:
The following uses may be allowed by special use permit in accordance with the
provisions of Section 18 of this Title:
Special uses allowed in the B-1 Retail and Service Business District, except
such as are permitted uses in the B-2 General Business District.
Building material sales with outside storage.
Cartage and express facilities providing for storage of goods, motor trucks and
other equipment in an enclosed structure.
Contractors and construction offices with outside storage.
Dog kennels.
Exterminating shops.
Garages, public, servicing automotive vehicles of three (3) ton weight and
under, including body repair and painting.
Garages, public, servicing automotive vehicles in excess of three (3) tons and
including engine repairs thereof.
Hotels, motels, lodging houses and group homes.
Municipal service buildings.
Planned unit developments.
Radio stations with transmission towers.
Satellite dishes no more than three feet (3') in diameter, but only when used
as an accessory use.
Second hand stores and rummage shops.
Undertaking establishments and funeral parlors. (Ord. 93-13, 8-10-1993)
10-7-4: FLOOR AREA RATIO:
Not to exceed 2.0. (Ord. 61-56, 12-1961)
10-7-5: YARDS:
As in a B-1 District. (Ord. 61-56, 12-1961)
10-7-6: SIGNS:
Regulations governing signs in a B-1 District shall apply. (Ord. 61-56, 12-
1961)
10-7-7: OFF-STREET LOADING:
Loading berths in accordance with provisions set forth in Chapter 12 of this
Title. (Ord. 61-56, 12-1961)
10-7-8: OFF-STREET PARKING:
Parking spaces in accordance with provisions set forth in Chapter 12 of this
Title. (Ord. 61-56, 12-1961)
CHAPTER 8
M-1 LIMITED MANUFACTURING DISTRICT
SECTION:
10-8-1: General Conditions
10-8-2: Permitted Uses
10-8-3: Special Uses
10-8-4: Yard Requirements
10-8-5: Regulations Along Business And Residence District Boundary Lines
10-8-6: Floor Area Ratio
10-8-7: Signs
10-8-8: Off-Street Parking
10-8-9: Off-Street Loading
10-8-10: Performance Standards
10-8-1: GENERAL CONDITIONS:
   (A)   Dwelling units and lodging rooms are not permitted.
   (B)   All uses in the M-1 Limited Manufacturing District shall comply with
the performance standards set forth in Section
10-8-10 of this Chapter.
   (C)   All business, service, storage, merchandise, display and, where
permitted, repair and processing shall be conducted wholly within an enclosed
building, except for off-street automobile parking, off-street loading and open
sales lots.
   (D)   Within three hundred feet (300') of a residence district boundary line
all uses, except drive-in types of business establishments, and off-street
parking for vehicles in operable condition shall be within completely enclosed
buildings. Outdoor storage is permitted in rear yards only and then if
completely screened by a solid wall or uniformly painted solid fence at least
eight feet (8') in height, and open storage shall not be of a greater height
than that of the enclosing fence. (Ord. 93-13, 8-10-1993)
10-8-2: PERMITTED USES:
The following uses are permitted in the M-1 Limited Manufacturing District:
Any establishment engaged in production, processing, assembly, disassembly,
cleaning, servicing, testing, repair or storage of material, goods or products.
Automobile laundries.
Automobile service stations.
Banks.
Building material sales with outside storage.
Contractors, architects and engineers' offices, shops and yards.
Drug stores and pharmacies.
Dry cleaning establishments.
Fuel and ice sales.
Garages, for storage, repair and servicing of motor vehicles.
Greenhouses, wholesale.
Highway maintenance shops and yards.
Laundries.
Lodges and offices of labor organizations.
Mail order houses.
Medical and dental clinics.
Municipal or privately owned recreational buildings or community centers.
Packing and crating services.
Parking lots and parking garages.
Printing.
Public utility service uses as follows:
Electric substations and distribution centers.
Fire stations.
Municipal service buildings.
Police stations.
Railroad rights of way.
Telephone exchanges and telephone transmission buildings, not including
microwave relay towers.
Utility service substations for electricity, natural gas, telephone and water
service.
Water filtration plants, pumping stations and reservoirs.
Publishing.
Radar installations and towers, not including microwave relay towers and
satellite dishes.
Radio and television studios, stations and towers, transmitting and receiving,
not including satellite dishes.
Restaurants, including the sale of liquor in conjunction therewith.
Stadiums, auditoriums and arenas, open or enclosed.
Taverns.
Temporary buildings for construction purposes, for a period not to exceed the
duration of such construction or one year, whichever is less.
Temporary real estate tract offices, for the purpose of conducting the sale of
lots of the tract upon which such tract office is located for a period of not
to exceed one year.
Trade or vocational schools.
Weighing stations.
Accessory uses. (Ord. 93-13, 8-10-1993)
10-8-3: SPECIAL USES:
The following uses may be allowed by special use permit in accordance with the
provisions of Chapter 18 of this Title:
Air, railroad, motor and water freight terminals, railroads switching and
classification yards, repair shops and roundhouses.
Cemeteries, including mausoleums, but not including crematories.
Extraction of sand, gravel or other raw materials.
Hotels and motels, including therein restaurants, theaters and similar
facilities.
Parks and playgrounds.
Planned unit developments.
Racetracks of any kind.
Railroad passenger stations.
Satellite dishes and microwave relay towers.
Signs, in excess of thirty feet (30') in height from curb level.
Theaters, automobile drive-in. (Ord. 93-13, 8-10-1993)
10-8-4: YARD REQUIREMENTS:
In the M-1 District the minimum yard requirements shall be not less than those
specified below:
   (A)   Front Yard: Not less than thirty feet (30') in depth.
   (B)   Side Yard: A side yard of not less than fifteen feet (15'), except on
a corner lot, a side yard adjoining a street shall be not less than thirty feet
(30') in depth.
   (C)   Rear Yard: Not less than twenty feet (20') in depth, and a rear yard
adjoining a railroad right of way or alley may be measured from the center line
of such right of way or alley.
   (D)   Transitional Yards:
      1.   Where a side lot line coincides with a side or rear lot line in an
adjacent business or residence district, a yard shall be provided along such
side lot line. Such yard shall be not less than twenty feet (20') in width.
      2.   Where a rear lot line coincides with a side lot line in an adjacent
business or residence district, a yard shall be provided along such rear lot
line. Such yard shall be not less than twenty five feet (25') in depth.
      3.   Where a rear lot line coincides with a rear lot line in an adjacent
business or residence district, a yard shall be provided along such rear lot
line. Such yard shall be not less than twenty five feet (25') in depth.
      4.   Where the extension of a front or side lot line coincides with a
front lot line of an adjacent lot located in a residence district, a yard equal
in depth to the minimum front yard required by this Title on such adjacent
residential lot shall be provided along such front or side lot lines for a
distance of at least twenty feet (20'), including the width of an intervening
alley from such residential lot.
      5.   Uses requiring compliance with provisions of the M-1 Limited
Manufacturing District, Chapter 8 of this Title. (Ord. 61-56, 12-1961)
10-8-5: REGULATIONS ALONG BUSINESS AND RESIDENCE DISTRICT BOUNDARY LINES:
   (A)   In the M-1 District on properties, or portions thereof, located
directly across a street from a business or residence district, if any point on
the exterior surface of any building or structure is at a greater height than
thirty five feet (35') above curb level, such point projected vertically upon
the ground shall, in no case, be nearer to a business or residence district
boundary line than a horizontal distance equal to one and one-half (11/2) times
the height of such point from curb level. However, stacks, tanks, bulkheads or
ventilating equipment, including towers enclosing same, shall be exempt from
such limitations if not exceeding in the aggregate twenty five feet (25') in
lineal dimension parallel to the street for any one hundred feet (100') of
street frontage. Parapets not exceeding three feet (3') in height shall also be
exempt from such limitations.
   (B)   In the M-1 District on properties, or portions thereof, located
adjacent to a side or rear property line in a business or residence district,
if any point on the exterior surface of any building or structure is at a
greater height than thirty five feet (35') above curb level, the vertical
projection of such point upon the ground shall, in no case, be nearer to the
side or rear lot line of any property in the adjacent business or residence
district than a horizontal distance equal to the height of such point above
curb level. However, stacks, tanks, bulkheads, or ventilating equipment,
including towers enclosing same, shall be exempt from such height limitations
if not exceeding in the aggregate twenty five feet (25') in lineal dimension
parallel to such business or residential lot line for any one hundred feet
(100') of length of such lot line. Parapets not exceeding three feet (3') in
height shall also be exempt from such limitations. (Ord. 61-56, 12-1961)
10-8-6: FLOOR AREA RATIO:
Not to exceed 1.7. (Ord. 61-56, 12-1961)
10-8-7: SIGNS:
Signs shall be permitted subject to the following conditions:
   (A)   Area: The gross area in square feet of all signs on a zoning lot shall
not exceed twenty (20) times the lineal frontage of such zoning lot. However,
the gross area of all flashing signs shall not exceed fifteen (15) times the
lineal feet of frontage of such zoning lot.
   (B)   Projection: No sign shall project more than three feet (3') from the
face of the wall of any building or structure.
   (C)   Height: No sign shall project more than thirty feet (30') above curb
level. (Ord. 61-56, 12-1961)
10-8-8: OFF-STREET PARKING:
Off-street parking facilities shall be provided in accordance with the
provisions set forth in Chapter 12 of this Title. (Ord. 93-13, 8-10-1993)
10-8-9: OFF-STREET LOADING:
Off-street loading facilities shall be provided in accordance with the
provisions set forth in Chapter 12 of this Title. (Ord. 93-13, 8-10-1993)
10-8-10: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
   (A)   General: Any use established in M-1, M-1-1 and M-2 Districts after the
effective date hereof shall be so operated as to comply with the performance
standards governing: 1) noise; 2) vibration; 3) smoke and particulate matter;
4) toxic and noxious matter; 5) odorous matter; 6) fire and explosive hazards;
and 7) glare and heat, set forth hereinafter for the district in which such use
shall be located. No use already established shall conflict with, or further
conflict with, the applicable performance standards established hereinafter for
the district in which such use is located.
   (B)   Noise; M-1, M-1-1 And M-2 Districts:
      1.   Should levels shall be measured with a sound level meter and
associated octave band filter manufactured according to standards prescribed by
the American Standards Association. The flat network and the slow meter
response shall be used. Sounds of short duration, as from forge hammers, punch
presses and the like, which cannot be measured accurately with the sound level
meter, shall be measured with the impact noise analyzer as manufactured by the
General Radio Company or its equivalent in order to determine the peak value of
the impact. For sounds so measured, the peak values shall not exceed by six (6)
decibels the values given in subsection (B)2 below.
      2.   At no point on the boundary of a residence or business district
shall the sound pressure level of any operation or plant (other than background
noises not directly under the control of the manufacturer) exceed the decibel
limits in the octave bands designated below:
Octave Band Frequency (Cycles Along Residence District Along Business District
Per Second)                   Boundaries               Boundaries
Octave Band Frequency (Cycles Along Residence District Along Business District
Per Second)                   Boundaries               Boundaries
0 to 75                       72                       79
75 to 150                     67                       74
150 to 300                    59                       66
300 to 600                    52                       59
600 to 1,200                  46                       53
1,200 to 2,400                40                       47
2,400 to 4,800                34                       41
Over 4,800                    32                       39
 
   (C)   Vibrations; M-1, M-1-1 And M-2 Districts:
      1.   Vibrations within a district shall be controlled so as not to become
a nuisance to adjacent uses.
      2.   No industrial operation or activity (except those not under the
direct control of the manufacturer) shall cause at any time ground transmitted
vibrations in excess of the limits set forth below. Vibrations shall be
measured at any point along a residence district boundary line with a three (3)
component measuring instrument approved by the Zoning Enforcement Officer, and
shall be expressed as displacement in inches.
 
Frequency (Cycles Per Second) Maximum Permitted Displacement
                              Along Residence District Boundaries (Inches)
0 to 10                       .0008
10 to 20                      .0005
20 to 30                      .0002
30 to 40                      .0002
40 and over                   .0001
 
   (D)   Smoke And Particulate Matter; M-1, M-1-1 And M-2 Districts:
      1.   Any use already established on the effective date hereof shall be
permitted to be altered, enlarged, expanded or modified; provided, that new
sources of smoke and/or particulate matter conform to the performance standards
established hereinafter for the district in which such use is located. The
total emission weight of particulate matter from all sources within the
boundaries of the lot shall not exceed the net amount permitted in the district
in which the use is located after such alteration, enlargement, expansion or
modification.
      2.   For the purpose of grading the density of smoke, the Ringelmann
Chart, published and used by the United States Bureau of Mines, shall be
employed. The emission of smoke or particulate matter of a density greater than
No. 2 on the Ringelmann Chart is prohibited at all times, except as otherwise
provided hereinafter.
      3.   The emission, from all sources within any lot area, of particulate
matter containing more than five percent (5%) by weight of particles having a
particle diameter larger than forty four (44) microns is prohibited.
      4.   Dust and other types of air pollution, borne by the wind from such
sources as storage areas, yards, roads and so forth within lot boundaries,
shall be kept to a minimum by appropriate landscaping, paving, oiling or other
acceptable means. Emission of particulate matter from such sources in excess of
the weight limitations specified hereinafter for the district in which such use
shall be located is prohibited.
      5.   In the M-1 and M-1-1 Districts the following additional regulations
shall apply:
         (a)   The emission of more than twelve (12) smoke units per stack in
any thirty (30) minute period is prohibited, including smoke in excess of
Ringelmann No. 2. However, once during any three (3) hour period, each stack
shall be permitted up to twenty (20) smoke units (not to exceed Ringelmann No.
3) in thirty (30) minutes for soot blowing and fire cleaning.
         (b)   The rate of particulate matter emission from all sources within
the boundaries of any lot shall not exceed a net figure of one pound per acre
of lot area during any one hour period, after deducting from the gross hourly
emission per acre the correction factor set forth in the following table:
   Allowance for Height of Emission*
 
Height of Emission Above Grade (Feet) Correction (Pounds Per Hour Per Acre)
50                                    0.01
100                                   0.06
150                                   0.10
200                                   0.16
300                                   0.30
400                                   0.50
 
   * Interpolate for intermediate values not shown in table.
Determination of the total net rate of emission of particulate matter within
the boundaries of any lot shall be made as follows:
(1) Determine the maximum emission in pounds per hour from each source of
emission and divide this figure by the number of acres of lot area; thereby
obtaining the gross hourly rate of emission in pounds per acre.
(2) From each gross hourly rate of emission derived in subsection (D)5(b)(1)
above, deduct the correction factor (interpolating as required) for height of
emission set forth in the table; thereby obtaining the net rate of emission in
pounds per acre per hour from each source of emission.
(3) Add together the individual net rates of emission derived in subsection
(D)5(b)(2) above, to obtain the total net rate of emission from all sources of
emission within the boundaries of the lot; such total shall not exceed one
pound per acre of lot area during any one hour.
      6.   In the M-2 District the following additional regulations shall
apply:
         (a)   The emission of more than sixteen (16) smoke units per stack in
any thirty (30) minute period is prohibited, including smoke in excess of
Ringlemann No. 2. However, once during any two (2) hour period, each stack
shall be permitted up to twenty four (24) smoke units (not to exceed Ringelmann
No. 3) in thirty (30) minutes for soot blowing and cleaning fires.
         (b)   The rate of particulate matter emission from all sources within
the boundaries of any lot shall not exceed a net figure of four (4) pounds per
acre during any one hour, after deducting from the gross hourly emission per
acre the correct factor set forth in the following table:
   Allowance for Height of Emission*
 
Height of Emission Above Grade (Feet) Correction (Pounds Per Hour Per Acre)
50                                    0.0
100                                   0.5
150                                   0.8
200                                   1.2
300                                   2.0
400                                   4.0
 
   * Interpolate for intermediate values not shown in table.
Determination of the total net rate of emission of particulate matter within
the boundaries of any lot shall be made as follows:
(1) Determine the maximum emission in pounds per hour from each source of
emission and divide this figure by the number of acres of lot area; thereby
obtaining the gross hourly rate of emission in pounds per acre.
(2) From each gross hourly rate of emission derived in subsection (D)6(b)(1)
above, deduct the correction factor (interpolating as required) for height of
emission set forth in the table; thereby obtaining the net rate of emission in
pounds per acre per hour from each source of emission.
(3) Add together the individual net rate of emission derived in subsection (D)6
(b)(2) above, to obtain the total net rate of emission from all sources of
emission within the boundaries of the lot; such total shall not exceed four (4)
pounds per acre of lot area during any one hour.
   (E)   Toxic And Noxious Matter; M-1, M-1-1 And M-2 Districts: No activity or
operation shall cause, at any time, the discharge of toxic or noxious matter
across lot lines in such concentrations as to be detrimental to or endanger the
public health, safety, comfort or welfare, or cause injury or damage to
property or business. In no case shall the concentration of toxic materials
released across lot lines exceed ten percent (10%) the value permitted an
industrial worker. (Ref: Threshold limit values for 1960, American Conference
of Governmental Industrial Hygienists, A.M.A. Archives of Environmental Health,
1, 140 (1960).)
   (F)   Odorous Matter:
      1.   M-1 And M-1-1 Districts: The emission of odorous matter from any
source shall be controlled so as to be below the odor threshold value when
measured at a lot line.
      2.   M-2 District: The emission of odorous matter from any source shall
be controlled so as to be no more than four (4) times the odor threshold value
when measured at a district boundary line.
   (G)   Fire And Explosive Hazard; M-1, M-1-1 And M-2 Districts:
      1.   Activities involving the manufacture of materials or products which
decompose by detonation are permitted only in the M-2 District, and then only
when specifically licensed by the corporate authorities after a public hearing
conducted by the Plan Commission.
      2.   The manufacture, utilization or storage of pyrophoric and explosive
dusts shall be in accordance with, the safety codes. of the National Fire
Protection Association. Such dusts include, but are not limited to: Aluminum
bronze and magnesium powder, powdered coal, powdered plastics, flour and feed,
spices, starches, sugar, cocoa, sulphur, grain (storage) and wood flour.
      3.   In the M-1 and M-1-1 Districts the following additional regulations
shall apply:
         (a)   The storage, utilization or manufacture of solid materials or
products ranging from incombustible to moderate burning is permitted.
         (b)   The storage, utilization or manufacture of solid materials or
products ranging from free or active burning to intense burning is permitted,
provided the following condition is met:
Said materials shall be stored, utilized or manufactured within completely
enclosed buildings having incombustible exterior walls, or protected throughout
by an automatic fire extinguishing system; or said materials may be stored
outdoors in conformance with the regulations of the Village, and such storage
shall have fifty feet (50') clearance from all property lines.
         (c)   The storage and utilization of flammable liquids or materials*
which produce flammable or explosive vapors or gases shall be permitted in
accordance with the following table:
   Total Capacity Of Flammable Materials Permitted, Gallons
Industries Engaged In Storage And Distribution Above Ground Under Ground
Industries Engaged In Storage And Distribution               Above   Under
                                                             Ground  Ground
Materials having a closed cup flash point over 187°         100,000 400,000
Fahrenheit
From and including 105° Fahrenheit to and including 187°   50,000  200,000
Fahrenheit
Materials having a closed cup flash point of less than 105° 20,000  100,000
Fahrenheit
Industries Engaged In Utilization Of Flammable Materials     Above   Under
                                                             Ground  Ground
Materials having a closed cup flash point over 187°         50,000  400,000
Fahrenheit
From and including 105° Fahrenheit and including 187°      10,000  200,000
Fahrenheit
Materials having a closed cup flash point of less than 105° 5,000   100,000
Fahrenheit
 
* When flammable gases are stored and utilized and measured in cubic feet, the
quantity in cubic feet (at S.T.P.) permitted shall not exceed three hundred
(300) times the quantities as listed above.
      4.   In the M-2 District the following additional regulations shall
apply:
         (a)   The storage, utilization or manufacture of solid materials
ranging from incombustible to intense burning are permitted, subject to
applicable rules and regulations of the Village.
         (b)   The storage and utilization of flammable liquids or materials*
which produce flammable or explosive vapors or gases, shall be permitted in
accordance with the following table:
   Total Capacity Of Flammable Materials Permitted, Gallons
Industries Engaged In Storage And Distribution                        Above Ground Under Ground
Materials having a closed cup flash point over 187° Fahrenheit                    
                                                                      Unrestricted Unrestricted
From and including 105° Fahrenheit to and including 187° Fahrenheit              
(Ord. 61-56, 12-1961)                                                 Unrestricted Unrestricted
                                                                      Within 300
                                                                      feet
                                                                      any zoning
                                                                      dis- trict
                                                                      boundary
                                                                      except an M-
                                                                      1 or M-
                                                                      2 boundary
                                                                      line, no
                                                                      more than
                                                                      50,000
Materials having a closed cup flash point of less than 105°          gallons per   
Fahrenheit                                                            lineal 100   Unrestricted
                                                                      feet running
                                                                      along said
                                                                      zoning
                                                                      district
                                                                      boundary
                                                                      shall be
                                                                      permitted.
                                                                      (Ord. 61-56,
                                                                      12-1961;
                                                                      amd. Ord.
                                                                      62-65, 3-13-
                                                                      1962)
Industries Engaged In Utilization Of Flammable Materials              Above Ground Under Ground
Materials having a closed cup flash point over 187° Fahrenheit                    
                                                                      Unrestricted Unrestricted
From and including 105° Fahrenheit                                                
and including 187° Fahrenheit                                        Unrestricted Unrestricted
                                                                      No more than
                                                                      200,000
Materials having a closed cup flash                                   gallons       
point of less than 105° Fahrenheit                                   within 300   Unrestricted
                                                                      feet of an
                                                                      M-
                                                                      2 boundary.
 
* When flammable gases are stored and utilized and measured in cubic feet, the
quantity in cubic feet (at S.T.P.) permitted shall not exceed three hundred
(300) times the quantities as listed above.
   (H)   Glare And Heat; M-1, M-1-1 And M-2 Districts: Any operation producing
intense glare or heat shall be performed within a completely enclosed building
in such a manner as not to create a public nuisance or hazard along lot lines.
Exposed sources of light shall be shielded so as not to create a nuisance
across lot lines. In no case shall illumination exceeding one-tenth (0.1) foot-
candle be permitted in a residential district which has its source in a
manufacturing district. (Ord. 61-56, 12-1961)
CHAPTER 9
M-1-1 MOTOR FREIGHT TERMINAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
10-9-1: General Conditions
10-9-2: Permitted Uses
10-9-3: Special Uses
10-9-4: Yard Requirements
10-9-5: Regulations Along Business And Residence District Boundary Lines
10-9-6: Floor Area Ratio
10-9-7: Signs
10-9-8: Off-Street Parking
10-9-9: Off-Street Loading
10-9-1: GENERAL CONDITIONS:
   (A)   Dwelling units and lodging rooms are not permitted.
   (B)   All nonresidential uses in the M-1-1 Motor Freight Terminal District
shall comply with the performance standards set forth in Section
10-8-10 of Chapter 8 of this Title.
   (C)   All business, service, storage, merchandise, display and, where
permitted, repair and processing shall be conducted wholly within an enclosed
building, except for off-street automobile parking, off-street loading and open
sales lots.
   (D)   Within three hundred feet (300') of a residence district boundary line
all uses, except drive-in types of business establishments, and off-street
parking for vehicles in operable condition shall be within completely enclosed
buildings. Outdoor storage is permitted in rear yards only and then if
completely screened by a solid wall or uniformly painted solid fence at least
eight feet (8') in height, and open storage shall not be of a greater height
than that of the enclosing fence. (Ord. 93-13, 8-10-1993)
10-9-2: PERMITTED USES:
The following uses are permitted in the M-1-1 Motor Freight Terminal District:
Any use permitted in the M-1 District.
Any establishment engaged in production, processing, cleaning, servicing,
testing, repair or storage of material, goods or products.
Motor freight terminals.
Sale, storage, display, repair and service of all types of new and used motor
vehicles (including, but without limitation, outdoor sales, storage and
display, without screening, of new and used motor vehicles and the performance
indoors of major automobile repair work), the sale of merchandise as is sold
ordinarily by an automobile and/or truck dealer for other purposes incidental
to an automobile and/or truck sales and service establishment. (Ord. 93-13, 8-
10-1993)
10-9-3: SPECIAL USES:
The following uses may be allowed by special use permit in accordance with the
provisions of Chapter 18 of this Title:
Any use allowed as a special use in the M-1 District, unless it is a permitted
use listed above in Section
10-9-2.
Planned unit developments. (Ord. 93-13, 8-10-1993)
10-9-4: YARD REQUIREMENTS:
The yard requirements in the M-1 District shall apply. (Ord. 61-56, 12-1961)
10-9-5: REGULATIONS ALONG BUSINESS AND RESIDENCE DISTRICT BOUNDARY LINES:
In the M-1-1 District, regulations along business and residence district
boundaries in the M-1 District shall apply. (Ord. 61-56, 12-1961)
10-9-6: FLOOR AREA RATIO:
Not to exceed 2.2. (Ord. 61-56, 12-1961)
10-9-7: SIGNS:
Signs shall be permitted subject to the following conditions:
   (A)   Area: The gross area in square feet of all signs on a zoning lot shall
not exceed twenty five (25) times the lineal frontage of such zoning lot.
However, the gross area of all flashing signs shall not exceed twenty (20)
times the lineal feet of frontage of such zoning lot.
   (B)   Projection: No sign shall project more than six feet (6') from the
face of the wall of any building or structure.
   (C)   Height: No sign shall project more than thirty feet (30') above curb
level. (Ord. 61-56, 12-1961)
10-9-8: OFF-STREET PARKING:
Off-street parking facilities shall be provided in accordance with the
provisions of Chapter 12 of this Title. (Ord. 93-13, 8-10-1993)
10-9-9: OFF-STREET LOADING:
Off-street loading facilities shall be provided in accordance with the
provisions of Chapter 12 of this Title. (Ord. 93-13, 8-10-1993)
CHAPTER 10
M-2 GENERAL MANUFACTURING DISTRICT
SECTION:
10-10-1: General Conditions
10-10-2: Permitted Uses
10-10-3: Special Uses
10-10-4: Yard Requirements
10-10-5: Regulations Along Business And Residence District Boundary Lines
10-10-6: Floor Area Ratio
10-10-7: Signs
10-10-8: Off-Street Parking
10-10-9: Off-Street Loading
10-10-1: GENERAL CONDITIONS:
   (A)   Dwelling units and lodging rooms are not permitted.
   (B)   All uses in the M-2 General Manufacturing District shall comply with
the performance standards set forth in Section
10-8-10 of this Title.
   (C)   All business, service, storage, merchandise, display and, where
permitted, repair and processing shall be conducted wholly within an enclosed
building, except for off-street automobile parking, off-street loading and open
sales lots.
   (D)   Within three hundred feet (300') of a residence district boundary line
all uses, except drive-in types of business establishments, and off-street
parking for vehicles in operable condition shall be within completely enclosed
buildings. Outdoor storage is permitted in rear yards only and then if
completely screened by a solid wall or uniformly painted solid fence at least
eight feet (8') in height, and open storage shall not be of a greater height
than that of the enclosing fence. (Ord. 93-13, 8-10-1993)
10-10-2: PERMITTED USES:
The following uses are permitted in the M-2 General Manufacturing District:
Any use permitted in the M-1 District.
Any establishment engaged in production, processing, cleaning, servicing,
testing, repair or storage of material, goods or products.
Air, railroad and water freight terminals, railroad switching and
classification yards, repair shops and roundhouses.
Accessory uses. (Ord. 93-13, 8-10-1993)
10-10-3: SPECIAL USES:
The following uses may be allowed by special use permit in accordance with the
provisions of Chapter 18 of this Title.
Any use allowed as a special use in the M-1 District, unless it is a permitted
use listed above in Section
10-10-2.
Motor freight terminals.
Planned unit developments.
Sale, storage, display, repair and service of all types of new and used motor
vehicles (including, but without limitation, outdoor sales, storage and
display, without screening, of new and used motor vehicles and the performance
indoors of major automobile repair work), the sale of merchandise as is sold
ordinarily by an automobile and/or truck dealer for other purposes incidental
to an automobile and/or truck sales and service establishment. (Ord. 93-13, 8-
10-1993)
10-10-4: YARD REQUIREMENTS:
The yard requirements in the M-1 District shall apply. (Ord. 61-56, 12-1961)
10-10-5: REGULATIONS ALONG BUSINESS AND RESIDENCE DISTRICT BOUNDARY LINES:
In the M-2 District, regulations along business and residence district
boundaries in the M-1 District shall apply. (Ord. 61-56, 12-1961)
10-10-6: FLOOR AREA RATIO:
Not to exceed 2.2. (Ord. 61-56, 12-1961)
10-10-7: SIGNS:
Signs shall be permitted subject to the following conditions:
   (A)   Area: The gross area in square feet of all signs on a zoning lot shall
not exceed twenty five (25) times the lineal frontage of such zoning lot.
However, the gross area of all flashing signs shall not exceed twenty (20)
times the lineal feet of frontage of such zoning lot.
   (B)   Projection: No sign shall project more than six feet (6') from the
face of the wall of any building or structure.
   (C)   Height: No sign shall project more than thirty feet (30') above curb
level. (Ord. 61-56, 12-1961)
10-10-8: OFF-STREET PARKING:
Off-street parking facilities shall be provided in accordance with the
provisions set forth in Chapter 12 of this Title. (Ord. 93-13, 8-10-1993)
10-10-9: OFF-STREET LOADING:
Off-street loading facilities shall be provided in accordance with the
provisions set forth in Chapter 12 of this Title. (Ord. 93-13, 8-10-1993)
CHAPTER 11
NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES AND USES
SECTION:
10-11-1: Statement Of Purpose
10-11-2: Continuation Of Nonconforming Uses And Buildings
10-11-3: Change Of Nonconforming Use
10-11-4: Discontinuance Of Nonconforming Use
10-11-5: Enlargements
10-11-6: Repairs And Alterations
10-11-7: Damage Or Destruction
10-11-8: Moving
10-11-9: Termination Of Nonconforming Uses, Buildings And Structures
10-11-1: STATEMENT OF PURPOSE:
The purpose of this Section is to provide for the regulation of nonconforming
uses, buildings, structures and to specify those circumstances and conditions
under which those nonconforming buildings, structures and uses may be
continued, in accordance with the authority granted by 65 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/11-13-1. (Ord. 71-266, 10-12-1971; amd. Ord. 93-13, 8-10-1993)
10-11-2: CONTINUATION OF NONCONFORMING USES AND BUILDINGS:
   (A)   Any lawfully established use of a building or land which becomes
nonconforming with respect to this Title on the effective date thereof or on
the effective date of any amendments thereto, shall be deemed to be a legal
nonconforming use and may be continued, except as otherwise provided in this
Chapter.
   (B)   Any legal, nonconforming building or structure may be continued in use
provided there is no physical change other than necessary maintenance and
repair, as otherwise permitted herein.
   (C)   Any use that is illegal at the time of the adoption of this Title, or
at the time of any subsequent amendment thereto, shall not become a
nonconforming use by reason of such adoption, but shall remain an illegal use,
except where such illegal use is in a zoning district permitting such use.
(Ord. 93-13, 8-10-1993)
10-11-3: CHANGE OF NONCONFORMING USE:
   (A)   No nonconforming use of any building, structure or portion thereof,
which is designed or intended for use not permitted in the district in which it
is located, may be changed to another nonconforming use thereof unless such
other use either conforms to the use regulations of the district in which it is
located or is permitted by a special use permit as authorized by Chapter 18 of
this Title.
   (B)   A nonconforming structure that was erected, converted or structurally
altered in violation of the provisions of this Title or any subsequent
amendment thereto shall not be validated by the adoption of this Title or any
subsequent amendment thereto, and such violations or any violations of this
Title may be ordered removed or corrected by the proper officials at any time.
   (C)   No change of use shall extend or otherwise modify any provision in
Section
10-11-9 of this Chapter for the elimination of a nonconforming building or
structure and the use thereof. (Ord. 93-13, 8-10-1993)
10-11-4: DISCONTINUANCE OF NONCONFORMING USE:
   (A)   Whenever any part of a building, structure or land occupied by a
nonconforming use is changed to or replaced by a use conforming to the
provisions of the ordinance, such premises shall not thereafter be used or
occupied by a nonconforming use, even though the building may have been
originally designed and constructed for the prior nonconforming use.
   (B)   Whenever a nonconforming use of a building or structure or part
thereof, has been discontinued for a period of twelve (12) consecutive months,
or whenever there is evident a clear intent on the part of the owner to abandon
a nonconforming use, such use shall not after being discontinued or abandoned,
be reestablished, and the use of the premises thereafter shall be in conformity
with the regulations of the district.
   (C)   Where no enclosed building is involved, discontinuance of a
nonconforming use for a period of six (6) months shall constitute abandonment,
and shall not thereafter be used in a nonconforming manner.
   (D)   A nonconforming use not authorized by the provisions of the zoning
ordinance in effect at the time the amendatory ordinance becomes effective,
shall be discontinued and not reestablished, except when the provisions of the
amendatory ordinance find the use to be conforming to the district in which it
is then located. (Ord. 93-13, 8-10-1993)
10-11-5: ENLARGEMENTS:
   (A)   Nonconforming Uses: There shall be no extension or enlargement of any
nonconforming use.
   (B)   Nonconforming Buildings:
      1.   A nonconforming building may be enlarged or extended only if the
entire building is thereafter devoted to a conforming use, and is made to
conform to all the regulations of the district in which it is located.
      2.   No building partially occupied by a nonconforming use shall be
altered in such a way as to permit the enlargement or expansion of the space
occupied by such nonconforming use.
      3.   A building or structure which is nonconforming with respect to
yards, floor area ratio or any other element of bulk regulated herein shall not
be altered or expanded in any manner which would increase the degree or extent
of its nonconformity with respect to the bulk regulations for the district in
which it is located. (Ord. 93-13, 8-10-1993)
10-11-6: REPAIRS AND ALTERATIONS:
   (A)   Normal maintenance of a building or other structure containing a
nonconforming use is permitted, including necessary nonstructural repairs and
incidental alterations which do not extend or intensify the nonconforming use.
   (B)   Alterations designed to increase the intensity of a nonconforming use,
or to introduce a new nonconforming use, are expressly prohibited.
   (C)   No structural alteration shall be made in a nonconforming building or
structure or in a building or other structure containing a nonconforming use,
except when the alteration is required by law or when the alteration will bring
the building or structure into conformity with the zoning district in which it
is located. (Ord. 93-13, 8-10-1993)
10-11-7: DAMAGE OR DESTRUCTION:
A building or structure which contains a nonconforming use or is designed or
intended for a use not permitted in the district in which it is located and
which is damaged or destroyed by any means to the extent of fifty percent (50%)
of its replacement value shall not thereafter be restored unless said building
or structure and the use thereof shall conform to all the regulations of the
district in which it is located. (Ord. 71-266, 10-12-1971)
10-11-8: MOVING:
No nonconforming building or structure shall be moved in whole or in part to
any other location on the lot, except as required by law, unless every portion
of such building or structure which is moved has the use thereof made to
conform to all the regulations of the district in which it is located. (Ord.
71-266, 10-12-1971)
10-11-9: TERMINATION OF NONCONFORMING USES, BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES:
   (A)   Valuation:
      1.   For the purposes of this Section, the valuation of a nonconforming
building or structure or use shall be its assessed valuation, or where no
assessed valuation exists, its appraised valuation at the time it became
nonconforming with respect to this Title.
      2.   When the provisions of this Section affect only a portion of a
building or structure, and when there is no separate valuation for such
portion, the Building Commissioner shall determine the valuation of same on the
basis of an equitable prorating of the valuation of the entire building or
structure.
   (B)   Nonconforming Buildings Or Structures Less Than Five Thousand Dollars
Valuation: Any nonconforming building, structure or portion thereof, which has
a valuation of less than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) shall be demolished,
removed or remodeled and converted for a use permitted in the zoning district
in which it is located within two (2) years from the date the building,
structure or portion thereof became nonconforming with respect to this Title,
as indicated herein, or five (5) years from the date of issuance of the
building permit for same, or from the date construction was completed if no
building permit was issued, whichever period shall terminate last.
   (C)   Nonconforming Buildings Or Structures From Five Thousand Dollars To
Ten Thousand Dollars Valuation: Any nonconforming building, structure or
portion thereof, which has a valuation of at least five thousand dollars
($5,000.00) but not more than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) shall be
demolished, removed or remodeled and converted for a use permitted in the
zoning district in which it is located within four (4) years from the date the
building, structure or portion thereof, became nonconforming with respect to
this Title, as indicated herein, or eight (8) years from the date of issuance
of the building permit for same, or from the date construction was completed if
no building permit was issued, whichever period shall terminate last.
   (D)   Nonconforming Buildings Or Structures Exceeding Ten Thousand Dollars
Valuation: Any nonconforming building, structure or portion thereof, which has
a valuation of more than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) shall be demolished,
removed or remodeled and converted for a use permitted in the zoning district
after the termination of the respective periods of time set out hereinafter,
which periods are hereby established as a reasonable amortization of the
normal, useful life of each class of building and type of construction above
the foundation walls or piers:
      1.   Fireproof construction of noncombustible materials consisting of
exterior walls of solid brick, stone, reinforced concrete or insulated metal
paneled between fireproofed steel and with interior structural members of
reinforced concrete or fireproofed steel, thirty (30) years from the date the
building, structure or portion thereof, became nonconforming with respect to
this Title as hereinbefore indicated, or forty (40) years from the date of
issuance of the building permit for the construction of either the whole
structure or the initial building or initial part thereof, whichever period
shall terminate last.
      2.   Fire resistant shell construction consisting of exterior walls of
solid brick, stone, reinforced concrete or other masonry units with structural
members of unprotected steel, timber or wood joist construction, twenty (20)
years from the date the building, structure or portion thereof, became
nonconforming with respect to this Title as hereinbefore indicated, or thirty
(30) years from the date of issuance of the building permit for the
construction of either the whole structure or the initial building or initial
part thereof, whichever period shall terminate last.
      3.   Frame type construction consisting of exterior walls of wood or
timber frame construction irrespective of the type of exterior surfaces and all
other structures not qualifying under subsections (D)1 or (D)2 herein and all
physical improvements to land, all or substantially all of which are below or
at ground level, ten (10) years from the date the building, structure or
portion thereof became nonconforming with respect to this Title as hereinbefore
indicated, or twenty (20) years from the date of issuance of the building
permit for the construction of either the whole structure or the initial
building or initial part thereof, whichever period shall terminate last.
If, prior to the adoption of this Title substantially all of a nonconforming
building has been reconstructed, rebuilt or structurally altered, or if an
addition at least equal in size or valuation has been structurally attached
thereto, then for the purposes of determining the normal useful life of such
building, the date of issuance of the building permit therefor shall be taken
to be the date of issuance of the building permit for such reconstruction,
alteration or addition.
   (E)   Nonconforming Use Of Conforming Building: In a residence district, the
nonconforming business or manufacturing use of a building, or portion thereof,
which is designed or intended for a residential purpose for a residential
accessory purpose, shall be entirely discontinued and shall thereafter cease
operation on or before five (5) years from the date the use became
nonconforming with respect to this Title and not be reestablished.
   (F)   Nonconforming Use Of Land:
      1.   The nonconforming use of land in a residence district shall be
terminated not later than two (2) years from the date the use became
nonconforming with respect to this Title in each of the following instances:
         (a)   Where no buildings or structures are employed in connection with
such use, or where the only buildings, structures or other physical
improvements employed are accessory or incidental to such use or have an
assessed valuation of less than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00); or
         (b)   Where such use is maintained in connection with a conforming
building or structure; except that inadequate off street parking facilities
accessory to a building or structure located in the residence district and
occupied by a use conforming with the requirements of the district may be
continued for as long a time as the premises are used for a permitted use.
      2.   A nonconforming use of land which is accessory to the nonconforming
use of a building or structure shall be discontinued on the same date the
nonconforming use of the building or structure is discontinued.
      3.   The sale of merchandise in the open, when not permitted by the
provisions of this title, shall be discontinued immediately.
      4.   A nonconforming use of land which has in connection therewith,
physical improvements, all or substantially all of which are underground or at
ground level, shall be deemed to be a nonconforming structure, and shall be
subject to the applicable provisions of this section.
   (G)   Exempted Buildings, Structures And Uses:
      1.   No lawfully established building, structure or use shall be subject
to the termination provisions of this section. Solely for reason of being
nonconforming with respect to the standards prescribed in this title for any of
the following:
   Floor area ratio.
   Yards - front, side, rear or transitional.
   Off street parking or loading.
   Lot area.
   Building height.
   Gross floor area.
(Ord. 71-266, 10-12-1971)
      2.   No nonconforming residential use or building lawfully established in
a residence district shall be subject to the termination provisions of this
section. For purposes of this section, the term "nonconforming residential use"
shall mean a use which was approved by the president and board of trustees in
the form of an ordinance or other formal action taken as reflected in the
minutes of the board of trustees. (Ord. 07-07, 9-11-2007)
CHAPTER 12
OFF-STREET LOADING AND PARKING
SECTION:
10-12-1: Off-Street Loading
10-12-2: Off-Street Parking
10-12-1: OFF-STREET LOADING:
In connection with any building or structure which is to be erected or
substantially altered, and which requires the receipt or distribution of
materials or merchandise by trucks or similar vehicles, there shall be provided
off-street loading berths not less than the minimum requirements specified in
this Chapter.
   (A)   Location: All required loading berths shall be located on the same lot
as the use to be served, and no portion of the vehicle shall project into a
street or alley. In the manufacturing districts no loading berth for vehicles
of more than two (2) ton capacity shall be located less than fifty feet (50')
to any residence district. No permitted or required loading berth shall be
located within twenty five feet (25') of the nearest point of intersection of
any two (2) streets, nor shall it be located in a required front yard or side
yard.
   (B)   Size: A required off-street loading berth shall be at least ten feet
(10') in width by at least fifty feet (50') in length, exclusive of aisle and
maneuvering space, and shall have vertical clearance of at least fourteen feet
(14').
   (C)   Access: Each required off-street loading berth shall be designed with
appropriate means of vehicular access to a street or alley in a manner which
will least interfere with traffic movements, and shall be subject to approval
of the Zoning Enforcement Officer of the Village.
   (D)   Surfacing: All open off-street loading berths shall be improved with a
compacted macadam base not less than seven inches (7") thick, or equal,
surfaced with not less than two inches (2") of asphaltic concrete or some
comparable all-weather, dustless material.
   (E)   Repair And Service: No storage of any kind nor motor vehicle repair
work or service of any kind shall be permitted within any required loading
berth.
   (F)   Space Allowed: Space allowed to any off-street loading berth shall
not, while so allocated, be used to satisfy the space requirements for any off-
street parking facilities or portions thereof.
   (G)   Required Loading Berths: For the uses here listed, loading berths
shall be provided as specified:
      1.   Auditoriums: For such a building containing 10,000 to 100,000 square
feet of floor area - 1 loading berth. For each additional 100,000 square feet
of floor area, or fraction thereof in such a building - 1 additional loading
berth.
      2.   Banks, Business And Professional Offices, or Public Administration
Buildings: For such a building containing 10,000 to 100,000 square feet of
floor area - 1 loading berth. For each additional 100,000 square feet of floor
area, or fraction thereof in such a building - 1 additional loading berth.
      3.   Bowling Alleys: For such a building containing 10,000 to 100,000
square feet of floor area - 1 loading berth. For each additional 100,000 square
feet of floor area, or fraction thereof in such a building - 1 additional
loading berth.
      4.   Hospitals, Schools, Colleges, Sanitariums And Other Similar
Institutional Uses: For such a building having 10,000 to 100,000 square feet of
floor area - 1 off-street loading berth. For each additional 100,000 square
feet of floor area, or fraction thereof in such a building - 1 additional
loading berth.
      5.   Hotels Or Private Clubs And Lodges: For such a building containing
10,000 to 100,000 square feet of floor area - 1 loading berth. For each
additional 150,000 square feet of floor area, or fraction thereof in such a
building - 1 additional loading berth.
      6.   Manufacturing And Warehousing: Manufacturing, fabricating, assembly,
disassembly, warehousing, storing, cleaning, servicing, testing and repairing
establishments: For such a building containing 5,000 to 40,000 square feet of
floor area - 1 loading berth, plus 1 additional loading berth for each
additional 40,000 square feet of floor area, or fraction thereof.
      7.   Retail Stores: Retail stores, furniture and appliance stores,
household equipment and furniture stores, repair shops, wholesale stores and
establishments handling the sale and consumption of food on the premises:
Loading berths in accordance with the following schedule:
 
Square Feet Of Floor Area Minimum Number of Berths And Size Of Each Berth
5,000 to 10,000           1
10,000 to 25,000          2
25,000 to 40,000          3
40,000 to 100,000         4
 
for each additional 100,000 square feet of floor area, or fraction thereof in
such a building - 1 additional loading berth.
      8.   Theaters: For such a building containing 8,000 to 25,000 square feet
of floor area - 1 loading berth. For each additional 50,000 square feet of
floor area, or fraction thereof - 1 additional loading berth.
      9.   Undertaking Establishments And Funeral Parlors: For such a building
containing 5,000 to 25,000 square feet of floor area - 1 loading berth. In such
a building containing more than 25,000 square feet, additional loading berth or
berths as determined by the Zoning Enforcement Officer.
      10.   Other Uses: Off-street loading berths shall be provided in
accordance with requirements determined by the Zoning Enforcement Officer and
approved by the Village Board, based upon requirements heretofore set forth for
the most similar use. (Ord. 61-56, 12-1961)
10-12-2: OFF-STREET PARKING:
Any off-street parking space in connection with existing buildings or
structures on the effective date of this Title shall not be removed, enlarged
or altered, except in conformance with the requirements of this Title.
In connection with any building or structure which is to be erected or
substantially altered, and which requires off-street parking spaces, there
shall be provided such off-street parking spaces in accordance with regulations
set forth hereinafter:
   (A)   Use: Except as may otherwise be provided for the parking of trucks or
for special uses, required accessory off-street parking facilities required as
accessory to uses listed herein shall be solely for the parking of passenger
automobiles of patrons, occupants or employees.
   (B)   Location:
      1.   Parking spaces required for single- or two-family dwelling units
shall be located on the same lot as the dwelling served.
      2.   Parking spaces required for all other uses shall be located on the
same lot as the use served.
      3.   Uses other than single- or two-family dwellings, which are in
existence on the effective date hereof and which are subsequently altered or
enlarged, may be served in accordance with requirements of this Title by
parking facilities located on land other than the lot on which the building or
use served is located, provided such facilities are located within three
hundred feet (300') walking distance from the main entrance to the use served,
as long as they are located in the same district.
   (C)   Computation: When determination of the number of off-street parking
spaces required by this Title results in a requirement of a fractional space,
any fraction of one-half (1/2) or less may be disregarded, while a fraction in
excess of one-half (1/2) shall be counted as one parking space.
   (D)   Collective Provisions For Nonresidential Uses: Off-street parking
facilities for separate uses may be provided collectively if the total number
of spaces so provided is not less than the sum of the separate requirements of
each such use, and if all regulations governing the location of accessory
parking spaces in relation to the use served are observed. But no parking space
or portion thereof shall serve as the required space for more than one use
unless otherwise authorized in accordance with this Title.
   (E)   Repair And Service: No motor vehicle repair work of any kind shall be
permitted in parking lots. No gasoline or motor oil shall be sold in
conjunction with any accessory parking facilities unless such facilities are
located within a completely enclosed building, in which case gasoline and motor
oil may be sold within such building to the users of such facilities, provided
that no advertising sign is visible from outside the building, and provided
further that all gasoline pumps shall be effectively screened from view of the
street.
   (F)   Size: A required off-street parking space shall be at least nine feet
(9') in width and at least twenty feet (20') in length, exclusive of access
drives, aisles, ramps, columns and office or work area. Such space shall have
vertical clearance of at least seven feet (7').
   (G)   Access:
      1.   Each required off-street parking space shall open directly upon an
aisle or a driveway of such width and design as to provide safe and efficient
means of vehicular access to such parking space.
      2.   All off-street parking facilities shall be provided with appropriate
means of vehicular access to a street, alley or driveway in a manner which will
least interfere with traffic movements.
      3.   A parking area containing four (4) or more parking spaces shall have
vehicular access to it over a street, alley or driveway containing all-weather,
hard-surfaced pavement, and the location route of access to such a parking area
shall be identified. No driveway across public property shall have a width
exceeding twenty four feet (24'), exclusive of curb returns.
   (H)   In Yards: Off-street parking spaces may be located in yards, except
required front yards and side yards adjoining a street.
   (I)   Design And Maintenance:
      1.   Open And Enclosed Parking Spaces: Accessory parking spaces located
on the same lot as occupied by the use served may be open to the sky or
enclosed in a building. Accessory parking spaces, located elsewhere than on the
same lot occupied by the use, shall be open to the sky.
      2.   Surfacing: All open off-street parking areas shall be improved with
an adequate storm water drainage system, and paved with a compacted macadam
base, or equal, not less than four inches (4") thick, and a wearing surface of
asphaltic concrete or comparable hard-surfaced, all-weather, dustless material
as approved by the Village.
      3.   Screening And Landscaping: All open automobile parking areas
containing more than four (4) parking spaces shall be effectively screened on
each side adjoining or fronting on any residential or institutional property by
a wall or fence not less than five feet (5') high or more than six feet (6')
high, or a densely-planted compact hedge not less than five feet (5') in
height; and wheel stops of masonry, steel or heavy timber shall be placed not
nearer than five feet (5') from the street line in districts where a front yard
is not required, or from side lot lines.
      4.   Lighting: Illumination of an off-street parking area shall be
arranged so as not to reflect rays of light into adjacent residential districts
and streets. All lighting shall be extinguished not later than thirty (30)
minutes after the close of business of the use being served, except as may be
otherwise authorized by the Village Board.
   (J)   Required Spaces: Off-street parking spaces accessory to designated
uses shall be provided as follows:
      1.   Single-Family Dwellings: At least 1 parking space for each dwelling,
plus 1 additional parking space for each 2 roomers lodgers accommodated, but no
more than 4 parking spaces for each single-family dwelling.
      2.   Hotels And Apartment Hotels: At least 1 parking space for each
lodging room.
      3.   Boarding Or Lodging Houses: At least 2 parking spaces, plus 1
parking space for each 3 persons for whom living accommodations are provided.
      4.   Private Clubs And Lodges: At least 2 parking spaces, and 1 parking
space for each 7 seats in accordance with design capacity of the main meeting
room.
      5.   Motels: At least 1 parking space for each dwelling unit or lodging
room.
      6.   Schools, Elementary Or Junior High, Public Or Private: At least 1
parking space for each 3 faculty members and other full-time employees.
      7.   Schools, High, Public Or Private: At least 1 parking space of design
capacity for each 7 students.
      8.   Churches: At least 1 parking space for each 7 seats, or 126 inches
of seating space in the main auditorium.
      9.   School And Institutional Auditoriums: At least 1 parking space for
each 2 persons employed on the premises, and one additional parking space for
each 5 seats, or for each 90 inches of seating space in the main auditorium or
assembly hall.
      10.   Theaters: At least one parking space for each 5 seats in the
theater.
      11.   Hospitals: At least 1 parking space for each 3 hospital beds, plus
1 parking space for each 4 employees other than doctors, plus 1 parking space
for each 2 doctors assigned to the staff.
      12.   Libraries And Museums: At least 1 parking space for each 1,000
square feet of floor area.
      13.   Recreational Buildings Or Community Centers: At least 1 parking
space shall be provided for each 3 employees, plus spaces in adequate number as
determined by the Village Board to serve the visiting public.
      14.   Medical And Dental Clinics: At least 11/2 parking spaces for each
examining or treatment room, plus 1 for each doctor and employee in the
building.
      15.   Public Utility And Public Service Uses: At least 1 parking space
for each 3 employees, plus spaces in adequate number as determined by the
Village Board to serve the visiting public.
      16.   Establishments Handling The Sale And Consumption Of Food And
Refreshment On The Premises: At least 1 parking space for each 150 square feet
of floor area.
      17.   Bowling Alleys: At least 7 parking spaces for each alley, plus such
additional spaces as may be required herein for affiliated uses such as
restaurants and the like.
      18.   Banks: At least 1 parking space for each 300 square feet of floor
area.
      19.   Business And Professional Offices Or Public Administration
Buildings: At least 1 parking space for each 500 square feet of floor area.
      20.   Automobile Service Stations: At least 1 parking space for each
employee, plus 2 for each service stall.
      21.   Furniture And Appliance Stores, Motor Vehicle Sales, Wholesale
Stores, Stores For Repair Of Household Equipment Or Furniture: At least 1
parking space for each 600 square feet of floor area.
      22.   Undertaking Establishments And Funeral Parlors: At least 10 parking
spaces for each chapel or parlor, plus 1 parking space for each funeral vehicle
maintained on the premises.
      23.   Retail Stores: At least 1 parking space for each 250 square feet of
floor area.
      24.   Manufacturing, Fabricating And Processing Plants Not Engaged In
Retail Trade: At least 1 parking space for each 3 employees.
      25.   Warehouse And Storage Establishments And Freight Terminals: At
least 1 off-street parking space for each 2 employees and 1 space for each
truck maintained on the premises.
      26.   Other Uses: Parking spaces on the same basis as required herein for
the most similar use as determined by the Village Board. (Ord. 61-56, 12-1961)
CHAPTER 13
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS
SECTION:
10-13-1: Purpose
10-13-2: Procedure
10-13-3: Standards
10-13-4: Required Documentation
10-13-5: Pre-Application Documents
10-13-6: Conceptual Plan Documents
10-13-7: Preliminary Plan Documents
10-13-8: Final Plan Documents
10-13-9: Permitted Uses
10-13-1: PURPOSE:
The planned unit development special use is a concept which encourages improved
design in the development of land by providing relief from the standards
established for districts. The concept provides for a mixture of uses otherwise
permitted only in separate zones and for a more flexible use of development
standards, including yards, height and bulk regulations based on design
excellence and improved performance, so that the following objectives may be
attained:
   (A)   Environmental design in the development of land that is better than
that normally attainable through the strict application of the Zoning Ordinance
subdivision regulations contained in this Chapter.
   (B)   Diversification in the uses permitted and variation in the
relationship of uses, structures, open spaces and heights of structures in
developments conceived as cohesive unified projects.
   (C)   Provision for functional aesthetic and beneficial use of open areas
for both public and private uses, including both active and passive forms of
recreation.
   (D)   Preservation of the natural environment and the conservation of
significant natural areas.
   (E)   Provision for a safe and desirable living environment for residential
areas characterized by a unified building and site development program.
   (F)   Provision for the unified development and redevelopment of business,
commercial, industrial and manufacturing centers while maintaining appropriate
buffers between such centers and adjacent residential areas through the
establishment of transitional uses and the use of landscaping and open areas.
   (G)   Rational and economic development on a scale consistent with the
Village's ability to provide needed public services. (Ord. 93-13, 8-10-1993)
10-13-2: PROCEDURE:
A planned unit development, if granted, shall be granted as a special use and
shall be subject to the provisions of Chapter 18 of this Title, except that the
procedures described in this Chapter shall be the exclusive procedures for
processing applications seeking approval of a planned unit development. In the
event that a conflict arises between a provision of this Chapter and another
provision of this Title, or a provision of this Chapter and any other ordinance
of the Village, the provisions of this Chapter shall prevail.
All applications for planned use development shall be made in accordance with
the following procedures and shall be accompanied by the required plats,
documents, detailed plans, drawings and other information as specified by this
Chapter 12.
   (A)   Pre-Application Conference: Prior to filing an application for a
planned unit development, the applicant may, but need not, request a pre-
application conference with the Zoning Board pursuant to the following
procedures:
      1.   The applicant shall request in a letter addressed to the Village
Board that a pre-application conference be scheduled with the Zoning Board.
      2.   The letter shall contain a brief description of the proposed
development including:
         (a)   Description of the site, including the common address, legal
description, name of owner of record, location of streets on and adjoining the
site and location of watercourses and drainageways on or adjoining the site.
         (b)   Description of the proposed development, including the number
and type of dwelling units; number and type of other principal uses, number and
type of accessory uses, park and recreational open space acreage and
development schedule.
         (c)   Identification of the owner and applicant and the principal
members of their design team.
      3.   The Village Board shall forward the request to the Zoning Board with
instructions to hold a pre-application conference with the applicant.
      4.   The purpose of the conference shall be two-fold:
         (a)   The applicant shall present a brief description of the proposed
planned unit development to the Zoning Board.
         (b)   The Zoning Board shall review with applicant any plans, current
planning programs, other proposed land developments of the area surrounding the
proposed development, and the ordinances and policies of the Village relative
to the regulation of land development.
      5.   The conference shall be a public meeting and all members of the
Village Board and other boards and districts are encouraged to attend. The pre-
application conference may be held at either a regular or special meeting of
the Zoning Board.
   (B)   Application: Within twelve (12) months of the pre-application
conference, the applicant may file a petition and application for preliminary
plan approval which, once approved, will take the form of a special use permit
for a planned unit development. The procedures and requirements herein shall
govern the submission, review and approval of the application, notwithstanding
the regulations of Chapter 18 of the Zoning Ordinance as they pertain to
special uses generally. The application shall not be considered complete unless
it is accompanied by all documentation required by Section
10-13-4 of this Chapter and by payment of all required fees.
   (C)   Review Of The Preliminary Plan:
      1.   The Village shall send copies of the complete application to: a) its
planning consultant for review of the development plans; b) the Village
engineer to assess the impact of the proposed development on traffic in the
Village; and c) the Village attorney to review the application and all legal
documents.
      2.   Upon receipt of a completed application, the Zoning Board shall hold
a public meeting for the purpose of hearing a presentation by the petitioner of
the proposed planned unit development, subject to the following:
         (a)   The meeting may be either a regular meeting of the Zoning Board
or a special meeting called for the purpose of hearing the applicant's
presentation. The meeting shall not be considered a public hearing.
         (b)   Thirty (30) days' public notice of the time, place and subject
of the meeting shall be given. Other notice shall be sent to the Village Board.
         (c)   All documents required as part of the application shall be
displayed at the meeting.
   (D)   Public Hearing: Within sixty (60) days of the completion of the
foregoing presentation to the Zoning Board, the Zoning Board shall schedule a
public hearing as follows:
      1.   The hearing shall be before the Zoning Board, with the applicant
giving notice as provided by statute for special uses.
      2.   Any resident of the Village, and all others as provided by law,
shall have standing at the hearing and present testimony. All witnesses shall
be sworn.
      3.   The reports of any outside consultants, including those required in
subsection (C)1 above, shall be made a part of the record and shall be
available for inspection at the Village Hall prior to and at the time of the
hearing.
      4.   Both proponents and opponents of the petition, if represented by
counsel, shall be entitled to examine witnesses.
      5.   The hearing may be continued from time to time by agreement of the
parties and as provided by law.
      6.   A record of the hearing shall be made.
   (E)   Report To The Village Board: Within sixty (60) days of the completion
of the public hearing, the Zoning Board shall submit a written report to the
Village Board as follows:
      1.   The report shall contain findings of fact relative to the
conformance of the preliminary plan of the proposed planned unit development to
the objectives, purposes and requirements of the Zoning Ordinance.
      2.   The report shall include a recommendation to the Village Board for
approval of the petition, approval subject to conditions or denial of the
petition.
      3.   If the report recommends approval subject to conditions, the
conditions of such recommendation shall be specified, including any variations
from the standards established by the Zoning Ordinance.
      4.   The report shall include, by reference, the reports of all outside
consultants and the record made of the hearing.
   (F)   Village Board Approval: Within sixty (60) days after receiving the
report from the Zoning Board, the Village Board may approve, modify or
disapprove the preliminary plan, or may refer the matter back to the Zoning
Board for further consideration. If the Village Board does not act finally on
the preliminary plan submission within sixty (60) days of its receipt of the
Zoning Board's report, the preliminary plan shall be deemed to have been denied
unless an extension is requested by the petitioner and granted by the Village
Board. In the case of approval, or approval with modifications, the Village
Board shall pass an ordinance granting the special use and amending the
Official Zoning Map of the Village. Approval of a preliminary plan shall not
constitute approval of the final plan and shall not entitle the applicant to a
building permit. Rather, it shall be deemed an expression of approval to the
layout submitted on the preliminary plan as a guide to the preparation of the
final plan.
   (G)   Final Plans: Within one year of the approval of the preliminary plan,
the applicant shall file final plans with the Zoning Board as follows:
      1.   Final plans including engineering plans, phasing plans,
architectural plans, plats and surveys shall conform to the approved
preliminary plan.
      2.   Final plans may be submitted for portions of the development
provided that each stage shall contain a proportionate amount of any open
spaces, dedicated public lands or other amenities. The filing of final plans
for a stage of development in any year shall automatically extend the special
use permit for another year.
      3.   The Zoning Board shall review the final plans for conformance with
the approved preliminary plan and shall approve the final plan prior to the
issuance of a building permit.
   (H)   Amendments:
      1.   Preliminary plans may be amended at any time by filing a petition to
amend accompanied by only those documents which require changes due to the
amendment. Except as provided in the following subsection (H)2, an amendment
shall be subject to the same procedures as the preliminary plan application.
Amended portions of the planned unit development shall become a part of the
special use permit, pursuant to ordinance.
      2.   Due to fluctuations in the real estate market, the developer may
desire to vary architectural treatment or make minor changes in site planning.
The Zoning Board shall review such changes prior to accepting a plan for final
approval. If requested changes do not significantly alter the economic,
population or school impact data, and, if the changes are considered an
improvement to the plan, the final plan may be changed without requiring
further public hearings.
   (I)   Fees: The petitioner shall pay such fees as established by ordinance
of the Village, including fees to cover expenses incurred by the Village in
obtaining outside consultation in the review and plan documents as provided in
subsection (C)1 above. (Ord. 93-13, 8-10-1993)
10-13-3: STANDARDS:
No planned unit development shall be authorized unless the Village Board finds
that the following general standards are met:
   (A)   Size: Unless unusual conditions are present which allow effective
planning upon a smaller site or as otherwise provided in this Section or in the
zoning districts of the Zoning Title, all planned unit developments shall be
required to contain a minimum of two (2) acres. Provided, however, that a B-
1 or B-2 business planned unit development must have a minimum site area of at
least two (2) lots.
   (B)   Compatibility: The uses permitted in the planned unit development
shall be compatible with the uses immediately adjacent to the site and not of
such a nature, of such density or so located as to exercise an undue
detrimental influence or effect upon the surrounding neighborhood.
   (C)   Unique Features: The site plan shall effectively treat the
developmental possibilities of the subject property, making appropriate
provisions for the preservation of waterways, wooded areas, scenic views, flood
plain areas, and similar physical features.
   (D)   Bulk Requirements: Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, the
planned unit development shall comply with the bulk requirements of the zoning
district in which it is located, unless specifically varied by the Village
Board after recommendation of the Zoning Board.
   (E)   Parking Requirements: Adequate parking shall be provided as required
by Chapter 12 of this Title unless specifically varied by the Village Board
after recommendation of the Zoning Board.
   (F)   Traffic Control: Adequate provision shall be made to provide ingress
and egress so designed as to minimize traffic congestion in the public streets.
The site will be accessible from public roads which are adequate to safely
carry the traffic that will be imposed upon them by the proposed development.
The streets and driveways on the site of the proposed development shall be
adequate to safely serve the uses located in the proposed development. Traffic-
control signals will be provided without expense to the Village when the
Village Board determines that such signals are required to prevent traffic
hazards or congestion in adjacent streets.
   (G)   Open Spaces: A minimum of twenty five percent (25%) of the total gross
area of a residential planned unit development shall consist of common open
space; no area within thirty feet (30') of any building or structure, except
one used for recreational purposes, shall be included in the computation of the
open space requirement. This requirement may be partially or totally waived by
the Village Board whenever a substantial amount of the land of the planned unit
development is proposed for development as single-family residential units.
   (H)   Yards And Spaces Between Buildings:
      1.   The required yards or setbacks along the periphery of the planned
unit development, along with the use of such yards for parking or other
purposes may be modified within the ordinance granting the planned unit
development special use so long as due consideration is given to the effect of
such modifications upon the healthful environment and peaceful enjoyment of
properties of the adjacent property owners. The required yards or setback may
receive modifications of up to fifty percent (50%) of the standards set forth
in the underlying zoning districts.
      2.   Buildings of more than twenty four feet (24') in height shall
provide a setback from any property line that is at least equal to the height
of such buildings.
      3.   No minimum horizontal distance between buildings is established;
provided, however, that good planning standards shall be followed and that
there is sufficient space between buildings to provide for adequate fire
protection.
   (I)   Landscape And Planting: Landscaping and plantings shall be considered
a key element in the design of a planned unit development. Wherever possible,
landscaping and planting shall be used to create transitions, buffers and
screens, including the following criteria:
      1.   Buffers such as earth mounds, berms, screen plantings, fences or
screens may be required.
      2.   Facilities for the storage or pickup of refuse shall be screened and
covered.
      3.   Privacy areas may be delineated with fences, plant materials, berms,
or a combination of such elements.
      4.   Existing features such as large trees or unique vistas should be
preserved or enhanced wherever possible.
   (J)   Variances From Zoning District Standards: The planned unit development
may depart from strict conformance with the required density, dimension, area,
zoning district size, height, bulk, use and other regulations of the underlying
zoning district to the extent specified in the preliminary and final plans and
documents authorizing the development, so long as the development will not be
detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety and welfare of the
residents of the Village.
   (K)   Signs: All signs in the planned development shall comply with the sign
regulations applicable to the zoning district in which the development is
located.
   (L)   Performance Standards: All planned business, office, manufacturing or
industrial developments shall comply with the performance standards specified
by Section
10-8-10 of Chapter 8 of this Title.
   (M)   Utilities: All of the planned unit developments shall provide for
underground installation of utilities (including electricity and telephone) in
both public ways and private extensions thereof. Provisions shall be made for
acceptable design and construction of storm water facilities including grading,
gutters, piping and treatment of turf to handle storm waters.
   (N)   Ownership: The site of the planned unit development must be under
single ownership or unified control. (Ord. 93-13, 8-10-1993)
10-13-4: REQUIRED DOCUMENTATION:
Unless waived by the Village Board, the development plans and supporting data
shall include at least the information specified in Sections
10-13-5 through
10-13-8 of this Title. The Village Board, Zoning Board and any other Village
official or department reviewing the PUD may request such additional
information deemed applicable to a particular development. (Ord. 93-13, 8-10-
1993)
10-13-5: PRE-APPLICATION DOCUMENTS:
   (A)   General Site Information: Data regarding the site conditions, land
characteristics, available community facilities and utilities, existing
covenants, and other related information about uses of land within one-half (1/
2) mile of the subject parcel of land.
   (B)   Sketch Plan: A drawing in simple sketch form showing the proposed
location and extent of land uses, streets, lots and other features.
   (C)   Legal Description: A complete property survey and legal description of
the site proposed for development.
   (D)   Variations: A list of all the variations from the zoning regulations
and other regulations of the Village which are sought for the particular
development. (Ord. 93-13, 8-10-1993)
10-13-6: CONCEPTUAL PLAN DOCUMENTS:
A conceptual plan is to be submitted only where the preliminary plan will be
submitted in stages. The conceptual plan is a drawing of the development
prepared at a scale that provides for a clear understanding of the way in which
the property is intended to be developed. The drawing shall indicate the
overall land use pattern, general circulation system, open space or park system
and major features of the development. The conceptual plan shall be in lieu of
the site plan provided for in Section
10-13-7, below. In all other respects, the conceptual plan documentation shall
be the same as that required for the preliminary plan stage. (Ord. 93-13, 8-10-
1993)
10-13-7: PRELIMINARY PLAN DOCUMENTS:
The following documents shall accompany all applications for approval of a
preliminary plan:
   (A)   Boundary survey of the property prepared by a registered Illinois land
surveyor.
   (B)   Legal description of the property.
   (C)   The owner's name and address, including the beneficiary of any trust
as owner.
   (D)   A site plan of the property drawn to scale showing:
      1.   Topographic contours at an interval of not more than two feet (2').
      2.   The boundary of any flood plain extending onto the property.
      3.   The boundary of any flood table land extending onto the property.
      4.   Subsurface conditions on the site; if required by the Village
Engineer, with location and results of tests made to generally ascertain
subsurface soil, rock and groundwater depth and results of soil percolation
tests if individual sewage disposal systems are proposed.
      5.   Other conditions on the site, such as watercourses, floodplains,
marshes, rock out-crops, wooded areas, isolated preservable trees with trunks
one foot (1') or more in diameter, houses, barns, accessory buildings, and
other significant features.
   (E)   A preliminary plan of the proposed development drawn to scale and
showing:
      1.   All structures and building areas, their use, and their approximate
dimensions, including height.
      2.   All circulation improvements including parks, walks, streets,
parking areas, loading areas, drives and streets.
      3.   Conservation areas, open spaces, parks, playgrounds and similar
uses.
      4.   Recreation facilities.
      5.   Landscape and planting plan.
      6.   Location and size of utilities on and adjacent to the site.
      7.   Proposed public improvements, including roads, streets and utility
structures.
      8.   Phasing plan that identifies the sequence of development areas and a
balanced number and type of structures and open space in each phase.
   (F)   A planning report, including maps and plans where necessary for a
clear understanding of the proposed development covering the following:
      1.   A development summary including:
         (a)   Number, size and type of housing units.
         (b)   Number, size and type of business or commercial uses.
         (c)   Number, size and type of manufacturing or industrial uses.
      2.   Estimates of the resident population by the following age
categories: pre-school, kindergarten through eighth grade, high school and
adult.
      3.   Estimates of the peak user population for all nonresidential uses
with an estimate of the date, time, frequency of peak use.
      4.   A brief summary of the environmental assessment as required by the
Village.
      5.   An assessment of the economic impact that the proposed development
will have on the community, Municipal finances (tax impact) and on the school
districts in which the development is located.
      6.   A brief explanation of the planning and design principles followed
in the preparation of the development plan.
      7.   Identification of any variations from the Zoning Ordinance required
to accomplish the development plan or otherwise contained in or shown on the
development plan.
   (G)   Drafts of any restrictive covenants, agreements, association by-laws,
condominium declarations or similar instruments designed to regulate the use of
the property or provide for its maintenance.
   (H)   Preliminary architectural plans and renderings of housing types and
other principal uses.
   (I)   Planning reports shall be provided to school districts for review and
comment at the public hearing. Where school donations are required, the Village
shall be informed and appropriate arrangements made to assure receipt of funds
prior to student impact. (Ord. 93-13, 8-10-1993)
10-13-8: FINAL PLAN DOCUMENTS:
The following documents shall accompany all applications for final plan
approval:
   (A)   Final Detailed Plan: A final plat suitable for recording with the
County Recorder of Deeds, shall be prepared. The final plat shall include, but
not be limited to:
      1.   Title under which the proposed development is to be recorded.
      2.   An accurate legal description of the entire area for which final
plat approval is sought, and total acreage included.
      3.   A subdivision plat of all subdivided lands, including but not
limited to the following:
         (a)   Dimensions of the proposed lots into which the property is
proposed to be subdivided;
         (b)   Location, dimensions and acreage of all proposed land uses; and
         (c)   Location and dimension of proposed sidewalks, streets, easements
and storm water control areas.
      4.   An accurate legal description of each separate subdivided area,
including common open space.
      5.   Designation with particularity the uses of the land and the exact
location of all buildings and structures to be constructed.
      6.   Certificates, seals and signatures required for the dedication of
lands and recording the documents.
      7.   Tabulation of unsubdivided area, including land area, number of
buildings, number of dwelling units per acre.
      8.   Date, scale, north point and date of preparation.
   (B)   Public Facilities: All public facilities and improvements made
necessary as a result of the development shall be either constructed in advance
of the approval of the final plan or a document of security shall be posted to
guarantee completion of construction of the required improvements. Such
document of security shall be in the form of an irrevocable letter of credit or
such other form as may be approved by the Village Attorney and shall be payable
to the Village in an amount sufficient to complete construction, plus an
additional percentage, asset by the Village Engineer.
   (C)   Final Engineering Plans: Detailed plans shall be submitted for the
design, construction or installation of site amenities; including buildings,
landscaping, lakes, sewer, water, storm water and flood water control, street
facilities and other site improvements, including specifications.
   (D)   Final Schedule: Final development and construction schedule, including
construction and dedication of public improvements.
   (E)   Design Schedule: A listing of the area, lot width, yard, height and
bulk requirements applicable to the planned unit development.
   (F)   Covenants: Final agreements, provisions or covenants which will govern
the use, maintenance and continued protection of the development shall be
recorded at the same time as the final development plan.
   (G)   Miscellaneous: Such other information and data the Zoning Board may
require for full and complete consideration of the planned unit development.
(Ord. 93-13, 8-10-1993)
10-13-9: PERMITTED USES:
   PERMITTED USES IN PLANNED DEVELOPMENTS
Zoning Buffer Districts  Permitted Uses
R-1 B-1 B-2 M-1 M-2
Zoning Buffer Districts   Permitted Uses
R-1 B-1 B-2 M-1 M-2
                    Residential
X         X            Single family (detached)
                    Business/Commercial
                            Convenience commercial facilities, neighborhood
   X   X   X   X         grocery, sundries, personal services and similar
                            uses (excluding automobile service stations)
   X   X   X   X         Full range of permitted business and commercial
                            uses permitted in the zoning district
         X   X         Boat docks and recreational facilities
                    Manufacturing and Industrial
      X   X   X         Office Parks
         X   X         Full range of permitted manufacturing and
                            industrial uses permitted in the zoning district
 
(Ord. 93-13, 8-10-1993)
CHAPTER 14
ADMINISTRATION
SECTION:
10-14-1: Certificates And Occupancy Permits
10-14-2: Duties; Zoning Enforcement Officer
10-14-3: Unrelated Persons Registry
10-14-1: CERTIFICATES AND OCCUPANCY PERMITS:
   (A)   Zoning Certificates:
      1.   No permit pertaining to the use of land or buildings shall be issued
unless the Zoning Enforcement Officer has certified after examination that it
complies with all provisions of this Title.
      2.   An application for a zoning certificate for a use in a manufacturing
district shall require the seal of a registered professional engineer of
Illinois certifying that the proposed use can meet the performance standards of
that district.
      3.   The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall be allowed up to fifteen (15)
days to act upon a zoning certificate application from date of receipt. If a
zoning certificate is not granted, then the Zoning Enforcement Officer shall so
inform the applicant, and the applicant then has thirty (30) days in which to
reply to the Zoning Enforcement Officer. If the applicant does not reply within
the thirty (30) day period, then the Zoning Enforcement Officer may void the
zoning application.
   (B)   Occupancy Permits:
      1.   No land shall be occupied or used and no building hereafter erected
or altered shall be occupied or used in whole or in part for any purpose
whatsoever until a certificate of occupancy shall have been issued by the
Zoning Enforcement Officer stating that the building complies with all the
building and health laws and ordinances and with the provisions of these
regulations. No change of use shall be made in any building or part thereof now
or hereafter erected or altered without a permit having been issued by the
Zoning Enforcement Officer, and no permit shall be issued to make such change
unless it is in conformity with the provisions of this Title and amendments
thereto.
      2.   Nothing in this Chapter shall prevent the continuance of the present
occupancy or use of any existing building, except as may be necessary for the
safety of life and property.
      3.   Certificate for occupancy and compliance shall be applied for
coincident with the application for a building permit and shall be issued
within ten (10) days after the erection or alteration of such building has been
completed. A record of all certificates shall be kept on file in the office of
the Zoning Enforcement Officer and copies shall be furnished on request to any
person having proprietary or tenancy interest in the building affected. A fee
of two dollars ($2.00) charged for each original certificate and fifty cents
($0.50) for each copy thereof. (Ord. 61-56, 12-1961)
10-14-2: DUTIES; ZONING ENFORCEMENT OFFICER:
The Zoning Enforcement Officer of the Village or such deputies that have been
or shall be duly appointed by the Village Board shall enforce this Title, and
in addition thereto, and in furtherance of said authority shall:
   (A)   Issue all certificates of occupancy and make and maintain records
thereof;
   (B)   Conduct inspections of buildings, structures and uses of land to
determine compliance with the terms of this Title;
   (C)   Maintain permanent and current records of the zoning title, including,
but not limited to, all maps, amendments, special uses, variations, appeals and
applications therefor;
   (D)   Receive, file and forward to the Clerk all applications for special
uses or petitions for amendments to this Title which may be filed initially in
the office of the Zoning Enforcement Officer;
   (E)   Receive, file and forward to the Zoning Board of Appeals copies of all
applications for appeals, variations and other matters to be referred to the
Planning and Zoning Board;
   (F)   Provide such clerical and technical assistance as may be required by
the Planning and Zoning Board in the exercise of its duties; and
   (G)   File a report with the Village President and a copy to the Village
Board of Trustees relative to findings of the Zoning Enforcement Officer on all
reports of zoning violations made to him by a citizen, Village employee or
Village official. (Ord. 61-56, 12-1961)
10-14-3: UNRELATED PERSONS REGISTRY:
   (A)   The Village Administrator shall maintain a registry of the names and
residence addresses of all unrelated adult persons residing in a dwelling unit
within a residential building located in a single-family zoned district.
   (B)   All unrelated persons residing in a dwelling unit within a residential
building in a single-family zoned district must respond to written or oral
requests received from the Village Administrator for information concerning
their identity and duration of residence in a dwelling unit.
   (C)   Failure to respond to such requests within thirty (30) days will
constitute a violation of this Section.
   (D)   Any person who leases or otherwise allows another adult person(s) who
is not related by genetics, marriage or adoption to other family members to
make a regular, fixed nighttime abode within a dwelling unit, whether owned or
rented, shall within two (2) weeks of commencement of such residency, notify
the Village Administrator in writing of:
      1.   The full name and alias of such person(s);
      2.   The duration of the written lease or other written agreement, if
any, between the owner(s)/renter(s) and the unrelated adult person; and
      3.   The anticipated term or duration of such residency, if there is not
a written lease or other written agreement.
   (E)   Notwithstanding subsection (D) of this Section, it shall be the duty
of any landlord to notify the Village Administrator in writing when the
landlord authorizes any additional adult persons not parties to the lease to
reside with the tenant(s). It shall be the duty of any landlord to notify the
Village Administrator in writing when the landlord has knowledge of any adult
persons not parties to the lease who appear to be residing with the tenants.
The Village Administrator shall notify the tenant(s) of the obligations of any
unrelated person(s) under subsection (D) of this Section to provide written
notification, if applicable.
   (F)   Penalties and enforcement shall be provided in Chapter 20 of the
Zoning Ordinance.
   (G)   This Section shall not apply to houseguests and other persons who have
not or do not intend to make their residence in the dwelling unit, except that
any adult person who inhabits such dwelling unit as a regular, fixed nighttime
abode for more than one month shall be required to register and respond to
requests from the Village Administrator, as provided herein.
   (H)   The registry shall at all times be maintained by the Village
Administrator for the exclusive purpose of determining compliance with the
residential character limitations pertaining to dwelling units in single-family
zoned residential districts established by the Zoning Ordinance. (Ord. 99-20,
9-28-1999)
CHAPTER 15
APPEALS
SECTION:
10-15-1: Initiation
10-15-2: Processing
10-15-3: Decisions
10-15-1: INITIATION:
   (A)   An appeal to the Planning and Zoning Board 1  may be taken by any
person aggrieved or by any officer, department, board or bureau of the
Municipality. The appeal shall be taken within such time as shall be prescribed
by the Board by a general rule by filing with the officer from whom the appeal
is taken with the Board a notice of appeal, specifying the grounds thereof. The
officer from whom the appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit to the Board all
the papers constituting the record upon which the appeal action is taken.
   (B)   An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed
from, unless the officer from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the Board
after the notice has been filed with him, that by reason of facts stated in the
certificate a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or
property.
In this event the proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a
restraining order which may be granted by the Board by a court of record on
application and no notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken, and on
due cause shown. (Ord. 61-56, 12-1961)
 
Notes
1 1. See Title 2, Chapter 1 of this Code.
10-15-2: PROCESSING:
   (A)   An appeal shall be filed with the Clerk. The Clerk shall forward the
appeal to the Board for processing in accordance with the statutes of the State
of Illinois.
   (B)   The Board of Appeals shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of
the appeal and give due notice thereof to parties and shall decide the appeal
within reasonable time. The Board may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or
may modify the order, requirement, or decision or determination as in its
opinion ought to be made on the premises and to that end has all the powers of
the officer from whom the appeal is taken. (Ord. 61-56, 12-1961)
10-15-3: DECISIONS:
All decisions, after hearing of the Board on appeals from an administrative
order, requirement, decision or determination of the Zoning Enforcement Officer
or other authorized official of the Village, shall, in all instances, be final
administrative determinations and shall be subject to judicial review only in
accordance with applicable statutes of the State. (Ord. 61-56, 12-1961)
CHAPTER 16
VARIATIONS
SECTION:
10-16-1: Authority
10-16-2: Initiation
10-16-3: Processing
10-16-4: Decisions
10-16-5: Standards
10-16-6: Authorized Variations
10-16-1: AUTHORITY:
The Village Board shall decide variations of the provisions of this Title in
harmony with its general purpose and intent, and shall vary them only in the
specific instances hereinafter set forth where the Board shall have made a
finding of fact based upon the standards hereinafter prescribed that there are
practical difficulties or particular hardship in the way of carrying out the
strict letter of the regulations of this Title. (Ord. 61-56, 12-1961)
10-16-2: INITIATION:
An application for a variation may be made by any person or by any office,
department, board, bureau or commission, requesting or intending to request
application for a zoning certificate. (Ord. 61-56, 12-1961)
10-16-3: PROCESSING:
   (A)   An application for a variation shall be filed with the Clerk. The
Clerk shall forward such application to the Board for processing in accordance
with applicable statutes of the State.
   (B)   No variation shall be made by the Village Board except after a public
hearing before the Board of which there shall be a notice of time and place of
the hearing published at least once not more than thirty (30) nor less than
fifteen (15) days before the hearing in one or more newspapers with a general
circulation within the Village; and a written notice is served at least fifteen
(15) days before the hearing on the owners of the properties located adjacent
to the location for which the variation is requested. (Ord. 61-56, 12-1961)
10-16-4: DECISIONS:
The Village Board, upon report of the Planning and Zoning Board and without
further public hearing, may grant or deny any proposed variation in accordance
with applicable statutes of the State, or may refer it back to the Planning and
Zoning Board for further consideration. (Ord. 61-56, 12-1961)
10-16-5: STANDARDS:
   (A)   The Board shall not recommend a variation in the provisions of this
Title as authorized in this Chapter unless it shall have made findings based
upon the evidence presented to it in the following specific cases:
      1.   That the property in question cannot yield a reasonable return if
permitted to be used only under the conditions allowed by the regulations
governing the district in which it is located;
      2.   That the plight of the owner is due to unique circumstances; or
      3.   That the variation, if granted, will not alter the essential
character of the locality.
   (B)   For the purpose of supplementing the above standards, the Board, in
making this recommendation whenever there are practical difficulties or
particular hardship, shall also take into consideration the extent to which the
following facts, favorable to the applicant, have been established by the
evidence:
      1.   That the particular physical surroundings, shape or topographical
conditions of the specific property involved would bring a particular hardship
upon the owner as distinguished from a mere inconvenience if the strict letter
of the regulation were to be carried out;
      2.   That the conditions upon which the petition for variation is based
would not be applicable generally to the other property within the same zoning
classification;
      3.   That the purpose of the variation is not based exclusively upon a
desire to make more money out of the property;
      4.   That the alleged difficulty or hardship has not been created by any
person presently having an interest in the property;
      5.   That the granting of the variation will not be detrimental to the
public welfare or injurious to other property or improvements in the
neighborhood in which the property is located; or
      6.   That the proposed variation will not impair an adequate supply of
light and air to adjacent property, or substantially increase the danger of
fire, or otherwise endanger the public safety, or substantially diminish or
impair property values within the neighborhood.
   (C)   The Board may require such conditions and restrictions upon they
premises benefited by a variation as may be necessary to comply with the
standards set forth in this Chapter to reduce or minimize the injurious effect
of such variation upon other property in the neighborhood, and to implement the
general purpose and intent of this Title. (Ord. 61-56, 12-1961)
10-16-6: AUTHORIZED VARIATIONS:
Variations from the regulations of this Title may be decided by the Board only
in accordance with the standards set forth in this Chapter and only in the
following instances and no others:
   (A)   To permit a yard less than the yard required by the applicable
regulations;
   (B)   To permit the use of a lot not of record on the effective date of this
Title for a use otherwise prohibited solely because of the insufficient width
and area of the lot, but in no event shall the width or area of the lot be less
than ninety percent (90%) of the required lot width or area; and
   (C)   To permit the same off-street parking spaces to qualify as required
spaces for two (2) or more uses, provided that the maximum use of such facility
by each user does not take place during the same hours or on the same days of
the week. (Ord. 61-56, 12-1961)
CHAPTER 17
AMENDMENTS
SECTION:
10-17-1: Authority
10-17-2: Initiation Of Amendment
10-17-3: Processing
10-17-4: Decisions
10-17-1: AUTHORITY:
The regulations imposed and the districts created under the authority of this
Title may be amended, from time to time, by ordinance in accordance with
applicable statutes of the State. An amendment shall be granted or denied by
the Village Board only after a public hearing before the Plan Commission and a
report of its findings and recommendations has been submitted to the Village
Board. (Ord. 61-56, 12-1961)
10-17-2: INITIATION OF AMENDMENT:
Amendments may be proposed by the Village Board, by the Plan Commission or by
any resident of or owner of property in the Village. (Ord. 61-56, 12-1961)
10-17-3: PROCESSING:
An application for an amendment shall be filed with the Clerk and thereafter
introduced into the Village Board. Such application shall be forwarded from the
Village Board by the Clerk to the Plan Commission with a request to hold a
public hearing in accordance with State statutes, and shall thereafter submit a
report of its findings and recommendations to the Village Board. (Ord. 61-56,
12-1961)
10-17-4: DECISIONS:
   (A)   The Village Board, upon request of the Plan Commission and without
further public hearing, may grant or deny any proposed amendment in accordance
with applicable statutes of the State, or may refer it back to the Plan
Commission for further consideration.
   (B)   In case a written protest against any proposed amendment signed and
acknowledged by owners of twenty percent (20%) of the frontage proposed to be
altered, or by the owners of twenty percent (20%) of the frontage immediately
adjoining or across the alley therefrom, or by the owners of twenty percent
(20%) of the frontage directly opposite the frontage to be altered, is filed
with the Clerk, the amendment cannot be passed except on the favorable vote of
two-thirds (2/3) of all members of the Village Board. (Ord. 61-56, 12-1961)
CHAPTER 18
SPECIAL USES
SECTION:
10-18-1: Purpose
10-18-2: Authority
10-18-3: Initiation
10-18-4: Processing
10-18-5: Decisions
10-18-6: Conditions
10-18-1: PURPOSE:
The development and execution of the Zoning Title is based upon the division of
the Village into districts, within any one of which the use of land and
buildings and the bulk and location of buildings or structures, as related to
the land, are essentially uniform. It is recognized, however, that there are
special uses which because of their unique character cannot be properly
classified in any particular district or districts without consideration, in
each case, of the impact of those uses upon neighboring lands and upon public
need for the particular use of the particular location. Such special uses fall
into two (2) categories:
   (A)   Uses operated by a public agency or publicly-regulated utilities, or
uses traditionally affected with a public interest.
   (B)   Uses entirely private in character, but of such a nature that the
operation may give rise to unique problems with respect to their impact upon
neighboring property or public facilities. (Ord. 61-56, 12-1961)
10-18-2: AUTHORITY:
   (A)   Special uses shall be authorized or denied by the Village Board in
accordance with the statutes of the State applicable to amendments of this
Title, and the regulations and conditions set forth in this Title for special
uses.
   (B)   No application for a special use shall be acted upon by the Village
Board until after a public hearing has been held by the Plan Commission, after
due notice publication as provided by the applicable statutes of the State of
Illinois for amendments, and the findings and recommendations of the Plan
Commission have been reported to the Village Board. (Ord. 61-56, 12-1961)
10-18-3: INITIATION:
An application for a special use may be made by any person or by any office,
department, board, bureau or commission, requesting or intending to request a
zoning certificate. (Ord. 61-56, 12-1961)
10-18-4: PROCESSING:
An application for a special use, in such form and accompanied by such
information as shall be established from time to time by the Plan Commission,
shall be filed with the Clerk and thereafter processed in the manner prescribed
heretofore for applications and amendments. (Ord. 61-56, 12-1961)
10-18-5: DECISIONS:
The Village Board, upon report and recommendation of the Plan Commission and
without further hearing, may authorize or deny an application for a special use
in accordance with the statutes of the State applicable to amendments, or may
refer it back to the Plan Commission for further consideration.
No special use shall be authorized by the Village Board unless the special use:
   (A)   Is deemed necessary for the public convenience at that location;
   (B)   Is so designed, located and proposed to be operated that the public
health, safety and welfare will be protected; and
   (C)   Would not cause substantial injury to the value of other property in
the neighborhood in which it is located. (Ord. 61-56, 12-1961)
10-18-6: CONDITIONS:
The Plan Commission may recommend, and the Village Board may provide, such
conditions and restrictions upon the construction, location and operation of a
special use, including, but not limited to, provisions for off-street parking
and loading as may be deemed necessary to promote the general objectives of
this Title and to minimize the injury to the value of the property in the
neighborhood. (Ord. 61-56, 12-1961)
CHAPTER 19
FEES
SECTION:
10-19-1: Fees
10-19-1: FEES:
A fee of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) accompanying an application for an
amendment or special use, a fee of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00)
accompanying an application for a variation, or a fee of one hundred fifty
dollars ($150.00) accompanying an application for an appeal, shall be filed
with the Clerk by or on behalf of the owner or owners of the property affected.
(Ord. 99-3, 3-23-1999)
CHAPTER 20
VIOLATION; ENFORCEMENT
SECTION:
10-20-1: Violation; Penalty
10-20-2: Enforcement
10-20-1: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects, refuses to comply with or
who resists enforcement of any of the provisions of this Title, shall upon
conviction be fined as in this Code provided. (Ord. 61-56, 12-1961)
10-20-2: ENFORCEMENT:
The Zoning Enforcement Officer is hereby designated and authorized to enforce
this Title. However, it shall also be the duty of all officers, citizens and
employees of the Village, particularly of all members of the Police and Fire
Departments, to assist the Zoning Enforcement Officer by reporting to him any
new construction, reconstruction, improper land uses or upon any seeming
violation  1 . (Ord. 61-56, 12-1961)
 
Notes
1 1. See Title 1, Chapter 15 of this Code.
